=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20231002005844+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
/ModDate: D:20231002005844+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October  2023  
Tbilisi, Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12  GCF/B.3 7/02/Add.1 3 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals –  
Addendum  XIII 
Funding proposal package f or FP222  
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a) A funding pro posal  summary  titled "Renewable Energy Performance Platform 
(REPP 2) " submitted by Camco Management Limited ; 
b) No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation  of the funding proposal . 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “ Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP 2) ” 
submitted by C amco Management Limited . is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to 
Board Members and Alternate Board Members  to ens ure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privile dged or commercially sensitive  information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.13  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  104  
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  115 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   119 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  132  
Gender documentation  134


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP 2)  
Country(ies):  Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and 
Zambia 
Accredited Entity:  Camco Management Limited  
Date of first submission:  2022/10/ 20 
Date of current submission 2023 /09/26 
Version number  V7.400


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name]- [Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 1  
 A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme 
targets below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF 
and Co -financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed 
should be 100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  80 % 80 % 
☒  Energy generation and access  80 % 80 % 
☐  Low -emission transport  0 % 0 % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  0 % 0 % 
☐  Forestry and land use  0 % 0 % 
Adaptation total  20 % 20 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  10 % 10 % 
☐  Health and well -being, and food and water 
security  0 % 0 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  10 % 10 % 
 ☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  0 % 0 % 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation outcome2 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided 
or removed / sequestered)  12,720,297 tCO 2e A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached)  Total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries :   729,847  
   Number of 
direct beneficiaries : 
370,244  Number of 
indirect beneficiaries : 
359,603  
Direct beneficiaries / 
total population  
0.04%  Indirect 
beneficiaries / 
total population  
0.03% 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co- finance3)  250 million  USD   A.9. Project size  Medium (Up to USD 250 
million)  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 2  
 A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  50 million  USD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding  ☐  Grant  Enter number  ☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☒  Equity  USD 50 million  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  a) Investment period: 
Seven (7) years; and  
b) Repayment period, if 
applicable: Fifteen  (15) 
years, starting in year 5  A.12. Total 
lifespan   The technology lifetime varies 
based on technology type: solar 
home systems have an average 
lifetime of 5 years, whereas solar 
mini- grids and isolated grids have 
an average lifetime of 20  years, 
and other on-grid renewable 
energy technologies have lifetim es 
of 25 years or more.    
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  7/31/2023  
 A.14. ESS 
category  I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been 
used to prepare 
this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information As further set out in S ection B4 there are several executing entities including:  
• GCF REPP Holdings SCSp , a société en commandite spéciale to be 
established in Luxembourg ; 
• Camco REPP SCSp , a société en commandite spéciale to be established in 
Luxembourg ; 
• Camco REPP GP S.a.r.l, a sociétés à résponsabilité limitée to be established 
in Luxembourg; 
• C amco Management Limited, a limited liability company with its register office 
at 28 St John’s Square, London EC1M 4DN , United Kingdom; 
• Camco REPP Holdings One S.a.r.l, a sociétés à résponsabilité limitée to be 
established in Luxembourg; 
• Camco REPP Holdings Two S.a.r.l , a sociétés à résponsabilité limitée to be 
established in Luxembourg; and  
• Alternative Investment Fund Manager and Depository to be appointed by 
Camco REPP SCSp in Luxembourg .


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 3  
 A.21. Executive summary  
1. Background 
The Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP Phase 1)4 is an existing climate finance facility for 
small to medium -scale grid- connected and distributed renewable energy projects in sub- Saharan Africa. 
Operational since 2016, REPP Phase 1 is grant -funded through the United Kingdom (UK) Foreign, 
Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO). An initial capitalisation of £48m was followed by a further 
commitment of £40m from the FCDO due to the success of the programme. Camco Management Limited 
(Camco) is investment manager for REPP Phase 1.  
2. Introducing REPP 2  
By launching a new Programme entitled REPP 2 , Camco is seeking to build on the successful track record 
of REPP Phase 1 (described further in Annex 28) and scale up support for small-scale renewable energy 
power generation in key African markets, focusing on Least Developed Countries (LDCs).  
REPP 2  is a blended finance facility  with a goal to create a paradigm shift for the small -scale renewable 
energy sector in S ub-Saharan Africa that will scale up and replicate funding for low -emission and climate -
resilient power generation, with increased access for local and vulnerable populations to modern renewable energy solutions.  
REPP 2  targets  funding and support to smaller -scale renewable energy projects and businesses in the LDCs  
of sub- Saharan Africa. To be eligible for receipt of GCF Proceeds, investments must be located in a 
jurisdiction which has provided a Letter of No Objection in a form acceptable to the GCF (Host Countries). 
Nine priority countries, seven of which are LDCs, have been selected for GCF funding, including:  Cameroon, 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) , Lesotho,  Madagascar , Malawi , Niger , Nigeria, Sierra Leone and 
Zambia .5  
3. Climate change problem  
Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa are highly vulnerable to climate change.6 Drivers of this vulnerability 
include:  
• Existing climate hazards (droughts, floods, extreme temperatures, etc.);  
• High dependence on rain -fed subsistence agriculture for a largely rural population across the region:  
• High levels of poverty and food insecurity; and  
• Widespread disregard for human rights (including limited access to water, sanitation, education), 
which often leads to high levels of national and regional conflict.  
As a result, the majority of the region’s population (particularly those living in rural areas) have very limited 
capacity to adapt to climate change . One outcome of this is that fewer than half of the population of the 
region (estimated at 570 million people) has access to electricity. In rural areas, this proportion falls to 25%.7  
4. Additional barriers  
Smaller -scale and off -grid renewable energy companies and investors face numerous  barriers, including:  
 
4 Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP), https://repp.energy . The REPP Phase 1 track record and 
transformational impact is described in Annex 28.  
5 Cameroon and Nigeria are not Least Developed Countries ( https://unctad.org/topic/least-developed-countries/list , last 
accessed 23 September 2022).  
6 IPCC, 2022:  Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.  Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H. -O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. 
Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B . Rama (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press. In Press.  
7 IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO. 2021. Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report. World Bank, Washington 
DC. © World Bank. License: Creative Commons Attribution— NonCommercial 3.0 IGO (CC BYNC 3.0 IGO).


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 4  
 • A lack of early -stage or development funding  to ensure projects or companies become technically 
and commercially viable;  
• Limited access to finance for growth and construction of smaller -scale renewables . In addition to a 
general lack of funding for smaller -scale renewables, commercial8 funding remains scarce at both 
the funding platform and individual asset levels ; 
• A limited appetite for investment in new markets , with generally higher levels of real and 
perceived risk ; 
• Challenging economics for smaller projects and companies , due to limited generation and 
revenue potential, which mean that costs are typically large relative to potential returns for investors . 
This situation has been exacerbated in the aftermath of the Covid pandemic due to delays, supply 
chain disruptions and cost escalations ; 
• The burden and cost of funder requirements , which add to delays and project costs;  
• Limited  or untested  domestic policy and regulatory frameworks , which further limit the 
bankability of smaller renewable energy projects and the appetite from private sector investors ; 
• The potential for negative climate change impact s on national  grids including the potential for 
reduced power generation from exi sting assets such as hydropower plants and the potential for 
increased grid instability as more variable forms of renewable energy generation are introduced ; 
• Grid utility political and bankability risk  which further limit public and private investor appetite; 
• Limited experience and funding for local developers which can result in delays, higher costs and 
greater potential for project failure; 
• Under -representation of women  in the sector;  and 
• Environmental and social barriers , with the level of environmental and social safeguards and 
management systems in many markets in sub- Saharan Africa regularly failing to meet international 
best-practice standards, leading to environmental hazards which often disproportionately affect 
women and other vulnerable groups . 
5. Climate benefits  
REPP 2  will deliver climate impact by:  
• Financing renewable energy power generation, which contributes to reduced GHG emissions from 
renewable energy installations (Outcome 1)  aligned with Host Country  priorities;  
• Delivering improved climate resilience of energy infrastructure (Outcome 2)  through 
diversification and decentralisation of renewable energy generation;  
• Delivering improved climate resilience of vulnerable people and communities (Outcome 3)  
through access to clean energy, which improves livelihoods and builds gender equity;  
• Achieving increased private sector investment (Outcome 4)  for renewable energy generation, 
particular at the level of the underlying assets funded by REPP 2, which benefits local developers , 
builds gender equity  and establishes a more commercially  viable market for smaller -scale 
renewables ; and  
• Contributing to stronger  technology deployment, innovation and market transformation 
(Outcome 5)  for smaller-scale and off -grid renewables in all Host Countries . 
All of the targeted climate impacts of REPP 2  are closely -aligned to the national priorities of Host Countries 
for mitigation and adaptation, including those defined in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 
and National Adaptation Plans (NAPs).  
 
 
8 In this Funding Proposal, a distinction is drawn between ‘private’ and ‘commercial’ sources of capital. Private sector capital 
is sourced from private investors on a commercial basis. Commercial funding may be sourced from public entities including 
Development Finance Institutions, where such entities source or raise  capital on their own balance sheets on a commercial 
basis including directly from private capital markets and therefore provide this funding on a commercial basis. The 
objective of leveraging both private and commercial capital, whether provided at either the fund level or the level of the 
underlying assets, is aligned to the GCF’s objectives  on mobilization of capital.


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 5 
 6. REPP 2  financing and support  
REPP 2  will further catalyse the growth of sub-Saharan Africa’s small- scale renewable energy sector by 
scaling up from the success of REPP Phase 1, further leveraging private sector capital flows into small -scale 
and distributed renewable energy markets across the region, with a focus on LDCs. The programme is 
expected to deliver 330MW of new installed capacity, more than 12.7 million tCO 2e (mtCO 2e) of GHG 
emission reductions and  provide new or improved access to clean energy to more than 7. 7 million people  
and improve the resilience of nearl y one million beneficiaries  over its 20 -year total lifespan.  
REPP 2  financing and support mechanisms include:  
• Early -stage and development funding,  which includes early -stage and growth funding for off -grid 
companies  (including solar home system and mini -grid companies) to demonstrate that selected 
technologies are fit -for-purpose,  to acquire first customers and to secure inventory and to 
demonstrate  that innovative new business models  are viable and sustainable. Additional 
development -stage  funding will be provided for grid- connected projects;  
• Gap funding for construction and implementation  of grid -connected projects  to ensure 
generation and installed capacity targets in Host Countries  are achieved. REPP 2  will also facilitate 
access to and financial risk mitigation to ensure bankability of projects ; and  
• Technology deployment, innovation and market transformation, designed to build skills and 
capacity amongst local businesses and developers, improve the ability of businesses and developers 
to deliver gender equity, and improve their ability to manage environmental and social governance 
(“ESG”) risk and impact.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 6  
 
  
9 Trisos, C.H., I.O. Adelekan, E. Totin, A. Ayanlade, J. Efitre, A. Gemeda, K. Kalaba, C. Lennard, C. Masao, Y. Mgaya, G. 
Ngaruiya, D. Olago, N.P. Simpson, and S. Zakieldeen, 2022: Africa. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H. -O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. 
Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1285– 1455, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.011.  B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text 
1. Climate change problem statement  
Climate change hazards 
People and communities across sub-Saharan Africa are exposed to a wide and expanding range of climate 
change hazards.9 A summary of key climate hazards for each REPP 2 Host Country  is provided below and 
discussed in greater detail in Annex 2: 
• Cameroon : Hazards include drought, heavy rainfall events, flooding, heavy winds, high 
temperatures, and heatwaves. Energy infrastructure is vulnerable to precipitation, extreme rainfall 
and flooding, as well as drought, and sea- level rise; 
• DRC: Hazards include intense rainfall, erosion, floods, heatwaves, and seasonal droughts. Reliance 
on the use of traditional biomass significantly increases the climate vulnerability of the population;  
• Lesotho : Hazards include more frequent, severe droughts and increased flooding. The energy 
infrastructure, particularly hydropower, is highly vulnerable to increasing temperatures. Reliance on 
subsistence agriculture significantly increases the climate vulnerability of the rural population;  
• Madagascar : Hazards include intensification of cyclones and associated flooding, sea- level rise, 
intensification of droughts in the south and west, and a more intense wet season elsewhere. The 
energy sector is vulnerable to a reduction in precipitation and cyclones destroying infrastructure. 
Over -reliance on the use of firewood further increases the level of vulnerability;  
• Malawi : Hazards include floods, droughts, strong winds, intense rainfall, riverine and flash floods and 
tropical cyclones. Vulnerabilities include poverty, rapid population growth, dependence on the 
agricultural sector reliance on rain- fed agriculture and biomass as well as lack of financing and weak 
institutional capacity to manage climate change;  
• Niger : Hazards include higher temperatures, increased frequency and intensity of extreme events, 
increased frequency of erratic rainfall and extreme droughts. Vulnerabilities include lack of financing, 
rapid population growth, and low institutional capacity. The energy sector in Niger is expected to be 
impacted by the effects of heavy rainfall resulting in damage to energy infrastructure;  
• Nigeria : Hazards include extreme heatwaves and rainfall events leading to droughts, floods, erosion, 
as well as rise in sea -level leading to intrusion and inundation of land. The energy system is 
vulnerable to increased demand for cooling and heating and already experiencing multiple supply 
shortages;  
• Sierra Leone: Hazards include floods, droughts, coastal erosion, decreasing river flow, storm surges, flash floods, sea-
level rise, and high winds. Vulnerabilities include water resources and a high 
dependence on commodity price; and  
• Zambia:  Main hazards includes floods and wildfires, with droughts also increasingly common. The 
frequency and intensity of extreme climate events are expected to rise, posing significant risks to Zambia’s economy, its people’s livelihoods (nearly 60 % of Zambia's  
people earn less than the 
international poverty line, and three quarters of the poor live in rural areas), and the sustainability of 
its natural resources base.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 7  
 
  
10 World Bank. 2020. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2020: Reversals of Fortune. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi: 
10.1596/978-1- 4648- 1602-4. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO  
11 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 2021: Economic Development in Africa Report 2021: 
Reaping the Potential Benefits of the African Continental Free Trade Area for Inclusive Growth, United Nations 
Publications, New York, ISBN: 978-92 -1-113004-1.  
12 UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), ECA and AUC. 2020. Africa Regional Overview of Food Security and 
Nutrition 2019 - In brief. Rome. 
13 Food and Agricultural Organisation, FAO, 2022: COVID -19 impacts on agrifood systems in Africa: policy priorities for 
inclusive and resilient recovery, ARC/22/8, March 2022.  
14 United Nations, 2022: Global Impact of war in Ukraine on food, energy and finance systems, Brief No. 1, 13 April 2022.  
15 Abrams, L., 2018: Unlocking the potential of enhanced rainfed agriculture. Report no. 39. Stockholm International Water 
Institute, Stockholm.  
16 FAO, 2017: Unlocking agriculture’s potential in Southern Africa  
17 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?locations=ZG   
18 Johnston, P.C., J.F. Gomez and B. Laplante, 2012: Climate Risk and Adaptation in the Electric Power Sector, Asian 
Development Bank, http://www.iadb.org/intal/intalcdi/PE/2012/12152.pdf  Climate change vulnerabilities  
The sub- Saharan Africa region as a whole is generally highly vulnerable to climate change .6 There are 
several mutually reinforcing drivers of this vulnerability, including:  
• Exposure to pre -existing climate hazards,  as outlined above;  
• High levels of poverty and food insecurity : More than two thirds (417 million people in 2017) of 
the global population living in extreme poverty live in sub-Saharan Africa.10 Levels of inequality 
across the region are also pronounced and have widened this century.11 In terms of food insecurity 
across Africa, 2 82 million people ( 20% of the population) faced hunger  in 2019.12 The recent COVID -
19 pandemic and war in Ukraine have exacerbated food insecurity across the region;13,14  
• High dependence on rainfed subsistence agriculture for a largely rural population : More than 
95% of agricultural production in sub-Saharan Africa is rainfed.15 More than 70% of the region’s total 
population is dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods, the majority of whom are smallholder 
farmers who rely on subsistence production.16 The World Bank estimates that 58% of the region’s 
population lived in rural areas as of 2021;17 
• Energy poverty  is endemic across all of the H ost Countries, with fewer than half of the population 
of sub- Saharan Africa having access to electricity. Of the 760 million people globally,  who do not 
have access to electricity, 5 68 million (7 7%) are located in the region and only 25% of people living 
in rural areas have access;7  
• Vulnerability of energy infrastructure to climate hazards and climate change impacts:  
Countries which depend on hydropower generation and are exposed to high rainfall seasonality and 
the occurrence of droughts  are vulnerable to climate change.  Projected decreases in annual rainfall 
and increases in the frequency and intensity of severe droughts exacerbate t he vulnerability  of 
energy infrastructure . Increased temperature decreased water availability and extreme  weather  
events are anticipated to lead to reduction in plant efficiencies . Given that many national grids are 
small and poorly -maintain, power generation as well as transmission and distribution infrastructure 
are often vulnerable to climate extremes ;18 
• Inability to cater to basic human rights  (including limited access to water, sanitation, education);6 
and 
• High levels of gender -based violence, as well as national and regional conflict , which may be 
exacerbated through the impacts of climate change and competition for resources.6  
As a result, the majority of the region’s population, particularly those living in rural areas, have very limited 
capacity to adapt to climate change .


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 8  
 
  
19 GCF, 2022: Steps to enhance the climate rationale of GCF -supported activities  2. Climate rationale  for mitigation 
Despite being amongst  the lowest contributors to global GHG emissions, sub-Saharan Africa has already 
experienced widespread loss and damage due to climate change, with impacts including biodiversity loss, 
water shortages, reduced food production, reduced economic growth and even loss of lives.6 Power 
generation across most parts of sub- Saharan Africa is still dominated by fossil fuels. In rural areas not 
connected to the grid, power generation is largely dependent on biomass and diesel generation.  
The potential of the REPP 2  Programme  to mitigate GHG emissions lies in:  
• Replacement of fossil fuel -intensive grid electricity with renewable energy power generation 
from grid -connected utility -scale projects and large mini -grid projects (isolated grids);  
• Replacement of fossil fuel -intensive off-grid electricity with renewable energy power 
generation ,  through  large mini -grid projects ( isolated grids );  and 
• Provision of new or improved access to clean energy for people and communities  that have 
historically had little or no electricity access, through off ‑grid solar home systems and solar 
photovoltaic mini -grid systems (which typically replace candles, kerosene and diesel power 
generation).  
The REPP 2 Programme will avoid and reduce greenhouse gas emissions (MRA 1) and promote a paradigm 
shift for climate mitigation in each of the Host Countries. The Programme will be aligned with the principles 
for demonstrating the climate rationale of mitigation activities, as recently clarified by the GCF.19 Specifically:  
• Emission reduction activities supported by REPP 2 will be strongly aligned with priorities defined in 
the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) of all H ost Countries;  
• At the time of investment, REPP 2 will determine and assess project impact boundaries, GHG 
emission baselines using standard emission factors that are aligned to national GHG reporting, 
projected emissions avoided or reduced, and additionality using internationally -accepted Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM) methodologies  (as presented in A nnex 22.B ); 
• The same CDM methodologies will be used to establish monitoring protocols;  and 
• A robust and comprehensive measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system for GHG 
emission reductions has been prepared in accordance with international best practise and GCF 
requirements.  
3. Climate rationale for adaptation  
The combination of hazards, exposure, vulnerability to current climate variability and existing and limited 
adaptive capacity due to existing socioeconomic circumstances described above leave people and 
communities across sub-Saharan Africa highly vulnerable to climate change. The mutually reinforcing 
vulnerabilities (induced by climate, socio- economic, cultural and political drivers) result in very limited 
adaptive capacity and make building climate resilience a priority. Climate adaptation initiatives and the need for significantly scaled- up financing for adaptation are thus a priority in all H ost Country NDCs and National 
Adaptation Plans.  
Without increasing adaptation capacity, climate change impacts are anticipated to deteriorate in all Host 
Countries , including decreased food security and further loss of livelihoods. Climate change hazards are 
also likely to disproportionately affect rural women, given their culturally -defined roles, and other vulnerable 
groups. The potential of REPP 2 to increase climate change resilience and adaptive capacity lies in:  
• The use of multiple energy sources and technologies to make energy systems more climate 
resilient against supply disruption. For example, hybridising  hydropower generation (which is often


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 9  
 
 seasonally variable and may be negatively impacted by reduced rainfall due to climate change) with 
solar or wind generation can provide a buffer against climate variability ; 
• Decentralising and diversifying energy supply with renewable energy systems and off -grid 
solutions,  which can provide increased energy security  through the ability to localise and buffer grid-
based supply disruptions ; 
• Increasing access to renewable energy in off -grid communities  to provide hous eholds and 
businesses with solutions that help to build resilience and respond to the impact s of climate change. 
Such s olutions include electricity provision for clinics to respond to increased illness, malnutri tion, 
and injury ; electricity provision to refugee camps  that are  accommodating di splaced people, ; 
electricity provision to educational  facilities to improve awareness and knowledge about climate 
change; improved access to climate information through cellular networks , radios, and internet  
enabling people and communities to benefit from access to climate early -warning systems for 
disaster risk reduction and seasonal climate information for planning and decision- making for 
management of crops and livestock ; providing power for increased cooling need; irrigation  to 
increase agricultural productive output ; e-mobility  to provide inc reased access to markets  as well as 
providing improved  cooking solutions  to households ;   
• Supporting local private developers  and helping them to become financial sustainable, thereby 
making the local renewable energy sector (as well as local economies more broadly) more resilient 
to macroeconomic shocks ; and  
• Supporting technological innovations that build the capacity of households and communities to 
anticipate and respond to climate impacts, including innovations for the delivery of climate services 
(e.g., access to mobile phones and internet improves access to meteorological and 
agrometeorological reports and early warning systems), market information, and other information 
on climate change, its impacts and the solutions; as well as technological innovations  for productive 
use applications.  
Please see Tables 1 and  2 below which present REPP 2 eligible adaptation responses. Detailed country  
level data is provided in Annex  2. 
The REPP 2 Programme responds directly to the urgent and immediate needs of vulnerable countries, as 
outlined in their NDCs. The Programme focuses on nine Host Countries in sub-Saharan Africa, of which 
seven are LDCs. The potential of REPP 2 to assist these countries to adapt to the impacts of climate change 
in the context of promoting sustainable development and a paradigm shift will be confirmed through the 
following:  
• Identification: People, communities and energy infrastructure in all H ost Countries and across the 
sub-Saharan African region are highly vulnerable to climate change  (see below eligibility criteria) ; 
• Response: The Programme will target adaptation impacts through increasing the resilience of the 
most vulnerable people and communities (ARA1), in addition to energy infrastructure and the built 
environment (ARA3) ;  
• Alignment : REPP 2 will place a strong focus on aligning its investments with national -level climate, 
energy and sustainable development priorities. The proposed climate adaptation impacts of the 
Programme (improved resilience of energy infrastructure and local populations) are closely aligned 
with and strongly support national plans and climate strategies of the H ost Countries. This is ensured 
through  document analysis and extensive engagement with key governmental  and non -
governmental  stakeholders, and confirmed through securing  Non-Objection Letters  from all H ost 
Countries ; and 
• Monitoring and evaluation: A comprehensive and detailed monitoring and evaluation framework 
has been developed for the Programme as part of the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to demonstrate its adaptation impact over time, as is expected to be approved 
by the  general partner of Camco REPP SCSp.


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
  
20 Johnston, P.C., J.F. Gomez and B. Laplante, 2012: Climate Risk and Adaptation in the Electric Power Sector, Asian 
Development Bank, http://www.iadb.org/intal/intalcdi/PE/2012/12152.pdf  
21 World Meteorological Organisation, 2017: Energy Exemplar to the User Interface Platform of the Global Framework for 
Climate Services, Geneva, Switzerland, https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=3581   
Eligibility criteria for programmatic adaptation projects  
The REPP 2 Programme is cross -cutting, targeting a 20% overall contribution to climate change adaptation  
and 80% contribution to mitigation. Interventions may be classified as  contributing to climate change 
adaptation where they can be demonstrated to be  a response to specific impacts and are  expected to deliver 
improved  adaptive capacity or climate resilience. The contribution towards the 20% target for adaptation will 
be based only on those funded interventions which are classified as an adaptation response and may be 
less than the total funding provided to that investment. In all cases , classification of adaptation responses  
will be undertaken through application of Camco’s Adaptation Decision and Project Tool  (ADAPT) , and 
guidance on the eligibility of the investment as an adaptation response will be considered by the REPP 2 
Investment Committee. The ADAPT tool will be implemented according to the following high- level decision 
process:  
• STEP 1: Identify climate hazards and climate change impacts  
• STEP 2: Define adaptation response  
• STEP 3: Identify adaptation metrics and monitoring, reporting and evaluation framework  
The ADAPT tool is  integrated within the existing analytical framework which drives eligibility, selection and 
approval of candidate investments  for categorisation as a climate change adaptation response . The ADAPT 
tool will provide analytical guidelines, including clear exclusion criteria and minimum criteria for acceptability. 
Assessments will be qualitative, rather than via a score, requiring the analyst to provide a rationale to support an investment’ s eligibility as an adaptation response as well as the  nature and extent of that contribution. 
Metrics, targets and monitoring and evaluation arrangements must be considered as part of the evaluation.  
Approval for the classification of an investment as cross -cutting, along with the climate change adaptation 
targets, will be provided by the REPP 2 Investment Committee.  
Further details of the process for classifying and investment opportunity as an adaptation response are 
provided in Annex 24.  Examples of the application of the ADAPT tool, based on an ex -post assess ment of 
three case studies from the REPP Phase 1 portfolio are shown in Annex 27.  
Most African countries (as illustrated in Annex 2) have low electrification rates, inefficient grid infrastructure  
and generally  rely heavily on hydropower generation ( with additional  dependence on diesel generation for 
sites not connected to the grid) . As a baseline for the REPP 2  Programme , eligible adaptation responses for 
improving the climate resilience of existing generation infrastructure are presented in Table 1 (after Johnston 
et al., 201220 and World Meteorological Organisation, 201721). Similarly, eligible adaptation responses with 
improv ed climate resilience for people and communities are shown in Table 2. Further detail is provided in 
the Market Analysis (Annex 2) for each Host  Country.  
Table 1: Adaptation responses for improving climate resilience of energy infrastructure  
Energy 
subsector 
(baseline)  Climate 
hazards  Climate change 
impacts  Eligible 
adaptation 
responses  Renewable 
energy 
technology  Metric 
monitored  
Hydropower 
generation  Increasing 
temperatures 
and evaporative 
losses  
 Reduction in 
available 
generation 
capacity or output  
 Increase 
decentralised 
renewable 
energy generation  
 Grid-connected 
solar PV and 
wind Number of 
hydropower plants 
hybridised using 
renewable


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 Changes in 
mean annual 
rainfall  
 
Changes in 
rainfall seasonality  
 Changes in 
frequency and / 
or intensity of 
droughts  
 
Increasing 
intensity and 
frequency of 
flooding  Changes in 
operating conditions  
 
Increased risk of 
physical damage to 
infrastructure  Hybridisation of 
hydropower 
generation 
capacity using 
renewable 
energy technology  energy 
generation  
 
USD invested in 
hybridisation  
Transmission 
and distribution 
grids Increasing air 
temperatures  
 
Increasing 
frequency and/ 
or intensity of 
extremes 
(temperature or wind)  
 Increasing 
frequency and 
severity of 
wildfires  
 
Increasing 
intensity of 
storm events 
leading to 
flooding  Reduction in 
transmission 
efficiency and 
available 
transmission 
capacity  
 
Increased risk of 
physical 
damage and 
decreased 
transmission 
capacity due to 
storm damage  Increase 
decentralised renewable 
energy 
generation to 
buffer against 
disruption of 
power supply  Solar, wind and 
hydro: mini -grid 
and isolated-
grids  USD invested 
which clearly 
demonstrate 
increase in 
resilience of 
energy system  
 
Table 2: Adaptation responses for improving climate resilience of people and communities . 
Energy 
subsector 
(baseline)  Climate 
hazards  Climate change 
impacts  Eligible 
adaptation 
responses  Renewable 
energy 
technology  Metric 
monitored  
Consumer 
energy demand  Increasing air 
temperatures  
 
Reduced rainfall / increase in 
droughts  
 
Increased 
rainfall / 
increase in floods  
 Increasing 
frequency and/ 
or intensity of Increased 
electricity demand for 
cooling.  
 
Increased risk of 
crop damage 
and loss of 
production 
leading to loss of income/ food 
insecurity  
 
Increased malnutrition, 
disease, injury Provide renewable 
energy power generation for:  
• Refrigeration and cold 
storage  
• Irrigation  
• Mobility (increased 
access to 
markets)  
• Critical care 
services 
(clinics & 
hospitals)  Off grid 
solutions using solar, wind and 
hydropower : 
mini- grid and 
isolated -grids, 
SHS solutions   
 Number of 
customers in each 
subcategory


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 extreme 
weather events  
 
Sea-level rise  and death 
leading to 
increased need 
for critical 
services.  
 
Increased need 
for awareness 
raising and 
education.  
 
Increased need for climate and 
weather information.  
 
Increase 
amount of climate -induced 
migration  • Critical 
community 
services (fire & 
police stations)  
• Educational facilities  
• Information 
systems: 
phone, TV, 
radio, cell 
phone towers, 
internet  
• Refugee 
camps 
international 
agency special 
missions  
Biomass  Increasing air 
temperatures  
 Decreasing 
water availability  
 Sea-level rise  
 
Increasing 
intensity and / or 
frequency of 
flooding  Reduces 
biomass 
availability for 
cooking.  Provide renewable 
energy power 
generation for 
households to 
support the use of improved cooking solutions (such as 
pressure cookers, 
heat retaining 
solutions)  Off grid 
solutions using 
solar, wind and 
hydropower: 
mini- grid and 
isolated -grids, 
SHS solutions  Number of 
customers with 
improved 
cooking 
solutions  
 
4. Business as usual scenario  
Given the paucity of funding (particularly in LDCs) for smaller -scale and off -grid renewables, and the catalytic 
role that GCF funding will play in mobilising funding at both the portfolio and project level, there is high 
confidence that the projected level of GHG emission reductions will not be achieved without GCF funding.  
5. Related projects and interventions  
Despite the successes of earlier programmes such as REPP Phase 1, key and persistent gaps in the funding 
landscape for smaller -scale renewables remain. This finding is reinforced after a detailed analysis of the 
potential for overlap and complementarity be tween REPP 2 and other financing programmes, including 
programmes funded by the GCF. Key gaps that REPP 2 will seek to address in nascent markets across sub-Saharan Africa, including LDCs, include:  
• An almost total lack of equity funding available across the spectrum for companies that need 
development capital for projects;  
• A very limited supply of growth equity for off -grid companies; and  
• Very limited investment in smaller -scale renewable energy projects in least developed markets, 
where real and perceived risks remain high.  
From a country perspective, investment is lacking in the places that need it most as exemplified by the 
distinct lack of funding in LDCs, even for more mature technologies, such as utility -scale solar PV. Similarly, 
there is also a significant and persiste nt funding gap for companies and projects that use innovative


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 13 
 
 technologies, focus on decentralised projects, which can improve climate resilience of energy infrastructure, 
or where some level of business model risk exists, even in middle- and upper middle- income countries.  
Of the 32 projects approved by the GCF that focus on energy generation and access in Africa, there is 
relatively little direct overlap with REPP 2.13 Where overlap does exist, there are extensive opportunities for 
complementarity, particularly because of the focus of REPP 2 on early -stage funding to fill gaps not 
addressed by other programmes.  The potential for overlap and complementarity of the REPP 2 Programme 
is analysed in further detail in Annex 23.  
An update on the status of c o-financing for REPP 2  is provided in Annex 25. A summary of the REPP 2 
pipeline is provided in Annex 26 . The rationale for selection of Host C ountr ies is provided in Section B.3.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  
1. Goal statement  
REPP 2 will aim to create a paradigm shift by leveraging  additional private sector funding to promote 
investments in small- scale renewable energy projects in LDC s and other sub -Saharan African countries . As 
result of this , local populations of some of the world's most vulnerable communities will have improved 
access to clean energy, improved access to climate resilient solutions and information, and  the Host 
Countries will transition towards low -emission resilient development pathways, meeting their NDC targets . 
Accordingly , with increased investment , the GHG emissions from electricity generation will be reduced, 
climate resilience of the energy infrastructure is enhanced, and climate resilience of vulnerable people and 
communities will be improved.  
2. Paradigm shift potential  
If the proposed programme receives GCF funding and leverages further private sector and commercial 
finance, then local populations of some of the world's most vulnerable communities will have improved 
access to clean energy, improved access to climate resilient solutions and information, and Host Countries  
will transition towards low- emission development pathways, meeting their NDC targets. Because with the 
increased investment the GHG emissions from electricity generation will be reduced, climate resilience of energy infrastructure will be enhanced, and climate resilience of vulnerable people and communities will be 
improved.
 
The REPP 2 activities are anticipated to lead to more skilled and experienced local businesses and project 
developers, which in turn will develop with the help of REPP 2 funding more financially  sustainable, 
innovative, environmentally and socially sound climate resilient renewable energy projects . In this way, by  
building local developer capacities, as well as  de-risking and innovating financial solutions which enable 
renewable energy development, REPP  2 will create a higher volume of projects that will catalyse further 
private sector finance, contributing to stronger business environment and leading to more technology 
transfer .  
The resulting increases in renewable energy capacity will lead to cleaner production of energy, reduced  
GHG emissions, and greater  energy security  due to hybridisation of energy systems that are vulnerable to 
climate hazards, and by decentralising energy systems, transmission and distribution which is likely to be 
impacted by the increased risk of physical damage and distribution. REPP 2 investment is anticipated to  
lead to improved resilience to disasters through an improved ability to provide localised power solutions and to buffer supply disruptions through decentralisation.  
Furthermore, project developers are anticipated to provide electricity  not only for off-grid household basic 
electricity  use, but also  to critical services (e.g. clinics, water pumping stations), cooling services (e.g. 
refrigeration), information services (e.g. cell phone towers, radio) and productive  use of energy opportunities


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 which increase climate resilience (e.g. irrigation). These opportunities are expected to lead to additional 
income generation opportunities  and especially in off -grid project communities  works as a driver for long-
term economic growth . Off-grid renewable energy projects also often deliver first -time access to electricity 
for marginalised and vulnerable communities (including wom en-headed households) and businesses,  
placing them on a low -emission, climate -resilient, gender -sensitive and sustainable growth trajectory  
3. Activities and out puts delivered by REPP 2 
The activities and outputs  delivered by REPP 2 are designed to strengthen the market for small -scale 
renewables in sub- Saharan Africa and crowd in private and commercial capital  leading to GHG mitigation 
and improved resilience of  people and energy infrast ructure. This is achieved through an integrated suite of 
interventions, including:  
Early -stage development funding  
Activity 1: Provide early- stage growth funding for off -grid companies. REPP 2 will fund the early -stage 
growth and development of off -grid companies, notably solar home system businesses and mini -grid 
developers with a gender lens. This means funding of feasibility studies, ESIAs,  design and implementation 
of ESMS,  design of  gender action plans , as well as funding to acquire  first customers and secure inventory.  
Activity 2: Provide development -stage funding for grid- connected projects . REPP 2 will provide loans 
to developers of grid -connected projects to co- finance development -stage costs, such as feasibility studies , 
grid studies, ESIAs , design and implementation of ESMS , legal due diligence,  and gender  action plans.  
All funding activities will be considered from  a gender lens  perspective, with the view to target  that a minimum  
30 % of REPP 2  funding is invested in women owned and led companies, as well as companies that provide 
solutions to women as energy end users in line with the 2X GLI criteria.  
The two early -stage development funding activities delivered by REPP 2 will ensure increased technical and 
commercial viability of small- scale renewable energy projects ( Output 1), leading to an increase in 
renewable energy capacity and generation ( Output 2 ) as more projects reach financial close, are 
constructed and become operational due to REPP 2 financ ing. Furthermore,  the funding of environmental 
and social studies  (incl. gender)  and management plans will help the renewable energy project developers 
to understand and better identify risks and impacts and to establish comprehensive management plans to 
mitigate and minimise  such risks and to deliver environmentally and socially sound projects and ensure 
gender equity through increased awareness  and action (Output 3) . 
Activity 3: Finance expansion of SHS businesses. REPP 2 will provide equity or loans to fund scale up 
of solar home system businesses with a gender lens.  This growth -stage capital , in the form of loans or equity 
will help to ensure that SHS business achieve scale and long- term commercial viability ( Output 1) and will 
increas e the renewable energy capacity and generation ( Output 2).  All funding activities will be considered 
from a gender lens, with the view to target  that 30% of REPP 2 funding is provided to  women owned and led 
companies, as well as companies that provide solutions to women as energy end users in line with the 2X 
GLI criteria. This will help to promote women’s  empowerment and female ownership in REPP investments 
leading to gender equity ( Output 3).   
Activity 4: Finance construction of mini -grid portfolios. REPP 2 will provide financing for construction 
of mini -grids. The mini -grids funded can be in both peri -urban and rural areas as well as for isolated grid 
projects, which are typically large installations (servicing entire towns and tens or hundreds of t housands of 
beneficiaries) which are isolated from the national grid. This construction finance from REPP 2, which can 
be provided in the form of loans  or equity, will demonstrate that more small -scale renewable energy projects 
can achieve t echnical and co mmercial viability  (Output 1) and ensure increased renewable energy capacity 
when more mini -grids and isolated grids are constructed and become operational ( Output 2 ). REPP 2 will


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 be aligned with 2X GLI criteria, which means that it will target  30 % of fun ding is provided to women owned 
and led companies , as well as companies that provide solutions to women as energy end users to deliver 
greater gender equity ( Output 3 ).  
Gap funding for construction and implementation of grid -connected projects  
Activity 5: Prov ide gap funding for construction of grid- connected projects . REPP 2 will provide gap 
financing for the construction of on -grid projects  with a gender lens. Construction loans from REPP  2 will 
demonstrate that more grid-connected small -scale renewable energy projects can achieve technical and 
commercial viability ( Output 1) and are constructed and become operational leading to increased renewable 
energy capacity ( Output 2). The modalities of providing such funding will include innovative and less 
traditional financing approaches to reduce cost and complexity for developers and sponsors in bringing their 
projects to financial close. This approach is necessary given the limited  capacity of many first -time and/or 
local p roject developers when combined with the small scale of REPP 2 projects. In practice this requires 
Camco to balance the “belts and braces” approach to risk in project finance structures with the barriers to financial close that already prevent the deployment of small -scale renewables. For example, REPP 2 will 
consider taking a more limited set of direct agreements, proceeding with a limited or even no government 
guarantee, accepting a scaled- down security package and/or considering a mor e balanced  covenant 
package.  However, it should be noted that Camco will nevertheless ensure that material risks are addressed 
in documentation in a manner that protects the interests of REPP 2 and its investors. REPP 2 will also 
provide other type of financing which ar e needed in the market, such as mezzanine finance, 
bridge/construction finance, and convertible notes . REPP 2’s attractiveness in the market  stems from its 
flexible approach and the ability to provide the right financing from the large tool box of ins truments.  As 
mentioned above , all funding activities will be considered from a  gender lens, which means that a portion of 
REPP 2 funding (a target of  30%) will be provided to women -
owned and led companies, as well as 
companies that provide solutions to women as energy end users in line with the 2X GLI criteria. This will help to promote women’s empowerment and female ownership in REPP investments leading to gender 
equity ( Output 3).   
Activity 6: Support the provision of  financial risk mitigation  to ensure appropriate and cost -effective risk 
mitigation . REPP 2 will innovate in terms of its approach to funding and mitigating risk in SHS businesses 
(Activity 3 ) mini- grid portfolios ( Activity 4) . This may include additional sources of local currency funding 
and designing new risk mitigation strategies , including minimum revenue guarantees  (in partnership with 
key risk mitigation providers in the region) , to de- risk these investments and attract more commercial and 
private sector funding into these sectors. In addition,  REPP 2 will be promote the provision of and access 
to connections  subsidies in the markets in which it invests, and will encourage its investees to secure such 
subsidies . For individual transactions REPP 2 will employ a comprehensive risk management framework  to 
ensure that cost -effective  financial, technical and political  risk mitigation solutions can be offered for projects.  
By de -risking investments in smaller -scale renewables, REPP 2 can ensure that more projects become 
commercially viable ( Output 1) , leading to increased renewable energy capacity  (Output 2).  
Technology deployment, innovation and market transformation 
Activity 7: Provide targeted support to developers. REPP 2 will provide targeted support and capacity 
building to developers and entrepreneurs  as part of the investment process . Tailored support and capacity 
building will be  provided for improving financial models, business plans and risk mitigation as well as projects ’ 
environmental and social management. This support  will improve  skills and expertise of project developers 
and off-grid companies  in the small -scale renewables sector across sub-all target markets , thus supporting 
market transformation  (Output 3 ).  
Activity 8: Improve environmental and social risk mitigation . REPP 2 will provide tailored support and 
capacity building to its investees on environmental and social issues and  require all investees to develop


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 and implement an appropriate environmental and social management system (ESMS). Implementation and  
maintenance of suitable environmental and social safeguards in accordance with industry best practice will 
improve  skills and capacity for local developers and off -grid companies and improve their ESG practices , 
making them ready to take on further investment and scale their operations in the future. (Output 3 ).  
Activity 9: Non-financial support to promote gender equity . In addition to the investments  which will be 
aligned with the 2X GLI criteria,  REPP 2 investee companies will be required to establish gender action plans 
which will lead to co -benefits in terms of more gender balanced job creation, more equitable workplaces , 
as well as more  gender balanced stakeholder and community engagement and land acquisition. Further 
detail on the gender -disaggregated impacts and indicators are provided in Section D.1 and Annex  8. 
Further details on all activities are provided in Section B.3 (item 2 , REPP 2 activities).  
4. Key barriers and risks for climate outcomes  
The following key barriers and risks which may prevent the realisation of REPP 2 outcomes have been 
identified:  
• Uncertainties and delays in implementing policy and regulatory frameworks  and/or limited 
experience amongst public sector stakeholders  with implementation of new or untested regulatory 
frameworks and project finance documentation can result in delays in project implementation, additional 
costs,  devolve  private sector involvement and slow down or prohibit  sector grow th.  
• Political uncertainty and change  which may have unexpected influence on projects ’ financial viability 
due to change in  IPP approval process, grid extension planning, feed in tariffs  and mini -grid tariff setting, 
land- use, currency risk and legal and documentation risk . This may hinder projects from progressing, 
reaching financial close or receiving anticipated returns.   
• Limited bankability for on- grid utilities  in Host Countries  in which the national grid utility is not 
regarded as creditworthy . This will increase real and perceived risk, which may  limit co -founder’s appetite 
in the smaller renewables sector  and hinder a project reaching financial close.  
• Limited access to finance at both the fund level and the level of underlying projects.  At the fund level, 
there is limited appetite from investors (public and private) for smaller -scale renewables . Commercial 
investors (both public and private) typically seek risk mitigation through the capital structure of a fund, 
requiring junior investors or guarantee provider s to provide first loss protection.  Asset -level f inancing is 
usually available at financial close for “bankable” projects or off -grid companies of sufficient scale. 
Smaller ticket sizes may fall below the appetite of public funders such as development finance institutions 
(DFIs), infrastructure funds as well as private and commercial investors , which means that such 
investments face the risk of not achieving financial close.  As a consequence, REPP 2 may struggle to 
attract co -financing, particularly private and commercial co -financing, and may also struggle to leverage 
third-party financing into individual assets that it funds . 
• Limited supply of projects with economically viable business which provide tailored energy services 
and innovative financing models for resilient productive uses of electricity  and last mile customers. 
Smaller project sizes limit generation and revenue potential. Costs of development and growth to scale 
are typically large relative to this potential, resulting in more marginal return expectations. Higher levels 
of macroeconomic risk have emerged, due to high inflation- low growth conditions in local economies 
which have followed the Covid-  pandemic, as well as higher foreign exchange and balance of payment 
risks as interest rates are raised to combat inflation and protect growth.  
• Weak/underdeveloped legal  frameworks and capacity to enforce best ESG practice and gender 
equality.  The level of environmental and social safeguards , their operationalisation and monitoring in 
many markets in sub-Saharan Africa regularly fail to meet international practice standards  on pollution 
prevention, labour rights and occupational health and safety, as well as gender balanced consultation 
and implementation. This may create an environment where investee is not motivated to uphold the 
required standar ds.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 • Limited ability and appetite from investees to improve their ESG practice and gender balance. 
Investees may consider this out of their core focus,  time-consuming and costly without understanding 
the importance for risk mitigation and benefit  of creating sustainable projects and businesses. 
Furthermore , amongst local communities, women are often constrained by gender -defined cultural roles 
and the rights of women – notably with respect to land ownership – are frequently not respected , which 
is likely to incr ease the complexity of implementing gender balanced engagement.  
• Limited capacity of grids and grid operators  to manage variable renewable energy supply which may 
arise due to lack of grid connectivity between high renewable resource regions to high power demand 
centers , grid flexibility or deficient assessment of available resources. This may lead to increased project 
costs due as grid infrastructure needs  to be upgraded to enable project to feed in.   
The f ollowing external assumptions , which  cannot be controlled by REPP 2,  have been made for a 
successful implementation of REPP 2 mandate :   
1. Sufficient s upportive policy and regulatory frameworks exist or can be developed and there is political 
will to do so ; 
2. Public and private investors are willing to invest in jurisdictions where REPP 2 operates ; 
3. Jurisdictions in which REPP 2 operates are and remain politically sufficiently stable for renewable 
energy  development;  
4. For grid- connected projects, utilities are bankable and offtake risks can be managed through 
available risk mitigation instruments ; and 
5. Sufficient demand for and opportunities exist to support women -owned and led businesses.  
The theory of change for REPP 2 is summarised in the diagram below.


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 18


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 19 
 
 B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 - 4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 - 4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1: 
Reduced 
GHG 
emissions 
from 
renewable 
energy 
installations  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 2: 
Improved 
climate 
resilience of 
energy 
infrastructure  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ 
Outcome 3: 
Improved 
climate 
resilience for 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities ” ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 4: 
Increased 
private sector 
investment  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 5:  
Contributing 
to stronger 
technology 
deployment, 
innovation 
and market 
transformatio
n ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1: 
Jobs created  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 20 
 
 Co-benefit 2:  
Enhanced 
gender equity   ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 3:  
Improved quality of life
  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 4: 
Improved ESG 
practices  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
  
 
B.3. Project/programme description 
1. The REPP 2 Programme  
REPP 2 will finance and promote the growth of small to medium -sized renewable energy projects across 
sub-Saharan Africa. Through this process, REPP  2 will catalyse the growth of sub-Saharan Africa’s smaller -
scale renewable energy sector, mobilising additional public , private and commercial funding to combat 
climate change and provide build climate resilience for people, communities and energy infrastructure. 
Building on the success of REPP Phase 1, REPP 2 will focus on support in nascent renewable energy 
markets, including eight  LDCs. The programme is expected to deliver 330MW of new installed capacity, 
reduce or avoid more than 12.7m tCO 2e of GHG emission , provide new or improved energy access to more 
than 7.7 million people, improve the quality of life of 3.7 million people and improve the resilience of nearly 
one million beneficiaries .  
In addition to reducing GHG emissions through renewables, REPP 2 will deliver climate adaptation impacts 
and build climate resilience by providing energy access to vulnerable people and communities, as well as 
diversifying and decentralising renewable energy infrastructure across sub-Saharan Africa. All of REPP 2’s 
targeted climate impacts are closely aligned with the national priorities of Host Countries  for mitigation and 
adaptation as defined in their NDCs, NAPs and other policy and strategic frameworks.  
REPP 2 will fund both on -grid and off -grid renewable energy projects and companies, including isolated grid 
developments in which renewable energy generation is used as the source of power for entire towns and 
small cities. REPP 2 investments will have significant transformational potential, with opportunities to provide clean, often first -time affordable power to tens of thousands of beneficiaries through one installation alone. 
REPP 2 will build on the success and learning from REPP Phase 1 to achieve greater scale and mobilise  
additional public and private funding into the smaller renewables sector. The Programme will focus on LDCs, where the funding and capacity gaps are greatest.  
The REPP 2 strategy is to take a bottom -up approach, working directly with private sector developers and 
companies to help develop a viable renewable energy sector  and a vibrant financing market for smaller 
renewable energy projects. Furthermore, REPP 2 seeks to be:  
• Additional , in that it stimulates sectoral development that would otherwise lag or not occur; and  
• Transformational , in that it helps to establish or build a market ecosystem that allows the ongoing 
growth of small -scale and distributed renewables in the region.  
REPP 2 will deliver on this mandate through providing funding and additional forms of support to developers   
designed specifically to overcome the barriers identified in Section B.1.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 21 
 
 2. REPP 2 activities  
All REPP 2 activities fall within a single component, designed to provide funding and support for smaller -
scale renewable energy businesses and projects across sub-Saharan Africa.   The activities delivered by 
REPP 2 are designed to strengthen the market for small -scale renewables in sub- Saharan Africa and crowd 
in private capital leading to GHG mitigation and improved resilience of people and energy infrastructure.  
The activities outlined below describe the provision of: 
• Early-stage growth funding for off -grid companies and development funding for grid- connected projects;  
• Gap financing for growth of SHS businesses as well as construction of mini -grids, isolated grids and grid-
connected projects; and  
• Support for technology deployment, innovation and market transformation  
 
Early -stage development and growth funding  
A range of funding activities for REPP 2 is described below. For all equity investments, REPP 2 will typically 
take a minority shareholding in accordance with its Investment Policy.  REPP 2 will act as an anchor investor 
and seek to crowd in other public and private sector investors to meet total project capital requirements . For 
debt investments, REPP  2 will typically require a minimum of 30% contribution from the investee.  
Activity 1:  Provide early -stage growth funding for off -grid companies  
REPP 2 will provide growth capital to off -grid electrification companies, many of whom are small, locally -
owned businesses. Growth capital for off -grid companies will be provided in the form of hybrid equity 
instruments (highly subordinated debt or senior ranked equity, typically convertible notes or redeemable 
shares), as well as subordinated and senior loans.  
Identified needs for SHS businesses include smaller equity investments to demonstrate that selected 
technologies are fit -for-purpose and the necessity to establish innovative new business models, acquire first 
customers and secure inventory.  
Mini- grid developers require smaller equity investments to demonstrate that selected technologies are fit -
for-purpose, as well as the need to establish innovative new business models, acquire first customers and 
to meet project development expenses.  
This funding will help these businesses  to achieve scale and sustainability  and overcome key barriers, such 
as a lack of early -stage or development funding, limited access to finance and challenging economics for 
smaller projects.  
Activity 2:  Provide development -stage funding for grid- connected projects  
REPP 2 will provide development -stage funding in the form of hybrid equity instruments  that are typically 
either repaid at financial close or include an option for REPP 2 to convert the loan into funding for construction 
at financial close. This funding approach directly addresses the key barriers experienced by developers of smaller -scale projects which are the lack of early -stage or development funding, and 
limited access to 
finance to develop bankable projects.   
The simplified development loan terms offered by REPP 2 will also help to reduce barriers related to 
challenging economics for smaller projects  because the costs of development are typically large relative to 
the potential of smaller projects to generate revenues, resulting in more marginal return expectations for 
developers, sponsors and commercial lenders.  
The simplified terms and conditions for REPP 2 development loans will also help to overcome t he burden  
and cost  of funder requirements . In accordance with the risk appetite of REPP  2, the development loans it 
offers will be structured to assume equity -like risk during the development phase and will be priced to ensure


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 22 
 
 commensurate returns if the development is successful. This structure is generally faster to execute, allowing 
more rapid deployment of capital for development than standard equity investments.  
Development funding for grid- connected projects will be used as a contribution towards the costs of project 
development (including design and permitting, technical feasibility studies, environmental and social impact 
assessments, gender actions plans, etc.) and due diligence (including legal fees and other third -party costs) 
as the projects approach financial close.  
Activity 3: Finance expansion of SHS businesses  
REPP 2 with provide funding for the expansion of SHS businesses in the form of equity (ordinary and 
preference shares)  and debt . Where REPP 2 provides debt , this will be in the form of mezzanine and senior 
loans . This funding must be used to scale these businesses to become fully sustainable once their business 
model is proven.  Funding for SHS businesses will be provided in the form of hybrid equity  instruments, as 
well as subordinated  and senior loans.  
This activity address es barriers to growth for SHS businesses, including a lack of early -stage or development 
funding,  limited access to finance for growth, and a limited appetite for investment in new markets . 
Activity 4: Finance construction of mini -grid portfolios  
REPP 2 may fund construction of mini- grid portfolios  and isolated grid developments  by way of   hybrid equity 
instruments, as well as subordinated  and senior loans.. This  funding will be used for construction and to 
achieve scale and sustainability once the mini -grid business model is proven.  
For mini -grid developers, this activity will help to overcome barriers which include a lack of early -stage or 
development funding,  limited access to finance for growth , and a limited appetite for investment in new 
markets . Mini- grid developers face additional barriers related to limited or untested domestic policy and 
regulatory frameworks  where regulatory frameworks are new and regulated tariffs are not cost -reflective. 
Activities  1-4 all support Out put 1 (Increased Commercial Viability) of off- grid businesses and grid- connected 
projects. Output 1 is described in detail in item 3 below.  
Funding for the expansion of SHS businesses (Activity 3) and construction of mini -grid portfolios (Activity 4) 
also help to deliver improved quality of life for people and communities provided with first -time electricity 
access for productive use of electricity and critical services (Output 2), described in further detail in item 3 , 
below . 
Gap financing for construction and implementation of grid -connected projects  
Activity 5: Provide gap funding for construction of grid- connected projects  
REPP 2 will seek to crowd in private and public  sources of funding and provide additional (gap) funding to 
fill a confirmed gap in the capital structure and achieve financial close. REPP 2 may provide funding via 
hybrid equity instruments, subordinated or  senior loans.  Loans will have a targeted weighted average tenor 
for the portfolio of 10 years and may also fund on concessional terms based on the needs of each project.  
This funding will help to overcome key barriers, including limited access to finance, by providing access to 
funding for construction for smaller projects, where investment ticket sizes often fall below the appetite of development finance institutions (DFIs), infrastructure funds as well as private and 
commercial lenders. 
REPP 2 funding for construction will also help overcome challenging economics for smaller projects and 
companies , where the smaller project size limits generation capacity and thus revenue and return 
expectations. Simplified and streamline funding conditions will also hel p to overcome the burden  and cost of 
funder requirements .  
Activity 1 -5: To enhance gender equality within renewable energy sector REPP 2 will target 30% of all 
funding towards companies that meet 2X GLI criteria. These are companies that: 
• Are founded by a woman or women or are majority -owned by women; and / or


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 23 
 
 • Have at least 30% women in senior management; and / or  
• Provide products or services designed to disproportionately benefit women; and / or  
• Have a workforce that is comprised of at least 30% women, together with a progressive human resource 
policy.  
Activity 6: Support the provision of  financial risk mitigation  
In nascent markets, developers of grid- connected projects face additional barriers related to limited or 
untested domestic policy and regulatory frameworks  and need to secure power purchase agreements with 
grid utilities and operators with limited creditworthiness and experience of working with independent power produced and variance energy generation from renewable energy sources such as solar PV (examples of 
grid utility political and bankability risk ). 
REPP 2 will seek to ensure appropriate and cost -effective risk mitigation  for off -grid business, as well as 
developers and sponsors  of grid -connected projects . In doing so, REPP 2 seeks to  reduce generally higher 
levels of real and perceived risk , particularly when developing smaller renewable energy projects in nascent 
and LDC markets . Elements of a more innovative approach to mitigating real and perceived risk and 
attracting more commercial and private sector funding include:  
• Attracting additional local currency funding  for SHS businesses (Activity 3) , mini- grid portfolios 
(Activity 4)  and grid -connected projects (Activity 5) . To reduce currency risk for businesses and 
funders alike, REPP 2 will work with additional sources of commercial as well as public local currency funders (in country as well as regional), to co-finance the roll -out of mini -grid p ortfolios and expansion 
of SHS business . 
• Securing innovative risk mitigation strategies  for mini -grid portfolios , including minimum revenue 
guarantees . This new form of risk mitigation is being considered in the market but is not yet widely 
available. REPP 2 will work with key risk mitigation providers for  the region, to de- risk these 
investments and attract more commercial and private sector funding into this  sector.  REPP 2 will 
also promote the provision of and access to connections  subsidies . 
• Employ ing innovative and less traditional project finance approaches to reduce cost and complexity 
for developers and sponsors to bring their projects to financial close. This approach may be 
implement for investments in both off -grid and grid- connected opportunities. Examples (often already 
utilised in REPP Phase 1) include  growth capital for off -grid companies (Activity 1) in the form of 
hybrid equity instruments , asset finance loans with loan principal growing in line with the asset base 
of the company , development -stage funding via hybrid equity instruments, typically either repaid at 
financial close or including  an option for REPP 2 to convert the loan into funding for construction at 
financial close (Activity 2) and  use of hybrid equity instruments to fund investments in the SHS sector 
(Activity 3).  
The capital structure of REPP 2 has been designed to address endemic risk factors such as currency risk, 
which impacts investors and investees . The junior equity/first loss tranche is designed to absorb losses from 
any cause across the portfolio, including through defaults caused by currency devaluation transfer and 
inconvertibility risk. This is likely to be more efficient than mitigating risk at the  level of each transaction. 
REPP 2 will also investigate sources  of first or second loss portfolio guarantees  to boost loss protection for 
senior equity investors and noteholders. Such guarantees cover the risk of losses due to any form of non -
payment, including where the cause of the failure to pay may be related to currency devaluation. 
At the transaction level, financial risk mitigation may take the form of political risk insurance, credit 
enhancement or mitigation of foreign exchange risk to address currency mismatches between revenues 
derived in local currencies and funding obligations in hard currencies. REPP 2 will work closely with i ts 
network of risk mitigation providers to reduce risks for governments, developers and funders alike. As was the case for REPP Phase 1, where a first- of-a-kind innovative risk mitigation solution for off taker liquidity risk 
was adopted, REPP 2 will continue to work with its partners to develop and implement innovati ve risk


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 24 
 
 mitigation solutions. Existing risk mitigation providers used by REPP 1 , and likely to be used by REPP 2,  
including  the African Trade Insurance Corporate (ATI), GuarantCo and World Bank MIGA. Continuous  
exchange of pipeline information and collaboration with partners are ensured through well -established 
communication channels. In all cases, a decision to secure risk mitigation (e.g. payment liquidity or payment 
default cover under a Power Purchase Agreement ( PPA) , or other forms of political risk cover) will be made 
on a case- by-case basis, based on the assessed level of risk and availability of risk mitigation instruments. 
These decisions will be approved by the REPP I nvestment Committee  in every case.  
REPP will attempt to secure (as appropriate and as available) the following existing forms of financial risk 
mitigation, in line with its Investment Policy:  
• Political risk insurance  (PRI):  PRI will be sourced at a transaction level.  Typically, PRI  cover will include 
transfer and convertibility  risk; breach of contract; expropriation; and war and civil disturbance.  REPP 2 
will source PRI cover from existing REPP partners such as the Africa Trade Insurance Corporation 
(“ATI”) as well as other reputable providers such as the World Bank (through the Multilater al Investment 
Guarantee Agency, “MIGA”) and the African Development Bank (“AfDB”).  
Offtaker credit risk:  Various forms of credit enhancement are possible / available to address offtaker 
credit risk  for national utilities. These include a) payment liquidity cover (e.g. standby letters of credit, or 
fully-funded  escrow accounts); and  b) payment default cover (e.g. via sovereign guarantees, corporate 
guarantees or breach of contract cover provided through PRI ). REPP 2 may source payment liquidity 
cover from the ATI’s Regional Liquidity Support Facility (“RLSF”) or seek funding of liquidity facilities 
directly from offtakers and sponsors (funding for debt service reserve accounts). REPP 2 may source 
non-payment (default) cover from the ATI as well as GuarantCo and other risk mitigation providers . A 
further source of protection for offtake r default risk will be via government guarantees (in support of 
national utilities which are acting as the offtaker for independent power producer projects).  
• Currency  hedging: In addition to efforts to secure local currency funding wherever possible and w here 
project economics and counterparty creditworthiness allows, c urrency  risk may be mitigated through  
denominating loans  and equity investments in hard currency , which transfers FX risk from REPP 2 to 
borrowers, investees and offtaker s.  
REPP 2 may engage in direct currency  hedging at the transaction level (via foreign exchange forwards 
and cross -currency swaps) which wo uld reduce  currency  devaluation risk to REPP 2 and also to 
borrowers / investees but would pass the costs of that hedging on to those borrowers / investees . Relative 
to the reduced scale of the revenues generated by smaller -scale renewable energy projects, these 
hedging costs are often prohibitive, even when sourcing hedging solutions from specialist market 
providers such as TCX. Other (potentially cost -effective) opportunities exist for  FX hedging at the portfolio 
level, which would also reduce FX risk to REPP 2 and help achieve economies of scale in terms of costs 
which can passed on to borrowers / investees . 
Activit ies 5 and 6 support achievement of Output 2 (Increase in renewable energy capacity and g eneration) 
through the construction of grid- connected projects .  
Support for t echnology deployment, innovation and market transformation  
A portion of REPP 2 operating costs will be allocated to build skills and capacity amongst local businesses 
and developers (Output 3), improve the ability of businesses and developers to deliver gender equity, and improve their ability to manage ESG risk and impact.  This support will be offered  alongside hybrid equity 
instruments or as part of subordinated or senior loan commitments at financial close.  Activities supported 
include the following:  
Activity 7 : Provide targeted support to developers  
REPP 2 will work to overcome the limited experience and funding for local developers  by engaging with 
them at their own pace and building local developer capacities by  providing technical support to upskill 
project developers and off -grid companies . This activity , conducted as part of REPP 2 investment approach,


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 25 
 
 will build project finance and specifically project finance risk management skills for local developers , enabling 
those developers to mitigate key risks and thereby secure both public and private sector funding. It will also 
support off -grid companies in strengthening their business plans and fundraising processes. Investees will 
also be supported in strengthening their internal gender and inclusion policies and designing their Gender 
Action Plans.  
Given the significance of local currency funding in providing long- term sustainable financing solutions for 
local developers, REPP 2 will also work to upskill and crowd in local (usually local -currency) funders, thereby 
making an important contribution to market development . 
Activity 8 : Improve environmental and social risk mitigation  
REPP 2 will require that all investees develop and implement an environmental and social management 
system (ESMS) that is commensurate with the level of risk for that investment and is fit for purpose in 
accordance with the REPP 2’s environment and social policy, which will itself be aligned with GCF and 
international best practise standards. This will support knowledge transfer to developers in REPP  2 Host 
Countries.  
REPP 2 will fund and proactively support investees in the development of their ESMSs and will establish 
new – and expand on existing – guidelines and toolkits to build their capacity. 
Activity 9 : Non-financial support to promote gender equity  
REPP 2 will integrate a gender equity  perspective into the design, implementation, monitoring and 
assessment of all renewable energy activities financed by REPP 2. This involves:  
• Analysing gender equity  in the investee company, country of operation, and targeted sector;  
• Establishing an investee- specific GAP by identifying gender performance indicators and gender -
disaggregated targets against an established baseline; and 
• Integrating the items listed in the two bullet points above into a monitoring plan. 
REPP 2 support for t echnology deployment, innovation and market transformation  will build  skills and 
capacity amongst local businesses and developers (Output 3), as described fu rther in item 3 . 
3. REPP 2 outputs  
The above activities will lead to the following REPP 2 outputs  
Output 1: Increased commercial viability  
All REPP 2 activities, including early -stage growth and development funding, gap funding for construction 
and support for market development combine to demonstrate the potential for technical and commercial 
viability of smaller- scale renewable energy businesses and projects  including female owned and led  in Host 
Countries  and across the region. Over its 20- year lifespan, REPP 2 targets support for thirty -seven  (37) new 
investments.  All new investments and the full funding commitment will be disbursed within seven (7) years 
of the first close for REPP 2.  
Output 2: Increased renewable energy capacity and generation  
Early -stage and construction funding from REPP 2 ensures that new renewable energy capacity and 
generation is realised. Renewable energy capacity and generation financed by REPP 2 contributes directly 
to improved access to clean electricity for women and men  and host -country priorities as outlined in their 
policy frameworks as well as their Nationally -Determined Contributions and National Adaptation Plans.


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
  
22 Note: in instances where REPP 2  will fund run- of-river hydropower assets, careful resource and design assessments will 
be undertaken to manage climate change risk  Output 3: Improved skills and capacity  
REPP 2 support for project developers  establish a more active and commercially -viable market for smaller -
scale renewables, which is better -able to attract both public and private finance in future. These impacts 
accrue to Host Countries  and more broadly throughout sub-Saharan Africa, with a demonstrat ion impact for 
other emerging markets  and with developers being better placed to expand to those markets . REPP 2 will 
directly contribute to improved gender equity through a focus on gender mainstreaming  within investee 
projects and businesses . 
4. REPP 2 outcomes  
The activities  and outputs  delivered by REPP 2 are designed to strengthen the market for small -scale 
renewables and crowd in private capital leading in sub -Saharan Africa leading to  GHG mitigation and 
improved and strengthen resilience energy infrastructure  and vulnerable people and communities, as 
follows:  
Outcome 1: Reduced GHG emissions from renewable energy installations  
Early-stage and development funding from REPP 2 will contribute to the achievement of the programme’s 
objectives to reduce GHG emissions and increase renewable energy generation capacity by helping off -grid 
companies to establish their business models and begin their growth towards scale and sustainability, and 
by helping grid- connected projects to reach f inancial close.  
REPP 2  funding for construction ensures that renewable energy businesses and projects are constructed 
and become operational, thereby reducing or avoiding GHG emissions for Host Countries . Targeted 
mitigation outcomes include 12.7 m tCO 2e of avoided or reduced GHG emissions and 3 30MW of new 
renewable energy capacity over the 25 -year total life time n of the technologies .  
Outcome 2: Improved climate resilience of energy infrastructure  
Funding for c onstruction from REPP 2  contributes to the climate resilience of energy infrastructure in 
numerous ways  (see Annex  2 for country  specific details) : 
• Funding to achieve scale and sustainability of off -grid renewable energy installations which  offer lower-
cost, climate -resilient solutions  and stable sources of clean energy generation for people , communities 
and business not connected to the grid;  
• Decentralisation and diversification of energy generation can lead to greater grid stability and climate 
resilience , especially in countries w here transmission and distribution infrastructure  is already  
constrained , and where an  increased  risk of physical damage and decreased generation and 
transmission capacity  is expected due to climate change.  
• Countries which depend on hydropower generation but  are also drought -prone with high rainfall 
seasonality  are vulnerable to current climate variability. Projected decreases in annual rainfall and/or 
increases in the occurrence and severity of droughts  increase  climate change vulnerabilit y. Hybrid  power 
solutions  (e.g., where solar PV is augmented with existing hydropower infrastructure) can directly 
contribute to improved grid stability and greater climate resilience ;22 
Outcome 3: Improved climate resilience of  vulnerable people and communities  
Funding for off -grid electrification projects will not only provide first -time and affordable clean energy access 
and improve quality of life of low-income people who typically live in rural communities and are most 
vulnerable to climate change, but it will also build climate resilience outcomes including:


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 27 
 
  
23 To date, REPP Phase 1 has mobil ised USD460 million in third party funding, representing a 3.8x multiple for third- party 
funding mobiliz ed into the underlying assets (according to its Quarterly Impact Report for Q2 2023 
https://repp.energy/resource-center/publications/q2-2023/ ). Of this, approximately 50% has been leveraged from private or 
commercial sources (unpublished data). Based on the proven track record of REPP Phase 1, the same proportion has 
been applied to the pipeline for REPP 2, which seeks to mobilise a total of USD786 million in third party funding. On this 
basis, the target for private or commercial funding mobilised is USD393 million.  • Communities not connected to the grid often rely extensively on wood biomass, kerosene and diesel as 
a fuel source. Reduced biomass availability and increase in fuel prices represent  additional climate 
change vulnerabilities. Adoption of renewable energy solutions, such as solar lighting, renewable energy 
powered pressure cookers, reduce these vulnerabilities;   
• Improved access to climate information through cellular networks powered by renewable energy improve 
ability to plan and reach to the impacts of climate change. Local residents and the broader community 
can then benefit from access to early -warning systems relating to both pending disasters (storm, hail 
flooding risk) and seasonal climate information (relating to planning and decision- making for 
management of crops and livestock). Similarly,  households and community’s  access to information can 
be improved t hrough solar powered cell phone charging, radio and TV;  
• Improved and more stable energy supply for critical community services such as health care facilities , 
emergency response,  schools  and water pumping stations build ability to respond to climate risks; 
• Similarly , e-mobility can assist some of the most vulnerable agricultural communities to better access 
markets . The need for irrigation as well as cooling will increase, and solar powered solutions can help to 
build  climate resilience and better adaptation response. 
Outcome 3 (improved climate resilience for vulnerable people and communities) supports all H ost Country 
adaptation and climate resilience priorities. 
Outcome 4: Increased private sector investment  
Programme Funding raised:  In addition to the GCF Proceeds, REPP 2  aims to raise  USD200 million of 
funding for smaller -scale renewables across sub-Saharan Africa through co- financing of the Programme. A 
total of USD 150 million is expected to be raised from public funding sources  and USD50 million is target ed 
to be raised from private funding sources . 
Additional finance mobilised: The current REPP 2  pipeline represents a total estimated project cost of 
USD1.02 b illion. On this basis, the target for additional finance mobilised through co- investment directly into 
off-grid businesses and grid- connected projects is USD786 million. The target for private and commercial  
finance mobilised for investment is USD393 million.23 
In addition to the above, REPP 2  intends to target  up to 30% of its funding in support of 2X Challenge Gender 
Lens Investing (2X GLI) opportunities. This represents a target of USD70 million.  
Outcome 5: Contributing to stronger technology deployment, innovation and market transformation  
REPP 2  will: 
• contribute to more and more rapid technology deployment by providing targeted support and finance to 
renewable energy companies during early and construction stages of the assets  and by  financ ing the 
deployment of smaller -scale and off -grid renewable energy technologies  in nascent markets, often 
financing first -of-a-kind transactions and business models ; and 
• contribute to market development and transformation through its financing and capacity building support 
to local developers , based on the  application of sound commercial investment principles  aimed at 
delivering commercially  viable and bankable projects. This support – directly and through demonstration 
effect to broader sector stakeholders – will stimulat e sectoral development that would otherwise lag or


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 not occur and help to establish or build a market ecosystem that will allow the ongoing growth of small 
and distributed renewables in Host Countries and across the region.  
5. REPP 2  co-benefits  
The construction and operation of renewable energy power plants will create new jobs  during construction 
and operations  for 76,801 people (co-benefit 1) .  
REPP 2  will also enhance gender equity  (co-benefit 2) through:  
• Anticipated 23,040 jobs for women  
• 70 mUSD funding committed to 2X Challenge’s Gender Lens Investing criteria- aligned companies    
• 11 female led or managed companies funded b y REPP 2 ; 
• All REPP 2  investees will be required to establish gender action plans to increase gender equity 
awareness and performance within investee company and though their project implementation. The 
REPP 2  target is 37 developers with improved gender equity awareness and practices;  
• 1,1 million  women with improved quality of life.  
• REPP 2  funding and support will lead to improved quality of life  through community and critical services 
connected to electricity  (co-benefit 3) . Co-benefits include improved access to healthcare, lighting , 
refrigeration,  improved access to information and more productive use of energy ( PUE) opportunities . 
These co -benefits will allow further socioeconomic  development of H ost Countries and their off -grid 
communities . The target for this co- benefit is improved quality of life through access to improved lighting for 
3.7 million people, improved access to  information for  1.7 million people.  
REPP 2  will deliver improved ESG practices  (co-benefit 4) by providing  its investees with train ing and 
funding to identify  environmental and social risk  and impacts, and to establish mitigation and management 
systems in accordance with industry best practices , leading to improved  environmental and social 
performance . Examples include improved waste management practices, mitigating the potential for negative 
impact s on biodiversity, soil and water resources, improved labour practices  and Occupational Health and 
Safety (OHS ) standards .  developers . 
6. Impact recognition 
Individual projects or off -grid renewable energy companies are eligible for multiple forms of support and 
funding from REPP 2 . For example, an off -grid company may receive both growth funding ( Activity 1) and 
gap financing for construction of mini -grids (Activity 4). Similarly, a developer of a grid- connect project may 
receive funding during the development phase (Activity 2 ) as well as gap financing for construction (Activity 
5). Recognition of t argeted impacts and Key Performance Indicator metrics will not be duplicated in these 
situations. Any decision to provide follow -on financing will typically not alter those metrics , with progress 
towards achievement of those metrics measured and reported through the project life cycle.  
Where a decision by REPP 2  to provide follow -on financing result s in a verifiable change to the amount of 
co-financing leveraged (from either public , whether concessional or commercial,  or private sources) or a 
change to the planned installed capacity for a project (or mini -grid or SHS portfolio) , such changes may  
result in changes to impact and KPI  targets . 
7. Rationale for selection of interventions  
The host country feasibility studies presented in Annex 2 include a country -level needs assessment that 
highlights the need for funding for on-  and off -grid renewables. The demand for the types of interventions 
outlined above is verified in Annex 2 based on reported impacts from REPP Phase 1 interventions as well 
as the stated pipeline of projects for REPP 2 .


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
  
24 As also further detailed in Annex 14 (Term Sheet)  The design of REPP 2  is informed by and builds on the successes of REPP Phase 1 to deliver scale, mobilise 
climate finance and achieve meaningful climate change impacts through both mitigation and adaptation in 
each of the Host Countries . 
8. Eligibility criteria  for REPP 2  
Installed capacity:  REPP 2  will invest in renewable energy power generation projects with an installed 
capacity of up to 25MW (and 50MW for wind). Eligible  projects can be further categorized as follows:24 
• Grid-connected projects (independent power producers or IPPs);  
• Large, isolated grids, where power is provided to entire towns (tens of thousands of connections); and 
• Off-grid RE power companies, providing mini -grid (MG) and solar home system (SHS) solutions  
Eligible technologies : As outlined in Annex 6, REPP 2  may invest in the following renewable energy power 
generation technologies: solar photovoltaic ( PV) with battery backup, onshore wind and run-of-river 
hydropower . 
Eligible countries: REPP 2  targets  small scale  renewable energy power generation projects in the Least 
Developed Countries of sub- Saharan Africa. To be eligible for receipt of GCF Proceeds , investments must 
be located in Host Countries, i.e.  a jurisdiction  which has  provided a Letter of Non -Objection in a form 
acceptable to the GCF. All such Host Countr y investments will be funded by Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l .  
REPP 2  may investment in other sub -Saharan African countries (including countries which are not classified 
as Least -Developed Countries ) where a Letter of No Objection has not been provided. Such investments 
will be funded from Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l   and will be ineligible to receive GCF funding.  
E&S risk categorisation:  REPP 2  will only invest in projects that are categorised as IFC risk category B or 
C. Category A projects are excluded . Please see Annex  6 for further detail.  
Investee requirements:  Where REPP 2  is making a project finance investment (typically for grid- connected 
IPPs), repayments and returns to REPP 2  depend on project SPV cashflows only (by definition, there is no 
recourse to the balance sheets of the sponsors). For this reason, risk assessment focuses on the commercial 
and technical viability of the project itself.  
Where REPP 2  is providing growth capital (either as debt or equity) to off -grid companies, the ability to 
service debt or generate returns depends on the long- term sustainability of the borrower. Key evaluation 
criteria include estimates of demand and revenue growth. In some cases, REPP 2  may insist on parent 
company guarantees prior to investment to boost creditworthiness of the borrower.  
Where REPP 2  is funding development for IPPs via development loans, such loans are exposure to the risk 
of failed development. Investment criteria include a requirement for a discernible pathway to commercial and 
technical viability for the project. In such cases, REPP 2  typical takes security in the form a pledge of the 
sponsor’s shares in the project SPV as well as legal charge over project assets . 
Off-grid companies:  Early -stage and g rowth capital for off -grid companies  will be provided in the form of 
equity  (ordinary and preference shares), convertible notes, junior and senior loans.  
SHS businesses : SHS businesses which sell SHS kits (typically panels , batteries , radio and/or TV , mobile 
phone charging  and lights ) and other appliances , including PUE devices (, cooling solutions, barber kits , 
irrigation  etc.) are eligible for REPP 2  funding. Business es which do not provide RE generation devices (e.g. 
sale of pico- solar devices only, or cookstoves), and business which operate as retailers or wholesales are 
not eligible for REPP 2  funding.


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 Mini-grid businesses:  Mini-grid business es must engage in the develop ment , construct ion and / or 
operat ion of  renewable energy  generation facilities (including generation, backup and reticulation)  at sites 
which are not initially connected to the main electricity grid. Typically , first-time connection includes lights. 
Such business may also provide PUE services  (e.g. irrigation, milling)  and other appliances  (such as 
pressure cookers , freezing) to their clients.   
On-grid projects:  IPPs must engage directly in the development, construction and operation of renewable 
energy  power generation facilities. REPP 2.0  may also fund the costs of grid connection.  
Skills and capacity development:  Skills and capacity building for developers (Activity 7), improved ESG 
practice (Activity 8 ) and promotion of gender equity (Activity 9 ) are targeted towards investee companies . 
To be eligible for these forms of support, beneficiaries must have an association with those companies 
(owners, management, staff, third-party advisors).  
9. Country prioritisation  
Only GCF Host Countries are eligible for investment from Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l . These Host Countries 
have been prioritised based on climate change vulnerabilities and impacts outlined in Section B.1 , Section 
D.4 as well as Annex 2 . Based on their NDCs and NAPs , further prioritisation is achieved through stakeholder 
consultation and by aligning their climate change mitigation and adaptation priorities with the objectives of 
REPP 2 , as outlined in Section D.4 as well as Annex 7 and Annex 2.   
For Portfolio HoldCo 2  S.à r.l , countries have been prioritized based on LDC status as well as demonstrated 
demand based on existing pipeline. In all cases, projects selected align with and promote country -level 
priorities in accordance with government strategic objectives, as reflected in NDCs, NAPs and other policy 
and strategic frameworks . 
Given that REPP 2  is driven by market demand for funding and requested support by project developers 
and off -grid renewable energy companies, country prioritisation is also a function of that demand, with the 
indicative pipeline shown in Annex 26  reflecting the current demand.  
10. REPP 2  risk management framework  
REPP 2  will incorporate a comprehensive enterprise risk management (“ERM”) framework , As outlined in 
the Operations Manual (Annex 21). Throughout the investment life cycle ( selecti on, analysis, approval, due 
lifecycle , implementation and exit / repayment),  risk will be assessed using a risk management toolkit which 
includes : 
• The ADAPT tool , used to assess a candidate investment’s eligibility  to be classified as a  climate change 
adaptation (cross- cutting) investment ; 
• A project risk assessment tool  (“RAT”) , which is used to assess  a wide range of risk factors  in all 
investments , including market, credit, financial, technical, environmental and social , country and 
regulatory as well as legal and documentation risks ; and 
• Additional specialised tools for detailed assess ment of  counterpar ty credit risk (for offtakers and 
borrowers) as well as environmental and social risks  (unique to each technology and asset class) . 
The REPP 2  risk management framework is designed to facilitate robust and dynamic risk identification, 
analysis, mitigation, reporting and ongoing review of the effectiveness of mitigation actions already taken. 
As Manager of REPP 2  and REPP Phase 1 before that , Camco Management Limited h as extensive 
experience and expertise in managing a wide range of risk factors, which affect individual technologies, 
asset classes and countries in unique ways. The ERM framework and proactive risk management approach 
adopted by an experienced team with on- the-ground presence throughout sub- Saharan Africa means that 
Camco is well- placed to manage existing and emerging risks effectively.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 31 
 
  
25 Subject to ongoing finalisation and further diligence of certain structural discussions with the Secretariat and legal advice 
from external counsels, which will be concluded and reflected in the Term Sheet. This section may be revised to reflect the 
above.  Further Legal and Tax Due Diligence is also being undertaken will completed prior to submission of the Funding 
Proposal to the Board . The ERM framework includes detailed policies and procedures, to be followed by all staff during origination, 
structuring and ongoing portfolio management (once investments have been made). REPP 2  will appoint a 
dedicated risk manager. Risk governance and oversight  will be  provided by  AIFM as supported by the 
Investment Committee, with approval of all policies and procedures provided by the general partner of 
Camco REPP SCSp .  
The ERM framework for REPP 2  will include a risk appetite statement, approved by the AIFM , to designed 
to ensure that the potential for financial losses within the REPP 2  portfolio remain within approved risk 
tolerance levels. A detailed limits framework, covering a) counterparty concentration limits at the borrower, 
sponsor and sponsor group levels , b) limits for countries, technologies and asset classes  and c) market risk 
limits (including foreign exchange and interest rate limits ) is defined  in the REPP 2 Operations Manual 
(Annex 21) .  
The enterprise risk management framework, including policies, procedures , governance arrangements , risk 
management toolkits and indicative limits framework are described in the Op erations Manual (Annex 21). 
The Operations Manual outlines specific eligibility criteria and risk assessment procedures for dealing with 
the unique risks associated with each technology (solar PV, wind and hydropow er), asset class (SHS, mini -
grids and grid- connected projects)  and Host Country . Key risks and risk mitigation actions for the successful 
implementation of REPP 2  and achievement of its goals are outlined in Section F.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
Camco REPP SCSp  
The main fund vehicle of REPP 2, and the primary Executing Entity (Camco REPP SCSp), is a société en 
commandite spéciale (“SCSp”) or special limited partnership, established in Luxembourg under the 
Luxembourg law of 10 August 1915 on commercial companies (the “1915 Law”).25  
The advantages of this structure for REPP 2 include:  
• The SCSp is a form with unlimited capacity and limited liability for its limited partners, provided they 
do not participate in the management of the SCSp vis -à-vis third parties (such management instead 
being carried on by its general partner);  
• It enables a flexible structure that can fully accommodate the blended capital structure of REPP 2;  
• The structure is market standard, frequently used for similar pooled investment structures and 
attractive to co- financing investors of REPP 2;  
• Governance can be adapted to reflect both the fiduciary standards of the GCF and any requirements of co -financing investors of REPP 2; and  
• Based in Luxembourg, Camco REPP SCSp will be an alternative investment fund or “AIF” for the purposes of the EU Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD) and the UK equivalent of AIFMD. Compliance with AIFMD can be expected to provide additional comfort to EU/UK co -
financing investors of Camco REPP  SCSp . 
 
The general partner of Camco REPP SCSp will be Camco REPP GP S.a.r.l, a Luxembourg société à 
résponsabilité limitée (a Luxembourg limited company) wholly owned by Camco Management Limited.  
 GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  
It is proposed that the GCF participate in Camco REPP SCSp via a special purpose vehicle (“GCF REPP 
Holdings  SCSp ”) established as a Luxembourg SCSp under the 1915 Law for which the GCF would be 
investor of record and no other limited partnership interests would be issued. GCF Proceeds would flow via


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 the AE to GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  and then be contributed to Camco REPP SCSp . Camco Management 
Limited would be the sole shareholder of the general partner of GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  . This GP/LP 
structure would be tax efficient for the GCF for the underlying participation in REPP 2. The funds received 
by GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp   would be contributed into Camco REPP SCSp via the Subscription and 
Partnership Agreement. Other investors would also contribute to Camco REPP SCSp or its feeder vehicle 
Camco REPP 2 F eeder SCSp as limited partners  and Note holders .  The Subscription and Partnership 
Agreement, binding on all limited partners, will be based on the Accreditation Master Agreement (“AMA”), 
the Term Sheet set out in Annex 14 and the Funded Activity Agreement (“FAA”) and provide for the 
investment terms, governance structure, policies and procedures, reflow waterfalls and respective rights of 
the limited partners –  including for distributions and the return of capital. A draft will be prepared subsequent 
to the approval of the FP by the GCF Board.  
Other feeder vehicle(s) in Camco REPP SCSp Holders of senior equity interests and senior note interests in Camco REPP SCSp are expected to participate 
in Camco REPP SCSp via one or more feeders which are also anticipated to be formed as Luxembourg SCSps under the 1915 Law.  
Side Letters  
A Side Letter is anticipated to be entered into with the GCF to implement certain aspects of the Term Sheet in Annex 14. Since side letters are likely also to be required by other co -financing investors in Camco REPP, 
the Term Sheet contains a most favoure
d nation provision (“MFN”) to protect the position of the GCF in 
Camco REPP. Th is MFN right is included in the Term Sheet in Annex 14 and provides  that during the term 
of the FAA, Camco REPP SCSp shall not enter into any additional, or modify any existing agreements with 
any existing or future investors to the effect of establishing rights or otherwise benefiting such investor in a manner more favourable in any material respect to such investor than the rights and benefits established in 
favour of the Fund pursuant to the Subsidiary Agreements, unless, in any such case, the Fund has been 
provided with such rights and/or benefits or waived its entitlement to such rights and/or benefits.  
Subsidiaries/Portfolio HoldCos  
To ensure that GCF Proceeds are provided only to Host Countries (being countries that have issued a Letter of Non- Objection), Camco REPP  SCSp   will establish two subsidiaries (in Luxembourg or other tax neutral 
or tax positive  form), likely to be Luxembourg sociétés à résponsabilité limitée (S.à r.l.) with Camco REPP 
SCSp, acting by its general partner, as the sole member: Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.a.r.l and Portfolio HoldCo 2 
S.à r.l .  
Portfolio HoldCo  1 S.à r.l  will only execute investment agreements for projects in Host Countries , i.e. for 
which the GCF has received Letters of No Objection. These countries are Cameroon, Democratic Republic 
of Congo (DRC), Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Zambia at the time of 
submission but this list may expand in future if further Letters of Non -Objection are received and an 
amendment to the Programme is subsequently approved by  the GCF Board.  
Portfolio HoldCo 2  S.à r.l  will execute investment agreements in the full range of REPP 2  eligible c ountries 
(non- NOL countries in sub- Saharan Africa with a focus on LDCs). According to the REPP 2 eligibility 
requirements, the list of non- NOL countries may include any other countries in sub- Saharan Africa  (provided 
that in the case of investments in the Host Countries, only after Portfolio Holdco 1 S.à r.l   is 75% committed 
for investment and in respect of these investments, the Fund and other Junior Class Interest (as such term is defined in the Term Sheet in Annex 14) holders would be drawn pro rata to their undrawn commitments) . 
 
The Subscription and Partnership Agreement, constitutional documents of the HoldCos and intra- group 
Camco REPP SCSp structuring will ensure that the capital contribution of the GCF will be deployed (and 
returned) solely in relation to the investments of Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l  in Host Countries. The anticipated 
split between the Portfolio HoldCos is set out in the financial model, but for the purpose of clarity, non- GCF 
investors will also be investing in projects in Host Countries via Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l   and this could 
include participation of other Junior Interest Class holders. However, GCF Proceeds may only be invested


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 in Host Countries through Portfolio Holdco 1  S.à r.l . As such, if an investment of Camco REPP SCSp is 
located in Host Countries and in other countries, it may only be made through Portfolio Holdco 2  S.à r.l .  
The dual Holdco structure provides GCF the protections necessary to ensure separation of funds, while 
minimizing transaction costs and maintaining a simplified governance agreement (under a single 
Subscription and Partnership Agreement).  
Management  
The general partner of Camco REPP SCSp (which will be a Camco -owned entity, Camco REPP GP S.à r.l.) 
has primary responsibility for management of the partnership. However, as an AIF, Camco REPP SCSp 
(and, subject to the terms of the long form documentation and further Luxembourg legal revi ew and advice, 
GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp ) will appoint an external third- party service provider as its AIFM.  Under AIFMD, 
the AIFM will be responsible for risk management and portfolio management of REPP 2. The AIFM will 
delegate certain of its duties to Cam co Management Limited  pursuant to an Investment Management 
Agreement. We anticipate these duties will include portfolio management.  
On the basis that:  
a. The Accredited Entity is a party to the AMA and will execute the FAA with the GCF;  
b. The Accredited Entity will be the sole shareholder of  Camco REPP GP S.à r.l  and a party to it’s  LPA;  
c. The third party AIFM will be appointed as alternative investment fund manager by Camco REPP 
SCSp pursuant to an alternative investment fund management agreement;  
d. The Accredited Entity will be appointed as investment manager by Camco REPP SCSp and will be 
the sole shareholder of the general partner  of Camco REPP SCSp, which will be a party to the 
Subscription and Partnership Agreement  
e. Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l. and Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l. will adhere to the Investment Management 
Agreement,  
each of the above is a Subsidiary Agreement as defined in the AMA (and see “Roles and Responsibilities” 
below)


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 Proposed structure  
 
The Accredited Entity will ensure the obligations of the AE under  the AMA, and in particular Clause 5 (Results 
Management Framework; Monitoring and Accountability ), Clause 7 ( Disbursement of GCF Proceeds to the 
Accredited Entity; Unused Funds; Reflowed Funds; Investment income), Clause 8 ( Implementation), Clause 
9 (Standard of Care ), Clause 10 ( Executing Entities; Affiliates ), Clause 11 ( Administration of Funds by the 
Accredited Entity ), Clause 13 ( Compliance with Standards, Policies and Procedures ), Clause  14 
(Procurement ), Clause 15 ( Record Keeping and Reporting), Clause 16 ( Periodic Reviews, Ad Hoc Checks 
and Evaluations ) and Clause 17 ( Financial Management; Financial Information)  are fully implemented as 
binding contractual obligations of the Executing Entities in each of the Subsidiary Agreements , subject as 
varied by the Term Sheet in Annex 14. Furthermore, the Accredited Entity shall ensure that each Investment 
Agreement executed by either Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l.  or Portfolio HoldCo 2  S.à r.l.  contains necessary 
and sufficient obligations on each Investee for the Accredited Entity to comply with its obligations under the AMA and FAA.  
Accredited Entity  
Based on the Term Sheet  contained in Annex 14, GCF and Camco Management Limited will enter into a 
Funded Activity Agreement (“FAA”) detailing the key implementation arrangements , commercial terms and 
legal obligations between the parties. The GCF will transfer funds to the AE under the FAA , which will then


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 be transferred to GCF  REPP Holdings  SCSp  and used as the capital contribution of GCF REPP Holdings  
SCSp  in Camco REPP SCSp  as outlined above and in the Term Sheet in Annex 14.   
Camco  Management Limited, as AE, will oversee the implementation of the programme on behalf of the 
GCF and will ensure that:  
• All GCF policies and procedures (including the Indigenous Peoples Policy, Environmental and Social 
Policy  and the Undated Gender Policy) are implemented at both the Camco REPP  SCSp level and 
in the underlying investment  agreements;  
• The GCF A ccount is maintained and operated pursuant to the requirements of the AMA and FAA;  
• The GCF Proceeds are only deployed in Host Countries ; 
• As set out in Annex 14 , GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp , Camco REPP SCSp and the Portfolio HoldCos 
comply with the Major Change provisions of the AMA and FAA ; 
• GCF Holdings REPP  SCSp , Camco REPP SCSp  and the Portfolio HoldCos comply with Monitoring 
and Reporting Framework and the Results Management Framework;  
• All Funded Activities fall within the Environmental and Social Risk Categories for which the AE has 
been accredited;   
• The administration of GCF Proceeds  will be carried out  with at least the same standard of care as it 
uses for the administration of its own funds  or funds for which it has management or investment 
responsibility ; and 
• GCF is provided access to information relating to the performance of Camco REPP  SCSp  vis-à-vis 
the targeted outcomes and results of Camco REPP  SCSp . 
 
Portfolio HoldCo Structure 
The dual -HoldCo structure is designed to address the twin aims of addressing the broader market demand 
for funding for smaller -scale renewables and building on the success of REPP Phase 1, while maintaining 
the strict separation of funds and reflows required under the FAA. The dual HoldCo structure is a simple and cost-effective way of ensuring separation between investments (and resulting cash flows) in Host Countries 
(Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l. ) and non- Host Countries (Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l.
). GCF Proceeds, as 
channelled via the AE, through GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  into Camco REPP SCSp will be available to 
Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l. only.  
The capital structure (i.e. same blended finance structure of junior equity, senior equity and senior debt) is 
broadly duplicated in both HoldCos (subordination is identical), as shown in the indicative table below. Senior 
debt distributions are made in proportion to funding commitments from the Camco REPP SCSp  to each 
Portfolio HoldCo. Investments and reflows are made independently in each HoldCo.  
It is possible that the amount of commitments of different classes could be different in each of Portfolio 
HoldCo 1  S.à r.l.  and Portfolio HoldCo 2  S.à r.l. , but with effect from the Final Closing Date Portfolio HoldCo 
1 S.à r.l   shall not have a greater ratio of Junior Class Interests to Senior Class Interests as compared to 
Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l. , subject always to the restriction that Junior Class Interests may not (with effect 
from the Final Closing Date) exceed 40% of Total Capital Commitments.  
Indicative illustration –  commitment sizes may vary  
 Amount 
(USDm)  % Total  Amount 
(USDm)  % Total  Amount 
(USDm)  % Total  
Notes  50 20% 25 20% 25 20% 
Senior Equity  100 40% 50 40% 50 40% 
Junior Equity  100 40% 50 40% 50 40% 
Total  250 100%  125 100%  125 100%


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 36 
 
 Roles and Responsibilities  
For the implementation of the Funded Activity, the Accredited Entity shall enter into the following  agreements, 
which will be considered Subsidiary Agreements under the AMA and FAA:  
i) Limited Partnership Agreement for the establishment of GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  between 
Camco REPP  GP S.à r.l  and GCF as limited partner, with the GCF being the investor of record 
in GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp ; 
ii) Articles of Association establishing the general partner of GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  and (if 
separate) of  Camco REPP  GP S.à r.l  . This limited company will be a subsidiary of the 
Accredited Entity and have no purpose other than acting as a general partner of REPP 2 
partnerships;  
iii) Subscription and Partnership Agreement for setting out the subscription for and the rights and obligations of the limited partners (including GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp
) in Camco REPP 
SCSp including the implementation of the Distribution Waterfall, establishment of governance 
bodies, compliance with GCF policies and procedures, powers enabling establishment of 
Portfolio Holdco 1  S.à r.l   and Portfolio Holdco 2 S.à r.l   and adoption of investment policy;  
iv) Alternative Investment Fund Management Agreement appointing a third party Luxembourg AIFM to act as alternative investment fund manager of Camco REPP SCSp;  
v) Investment Management Agreement 
appointing the Accredited Entity as investment manager 
of Camco REPP SCSp providing for all relevant management services to be provided to 
Camco REPP SCSp by the Accredited Entity  (subject to applicable law including where a 
service is required to be provided formally by a third party Luxembourg AIFM) ; 
vi) Deed of Adherence to the Investment Management Agreement for Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l ; 
vii) Deed of Adherence to the Investment Management Agreement for Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l ; 
viii) Articles of Association establishing Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l ; 
ix) Articles of Association establishing Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l ; 
x) Intra-group loan agreements providing for the disbursement of funds from Camco REPP 
SCSp to Portfolio Holdco 1 S.à r.l   and Portfolio Holdco 2 S.à r.l   on a needs basis;  and 
xi) Service Agreements with independent members of the Investment Committee of Camco 
REPP SCSp.  
A further description of the roles and responsibilities of the AE and each Executing Entity is set out in the 
table below:  
Role Name  Responsibilities  
Accredited 
Entity  Camco Management 
Limited  • Execute FAA with GCF  
• Establish and manage, as general partner, GCF 
REPP Holdings  SCSp  
• Receive the GCF Proceeds under the FAA (into the GCF Account)  
• Transfer the GCF Proceeds from the GCF Account to 
a dedicated account in the name of GCF REPP 
Holdings  SCSp  
• Transfer the GCF Proceeds contemporaneously as a 
capital contribution to Camco REPP SCSp as set out in the Subscription and Partnership Agreement 
• Enter the Subsidiary Agreements with each of the Executing Entities  
• Crowd in up to USD200m of co -investors into REPP 
2 by way of equity and debt


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 • Ensure compliance with GCF fiduciary standards and 
the obligations of the AMA and FAA  
• Ensure compliance with applicable local law  
Executing Entity  GCF REPP Holdings 
SCSp  • Act as SPV for GCF funding to Camco REPP SCSp  
• Contribute capital to Camco REPP SCSp as per the 
Subscription and Partnership Agreement  
• Distribute returns to GCF as per the Holdings LPA  
• Ensure compliance with applicable local law  
• Pursuant to the Subsidiary Agreement with the AE, 
comply with GCF policies and procedures  
Executing Entity  Camco REPP SCSp,  • Pool capital of GCF and other investors and debt 
providers  
• Establish Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l  (for GCF Target 
jurisdictions) and Portfolio HoldCo 2 S.à r.l  (for other 
sub-Saharan African jurisdictions)  
• Establish Advisory Board and (unless established by 
Camco Management Limited) Investment Committee  
• Distribute capital and returns to investors as per the Subscription and Partnership Agreement (and Notes 
Agreements to the extent not applicable to any feeder 
vehicle if that is the contracting party for a Note 
Agreement)  
• Provide, or procure the provision of, the reporting and monitoring as required by the AE to enable the AE to 
comply with its obligations under the AMA and FAA  
• Ensure compliance with applicable local law  
• Pursuant to its Subsidiary Agreement with the AE, 
comply with GCF policies and procedures  
Executing Entity  Camco REPP GP 
S.à r.l  • Serve as general partner of Camco REPP S CSp 
• Provide, or procure the provision of, the reporting and 
monitoring as required by the AE to enable the AE to 
comply with its obligations under the AMA and FAA  
Executing Entity  Portfolio HoldCo 1  
S.à r.l  • To serve as the contractual counterparty to investees 
in the GCF Host Countries  
• Pursuant to its Subsidiary Agreement with the AE, 
comply with GCF policies and procedures  
Executing Entity  Portfolio HoldCo 2  
S.à r.l  • To serve as the contractual counterparty to investees 
in Camco REPP countries other than Host Countries  
Executing Entity  Camco Management 
Limited (or 
subsidiaries)  • Through its subsidiary,  Camco REPP GP S.à r.l act 
as general partner of Camco REPP SCSp  
• Through its subsidiary,   Camco REPP GP S.à r.l  act 
as general partner of GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  
• Serve as Investment Manager of Camco REPP SCSp 
pursuant to the terms of the Investment Manager 
Agreement  
• Provide, on behalf of Camco REPP  SCSp , the 
reporting and monitoring as per the Partnership 
Agreement and Notes Agreements  
• Lead the due diligence, negotiation, execution, implementation, monitoring and enforcement of 
investment agreements  
• Ensure compliance with applicable local law


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 • Pursuant to its Subsidiary Agreement with the AE, 
comply with GCF policies and procedures  
Executing Entity  AIFM & Depositary 
Agent  • To have regulatory responsibility for REPP 2 to the 
Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier  of 
Luxembourg  
• Ensure compliance with applicable local law  
• Pursuant to its Subsidiary Agreement with the AE, 
comply with GCF policies and procedures  
Track record  
Camco is a climate and impact fund manager, leading the clean energy transition in emerging markets. 
Having spent over thirty years in the renewable energy sector, we offer practical and valuable financing 
solutions, pairing the discipline of a development  bank with the agility of a private company. Camco was 
formed in Nairobi in 1989, is a regulated small Alternative Investment Fund Manager in the UK and is a 
Green Climate Fund Accredited Entity.   
As a climate and impact fund manager, Camco’s  track record includes:  
• Co-advisor of the USD200 million Green Africa Power (GAP) mandate, 2014- 2017.  
• Sole manager of the Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP Phase 1): GBP48  million first 
close in 2015, GBP40  million second close in 2019.  
• Sponsor and manager of Spark Energy Services, a USD50 million, commercial and industrial energy 
efficiency and renewable energy facility focused on key African markets . Spark is funded by private 
and commercial funders and is currently in financial close; and  
• Currently fundraising for Transforming Island Development for Electrification and Sustainability 
(TIDES), a USD100 million renewable energy and energy access facility for Pacific Islands.  
Over a 30 -year track record, Camco impacts include:  
• 60+ projects completed  
• 15.5 million people provided with new and improved electricity access  
• 600 MW installed capacity realized; and  
• USD900 million in third party funding mobilized 
Camco’s key strengths include:  
• A long- standing presence in the region, with offices in west, east and southern Africa;  
• Detailed local knowledge from the ground up, combined with international reach;  
• Extensive, deep relationships with –  and understanding of -- developers, policymakers, donors, DFIs 
and private finance; and  
• Experience across a range of key disciplines including policy, regulation, market and project 
development, technical assistance, equity, debt, monitoring & evaluation, asset management and 
exits.  
• Deep experience of financing small -scale renewables in Sub- Saharan Africa.  
Flow of Funds  
Disbursements  
• The GCF will commit USD50 million , with GCF Proceeds provided to Camco Management Limited 
as AE in six annual disbursements, in accordance with Annex 14 (Term Sheet) ; 
• The GCF will pay fees to the AE in 6 equal instalments in accordance with Annex 14 (Term Sheet);  
• The GCF Proceeds received by Camco Management Limited as AE under the FAA will be transferred 
from the GCF Account to a dedicated account in the name of GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp ; 
• The GCF Proceeds will be transferred contemporaneously as a capital contribution to Camco REPP 
SCSp as set out in the Subscription and Partnership Agreement;


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 • Camco REPP SCSp will maintain separate bank and ledger accounts for receipt and transfer of 
capital contributions in respect of Partnership Expenses; Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l ; and Portfolio 
HoldCo 2  S.à r.l . 
• Camco REPP SCSp will transfer capital contributions from the designated Portfolio HoldCo1 S.à r.l   
account it maintains to Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l ; 
• Camco REPP SCSp will pay fees from the designated Partnership Expenses account to Camco as 
Investment Manager, in accordance with the Investment Management Agreement;  
• Only Camco REPP SCSp  will transfer capital contributions to Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l , and  
• Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l  will disburse loans or make equity investments in investment opportunities 
in Host Countries.  
 
Reflows  
• Individual loan repayments (principal plus accrued interest) from investments in Host Countries will 
be made to Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l ; 
• Simila rly, equity investments in Host Countries will generate dividends  or will be repaid via exits, with 
funds flowing to Portfolio HoldCo 1 S.à r.l ; 
• Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l   will make payments or distributions to Camco REPP SCSp;  
• Returns from investments, being realised proceeds from the Portfolio HoldCos will be allocated to investors per the distribution waterfall. Amounts held may be reinvested. Such reinvested amounts shall be deemed as a Capital Contribution for holders of Junior and Senior Class Interest Holders  
• Camco REPP SCSp will distribute amounts relating to GCF’s junior LP interest in accordance with 
the waterfall to GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp , subject to any necessary or appropriate retentions; and 
• GCF REPP Holdings  SCSp  will distribute amounts under the Holdings Partnership Agreement, 
subject to any necessary or appropriate retentions.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 40 
 
  
26 Terms dependent on current market conditions  
27 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf -b05-23  
28 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf -b33-19  
29 https://data.greenclimate.fund/public/dashboard/data-browser/approved-portfolio/financing  (last accessed 08 September 
2022).  B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
1. Motivation for GCF funding 
The proposed capital structure for REPP 2  is outlined in the table below.  
Instrument  Description  Final  close 
(USD million)  tenor / hold  
(years)  Return 
target  Funders / Co -
funders  
Senior debt26 Impact and capital 
preservation with 
debt returns  50   private 
investors, DFIs  
Equity  Impact and equity 
risk / return  100   Private 
investors, IFIs, 
DFIs , 
Foundations  
Junior equity 
(concessional 
equity)  Impact and 
mobilisation of 
third-party funds  100   GCF, donors  
TOTAL   250    
The capital structure for REPP 2  is designed to help to address key market failures  for smaller -scale 
renewables across sub -Saharan Africa, including:  
• A lack of early -stage or development funding for smaller -scale renewables; and  
• A limited risk appetite from both public and private funders for early -stage and smaller -scale projects.  
Approved GCF funding programmes for climate mitigation  through renewables are typically focused on 
larger -scale projects. These programmes have provided only limited support for early -stage funding, 
particularly for smaller project sizes (Annex 23). There is also relatively limited geographic overlap between 
the proposed Host Countries  for REPP 2  and programmes which are already funded by the GCF. Climate 
mitigation funding from GCF for REPP 2  thus has the potential to be strongly complementary to existing 
funded activities .  
In terms of climate adaptation , the GCF recognises “the urgent and immediate needs of vulnerable 
countries, in particular least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing States (SIDS) and African States” and has recently reaffirmed this decision.
27,28 Despite this, the scale and scope of funding from the 
GCF for adaptation in sub -Saharan Africa is relatively small. For the African region, adaptation makes up 
9% of total approved funding within the GCF portfolio, with cross -cutting programmes making up a further 
13%.29 Of the energy programmes reviewed in Annex 23, only two are cross -cutting programmes involving 
renewables. GCF funding for REPP 2  and a cross -cutting programme will thus contribute to the GCF’s 
strategic priorities and will make a materially positive impact to build climate resilience across the region. 
There is no lack of financing for large- scale, commercially viable renewable energy projects across sub-
Saharan Africa. The analysis presented in Annex 23 shows a different picture for smaller -scale projects as 
well as nascent renewable energy markets in LDCs and middle- income countries, where significant funding 
gaps exist. The same analysis highlights the paucity of funding available for early -stage growth capital of off -


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 grid renewables and development funding for grid -connected projects. In general, private capital providers 
do not offer funding to cover development costs or do so on strictly commercial terms which tend to 
discriminate against (“crowd out”) local develope rs. REPP 2  will seek to support smaller -scale renewables 
and local developers, providing funding for growth during project development and addressing funding gaps 
for construction. In the process, REPP 2  will both address a key barrier and have the potenti al to be highly 
complementary when working with other sources of public and private capital. REPP 2 ’s focus on funding to 
achieve scale and sustainability for off -grid companies, combined with its relatively unique risk appetite for 
early -stage, smaller -scale renewables, will make its funding strongly additional –  acting to crowd in other 
sources of public and private funding for construction.  
REPP Phase 1 is funded through the United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO). An initial capitalisation of GBP 48 million was, due to the early success of the programme, followed 
by a further commitment of GBP 40 million. Despite this, the current funding cycle for REPP Phase 1 is 
coming to an end and the FCDO has no obligation to provide funding to REPP 2 .  
Despite this , REPP Phase 1 / FCDO has agreed in principle to provide matching funding of up to USD50 
million in junior equity funding, alongside the GCF, for REPP 2 . A term sheet is in an advanced stage of 
discussion.   
The AE is in advanced discussions with several private investors (such as Calvert Impact ) as well as 
commercial  investors (such as FinnFund,  which has indicated that the source of its funding will be from 
private capital markets, with funding provided to REPP 2 on commercial terms). B oth investors  have 
indicated their interest in REPP 2 through Term Sheets and Heads of Terms.  
Junior equity funding from both the GCF and REPP  Phase 1 / FCDO will be catalytic in securing the 
fundraising targets for REPP 2 . In fundraising conducted to date, private and commercial funders have 
consistently indicated a desire to secure funding for the junior equity tranche (which effectively de -risks all 
more senior investors ) before considering their own funding decision.  The process of s ecuring the initial 
funding targets for REPP 2 and crowding in private and commercial funders into the structure has been 
delayed for these reasons.  Requirements and commitments for co -investment, including co mmercial co -
investment, are outlined further in Section C.1.  
The target size of REPP 2  ($250m) was set to meet several objectives:  being large enough  to build a 
diversified portfolio (37 transactions) , thereby  minimiz ing concentration risk , being large enough to attract 
commercial and private investors  (as typically investors don’t want to commit a large portion of fund size), 
and being able to meet  the significant market needs as exemplified by the large pipeline of transactions 
originated by Camco ($1bn+) .   
2. Platform financing instruments  
REPP 2  is a blended finance facility featuring a  junior equity  tranche, equity and debt. The proposed capital 
structure for REPP 2  (and the GCF’s position within it) , along with  the selection of financing instruments 
used to complete the capital stack  have been designed to crowd in additional sources of both public and 
private capital.  
The junior equity tranche, which will act as a first loss buffer,  is designed to deliver incrementally greater 
impact and further mobilisation of third- party funds (both public and private) from more risk -averse investors. 
The sizing (at least 30% of total available capital) and subordinated position of this tranche in the REPP 2  
capital stack will provide protection for all investors in more senior tranches. It is proposed that the GCF 
invest junior equity on a pari passu  basis alongside other donors  and DFIs. For clarity, the protection 
provided by the GCF junior equity investment will be limited to other investors in the NOL portfolio ( Portfolio 
HoldCo 1  S.à r.l ). The junior equity tranche will target low, single- digit returns in the base case.


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 42 
 
  
30 GCF 2020: Updated Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund: 2020-2023, GCF document GCF/B.27/21 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf -b27-21  The senior  equity tranche  is designed to provide more commercially oriented equity returns. Camco is  
targeting 40% of the total capital requirement in the form of senior  equity from a combination of private 
investors, international financial institutions (IFIs) and development finance institutions (DFIs), all of whom 
will effectively be crowded into the capital structure of REPP 2  through the protection of returns provided by 
the junior equity tranche.  
The senior debt tranche  will enjoy maximum credit enhancement from the equity tranches. The senior debt 
tranche is expected to be financed by commercial debt providers.  
3. Level of concessionality  
The GCF’s strategic objective is to catalyse climate finance for mitigation and adaptation which is new, 
additional (in the sense that a project or programme would not have occurred in the absence of GCF 
funding), adequate and predictable.30 Accordingly, REPP 2  will ensure that its investments are additional 
and contribute to the establishment of a more viable and active market for smaller -scale renewables in Host 
Countries .  
In financing smaller -scale renewable energy projects and businesses, REPP 2  recognises the need to strike 
a balance between the need for concessionality, the levels of real and perceived risk and the desire to grow 
a sustainable market for renewables. In the African context, these risks  are higher, given that the market is 
as yet unproven, and the perception of risks is also higher than other markets. In order to mobilize capital in the sector the balance of risk and return provide d needs to match the risk appetite and requirements  for all 
investors.  
Small- scale renewable energy businesses in African LDCs struggle to attract funding in general, and 
particularly private and commercial funding. The fact that barriers and significant funding gaps persist is 
demonstrated through the experience of REPP Phase 1, the broader market barriers identified in Section 
B.2(a)  and the need to develop a tranched capital structure for REPP 2 with a layer  of junior equity below 
senior equity and notes layer s to attract  private and commercial investors  as much as possible, given limited 
appetite of such investors for the sector .  
At the level of the underlying assets funded by REPP 2, and in providing gap financing to smaller -scale grid-
connected projects, REPP 2  will help developers and sponsors of these projects to overcome a range of 
barriers , notably limited access to finance and to financing on terms that allow these projects to become 
commercially viable. Traditional investors, such as banks and utilities, often consider small -scale projects to 
be too risky or too expensive to finance.  In addition, d evelopment finance institutions and other typical 
investors in the sector typically require minimum ticket sizes of USD10- 20 millio n, which is often  larger than 
the financing needed by small -scale projects.  The economics of small -scale projects are often marginal,  and 
the project development and construction risks are often higher than for large projects, with the potential for 
revenue and profit generation limited by the smaller installed capacity of the plant. For these reasons, REPP 
2 must take a more flexible approach  to address the financing gap, with a risk -adjusted return expectation 
that is lower than what is typically required by the market.   
To address these challenges, REPP 2  offers flexible financing with a risk -adjusted return that is lower than 
what is typically required by the market, in order to help reduce the barriers to financing small -scale 
renewable energy projects in Sub- Saharan Africa and promote the development of  these projects in the 
region.  
Targets for leveraging addition private and commercial capital at the level of the underlying assets funded 
by REPP 2 are also commensurate to the level of appetite from  such investors.  The target of leveraging 
USD393  million in private and commercial funding in the underlying investments represents 50%  of the 
overall target for third party funding mobilised (USD786 million). The target is derived from the experience


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 of REPP Phase 1  and is set conservatively  in that the proportion of third party funding from private and 
commercial sources is no higher than that already achieved in REPP Phase 1. While the AE is motivated to 
increase this proportion over time, the target is set conservatively in recognition that the risk appetite f rom 
private and commercial funders remains low and it remains a difficult task to  leverage additional private 
investment.   
In this context, GCF funding is highly catalytic, in attracting  the existing fund-level co -financing targets from 
private and commercial investors and in leveraging additional co -financing at the level of the underlying 
investments.  
REPP 2  acknowledges that it cannot price for risk on a purely commercial basis. If commercially viable 
projects and a ready supply of commercial funders already existed, the funding gaps identified in Section 
B.2(a) and A nnex 23 would not exist and there would be no need for a facility such as REPP 2 . The learnings 
from REPP Phase 1 and other related facilities active across sub -Saharan Africa is that small -scale 
renewable energy businesses struggle to access private capital on terms which leave their projects 
commercially viable and that public financing in this space is still required. In this context, funding for REPP 2 
will contribute to the continued growth and increasing sustainability of commercial renewable energy 
sectors in Host Countries .  
If REPP 2  adopted a purely concessional approach to pricing, the effect would be to negatively disrupt a 
nascent market for renewables in Host Countries . A purely concessional pricing approach would lack 
financial rigour and have the unintended consequence of crowding out private sector funding. The approach 
to concessionality for REPP 2  will thus strive to achieve a balance between the need for a considered level 
of concessionality, in order to build the market and crowd in private sector funding, and the need for rigour 
and more commercial pricing approaches, where the market, investor appetite and project economics allow 
for it.  
The concessionality of the GCF junior equity funding is defined to pro tect other more senior investors in the 
capital stack  and provide an appropriate level of return for the GCF, while simultaneously crowding in 
(catalysing) other private and commercial investors . The junior equity tranches in Portfolio HoldCo 1  S.à r.l   
and Portfolio HoldCo 2  S.à r.l   (sized and priced identically) are designed to provide first loss protect ion to  
other investors in the capital stack . The financial model demonstrates that the sizing (40% of total capital) 
and pricing of the junior equity tranche is met while also facilitating targeted returns for the equity providers. 
For s enior debt providers , the structure and pricing of the capital stack also supports  current market  pricing . 
4. Risk -sharing 
The proportion of GCF and other public funding to private funding sources targeted for the REPP 2  fundraise 
(a ratio of 1:4) represents a realistic goal given the scale of private financing that Camco expects can be 
mobilised into this sector, for the activities proposed in this Programme.  
For the GCF, where an invest ment  in the junior equity tranche is proposed, risk will be shared pari passu  
with other investor s.


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3 .0 | PAGE 44 
 
 B.6. Exit strategy  
1. Overall  exit strategy 
REPP 2  is a fixed -term (2 0-year) fund. The limited partners of Camco REPP SCSp  may agree to extend the 
objects of the REPP 2  as further set out in Annex 14 (Term Sheet) . 
Junior equity investors will earn a targeted return  over the 20- year term of REPP 2. Senior equity investors 
will earn a targeted return in the base case. Senior debt will be repaid in full (principle plus accrued interest) 
over a weighted average  tenor of 7 years.  The Subscription and Partnership Agreement will, on cust omary 
terms,  contain a range of exit scenarios  in re limited members  including insolvency of the limited member or  
transfer for value by the limited member . The dissolution mechanics for GCF REPP Holdings  and Camco  
REPP SCSp  will be set out in Holdings GPA and Subscription and  Partnership Agreement,  respectively . 
Following the completion of the activities of REPP 2  (including the dissolution of the Portfolio HoldCos), the 
final disbursements under the cash waterfall  and the completion of any residual obligations  of any Executing 
Entity pursuant to a Subsidiary Agreement,  a recommendation would be made by Camco REPP GP S.a.r.l,  
as general partner of  Camco REPP SCSp  to the limited partners of Camco REPP SCSp for dissolution. In 
the absence of a voluntary dissolution, Camco REPP SCSp will be dissolved at the end of its term as set 
out in its deed of incorporation.  Pursuant to . GCF REPP Holdings will be dissolved in a similar manner upon  
the satisfaction of all the obligations of the Holdings GP under the Holdings GPA.  
For debt instruments , the baseline scenario is repayment in full (principal plus accrued interest) over the 
loan tenor.  Where possible, REPP 2  will seek to reduce or exit its debt investments through refinancing 
opportunities , either for individual transactions or at the portfolio level . 
The baseline scenario for equity investments is realisation in full of principal repayment plus returns over the targeted investment period.  Where possible and profitable, REPP will seek an early exit from equity 
investments through new fundraising rounds and / or sell -down of existing shareholding to new investors. 
The portfolio of active transactions for REPP 2  will be actively managed in order ensure orderly repayment 
of debt and equity returns and to proactively identify and execute opportunities for new investment, 
refinancing or sale.  
2. Pricing approach  
From a pricing perspective, the REPP 2  approach ensures an appropriate blend of concessional and 
commercial pricing. This approach accounts for its additionality mandate and seeks to minimize market 
distortion as far as possible – crowding in other sources of private and public funding rather that crowding 
other funding out through a pricing approach which is too concessional.  
Where debt and equity investments are priced on a more concessional basis, the goal will be explicitly to 
support business growth in order to achieve long- term commercial sustainability.  
Where REPP 2  makes equity investments in off -grid companies, opportunities for co -investment and sell-
down exist as these businesses grow (later fundraises) – which may represent opportunities for REPP 2  to 
achieve partial or full exit or continue as a more- diluted equity sponsors.  
Where REPP 2  provides development loans, these loans will include convertibility options which are 
designed to compensate the facility for the additional risk taken during development. This approach also 
enforces appropriate rigour among developers and sponsors.


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
  
 Where business or project economics allow, REPP 2  will invest on purely commercial terms. This approach 
ensures minimum market distortion, maximises pricing rigour in line with market benchmarks and ensures 
that funds can be returned or repaid to REPP 2  and can achieve approach return for risk.  
3. Paradigm shift 
REPP 2  helps to innovate and transform the market for smaller -scale renewable in each of the Host 
Countries . Benefits including skills and technology transfer, development of an active market with direct 
private sector participation are all permanent. These elements achieve the targeted paradigm shift potential.  
With the expectation of SHS systems, all technologies will have a lifetime over 20 years , therefore impacting 
countries transformation to resilient low carbon world . SHS companies are expected to succeed in their 
business mode, offering affordable energy to vulnerable communities , and hence providing long- term service 
beyond technical lifetime of the system.  Monitoring and verification of the effectiveness of the projects i s 
conducted in accordance with industry -best practices as described in Section E. 7.  REPP 2 performance will 
be reported to its stakeholders, through annual  reports on its key KPIs, which are published on the REPP 2  
website. Through organic growth of host countr y financial markets and with REPP 2  demonstrational  effect 
it is expected that other developers and funds will adopt a similar approach.


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 C. FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv 
+ v + vi + vii)  Total amount Currency  
50 million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  0    
(ii) Subordinated 
loans  0    
(iii) Junior Equity  50   As per Term Sheet  
(iv) Guarantees  0    
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  0    
(vi) Grants  0     
(vii) Results -
based payments  0    
(b) Co-
financing 
information Total amount  Currency  
200 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace31 Pricing  Seniority  
DFIs, private 
investors,  
commercial 
banks  Senior 
Loans  50 million 
USD ($)   10 years  
5 years  As per Term Sheet  senior  
DFIs, 
foundations, 
private 
investors, 
donors  Equity  100 million 
USD ($)   13 years  
5 years  As per Term Sheet  senior  
DFIs, donors  Equity  50 million 
USD ($)   20 years  
12 years  As per Term Sheet  junior  
(c) Total 
financing 
I = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
250 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)   
For the first close of REPP 2, there will be a requirement for co- investment on commercial 
terms from at least one additional investor, with  the funding from third party investors 
matched by REPP  Phase 1 / FCDO . A minimum of USD60 million has been agreed for a 
first close , in which the GCF would provide USD20 million, REPP Phase 1 / FCDO would 
provide a further USD20m, and additional commercial  investor(s) would provide a further 
USD20 million , with one commercial investor in each senior equity and notes tranches.   
Further disbursement from the GCF will be subject to  the aggregate amount of 
commitments held by GCF REPP Holdings in the Camco REPP SCSp (including the 
requested disbursement) not exceeding  40% of the total equity commitments in the Camco 
 
31 For senior loans, reference to tenor reflects weighted average tenor for the portfolio. Reference to grace reflects a 
maximum grace period for principal and interest repayments.  For equity investments, reference to tenor reflects the 
expected period over which full equity returns (principal plus preferred return) are realized. Reference to grace reflects the 
expected delay before dividends begin to be paid or exit is expected to be achieved .


---
*Page 51*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 REPP SCSp (including the requested GCF disbursement) and no more than 20% of the 
total capital commitments in the Camco REPP SCSp (including the requested GCF 
disbursement) .To meet investor expectations, REPP2 will offer a minimum internal rate of 
return to senior equity investors32. As the asset class is relatively new and considered very 
risky by investors, co-financing from private investors  isn’t expected to be raised at first 
close.  
The sizing of the notes and senior equity  tranches in the REPP 2 capital stack  may be 
adjusted prior to financial close to maximum returns to private and commercial invest ors. 
The Investment Manager is working to secure a portfolio guarantee to provide credit 
enhancement  through the tranched structure, thereby  protecting returns for more senior 
investors (including private and commercial investors ) and enhancing the potential to attract 
commercial refinanc ing of  the portfolio at a later date. The AE is working with the Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency  (SIDA ) to secure a second- loss portfolio 
guarantee, which will provide additional loss protection for senior equity providers as well 
as noteholders.  
The AE will conduct high- level KYC on prospective funders and undertake a simplified pre-
classification exercise to identify the suitability of each party as a possible investor into REPP2. Detailed client classification and take- on procedures will be undertak
en upon 
signing non- binding term sheets or letters of intent with respective parties.  
All of the potential co- financiers are well known financial institutions,  so KYC risk is regarded 
as low. KYC will be conducted before the Subscription and Partnership Agreement  is signed 
by the investor.  
Camco Management Limited or its Affiliates, as limited partner to the Camco REPP SCSp , 
will commit a Senior  Interest amounting to 1% of the total commitments of the Camco REPP 
SCSp . 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Financing and 
Support for 
Smaller- Scale 
Renewable 
Energy  Output 1: 
Increased 
commercial 
Viability  154.94 30.98 Junior Equity  123.96 Senior loans, 
Equity, Junior 
Equity  DFIs; 
commercial 
bank; 
foundations, 
private 
investors, 
donors  Output 2: 
Increased 
renewable 
energy capacity 
and generation 94.16 18.83 Junior Equity  75.33 Senior loans, 
Equity, Junior 
Equity  
Output 3: 
Improved s kills 
and capacity  0.90 0.19 Junior Equity  0.71 Junior Equity  DFIs, donors  
Indicative total cost  (million USD)  250.00 50.00  200.00   
The GCF contribution to Output 3 (Skills and Capacity Development) will be funded out if its contribution to 
operational expenditure, alongside all other investors.  
 
 
 
32 Up to 15% to commercial private investors.


---
*Page 52*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A technical assistance component of REPP 2  will be funded separately to the Programme on a grant -
funded basis  through the Technical Assistance Facility (to be established as a separate legal entity).  
Until the TAF is established and operational, a portion of REPP 2  operating costs will be allocated to 
support market development, skills and capacity building and technology transfer.33  
REPP 2  funding for skills development and capacity building within Host Countries  as well as for the 
smaller -scale renewables sector as a whole will be used to:  
• Build the capacity, skills and experience of renewable energy project developers , both local 
and international, as well as management and staff of early -stage off-grid companies ; 
• Contribute to a stronger enabling environment for renewables through building institutional 
and regulatory capacity  and strengthening policy and regulatory frameworks ; and 
• Ensure business model innovation and technology transfer occur.  
These activities will be funded out of normal operating costs of REPP 2  (with contributions from all 
investors, including the GCF), based on a final budget that is expected to be approved by the general 
partner of  Camco REPP SCSp . 
 
 
33 A term sheet for initial funding of the TAF  from REPP Phase 1 / FCDO is in an advanced stage of discussion.


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
1. Programme targets aligned to GCF indicators for reduced emissions and 
increased resilience  
Targets for the REPP 2  are as follows:34 
GHG emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered  
• Total GHG emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered (Core Indicator 1):  The target for 
GHG emissions reduced or avoided over the lifetime is  12,720,297  tCO 2e.35 
• Installed renewable energy capacity (Supplementary Indicator 1.3):  The installed capacity target for 
the Programme is 3 30MW. 
• Renewable energy generated (Supplementary Indicator 1.4):  The renewable energy generation 
target for the Programme is 8 12,771  MWh/year.  
Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached  
• Total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries reached (Core Indicator 2):  The target for the total 
number of direct beneficiaries, which is the number critical community services customers  people  
benefiting of productive use of energy equipment that builds resilience , as well as people benefiting 
from isolated grids and mini- grids that improve the resilience of energy infrastructure  is estimated  ex-
ante at  370,244 . 
• The numbers of direct  female beneficiaries are estimated to be 1 11,073  and  the number of direct 
male beneficiaries is estimated to be 259,171  
• The target for the total number indirect beneficiaries, which is the number of people with improved 
energy connections  through energy systems made resilient , reached through the Programme is  
estimated ex -ante at  359,603. The numbers of indirect female beneficiaries are estimated to be  
179,801 and the same amount of indirect male beneficiaries is expected.   
• Beneficiaries adopting improved and/or new climate -resilient livelihood options (Supplementary 
Indicator 2.1):  The target for the number of beneficiaries adopting improved and/or new climate-
resilient livelihood options through the Programme is 27,652 people . The numbers of female 
beneficiaries are estimated to be 8,295 and the estimated number of male beneficiaries is 19,356 . 
Infrastructure and built environment  
• Value of physical assets made more resilient to the effects of climate change and more able to reduce 
GHG emissions: The target for improved climate resilience of energy infrastructure USD37 million . 
2. Mitigation outcomes  
Outcome 1: Reduced GHG emissions from renewable energy installations  
The mitigation targets will be estimated using a technology split based on REPP 2 ’s transaction pipeline, 
average technology -specific electricity generation estimates, UNFCCC- approved grid emission factors and 
average technology lifetimes. The energy baseline is the total annual electricity generated or renewable 
energy supplied by the project activity in line with the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) methods: AMS -
I–A - Electricity generation by the user (version 19 ), AMS -I.D – Grid-connected renewable electricity 
generation (version 18), and AMS -I.L – Electrification of rural communities using renewable energy (version 
4). All mitigation targets will be aligned with host -country targets and priorities.  
 
34 All figures shown here reflect targets for the full REPP 2  Programme, not merely the portion attributable to GCF funding.  
35 Lifetime applied for each technology  is as follows: wind = 20 years, grid- connected solar = 25 years, hydropower = 25 
years, solar PV mini -grids = 20 years, and solar home systems (SHS) = 5 years.


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 3. Adaptation outcomes  
Outcome 2: Improved climate resilience of energy infrastructure 
The value of the energy infrastructure made resilient is estimated based on the estimated value of the 
pipeline of projects in countries in which the energy system is currently vulnerable due to 1)  a reliance on 
hydropower in countries which are prone to drought  and 2 grid instability due to widespread power outages 
and poor grid maintenance and management  and exposure of grid to climate impacts . This methodology is 
consistent with GCF core indicator 3 (value of physical assets made more resilient to the effects of climate 
change).  The Annex  2 provides country specific vulnerabilities  of the energy sector.  
Currently, in average 20  % of all REPP 2  on-grid investments  are anticipated to assist in building resilience  
of energy infrastructure.  Resulting to U SD  37 million  value of assets made more climate -resilient. Please 
see Annex  22 for detailed calculation and assumptions.  
Outcome 3: Improved climate resilience of vulnerable people and communities  
Improved climate resilience of vulnerable people and communities will be achieved through the provision of 
access to clean energy, which improves the ability of off -grid communities  to respond to climate  impacts and 
build resilience .  
The number of people who will adopt improved livelihood options has been estimated with reference to the 
REPP Phase 1 experience, specifically relating to the number of productive uses of energy (PUE) activities 
and microbusinesses operated by off -grid companies. Using this data, it is estimated that 5% of off -grid 
customers will be microbusinesses and approximately half of these microbusinesses  are anticipated to 
implement PUE activities that build resilience i.e. include solar water pumping and irrigation , produce 
refrigeration, electric  milling , improved access to markets through mobility  etc. Similarly based on R EPP 
Phase 1.0 data it is estimated that 1% of off -grid customers will be providers of critical services e.g., clinics 
and hospitals, fire stations, schools, drinking water stations, cell phone towers etc.  
4. Enabling outcomes  
Outcome 4: Increased private sector investment  
Finance mobilised for renewable energy generation benefits local developers, builds a stronger local market 
for smaller -scale renewables and helps to build gender equity.  
REPP 2  will work to mobilise the private and public f inance necessary to grow a robust and viable market 
for renewables by applying innovative climate funding solutions to overcome historic barriers to finance and 
demonstrate the bankability of projects to crowd in other investors. In addition, REPP 2  will facilitate 
knowledge transfer and innovation through demand- driven capacity building efforts to unlock investments 
and support successful project implementation. REPP 2  is anticipated to mobilise  USD786 million additional 
finance towards climate -resilient renewable energy infrastructure.  
USD7 0 million – or 30%  – of REPP 2  funding will be targeted  to assist the USD7 0 billion funding gap facing 
female entrepreneurs in Africa.36 REPP 2  will aim to dedicate a portion of its funding to renewable energy 
companies in line with 2X Challenge’s Gender Lens Investment (2X GLI) criteria. This means the company 
must: 
• be founded by a woman or women or be majority -owned by women; and / or  
• have at least 30% women in senior management; and / or  
• provide products or services designed to disproportionately benefit women; and / or  
• have a workforce that is at least 30% women, together with a progressive human resource policy .


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 Outcome 5: Contributing to stronger technology deployment, innovation and market 
transformation  
REPP 2  will contribute to stronger enabling market environment for renewables through building capacity  
and financing  a stronger level and faster technology deployment, innovation and market development in 
Host Countries. To achieve this, REPP 2  will: 
• contribute to technology deployment, dissemination, development or transfer and innovation (Core 
Indicator 6) : REPP 2  will contribute to more and more rapid technology deployment  by providing 
targeted support to renewable energy companies and local financial institutions during early and 
construction stages of the assets.  REPP 2  will also finance the deployment of renewable energy 
technology in nascent markets , often financ ing first-of-a-kind transactions and business models . The 
innovative and transformational nature of each transaction will be  asse ssed during the project 
approval process based on approved selection  criteria  defined in the REPP 2.  Operations Manual  
(Annex 21)  and 
• contribute to market development  and transformation at the sectoral, local, or national level  (Core 
Indicator 7): REPP 2  will stimulate sectoral development that would otherwise lag or not occur 
(additionality ) and help to establish or build a market ecosystem that will allow the ongoing growth of 
small and distributed renewables in Host Countries  and across the region ( transformational ). REPP 
2 will take a bottom -up approach, working closely with its investees and by extension, at a deal level, 
Host Country  governments and regulators to  help to develop a viable renewable energy sector, and 
facilitating the development of a sustainable financing market for smaller -scale and off -grid 
renewable energy projects. REPP 2  will help to build skills and establish disciplines which underpin 
a commercially -viable market for smaller -scale renewables through its support for local developers 
and based on its application of sound commercial investment principles.  
Progress towards this outcome will be monitored on an ongoing basis and reported via the mid- term and 
final reports to the GCF . 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
1. Potential for scale, replicability and sustainability at the Programme and 
market level  
The REPP 2  Programme  seeks  to mobilise additional public and private funding and achieve scale and 
sustainability for the smaller -scale renewable energy market across sub -Saharan Africa.  
REPP 2  aims to deliver a paradigm shift for the small -scale renewables sector within Host Countries  and 
across the region as a whole, with demonstration potential more broadly across emerging markets. The 
Programme also aims to deliver a paradigm shift at the level of individual projects and renewable energy 
businesses, where additional funding is needed to achieve scale and sustainability for off -grid companies 
and where local developers of grid- connected projects need funding and support to develop technically - and 
commercially -viable projects.  
In both senses, REPP 2  builds upon and scales up the early successes of REPP Phase 1 by mobilising 
finance from public , private and other commercial sources, using its blended finance approach. 
The potential of REPP 2  to deliver this paradigm shift can be demonstrated through the following:  
• The market study presented in Annex 2 identifies the scale of demand currently unmet for funding of 
smaller -scale renewables across the region. A  prior assessment identifies a total funding demand 
and potential to scale up financing in excess of USD900 million, with more than USD565 million of 
that target located in Host Countries  identified in this Funding Proposal;  
 
36 IFC 2019. MSME Finance Gap: Assessment of the shortfalls and opportunities in financing micro, small, and medium enterprises in 
emerging markets


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 • REPP 2  support for innovative37 technologies , services and business models  in nascent markets  
provides an opportunity to demonstrate technical and commercial viability, implement new regulatory 
frameworks  and crowd in public and private finance; 
In this regard, REPP 2  will scale up and replicate existing successes achieved by REPP Phase 1, 
such as in Burundi, where REPP Phase 1 support for the first solar PV IPP in the country 
demonstrated the viability of a renewable energy technology in new market and led to further 
expansion of its market  for renewable energy IPPs .38,39 Another example can be given from Sierra 
Leone, where REPP Phase -1 investee provides electrification and access to PuE equipment through  
an innovative rental model, in which customers rent out solar -charged lithium ion batter ies in 24 -hour 
increments to service low income customers ;40   
• By providing early -stage funding and technical support  to local developers  in Host Countries , REPP 
2 will develop a stronger enabling market environment  for smaller -scale renewables.   
• The design of the REPP 2 facility ensures that GCF and other more senior funders can be repaid in 
full, inclusive of targeted returns. The blended finance approach of REPP 2 is designed to de -risk 
investments. With an expected aggregate portfolio loss of 20% , the junior  equity providers provide 
protection to the equity investors , while their investment is still fully returned at the end of the fund 
Senior debt providers, including private debt providers, enjoy most risk- reduction through the blended 
finance structure. The REPP 2 risk appetite, broader risk management procedures, project selection, 
deal structuring, and pricing and portfolio management approach are also designed to ensure 
sustainable returns for investors; and  
• The platform approach of REPP 2  helps to deliver specific climate change mitigation and adaptation 
outcomes which contribute to climate -resilient development pathways  consistent with national 
priorities and plans for Host Countries. Such support, and specifically the demonstration impact of a 
more commercial approach (which directly targets crowding in of private capital), works as a blueprint 
for other markets, including LDCs, across sub -Saharan Africa and further within emerging markets 
globally.  
2. Potential for scale, replicability and sustainability at the project and 
investment level  
• For REPP 2 , investments in off -grid companies help to expand to nascent markets, achieve growth, 
commercial scale and long- term sustainability;  
• For grid connected projects, funding and support from REPP 2  supports the development and 
implementation of technically - and commercially viable projects which operate for design lifetimes  of 
20 years and longer , often first -of-its-kind in the host country. The demonstration impact from such 
funding combined with the knowledge, skills and technology transfer to local developers, funders, 
institutions and regulatory bodies help to build the enabling environment for small -scale renewables, 
based on commercial  best practise;  
• At a community  level, REPP 2  especially for off -grid electrification builds climate resilience for 
women, children and other vulnerable groups; and 
• By the providing funding at scale for both off -grid and grid- connected renewables, REPP 2  helps to 
reduce GHG emissions and build climate resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change for 
people and communities in rural areas, as well as improve the climate resilience of energy 
infrastructure. These represent durable and significant contributions to climate- resilient development 
pathways which are consistent with relevant national climate change adaptation strategies and plans.   
 
 
37 Innovative is defined as a project which is first -of-its-kind or among the first in the target country or regions based on 
technology, service, product or business model which supports the uptake of renewable energy or resilience -building  
38 REPP, 2021,  REPP invests in landmark hydro project in Burundi  
39 Afrik21, 2021,  BURUNDI: Gitega approves  the construction  of 2 hydroelectric  power  stations   
40 ESIA Africa, 2021 , Talking Points: The Power of pay peruse battery sharing model


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 D.3. Sustainable development  
1. Sustainable Development Goals  
REPP 2  contributes to the following SDGs:  
• SDG 1: No Poverty;  
• SDG 5: Gender Equality;  
• SDG 7: Affordable, Clean Energy;  
• SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth;  
• SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
• SDG 13: Climate Action  
• SDG 17: Partnership for the Global Goals  
The ultimate beneficiaries of REPP 2  funding for off -grid projects are the communities and businesses who 
will gain often first -time access to a clean, reliable and affordable source of electricity, which will contribute 
adaptive capacity and build climate resilience at a local level. Grid-connected projects supported by REPP 
2 will provide clean electricity to the grid that will contribute to national GHG emission reductions  helping to 
build the resilience of national energy infrastructure. Local private sector companies developing small- scale 
renewable energy projects will also benefit from REPP 2  funding and related capacity building leading to 
quality jobs . REPP 2  will mobilised additional  funding towards to climate action .  
2. Environmental co -benefits (co-benefit 4) 
The potential environmental and social impacts of all projects will be managed according to the REPP 2  
Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures (to be approved by the general partner of Camco REPP 
SCSp ) and the Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) Framework (Annex 6). Both the Policy and 
Procedures and the ESMS will adhere to IFC Performance Standards. At the project / investment level, a 
specific environmental and social management system (ESMS) will be established to mitigate and manage 
any negative impacts. REPP 2  capacity building activities and early -stage funding will improve environmental  
and social  performance within portfolio companies  (co- benefit 4. The improved performance  will be 
measured through the establishment and implementation  of high quality  ESMS and will lead to benefits such 
as improved waste management practices, mitigating  negative impact to biodiversity,  soil and water 
resources. In addition to  GHG mitigation, additional co- benefits, such as improved ambient air quality are 
expected to occur. However, these are not quantified.  
3. Social co -benefits including health co -benefit  
At the household level, the small renewable energy projects that REPP 2  will offer multiple environmental 
and social co- benefits. R EPP 2 funding and support will lead to improved quality of life through  communit ies 
and critical services connected to electricity (co- benefit 3). Co- benefits include improved access to lighting , 
healthcare, lighting, refrigeration, improved access to information and more productive use of energy (PUE) 
opportunities. These co- benefits will allow further socioeconomic development of H ost Countries and their 
off-grid communities . There are particular co- benefits for women and girls , where greater energy access 
allows them to participate in new income generation and educational activities . In general, i mproved access 
to renewable energy through REPP 2  will act as a driver for long- term economic growth in local communities, 
increasing their resilience to climate change. These co -benefits will contribute towards the achievement of 
SDG 1.


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 4. Economic co -benefits 
Renewable energy projects have the potential to create employment opportunities, both during development 
and operation and across numerous skill sets, from engineering and construction to sales and customer 
services (co-benefits 1) . As above, first-time access to energy also generates economic co -benefits through 
new opportunities for social and economic development through extended working hours and greater 
efficiency  in the workplace. REPP 2  will work to ensure all jobs created through the projects it supports 
provide decent work, respect labour rights, and improve skills in line with the REPP 2  Environmental and 
Social Policy and Procedures and the ESMS Framework, and supporting the achievement of SDG 8.  
5. Gender -sensitive development co-benefit s (co-benefit 2) 
The positive impacts identified above will specifically  benefit women, since across rural communities in Africa 
in particular women and girls are the primary energy users in the household, responsible for sourcing fuel, 
paying for it and managing its use. REPP 2  will be committed to building capacity on gender  equality  in line 
with the gender action plan of  REPP 2  (see Annex 8). This will be achieved by assisting investee companies 
in establishing and implementing gender action plans . All companies  are required to establish action plans 
which  will h elp to increase awareness  and improve the equality situation at company and project 
implementation level.   
In addition,  a target of 30% of REPP 2  funding will be directed to assist the USD42 billion funding gap female 
entrepreneurs face in Africa in line with 2X GLI criteria. These co -benefits will contribute towards the 
achievement of SDG 5 – Gender Equality.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  
6. Vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups  
Country -specific climate change hazards, vulnerabilities, and impacts include:41 
• Cameroon: Hazards include drought, heavy rainfall events, flooding, heavy winds, high temperatures, 
and heatwaves. Energy infrastructure is vulnerable to precipitation, extreme rainfall and flooding, as well 
as drought, and sea- level rise . Rural electricity access is low, 25% and 26 % of population lives in poverty 
making them specifically vulnerable to climate impacts; 
• DRC: Hazards include intense rainfall, erosion, floods, heatwaves, and seasonal droughts. Reliance on 
the use of traditional biomass significantly increases the climate vulnerability of the population  Rural 
electricity access is extremely  low, 1% and majority (70 %) of population lives in poverty making them 
extremely vulnerable to climate impacts ; 
• Lesotho : Hazards include more frequent, severe droughts and increased flooding. The energy 
infrastructure, particularly hydropower, is highly vulnerable to increasing temperatures. Reliance on 
subsistence agriculture significantly increases the climate vulnerability of the rural population. Rural 
electricity access is low 35% and 32 % of population lives in poverty making them vulnerable to climate 
impacts ; 
• Madagascar:  Hazards include intensification of cyclones and associated flooding, sea- level rise, 
intensification of droughts in the south and west, and a more intense wet season elsewhere. The energy 
sector is vulnerable to a reduction in precipitation and cyclones destroying infrastructure. Over -reliance 
on the use of firewood further increases the level of vulnerability . Rural electricity access is low extremely  
low 11% and majority (81  %) of population lives in poverty making them extremely  y vulnerable to climate 
impacts ;  
• Malawi:  Hazards include floods, droughts, strong winds, intense rainfall, riverine and flash floods and 
tropical cyclones. Vulnerabilities include poverty, rapid population growth, dependence on the agricultural 
sector reliance on rain -fed agriculture and biomass as well as lack of financing and w eak institutional 
 
41 Detailed references for the summaries provided here and elsewhere in Section B.1 can be found  in Annex 2.


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 capacity to manage climate change . Rural electricity access is extremely low 6.6% and majority ( 70 %) 
of population  lives in poverty making them very vulnerable to climate impacts ;  
• Niger:  Hazards include higher temperatures, increased frequency and intensity of extreme events, 
increased frequency of erratic rainfall and extreme droughts. Vulnerabilities include lack of financing, 
rapid population growth, and low institutional capacity. The energy sector in Niger is expected to be 
impacted by the effects of heavy rainfall resulting in damage to energy infrastructure . Rural electricity 
access is extremely  low 13% and half of the (51 %) of population lives in poverty making them extremely  
vulnerable to climate impacts ; 
• Nigeria:  Hazards include extreme heatwaves and rainfall events leading to droughts, floods, erosion, as 
well as rise in sea -level leading to intrusion and inundation of land.  The energy system is vulnerable to 
increased demand for cooling and heating and already experiencing multiple supply shortages . Rural 
electricity access is low 2 6% and 31 % of population lives in poverty making them specifically vulnerable 
to climate impacts ;  
• Sierra  Leone: Hazards include floods, droughts, coastal erosion, decreasing river flow, storm surges, 
flash floods, sea -level rise, and high winds. Vulnerabilities include water resources and a high 
dependence on commodity prices . Rural electricity access is extremely low 4.2% and 26 % of population 
lives in poverty making them specifically vulnerable to climate impacts ; and  
• Zambia:  Hazards include flooding, including flash floods, extreme temperatures and droughts.  
Vulnerabilities include poverty, food and water insecurity and dependence on natural resources.  Rural 
electricity access is extremely  low 14% and majority ( 61 %) of population lives in poverty making them 
extremely  vulnerable to climate impacts . 
 
There is a clear need  in all REPP 2  targe countries  for affordable access to energy and adaptation solutions 
which help to build the resilience of most  vulnerable people’s  resilience .  
7. Economic and social development level of the country and affected 
population 
Eight  of the REPP 2  Host Countries  are classified as LDCs. The economic and social development status 
summarised below , shows that development stat us is low, confirming populations vulnerability to climate 
change.42 
Country  GDP (USDbn)  Gross national 
income per 
capita  (USD)  National 
poverty 
ratio (%)  Life expectancy 
at birth, total 
(years)  Gini index  
0 = max. equality;  
100 = max. 
inequality  
Cameroon  25.24 (2021)  1,662 (2021)  25.7 (2014)  60 (2020)  46.6 (2014)  
DRC  53.96 (2021)  584 (2021)  69.7 (2012)  61 (2020)  42.1 (2012)  
Lesotho  2.52 (2021)  1,167 (2021)  32.4 (2017)  55 (2020)  44.9 (2017)  
Madagascar  14.64 (2021)  516 (2021)  80.7 (2012)  67 (2020)  42.6 (2012)  
Malawi  12.63 (2021)  643 (2021)  70.1 (2019)  65 (2020)  38.5 (2019)  
Niger  14.95 (2021)  595 (2021)  50.6 (2018)  63 (2020)  37.3 (2018)  
Nigeria  440.78 (2021)  2,085 (2020)  30.9 (2018)  55 (2020)  35.1 (2018)  
Sierra Leone  4.2 (2021)  516 (2021)  26.1 (2018)  55 (2020)  35.7 (2018)  
Zambia  21.2 (2021)  1,120.6 (2021)  61.4 (2015)  64 (2020)  57.1 (2021)  
Please refer to Annex 8 for country -specific gender baselines.  
8. Absence of alternative sources of financing  
Adoption of renewable energy technologies is a priority under all target country NDCs, with additional funding 
needed to address climate change mitigation and adaption challenges. Despite this, the analysis presented 
in Sections B.1 and B.2 demonstrates th e significant funding and regulatory barriers faced by these countries 
 
42 World Bank,  World Bank Open Data , last accessed 24/09/2022


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 to achieve these ambitions. Commercial funding is not readily available , and most investors look to invest in 
more developed and stable markets.  
9. Needs for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
REPP 2  contributes to the development of an enabling environment in Host Countries  by supporting 
technology transfer and capacity development of local developers. Through its investments, which are often 
first-of-a-kind, REPP 2  can also support institutional knowledge development in the Host Countries by 
engaging with government stakehol ders – directly or through its investees – to discuss the regulatory 
frameworks and standard project documentation, sharing a financier’s perspective on what is required to 
ensure ‘bankability’ of these documents from an international standard. This could subsequently help  attract 
private sector investors to fund the renewable energy priorities which are key to target country climate 
change responses. Examples include: a) providing a private sector perspective on the current policy and 
regulatory framework for mini- grids in Nigeria to further strengthen the successful and timely implementation 
of the Nigeria Electrification Programme; b) advising the Zambian government on the design of  a micro -
generation programme which would successfully attract private investment; supporting the Government of 
Niger in strengthening private sector engagement in renewable energy development . As it further develops 
its relationship with national stakeholders, Camco will provide advice and support for national stakeholders 
going through the GCF accreditation process  (such assistance is already being discussed in Nigeria  and 
Lesotho).  
D.5. Country ownership  
REPP 2  will place a strong focus on ensuring country ownership of its activities. While it will  apply a bottom -
up approach to its operations, driven by demand from renewable energy project developers and companies, 
the Programme will also place considerable emphasis on the alignment of its investments with national -level 
climate, energy and sustainable development priorities and ensuring that effective consultations with key 
stakeholders (including both government and non- government entities) take place to inform  the 
Programme’s design.  
1. Alignment with and contribution to national priorities and climate strategies  
In 2020, Camco undertook an analysis of the key policies in all REPP Phase 1 countries of operation and 
assessed the extent to which the portfolio was aligned with key national policy targets and priorities. The 
assessment identified a high level of alignment overall.43 It has also helped to improve how REPP Phase 1 
aligns its investment decisions with national policies. The same approach  will be critical to ensuring country 
ownership of REPP 2 .  
REPP 2 ’s diverse technology focus and support for the increase of renewable energy generation capacity 
and diversification of energy systems is strongly aligned with all Host Countries ’ NDCs.  Most of these 
countries also consider renewable energy development as a strong adaptation measure through the 
improvement of energy infrastructure resilience and – by improving livelihoods, with particular attention given 
to women and vulnerable groups - the resilience of local populations.  
Through its investments, REPP 2  will support the numerous national priorities  outlined below. A more 
detailed analysis is provided in Annex 2.  
Cameroon  
• Reduce emissions by 35% by 2030 through increased renewable energy capacity and expanded energy 
access (conditional, Updated NDC).  
• Reduce energy sector’s vulnerability through focus on small -scale and distributed generation (National 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan).  
 
43 REPP, 2021: Advancing national policy agendas through responsible investing


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
 • Support gender goals through focus on the empowerment of women (National Gender Policy; National 
Development Strategy 2020- 2030.  
Democratic Republic of the Congo  
• Reduce emissions by 21% compared to the 2030 BAU scenario and strengthen resilience of 
infrastructure (adaptation goal) through  investments in renewable energy (Updated NDC; National 
Adaptation Plan to Climate Change). 
• Expand access to modern energy sources through funding for off -grid projects.  
• Optimise related adaptation and resilience benefits, including  reduced use of traditional biomass 
(Updated NDC;  DRC GCF Country Programme; National Development Strategic Plan).  
Lesotho  
• Reduce emissions by 25% by 2030 (conditional, Updated NDC)  
• Increase power generation using solar PV and wind technologies, as well as the expansion of rural 
electrification through mini- grid development (conditional, Updated NDC). 
• Reduce reliance on hydropower and biomass -based generation, thereby strengthening climate resilience 
of energy supply (National Climate Change Policy 2017- 2027;  National Adaptation Programme of Action 
2007).  
Madagascar  
• Reduce emissions by 14% by 2030 (conditional, Updated NDC).  
• Increase clean energy supply and reduce reliance on costly fuel imports (Government’s Emergence 
Initiative for Madagascar 2018- 2023).  
• Build resilience of energy infrastructure and reduce biodiversity loss by diverting energy generation away 
from fuelwood (National Adaptation Plan).  
• REPP 2 ’s focus on gender equity is also well -aligned with the framework of the Government’s Emergence 
Initiative. 
Malawi  
• Prioritise solar PV, hydropower, wind and off -grid solar (conditional,  Updated NDC target).  
• Increase  renewable energy generation capacity to strengthen energy security (National Adaptation Plan 
Framework (NAPF).  
• Increase climate resilience of infrastructure through support for  small -scale solar and run- of-river hydro 
(National Climate Change Management Policy (NCCMP).  
• Increase resilience of rural communities through investments in off -grid solar (Updated NDC; NAPF;  
NCCMP) . 
• Support women’s economic empowerment through focus on gender equity (National Gender Policy).  
Niger  
• Reduce emissions by 45% by 2030 (conditional, Updated NDC)  
• Promote renewable energy and related ‘green’ job creation (National Climate Change Policy).  
• Support private sector development (Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy).  
• Improve women’s lives through rural electrification and related job creation ( Updated NDC). 
Nigeria  
• Reduce emissions by 47% by 2030 (conditional, Updated NDC target).  
• Deliver energy access through a combination of centralised and decentralised approaches (Rural 
Electrification Strategy and Implementation Plan; Rural Electrification Agency’s Off -grid Electrification 
Strategy).  
• REPP 2  will also closely monitor the development of the National Adaptation Plan (as envisaged in the 
National Adaptation Plan Framework) to ensure its alignment with national priorities.


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 Sierra Leone  
• Reduce emissions by 10% by 2030 and 25% by 2050 (Updated NDC). 
• Increase renewable energy capacity and energy access (National Renewable Energy Policy and Action 
Plan).  
• Increase the participation of women in the sustainable energy sector, particularly through off -grid 
development, thereby building adaptive capacity (Updated NDC).  
Zambia  
• Reduce emissions by 47% by 2040 (Updated NDC) . 
• Increase the proportion of renewable energy in the energy mix and promote investments in climate 
resilient and low carbon development pathways (National Policy on Climate Change 2016) . 
• Increase equitable access to affordable renewable energy (Zambia’s National Gender Policy).  
2. Engagement with NDAs and other stakeholders  
In 2021, Camco began the process of obtaining no objection letters (NOLs) from the respective National 
Designated Authority (NDA) in most of the countries that will be supported through REPP 2  GCF’s 
contribution. This involved introductory letters and calls in which the concept of REPP 2  and its planned 
activities and operational model were explained. The REPP 2  draft Concept Note was shared with key 
stakeholders in February 2022, followed by presentations and/or email exchanges where specific points 
raised were discussed, with feedback integrated into the final version of the Concept Note and this Funding 
Proposal . The Funding Proposal has also been shared and discussed with the NDAs.  The ESMF was shared 
in July 2023.  
As part of the engagement process, Camco consulted respective NDAs and other relevant sectoral 
stakeholders, particularly ministries of energy and rural electrification agencies, virtually and/or in- person (in-
person meetings were held with NDAs and/or NDA advisors of Cameroon, DRC, Lesotho, Madagascar, 
Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Zambia , as well as several sectoral stakeholders). The aim of these 
consultations was  to ensure an alignment of interests and develop a strong basis for continuous engagement  
during the approval process of this Funding proposal  and throughout the REPP 2  operational timeframe, 
which will include annual progress updates and ad hoc engagement as required to discuss specific 
investments. NOLs have been secured from all Host Countries . Additional countries may be added to the 
programme after initial  GCF  Board approval, provided they submit an NOL, and the addition is approved by 
the GCF Board.  In addition to public sector engagement, Camco has engaged with multiple private sector 
stakeholders and civil society representatives. 
Country ownership of REPP 2 , once operational, will be ensured through regular dialogue and long- term 
relationship building with national governments and other relevant national stakeholders (identified by the 
NDAs). This will include:  
• Annual updates to NDAs and sectoral stakeholders on the progress of REPP 2 activities and broader 
discussion on market development;  
• Ad hoc engagement with relevant government agencies, management units of sector support 
programmes, and/or non- governmental institutions and civil society organisations to ensure 
alignment and inform the requirements outlined in the REPP 2  E&S and gender -mainstreaming 
policies;  and 
• Ad hoc engagement as part of investment due diligence (DD) process . 
Once the Programme is operational, REPP 2  will promote its activities internationally and in Host Countries  
through industry associations and its on -the-ground network and partners to ensure local companies in those 
markets are aware of - and have the opportunity to benefit from - the REPP 2  offering.


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 Engagement of ultimate beneficiaries at the project site will be led by REPP 2  investees. REPP 2  has a 
responsibility of ensuring all its investees continually engage with all stakeholders identified within the project 
area of influence (both directly and indirectly), to fully understand the shortfalls against its standards and 
international best practice, and identify potential risks, which can effectively be managed. All REPP 2 ’s 
investees will be required to design and effectively implement a Stakeholder  Engagement Plan, as part of 
their ESMS (see REPP 2 ’s Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in Annex 6 for further 
information).  
3. Suitability of the Accredited Entity  
As a climate and impact fund manager, Camco seeks to deliver on its vision for “A brighter future, today” by 
supporting the clean energy transition in emerging markets. With  local offices and staff in West, East and 
Southern Africa, Camco leverages its on -the-ground presence, sector expertise and more than 30 years of 
experience to deliver value as both the REPP Phase 1 manager and as a GCF Accredited Entity . 
As the REPP Phase 1 manager, Camco has been integral to the programme’s design and implementation  
and is leading the re -design and fundraising activities for REPP 2 . Internally, Camco resources the REPP 
Phase 1 management role separately from delivering its obligations as a GCF Accredited Entity. From a 
governance perspective, this separation of roles and responsibilities is important to maintain independence 
and a f ocus on delivery.  
Camco (as a GCF Accredited Entity), REPP 2  and the GCF, leveraging their respective skills, experience 
and expertise, all seek to achieve meaningful and lasting climate change mitigation and adaptation impacts. 
Camco, which is a signatory to the UN Global Compact, recognises its responsibility and opportunity to 
support both the Paris climate targets and the Sustainable Development Goals. Both remain core objectives 
of our work.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
1. Rationale for a blended finance approach  
The supply of private (and public) capital is scarce for smaller -scale renewables across sub-Saharan Africa, 
and the limited risk appetite of (particularly) private commercial funders exacerbates this situation. In order 
to deliver REPP 2 ’s targeted mitigation (via renewable energy) and adaptation (via climate resilience ) 
impacts, the finance mobilisation must expand beyond the single grant -based donor approach of REPP 
Phase 1 to the blended finance approach of REPP 2 . This paradigm shift in funding structure is necessary 
to provide finance at scale and assist the targeted countries in achieving their climate goals.   
2. Adequacy and reasonableness  
As outlined in detail in Section B.5, the proposed capital structure for REPP 2  - and the GCF’s position within 
it - have been designed to crowd in additional sources of both public and private capital. The GCF investment 
in the junior equity tranche would also be shared by another investor with these investments mobilising 
additional public and private investment in more senior equity and debt tranches.  
REPP 2  acknowledges that it cannot price for risk on a purely commercial basis. Since small -scale 
developers often struggle to access private capital on terms that leave their projects commercially viable, 
public financing in this space is still required. In this context, funding for REPP 2  will contribute to the 
continued growth and increasing sustainability of commercial renewable energy sectors, as well as the 
delivery of climate mitigation and adaptation impacts in Host Countries .  
On the other hand,  if REPP 2  adopted a purely concessional approach to pricing, it may have the unintended 
consequence of negatively disrupting a nascent market for renewables in Host Countries  crowding out 
private sector funding.  REPP 2 ’s approach to concessionality will thus strive to achieve a considered balance 
between the need for concessionality, in order to build the market and crowd in private sector funding, and


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 the need for rigour and more commercial pricing approaches, where the market, investor appetite and project 
economics allow for it.  
3. Efficiency and effectiveness  
At the fund level, GCF’s funding would mobilise an additional USD 200 million from public and private sources 
in the same or in more senior tranches of the capital stack. Expressed as a ratio of funding expected to be 
mobilised in more senior tranches (USD150 million), this would represent a funding mobilisation ratio of 
3:1. Including funding expected to be mobilised into the junior equity tranche alongside the GCF, this ratio 
would be 4 :1.  
At the level of investments planned to be made by REPP 2 , the GCF investment would be expected to 
mobilise  total finance (total project costs  less REPP2 investments ) in excess of USD786 million.  This would 
represent an investment leverage ratio (total project costs / GCF funding) of 20:1 .  
REPP 2  will aim to mobilise an additional USD50 million from private investors  into both the equity and senior 
debt tranches. This would represent a private sector leverage ratio  of 1:1. The analysis presented in 
Section B.2 identifies limited access to finance in general, and very limited access to private sector capital 
in particular, as key barriers for the small -scale renewable energy sector in sub- Saharan Africa. Given the 
limited risk appetite from private and commercial funders, especially for smaller -scale renewables where 
funding quantum are lower and the potential for returns relative to the level of costs are constrained, it 
appears unrealistic to target a significantly higher private sector leverage ratio.  
The capital structure of REPP 2  is designed to address these key market failures by catalysing funding into 
the sector. This goal is strongly aligned to the GCF’s strategic objective to catalyse climate finance for 
mitigation and adaptation which is new, additional,  adequate and predictable.  
The indicative REPP 2  pipeline can be used to estimate  cost efficienc ies (total installed project cost, including 
fixed financing costs , per MW of installed capacity ), per technology. In general, cost efficienc ies for small -
scale grid- connected projects and off -grid electrification programmes will be lower  than global benchmarks 
for large utility -scale projects, due to the effects of economies of scale as well as additional costs relating to 
supply chain and logistics, when purchasing equipment in smaller quantities and needing to maintain 
operations over a diverse range of sites, often in rural areas. The higher total installed cost for small -scale 
renewables also reflects the higher cost of capital for such businesses and projects, another financing barrier 
which REP P 2 seeks to overcome. Total installed cost estimates from the REPP 2  indicative pipeline and 
relevant benchmarks are shown below.  
Generation technology  Installed cost – 
REPP 2  pipeline 
(USD m/MW)  Installed cost – 
global benchmark 
(USD m/MW)  Source and comments  
Solar PV (grid -
connected)  1.732  0.857  IRENA, 202244, for global (larger) 
utility -scale projects  
Onshore wind  2.934 1.325  IRENA, 2022  
Hydropower  590 2.135  IRENA 2022 (not restricted to small 
run-of-river hydropower)  
Solar mini- grids  4.908  3.659  ESMAP, 202245 (the ESMAP 
benchmark covers capital costs 
only)  
Solar home systems  3.174 1600  IRENA , 201646 
 
44 IRENA , 2022 : Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2021, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.  
45 Energy Sector Management Assistance Program  (ESMAP), 2022 : Mini Grids for Half a Billion People:  Market Outlook and 
Handbook for Decision Makers. Washington, DC: World Bank. www.esmap.org/ mini_grids_for_half_a_billion_people. 
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO  
46 IRENA , 2016 : Solar PV in Africa: Costs and Markets


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 Overall  394   
Other efficiency and effectiveness benefits of REPP 2  
• For the equity tranche, targeted returns in the base case are appropriate given the experience from 
REPP Phase 1 and relevant market benchmarks.  
• For the GCF and other investors in the junior equity tranche, targeted returns are appropriate  in the 
base case. These returns are aligned with a blended finance approach to mobilise additional public 
and private capital in more senior tranches.  
• For the senior debt tranche, targeted returns in the base case are appropriate given representative 
pricing and the level of protection provided by the blended finance structure of REPP 2 . 
• The estimated cost per tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent (PMF -M core indicator 2) is USD18. 35 
per tCO 2e.47 The lower installed capacity of small- scale projects limits their generation potential and 
consequently the potential to generate emission reductions . In general,  total project costs (capital 
and operating expenditure) are unavoidably high relative to the emission reduction potential of the 
plant.  
• Based on a target of  729,847 direct and indirect beneficiaries, the estimate cost per beneficiary over 
the Programme’s lifespan  is USD  320 (using  total funding of USD250 million as the numerator in the 
ratio calculation).  
 
 
 
47 PMF-M core indicator 2: Total investment cost  (USD250 million )/expected lifetime emission reductions  (12.7mtCO 2e) = 
USD 18.35 per tCO 2e


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
 
Assessment 
dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  In the target markets 
as well as most LDCs and other emerging 
markets across sub -
Saharan Africa, there 
is limited funding available and limited 
appetite for 
investment into the smaller -scale 
renewable energy 
sector.  
The limited supply of 
funding affects off -
grid companies, which require growth 
capital to achieve 
scale. Funding limitations also affect grid-connected 
projects which lack 
capital during the Medium  The target scenario is a situation in which, through REPP 2 , innovative 
and resilient renewable energy 
projects in Host Countries  and other 
markets can attract funding to 
become technically and commercially viable at scale.  REPP 2  will originate and provide 
early -stage growth funding for off -grid 
companies as well as development-
stage for grid- connected projects. 
REPP 2  funding and support will help 
to demonstrate technical and 
commercial viability prior to financial 
close, thereby de- risking investments 
in the renewable energy sector and 
crowding in additional finance.  
In the off -grid sector, REPP 2  will 
also provide gap funding to finance 
the expansion of solar home system 
(SHS) companies once their business 
models are proven and construct mini- grid portfolio as well as grid-
connected projects.  
In doing so, REPP 2  may take an 
anchor investment position and / or help access risk mitigation instructions to unlock capital markets 
and crowd in other forms of capital.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
 development phase 
as well as for 
construction.  The net impact of REPP 2  funding is 
to increase the scale of renewable 
energy power capacity, generation 
and access to clean energy , access  
to climate resilient energy  solutions,  
all of through which  the quality of life 
in beneficiary communities is 
improved and the quantum of finance 
mobilised into the renewable energy sector in host markets. 
 
Replicability  Nascent markets for 
renewable energy are 
characterised by 
limited availability and access to finance, inflexible and high 
costs of finance from 
those willing to provide it, limited skills and experience 
of local developers, 
and untested markets where policy and regulatory 
frameworks are 
unclear, untested or uncertain.  
All of these factors 
limit the potential to 
replicate examples of successful renewable 
energy investments Medium  The target scenario is a situation in which REPP 2  demonstrates the 
successful application of blended finance and innovative financing and support mechanisms in a resilient renewable energy sector.  
Renewable energy markets in Host Countries  and across the region are 
viewed as bankable, with private lenders and investors more willing to 
participate to on more standard 
commercial terms. 
 REPP 2  support for a company or 
project in a nascent market will be 
based, in part, on the project’s 
potential for replication.  Its financial 
and non- financial support will:  
• Promote first -time applications of 
technologies  and innovative 
funding instruments  in new 
markets;  
• Crowd in other sources of both 
public and private finance, and  
actively promote investment in 
smaller -scale supporting efforts to 
replicate its successes within Host Countries, across the region 
and in other emerging markets.


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 within Host Countries , 
across sub- Saharan 
Africa and beyond to 
other emerging markets.
 
Sustainability  Lack of early -stage 
and development funding in LDCs for small- scale 
renewable energy 
projects. Limited 
experience and commercial backing for local developers 
and a limited appetite 
for investment in new markets means that off-grid companies 
cannot achieve sustainable levels of growth and that the market for on- grid 
renewables cannot grow without continued interventions from 
facilities like REPP 2  
and from DFIs.
 Medium  The target scenario is a situation in which off -grid companies can achieve 
scale and long- term sustainability for 
their businesses.  
For on -grid projects the target 
scenario is one in which developers 
and sponsors can attract sufficient volumes of commercial funding, on commercially viable terms and can 
operate the installations in a manner 
which can services debt obligations and genera te commercially 
sustainable returns for investors.  
For the smaller -scale renewable 
energy sector as a whole, the target scenario is one in which the appetite for risk is increased as real and 
perceived risks are addressed and 
the supply of commercial funding is increased, ensuring that the market can opera te on more commercial 
terms without the need for ongoing interventions.  The REPP 2  facility is designed to be 
‘semi- evergreen,’  to ensure that GCF 
and other commercial funding can be repaid. REPP 2 ’s capital stack is 
designed to effectively de-risk 
investments by commercial funders, 
through the provision of a junior equity tranche provided by the GCF, REPP Phase 1 reflows and other 
donors. REPP 2 ’s risk appetite, 
broader risk management 
procedures, project selection, deal structuring, and pricing and portfolio 
management approach are designed to ensure sustainability for invest ors. 
Furthermore, the ongoing support 
provided by REPP 2  will also help to 
build capacity, establish a track record, and attract other finance to achieve sustainability by providing 
growth capital in nascent markets.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final48 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Calculated ex -post 
based on renewable 
energy generation 
data from portfolio 
companies and reported in annual reports. An 
independent 
verification will be conducted before 
interim and final 
evaluations. 
 0 1,666, 584 
tCO 2e 4,166,460  
tCO 2e 
(proportional 
allocation to 
fund 
lifespan49) 
and 
12,720,297  
tCO 2e (full 
REPP 2  
Programme 
over 
technology lifetime
50) The baseline emissions 
have been calculated based on the fuel 
consumption of the 
technology that would have been used to generate the equivalent 
quantity of energy in the 
absence of REPP 2 ’s 
intervention, in line with the CDM methods AMS -
I.A – Electricity 
generation by the user (version 18), AMS -I.D – 
Grid-connected 
renewable electricity generation (version 18), and AMS -I.L – 
Electrification of rural 
communities using 
renewable energy (version 4).  
 
48 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.  
49 Refers to total emission reduction potential calculated at the end of  programme implementation period i.e., 7  years.  
50 Refers to total emission reduction potential at the end of the technology lifetime (25 years for  on-grid PV, wind and hydro; 20 years for PV mini-grids ; 5 years for SHS).


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity  To be measured  ex-
post based on 
installed renewable energy capacity data from portfolio 
companies and 
reported in annual reports. An independent 
verification will be 
conducted before 
interim and final 
evaluations.
 0 132 MW 330 MW The baseline is the current energy 
generation capacity in the host country based on CDM methods AMS-
I.A – Electricity 
generation by the user 
(version 18) and AMS -I.D 
– Grid connected 
renewable.  
Installed capacity refers to the rated power output 
when operational in 
megawatts (MW) of the 
clean energy technology, either in the output of electrical power (M we) or 
thermal power (MWt).
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated  To be measured ex -
post based on renewable energy 
generation data from 
portfolio companies and reported in annual reports. An 
independent 
verification will be conducted before 0 325,108 
MWh  812,771 MWh  The energy baseline is the total annual electricity generated or renewable 
energy supplied by the 
project activity in line with the CDM methods AMS -
I.A – Electricity 
generation by the user (version 18), AMS -I.D – 
Grid connected renewable electricity 
generation (version 18),


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
 interim and final 
evaluations.  and AMS -I.L – 
Electrification of rural 
communities using renewable energy 
(version 4). 
 
All adaption results 
areas  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Direct beneficiaries  
are calculated and 
disaggregated ex -post 
based on critical 
services customers 
and resilient PUE 
customers, as well as estimated number of people within 
households benefiting 
from climate resilient  infrastructure (mini -
grids).  
Indirect beneficiaries are counted ex -ante 
as the number of people benefiting from 
energy assets made 
climate  resilient (on -
grid, isolated grids).  0 Total  direct 
and indirect beneficiaries   
291,939  Total  direct 
and indirect beneficiaries  
729,847  Direct beneficiaries are 
calculated based on the 
number of active SHS and mini -grid customers  
that are anticipated to 
build resilience and 
average household size of Host Countries .  
Indirect based on 
electricity production 
from resilient energy 
infrastructure divided by 
average electricity 
consumption in the 
country.  
Ex-post reporting 
disaggregated by gender  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities   Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  To be calculated and disaggregated ex -post 
based on 
critical 
services customers 
and resilient PUE 0 Total direct beneficiaries:   
148,098  Total direct beneficiaries:   
 370,244  Calculated based on the number of active SHS 
and mini -grid customers  
that are anticipated to 
build resilience and


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 customers, as well as 
estimated number of 
people within households benefiting from climate  resilient  
infrast ructure (mini -
grids) .
 Direct female 
beneficiaries:  
44,429  
Direct male beneficiaries:  
103,668  Direct female 
beneficiaries : 
111,073  
Direct male beneficiaries : 
259,171  average household size 
of Host Countries  
Ex-post reporting 
disaggregated by gender  
ARA3 Infrastructure 
and built environment  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Indirect beneficiaries are counted ex -ante 
as the number of 
people benefiting from  
the energy assets 
made climate resilient 
(on-grid, isolated 
grids).  0 Indirect beneficiaries:  
143,841  
Indirect  
female beneficiaries:71,921  
Indirect male beneficiaries:71,921  Indirect beneficiaries : 
359,603  
Indirect female beneficiaries: 179,801  
Indirect male  
beneficiaries: 179,801  Indirect based on electricity production from resilient energy 
infrastructure divided by 
average electricity consumption in the country.  
Ex-post reporting 
disaggregated by gender


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  To be calculated and 
disaggregated ex -post 
based on critical 
services customers and resilient PUE 
customers, as well as 
estimated number of people within households benefiting 
from the PUE 
solutions.
 0 People 
benefiting from resilient 
PUE: 55,303  
Women benefiting 
from resilient PUE: 16,591  People benefiting from resilient 
PUE:  
138,258  
Women 
benefiting 
from resilient PUE: 41,447  Calculated based on the 
number of active PUE 
customers that are 
anticipated to build resilience and average 
household size of Host Countries . These 
numbers relate to direct beneficiaries only; 
indirect beneficiaries 
have not been defined.  
Ex-post reporting 
disaggregated by gender.  
ARA3 Infrastructure 
and built environment  Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions  Calculated ex -post 
based on portfolio investments in countries in which renewable energy 
generation will 
improve the resilience of the energy infrastructure. 
Reported in annual 
reports and with an independent verification conducted 
before interim and 
final evaluations. 
 0 USD  
15million  USD 37 
million  The value of the energy 
assets made resilient 
was estimated based on the value of pipeline of projects in countries in 
which the energy system 
is currently vulnerable due to  reliance on hydropower in countries 
which are prone to 
drought . 
The % investment  in 
energy infrastructure  that 
improve resilience is estimated based on 
technology and country.


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 Details provided in Annex 
2 and 22.  
The resilience of each 
investment will be assessed with the help of 
ADAPT tool at the time of 
investment decision.
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
 
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  Local developers often lack the skills 
and experience 
needed to develop, construct and operate projects. In under -
developed markets, local commercial lenders often have limited or no
51 
experience of lending to the renewable energy sector.  Low Improved renewable 
energy generation 
capacity,  knowledge 
and technical skills at 
the local renewable energy company and 
funder level  measured 
through:  
Operational 
renewable energy capacity  in MW: 330  
Private sector funding 
leveraged in 
USDm :393
 REPP 2  will contribute 
to enabling 
environment thr ough 
technology transfer by providing targeted support to renewable 
energy companies 
during early and construction stages of the assets. REPP 2  
will also finance the deployment of renewable energy technology in nascent 
markets .
 Multi -countries


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  Generally higher than 
average levels of real 
and perceived risk and a limited appetite for investment in new 
markets, especially in 
small- scale renewable 
energy sector.
 Low Improved market 
ecosystem that will 
allow growth of small and distributed renewables in the 
region, measured 
through:  
Number of renewable energy transactions  
funded: 37 
Number of innovative renewable energy transactions  funded
52: 
26 Through its 
investment strategy, 
REPP 2  will seek to 
be: Additional, in that 
it will stimulate 
sectoral development 
that would otherwise lag or not occur, and transformational, in 
that it will help to establish or build a market ecosystem that will allow the 
ongoing growth of 
small and distributed renewables in the region.  REPP 2  aims 
to unlock investments in renewable energy and by often supporting first -mover 
projects, to test  and 
further inform the development of the enabling environment.  
This will be measured through the 
transformative or 
additional nature of Multi -countries  
 
52 Innovative is defined as a project  which is first -of-its-kind or among the first in the target country or regions based on technology , service, product  or business model which 
supports the uptake of renewable energy or resilience -building .


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 the investment at the 
time of investment  
decision in 
accordance with 
evaluation criteria 
approved by the 
general partner of Camco REPP SCSp .
  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 4 : Increased 
private sector 
investment /  
Output 1: Increased 
commercial viability  USD funding 
leveraged from 
private and public 
sources  Measured  and 
monitored  ex-post 
based on portfolio 
investments through 
the amount specified in 
the funding agreements  
by other parties . 
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent verification 
conducted before 
interim and final 
evaluations.  0 USD315 
million  USD786 
million  As per funding 
agreements means that 
the amount is 
monitored through the 
amount specified in the 
funding agreements by 
other parties .


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 Outcome 3: Improved 
climate resilience of 
vulnerable people and 
communities / Output 
2: Increase in 
renewable energy 
capacity and 
generation   MWh of electricity 
sold to customers  / 
year Measured ex -post 
based on resilient 
portfolio investments 
through  the amount of 
electricity sold  to 
customers .  0 52,233 MWh  130,580MWh  In case of off grid 
customers, driven by 
customer affordability.   
Outcome 5: 
Contributing to 
stronger technology 
deployment, 
innovation and 
market 
transformation/ 
Output 3: Improved 
skills and capacity  Operational 
renewable energy 
capacity  in MW Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments through 
MWs commissioned by 
investee through 
technical report and for 
SHS sales records   0  132 MW  330 MW  As defined in technical 
commissioning report 
and for SHS companies 
sales report to define 
capacity.  
Private sector 
funding leveraged 
in USDm  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments through 
third party funding 
agreements  0 157 mUSD  393 USDm  As per funding 
agreements means that 
the amount is 
monitored through the 
amount specified in the 
funding agreements by 
other parties . 
Number of 
renewable energy 
transactions funded  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments through 
funding agreement  0 15 number of 
transactions  37 
transactions   
Number of 
innovative 
renewable energy 
transactions funded  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments as defined 
in the concept note 
and/or structure papers  0 10 number of 
innovative 
transactions  26 innovative 
transactions


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1: New 
jobs generated,  and 
community services 
provided through 
clean energy  Number of jobs 
disaggregated by 
type  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
employment records . 
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  
Type should include, 
as a minimum, 
differentiation between 
construction and 
operations jobs. 
Reported as full -time 
jobs in each year.  0 30,720 jobs  76,801 jobs   
Co-benefit 2:  
Enhanced gender 
equity  2.1 Number of jobs 
disaggregated by 
gender  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
employment records . 
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  
Type should include, 
as a minimum, 0 9,216 female 
jobs 23,040 female 
jobs


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 differentiation between 
construction and 
operations jobs. 
Reported as full -time 
jobs in each year  
2.2 USD funding 
committed to 2X 
Challenge’s 
Gender Lens 
Investing criteria -
aligned companies    Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
funding agreements .  0 USD28 
million  USD70 
million   
2.3 Number of 
female- led or 
managed 
companies funded  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
funding agreements to 
female owned and led 
companies In line with 
2X criteria.  
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  0 4 11 Ex-ante estimate 
based on 30 % 
assumption.  
2.4 Number of 
women with 
improved quality of 
life Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
customer records . 0 Number 
women with improved 
lighting: 
447,101  Number of 
women with improved 
lighting: 
1,117,752  Calculated based on 
the number of active 
customers that are 
women.


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  Number of 
women with 
improved access to information: 
219,075  Number of 
women with 
improved access to information:  
547,687  
Co-benefit 3: 
Improved quality of 
life through 
electrification  Number of people 
with first -time clean 
energy  access to 
energy 
disaggregated by 
gender and type of 
user/ use  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  through 
number of customers 
and type of customers 
(off-grid companies, 
only) . In addition, ex-
post the average 
energy usage by  
customer can be assed 
based on the amount 
of electricity sold by the 
off-gird investees and 
the number of 
customers .  
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  
Reported based on 
customer records and 
energy sales.  0 Number of people with 
improved lighting: 
1,490,336  
Number of 
people with improved 
access to 
information:  
730,260  Number of people with improved lighting: 
3,725,840  
Number of 
people with improved 
access to 
information: 1,825,625


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 These numbers relate 
to direct beneficiaries 
only; indirect 
beneficiaries have not 
been defined.  
Co-benefit 4: 
Developers with 
improved ESG 
practice  Number of 
projects/renewable 
energy companies 
with improved ES G 
practices.  Measured ex -post 
based on portfolio 
investments  number of 
investees with 
improved quality of 
their ESIA and/or 
ESMS as result of 
REPP 2  intervention.  
Number of investees 
who maintain high 
quality od E&S 
implementation  - 
assed annually during 
investee annual review.  
Reported in annual 
reports, with an 
independent 
verification conducted 
before interim and final 
evaluations.  26 (7 0%) of 
portfolio 
companies are 
anticipated to 
have good ESG 
practices , which 
are improved 
through REPP 
2 intervention. 10 26 Measured as a YOY 
comparison between a 
project’s initial ESG 
status , ESG status and 
performance after 
REPP investment and 
its status 12 months 
later.  
Ex-ante assumption is 
that in 70% of the 
projects, ES practices 
will be improved  as a 
result of  REPP 2  
funding.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
 
Activities  Description  sub-activities  Deliverables  
Sub-activity 1.1: Provide growth 
funding to SHS businesses  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 Activity 1:  Provide early -
stage growth funding for off -
grid companies  REPP 2  will provide early -
stage growth capital to off -grid 
electrification companies.  Sub-activity 1.2: Provide growth 
funding to mini -grid and isolated 
mini- grid businesses  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Sub-activity 1.3: Provide capital for 
environmental, social and gender 
studies and plans  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 2:  Provide 
development funding for grid-connected projects  REPP 2  will provide 
development loans prior to financial close for grid-connected projects.  Sub-activity 2.1: Partial  funding of  
project development costs (including design and permitting, technical feasibility studies, 
environmental and social impact 
assessments, gender action plans , 
etc.) The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Sub-activity 2.2: Partial funding of  
due diligence costs as projects 
approach financial close (covering 
legal fees and other third -party 
technical, commercial and financial due diligence costs)  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 3 : Finance 
expansion of SHS businesses  REPP 2  will provide 
mezzanine and senior debt funding for SHS businesses.  Sub-activity 3.1: Growth funding for 
SHS businesses  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Sub-activity 3. 2: Provide funding 
with a gender lens   The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 Activity 4:  Finance 
construction of mini -grid 
portfolios  REPP 2  will provide junior and 
senior debt funding to mini- grid 
and isolated mini- grid projects.  Sub-activity 4.1: Construction 
funding for mini -grid portfolios and 
isolated mini -grid projects  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Sub-activity 4.2: Provide funding 
with a gender lens  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 5:  Provide gap 
funding for construction of 
grid-connected projects  REPP 2  will provide equity or 
debt funding to fill gaps in the capital structure of grid-connected renewable energy projects.  Sub-activity 5.1: Construction 
funding for grid- connected 
renewable energy projects  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Sub-activity 5.2: Provide funding 
with a gender lens  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 6:  Support the 
provision of financial risk mitigation  REPP 2  will work with risk 
mitigation providers to de-risk renewable energy projects.  Sub-activity 6.1: Support the 
provision of appropriate and effective  risk mitigation solutions   The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 7 . Provide targeted 
support to developers and companies  REPP 2  funding and capacity 
building will be directed towards local project 
developers and renewable 
energy companies.  Sub-activity 7.1: Support and 
capacity building for project developers  The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
Activity 8.  Improve 
environmental and social risk mitigation. Comprehensive assessment of projects environmental and social risks, d evelopment and 
implementation of environmental and social management systems (ESMSs) to avoid and mitigate 
risk and to improve Sub-activity 8.1: Funding and 
support for implementation of ESIAs and ESMSs   The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 performance in accordance 
with REPP 2  policy, approved 
by the general partner of 
Camco REPP SCSp . 
Activity 9 : Non-financial 
support to promote gender 
equity  REPP 2  will provide technical 
support  and train to  
mainstreaming gender  into 
investee company’s operations  
equity.  Sub-activity 9.1: Integration of a 
gender equality perspective into the design, implementation, 
monitoring and assessment of all renewable energy activities.   The REPP Manger will provide an annual 
impact report to it investors.  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
1. Monitoring and  reporting 
Monitoring and reporting will be conducted in accordance with industry best practice, following the CDM standards mentioned above and the guidance 
from Global GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry.  The monitoring methodology to estimate ex -ante and to calculate 
ex-post has been presented in the Annex 22B.  
In addition to the arrangements laid out in the Accreditation Master Agreement and the Funded Activity Agreement between Camco and the GCF, 
the implementation of REPP 2  will involve:  
• Monitoring of programme’s key performance indicators (KPIs) as per section E5;  
• Monitoring of key environmental and social (E&S) indicators to ensure project -level compliance with the REPP 2  ESMS Framework, to be 
approved by the general partner of Camco REPP SCSp;  
• Monitor the implementation of gender action plans (GAP) and gender disaggregated data;  
• Monitoring of portfolio companies’ financial performance; and  
• Periodic monitoring and reporting of KPIs and E&S indicators. 
 
REPP 2 ’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) process and requirements are outlined in the REPP 2  Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures  
and the REPP 2  Operations Manual, to be approved by the general partner of Camco REPP SCSp. The M&E process will include:  
• Training investees in REPP 2 ’s M&E process and requirements by the time of signing a Term Sheet;  
• Ex-ante estimates of investees’ KPIs included in the Support Agreement;  
• Agreeing a monitoring plan with investees as part of their ESMS, which will be part of the obligations pursuant to the Suppor t Agreement with 
each investee . This will detail the indicators each investee will monitor and report to REPP 2  on quarterly basis ;


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
 • Quarterly monitoring of portfolio companies ’ financial performance;  
• Collecting KPI and E&S data and supporting documents on a quarterly basis with each investee via the REPP 2  Impact Data Management 
System ( presented in Annex 11B ), to be approved by the general partner of Camco REPP SCSp. The investees will report on site-specific 
data to REPP, with the exception of SHS companies, which will report country specific numbers. This allows aggregation of monitored data 
and indicators by investee, country and technology. An annual investee review  which is used to assess the fitness of investees ESMS 
implementation and to verify KPIs reported. This review is conducted by REPP 2  Manager.  
 
REPP 2  will provide KPI updates to the AIFM, REPP 2  Investment Committee and REPP 2  Advisory Board on a quarterly basis and a full M&E report 
in the form of a logframe on an annual basis.  
An important aspect of REPP 2 ’s risk management process and impact verification will be the annual review of investments . The annual review will 
assess fitness of ESMS implementation and verify the reported impact indicators. The annual reviews will be based on document reviews ( As an 
example, the review will revive customer records to verify number of customers and employment records and contracts to verify  number of employees 
reported. The records will be provided by the investee company and reviewed by R EPP managers impact team. If the review raises any 
discrepancies, concerns or material issues a site visit is conducted.) and interviews and will measure, compare and analyse a project’s performance 
against the baseline and targets set during the due diligence process. This will include review of investees GAP against the set targets. If substantial 
material issues are discovered, a site visit may be conducted as an additional part of the annual review. The results of the annual review will confirm 
whether support can be continued in its current form, if modifications of the REPP 2  support are needed, or if withdrawal of REPP 2  support is 
required.  
2. Evaluation  
REPP 2 ’s evaluation process is outlined in the Independent Evaluation of Camco Investment Mandates policy.  The evaluation is an independent 
review commissioned by REPP 2  halfway through the investment period (mid- term review) as well as at the end of the investment mandate (final 
review) to ensure activities compliance with Camco 2 policies and procedures. An open tender procurement procedure will be followed to select the 
appropriate service provider to conduct the independent evaluation.  Evaluations will be conducted based on following principles:  
• Independence:  Evaluations must be conducted independently from the delivery and management of financial assistance and project 
implementation.  
• Credibility:  Evaluations must be credible and based on reliable data and observations. Evaluation reports should reflect consistency and 
dependability in data, findings and lessons learned, with reference to the quality of the procedures and analysis used to col lect a nd interpret 
information.  
• Impartiality : Evaluations must give a comprehensive and balanced presentation of the strengths and weaknesses of the activity being 
evaluated. The evaluation process should reflect impartiality at all stages and consider the views of all stakeholders.


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
 • Transparency:  Transparency involves clear communication on the criteria applied, the evaluation approach and methods, and the intended 
use of the findings. Documentation related to evaluations must be freely available,  easily  accessible and readable for transparency and 
legitimacy. 
• Integrity:  Evaluators must honour the dignity, well -being and self -worth of individuals and acknowledge the influence of culture within and 
across groups. Evaluators must respect the right of institutions and individuals to provide information on the facts confident ially.  
• Gender equity : Evaluations must assess whether – and if so, how - men and women are affected by changes to natural resource use and 
decision- making resulting from the funded activity.  
• Competencies and capacities:  Evaluations require a range of expertise that may be technical, environmental, cultural, ethical or within a 
social science. Evaluators must have sufficient experience and skills in the appropriate fields.  
3. Evaluation reporting of Camco (Accredited Entity) to GCF  
Camco will provide the GCF with:  
• Annual activity performance reports on the status of the Programme throughout the relevant reporting period;  
• A mid -term evaluation report at the midpoint of the implementation period of the Programme; and  
• A final evaluation report at the end of the implementation period of the Programme as per the funded activity agreement.


---
*Page 87*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 83 
   
 F. RISK  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1  Co-Financing  Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High  
Description  
The risk that  an insufficient  amount of co- financing is raised  to meet GCF co- financing requirements 
or deliver the targeted impacts for REPP 2 . There is an additional risk that the terms on whic h co-
financing can be secure d, particularly in the current high- inflation, rising interest -rate environment,  
limit the potential for  REPP 2  to be commercially viable  and deliver targeted impacts and returns for 
investors . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Fundraising efforts on behalf of REPP 2  are ongoing and at an advanced stage  
• In the event that the amount of co-financing raised is below the targeted level, the capital structure 
for REPP 2  is sufficiently flexible to ensure that all GCF requirements in terms of co- funding ratios 
will be met 
• The REPP 2  financial model incorporates an expectation of higher pricing and return expectations 
in light of current macro -economic trends  
• Discussions are ongoing with potential investors (public and private) to secure financing on terms 
which reflect the REPP 2  mandate and goal to build a more viable market for small -scale 
renewables in Africa – particularly when macroeconomic conditions exacerbate existing barriers 
such as access to finance.  
Mitigation measures are expected to manage and reduce the probability of occurrence of this risk 
factor.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 Investment Performance Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The risk that assets in the REPP 2  portfolio underperform investment expectations and that targeted 
returns for investors are not achieved as a result.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Robust asset selection processes in accordance with defined investment criteria, including 
REPP 2  IC approval  
• Comprehensive risk assessment and due diligence procedures in line with REPP 2  risk 
management policies and procedures  
• Ongoing assessment of risk management framework and procedures as well as operations and maintenance at asset level  
• REPP 2  oversight and input on key strategic decision- making for equity investees through 
representation on project company boards  
• Ongoing monitoring of asset performance and revenue- drivers  
• Ongoing communication with investees, combined with annual review cycle for investments, including site visits


---
*Page 88*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 84 
   
 Mitigation measures are expected to manage and reduce the probability of occurrence of this risk 
factor.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 Developer / Investee Performance Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Project developer or investee company management fail to execute on company growth plans (off-
grid investments), achieve financial close or complete construction, achieve commercial operations 
within targeted timeframes and against agreed budgets.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Milestone- based disbursement of funds linked to achievement of pre -agreed growth targets (for 
off-grid investments) and pre -defined contractual obligations (for development -stage funding and 
construction of grid- connected projects)  
• Ongoing communication, oversight and review of investment progress, including via company 
board representation where an equity investment has been made  
• Support and capacity building to company management and local project developers  
• Support and capacity building (as appropriate) to regulators and other government institutions 
crucial for project or business development  
The milestone -based disbursement approach is expected to reduce the risk of REPP 2  losses. 
Capacity building initiatives are expected to help to build institutional, regulatory and business skills 
and experience, which reduce the risk of project / investment failure and enhance potential for 
commercial viability and long- term sustainabi lity. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Exit / Refinancing Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk that REPP 2  is unable to exit or refinance a transaction according to original expectations  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Explicit consideration of exit and refinancing plan as part of all investment proposals, with REPP 
2 IC approval  
• Pricing and deal structuring approach aligned to market benchmarks wherever commercially possible 
• Refinancing plans agreed and approved by refinancing parties (including approvals, wherever possible) before disbursement  
• Active portfolio and asset management with dedicated role for this purpose  
• Ongoing oversight and review of performance at an asset and portfolio level to maximise profitable exit, sell -down and refinancing opportunities  
Mitigation measures described above are expected to reduce the probability of occurrence of this 
risk factor.


---
*Page 89*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 5 Conflict of Interest Risk 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
The risk that a conflict of interest occurs for Camco between its obligations as the manager of REPP 
2 and its obligations as Accredited Entity on behalf of the GCF. 
Similar potential for conflict of interest in terms of management services rendered to any other platform 
by Camco and the REPP 2  platform, particularly where these have the potential to result in losses to 
investors participating in REPP 2  as well as one or more other facilities managed by Camco.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Camco maintains a comprehensive Conflicts of Interest Policy, governing the risks outlined above 
• Where a potential conflict is identified, appropriate measures will be implemented to manage and 
mitigate the conflict  
• The REPP 2  Conflicts of Interest of Policy will b e approved by its the general partner of Camco 
REPP SCSp and supervised by the Advisory Board and AIFM, once constituted and maintained on an ongoing basis  
• Camco, as fund manager, will appoint and maintain an independent REPP 2  coordinator and 
(separately) a GCF coordinator  
• Camco REPP SCSp , as Executing Entity, will be supervised by the AIFM who will ensure 
compliance with the Luxembourg Law of 10 August 195 on Commercial Companies  
The measures outlined above are expected to reduce the probability of occurrence and the potential 
impact of this risk factor . 
Selected Risk Factor 6 General Operational Risk 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Risk of loss or other damage resulting from insufficient or failed policies, processes and procedures, 
or a failure to implement and maintain existing ones . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Develop detailed and comprehensive policies, processes and procedures covering all 2 REPP 
activities and maintain these on an ongoing basis  
• Ensure that policies, processes and procedures are maintained and recorded in the REPP 2  
Operations Manual (Annex 21)  
• Provide ongoing training to REPP 2  staff, IC and  Advisory  Board  
• Ensure systems and IT infrastructure are appropriate to meet the operational, monitoring and reporting needs of REPP 2  on an ongoing basis  
• Minimise key person dependencies and maintain a detailed business continuity plan for REPP 2  
• Ensure appropriate segregation of duties amongst REPP 2  staff.


---
*Page 90*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 7 Offtaker Credit Risk (grid- connected projects)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk of payment delay or default associated with utility offtakers for grid- connected projects . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Rigorous analysis credit risk during project selection and deal structuring with approval provided 
by the REPP 2  IC. 
• Structure and ensure both innovative and traditional forms of credit risk mitigation for payment liquidity and default, sourced from partner organisations which provide risk mitigation products.  
Mitigation measures can minimise and transfer offtaker credit risk to parties which are better -
positioned to manage it. Where cover is purchased, this provided effective risk mitigation to both 
project companies and REPP 2  investees.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 Demand Risk (off -grid companies)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk that estimates of demand and revenue growth achieved for off -grid companies are lower than 
initially projected, resulting in delays or failure to achieve growth targets and become sustainable. 
Persistent failure to grow demand and revenue will lead to  below -par returns and losses for REPP 2  
in a worst -case scenario.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Ensure rigorous assessment is undertaken by the off -grid company of customer ability - and 
willingness -to-pay, prior to investment decision 
• Ensure that drivers of demand and revenue growth are well -understood and that growth 
projections are realistic  
• Seek additional / alternative revenue sources to meet projected payment obligations, through 
product and business model innovation, productive use of energy applications, securing anchor 
consumers to boost revenues, etc.  
• Provide capacity building support for off -grid companies to develop skills and expertise in 
estimating future demand and managing demand / revenue growth risk  
• Provide strategic oversight and input (via board positions) to ensure costs are managed carefully 
and that business is focused appropriately on demand and revenue growth 
• Provide support for development and implementation of policy and regulatory frameworks and 
well as donor support programmes which provide tariff or result -based subsidies for off -grid 
electrification in Host Countries  
Mitigation measures can be effective in reducing demand risk.


---
*Page 91*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 87 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 9 Currency Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  High Medium  
Description  
Where mismatches exist between revenues received by investees or borrowers in local currency and 
their hard currency funding obligations, there is a risk that they will be unable to meet those obligations 
(in part or in full) as a result of currency devaluation. The consequences for REPP 2  may include a 
failure to achieve targeted returns for its investors and, in a worst -case scenario, financial losses at 
the portfolio level. The risk is exacerbated by the high cost and lack of liquidity of hedging for eme rging 
market currencies, especially in comparison to the lower revenues generated by smaller renewable energy projects.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• In general – and particularly for grid- connected projects – REPP 2  will invest and provide loans 
denominated in hard currency, effectively transferring currency risk to investee companies and 
borrowers. For grid- connected projects, where project companies can negotiate power purchase 
agreements denominated in hard currency, this risk can be passed on to the offtaker. Where the PPA is denominated in local currency or where off -grid companies generate revenues in local 
currency, currency risk lies with the investee / borrower. 
• In rate cases where project economics allow, currency risk may be reduced through FX hedging, with hedging costs passed on to borrowers / investees.  
• REPP 2  will typically only consider offering investments in local currency where the investment or 
project can afford the cost of FX hedging or where alternative mechanisms to facilitate local 
currency lending are available (such as on- lending facilities via local financing partners).  
• REPP 2  may also consider implementation of portfolio hedging solutions, effectively hedging FX 
risk for investors and a reduction in the costs of hedging for individual investees or borrowers through portfolio aggregation and scale. 
Selected Risk Factor 10  Currency Transfer and Inconvertibility Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Medium  Medium  
Description  
In relation to currency risk, the additional risk that funds received by companies in local currency in a 
host country cannot be converted into foreign currency and transferred internationally in a timely 
manner. Delays in this process may result in losses  for the investee or borrower due to currency 
movements, breach of contractual obligations. For REPP 2 , the result may be lower -than-expected 
returns and losses in a worst -case scenario.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Secure government guarantees or assurance regarding access to foreign currency and transfer procedures in Host Countries  
• Where available, secure transfer and inconvertibility protection as part of a political risk insurance package 
• Work with local authorities (including central banks) to develop, implement and familiarise local 
staff procedures for the processing (preparation, approval, etc.) of currency conversion and 
transfer requests  
The measures can reduce the probability of occurrence of delays and losses.


---
*Page 92*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 88 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 1 1 Environmental and Social Safeguards  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational Low High 
Description  
The risk that environmental and social safeguards (ESS) fail to address relevant environmental and 
social risks, or that failures in the implementation of those safeguards lead to negative and / or 
unintended environmental or social impacts.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Development of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) framework at the 
facility level, as well as an ESMS and Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) at investee 
level. All related policies and procedures to be in accordance with internat ional best practice 
standards as well as REPP 2  and GCF policies  
• Preparation of detailed environmental and social impact assessments for each Invested by 
qualified independent consultants  
• Careful assessment of environmental and social risk throughout the transaction approval process 
in accordance with the REPP 2  Environmental and Social Policy and ESMS Framework, from pre -
selection through to approval by the REPP 2  IC of a transaction funding proposal  
• Undertaking careful due diligence, including a site visit prior to execution and disbursement of 
funds  
• Extensive and ongoing stakeholder engagement at investee level – particularly for vulnerable 
people such as women, children and the elderly  
• Extensive and ongoing training and capacity building for developers as well as management and 
staff of off- grid companies to build skills and expertise in relation to managing environmental and 
social risk  
• Engagement and training provided to institutions in Host Countries  responsible for the oversight 
and compliance with national policy, to develop and implement environmental and social 
safeguards and policy requirements which are appropriate for the scale and risk associated with 
each technology asset type 
• Early -stage development funding to prepare project level ESIAs and ESMS  
• Ongoing monitoring, reporting and evaluation on environmental and social risks during 
construction and once plants become operational in accordance with the Section E. 
The measures described above can adequately minimise and manage environmental and social risks 
and the implementation of environmental and social safeguards.  
Selected Risk Factor 12 Forced and child labour  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational Medium  High 
Description  
There is a risk that forced and / or child labour is used  in the supply chain of silicon- based solar panels 
solar and lithium -ion-batteries.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• REPP 2  is committed to following the conventions  of the International Labour Organisation (“ILO ”), 
as well as the IFC P erformance Standards with regard to forced labour and child labour.  
• REPP 2 will adhere to GCF environmental and social policy and local relevant laws in terms of the 
prohibition of forced labour in any form, including slavery and human trafficking.  
• REPP 2  takes a firm stand against all forms of forced labour and expects the same of its primary 
suppliers, partners, contractors and subcontractors.


---
*Page 93*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 89 
   
 • REPP 2  will not tolerate child labour under circumstances. A clear distinction between child labour 
and utilisation of young worker s shall be established in accordance with  internationally -recognized 
standards. Only people who are 18 years or older  will be permitted to be employed on REPP 2  
funded projects. These commitments will be absorbed by all REPP 2  investees and projects 
funded under REPP 2  through the funding agreements which each investee. 
• REPP 2  investees will be required to prepare, implement and maintain a clear and transparent 
Supply Chain Procurement Plan (“SCPP”) , setting out the measures which must be taken to 
prevent forced and child labour. The SCPP should clarify that the policies preventing forced and  
child labour  apply to all subsidiaries of a company and their respective supply chains. These 
policies will also stipulate any training needs of human resource and/or procurement personnel 
on how to identify forced labour in practice and seek appropriate remedies  where it is identified. 
• REPP 2  and the  AE will participate in and contribute to the e stablishment  of supplier code of 
conduct principles , covering compliance with international labour and human rights laws, including 
the prohibition of forced and child labour, and occupational health and safety.  
• REPP 2  will d evelop, implement and maintain supply chain risk assessment procedures and a 
due diligence screening mechanism to mitigate the risk of forced and child labour . These 
procedures will be implemented in the project approval, due diligence and review procedures 
which are applicable to all  invest ments . 
Selected Risk Factor 1 3 Compliance Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational Low Medium  
Description  
The risk is that compliance obligations (regulatory or internal) are not met by REPP 2  or Camco, 
including reporting requirements . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• REPP 2  staffing will include dedicated legal and compliance staff  
• REPP 2  will require quarterly compliance reporting and regular testing 
• Comprehensively -documented policies and procedures maintained on an ongoing basis  
• Formal staff induction training and training with respect to compliance requirements during 
onboarding provided to REPP 2  investees  
• Ongoing compliance training for REPP 2  staff 
• Ongoing oversight and review by Camco and REPP 2  governance structures  of compliance 
requirements  
The measures outlined above are expected to provide adequate risk mitigation for compliance risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 4 Governance / Integrity Risk 
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low High 
Description  
Risk of failed governance resulting in losses and reputational damage among investees or project 
companies as well as for REPP 2 . Risk of any counterparty or one of its employees, or any Camco 
employee, acting corruptly or fraudulently or in breach of the law, wilfully or otherwise.  
And or failure to comply with REPP 2  policies, especially Anti- Corruption and Integrity Policy and 
Investing with Integrity Policy, Know- Your -Client


---
*Page 94*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 90 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Development and implementation of comprehensive and robust policies and procedures 
governing Know -Your -Client, Anti -Corruption and Anti Money Laundering, Counter -Terrorist 
Financing, fraud, integrity and tax and domicile requirements in accordance with international law, 
as reflected in GCF requirements  
• Implementation and maintenance of good governance practices for REPP 2 , in accordance with 
the requirements of its AIFM and the GCF 
• Implementation and maintenance of good governance practices for REPP 2  investees in 
accordance with REPP 2  policies  
• Ongoing training for REPP 2  staff as well as training for staff of investee companies  
The measures outlined above are designed to establish and maintain high standards of good 
governance for investee companies and for REPP 2 , thereby reducing the risk of failed governance.  
Selected Risk Factor 15 Policy and Regulatory Risk 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk of a failure to align or comply with host country policy and regulatory requirements, resulting in 
delays during project development or a failure to obtain necessary permits and licences to proceed 
with construction or begin commercial operations. Additional risks to project or business development 
associated with policy and regulatory uncertainty, including gaps in policy and regulatory frameworks as well as slow or inconsistent application of policies and regulations.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Detailed analysis of policy and regulatory frameworks in all Host Countries  conducted on an 
ongoing basis, informed through engagement with government counterparties and their 
development partners.  
• Careful assessment of risks posed by policy or regulatory uncertainty to project or business 
development, construction or operations – prior to decision to invest, with a clear mitigation plan 
if the investment is made  
• The broad scope of REPP 2  mandate (SHS, mini/isolated grids, on- grid) will allow it to select 
investments where policy and regulatory risk is acceptable, while continuing to monitor the 
enabling environment for other market segment to position its future investments.  
• Ongoing monitoring of policy and regulatory risks throughout the investment lifecycle  
• Training and skills development for business owners and project companies to manage policy 
and regulatory uncertainty  
• Targeted interventions within Host Countries  to support development and implementation of 
policies and regulations, where Camco and REPP 2  experience can add value.  
Mitigation measures are designed to reduce policy and regulatory uncertainty, which contributes to 
broader market development.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 6 Political Uncertainty  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Low 
Description  
Risk of political uncertainty (and in worst cases unrest and violence) resulting in delays, additional 
costs and / or failure of REPP 2  investments.


---
*Page 95*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 91 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Detailed analysis of political uncertainty in all Host Countries  conducted on an ongoing basis  
• Careful assessment of political risks to project or business development, construction or 
operations – prior to decision to invest  
• Ongoing monitoring of policy and regulatory risks throughout the investment lifecycle  
• Continuous and inclusive engagement with public sector stakeholders  
Mitigation measures do not reduce the probabilities of occurrence of political risk events but may help 
to minimise delays and losses in the REPP 2  portfolio.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 7 Climate Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk that funding provided by REPP 2 fails to deliver the intended climate change mitigation and 
adaptation / climate resilience impacts. Related risks include resource risk and reputational risk to 
REPP 2 and its investors where unforeseen climate change impacts to infrastructure as well as 
vulnerable people and communities result in unintended consequences, including reduced climate 
resilience and maladaptation. 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Incorporate comprehensive climate risk assessment in the REPP 2 Risk Management Policy and 
Procedures, to be approved by the REPP 2 
• Internal (desktop) climate risk assessment to be conducted prior to investment approved by the REPP 2 IC and confirmed during due diligence, including via site visit  
• Climate risk assessment to be conducted as part of all ESIAs to assess the impacts of climate change in aggravating environmental and social risk  
• Appropriate levels of ongoing monitoring, reporting and evaluation of climate risk for all assets in the REPP 2 portfolio 
• Training and skills development for off- grid companies and project companies in identification, 
assessment and management of climate risk (to infrastructure, environment as well as vulnerable people and communities). Particularly attention to be focused on avoiding maladaptation.  
REPP 2 interventions are designed to contribute to efforts by Host Countries  to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change, building climate resilience for energy infrastructure and for vulnerable people and 
communities in the process. Mitigation measures identified here can enhance the potential for positive climate change impacts and minimise potential for unintended outcomes such as maladaptation.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 8 Technical Assistance Facility  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk of a limited contribut ion to building a stronger enabling environment for smaller -scale renewables 
through a) support for policy and regulatory frameworks, b) support to developers, improved capacity to management environmental and social risk or d) promote gender equity. Potential impacts of  this 
risk include a failure to develop a sufficient pipeline of viable opportunities for investment, leading to a failure to achieve stated climate mitigation and adaptation outcomes  (Outcomes 1- 3), mobilisation 
of private sector investment (Outcome 4), contributing to stronger technology deployment, innovation 
and market transformation (Outcome 5) and numerous co -benefits.


---
*Page 96*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 92 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Experience in delivering REPP Phase 1 has built networks and expertise in delivery of target ed 
skills and capacity development which will be applied in REPP 2.  
• The market feasibility studies in each Host Country identify specific opportunities to provide 
targeted support for development and implementation of policy and regulations.  
• The indicative pipeline (Annex 26 ) demonstrates demand for early -stage and development 
support . Camco will leverage experience from delivery of REPP Phase 1 to ensure skills and 
capacity building occurs for developers. 
• The REPP 2 ESMF requires that all investees must develop and implement an ESMS, which will 
ensure improved capacity to manage E&S risks  
• GLI-aligned investment targets to promote gender reduces the risk of a failure to achieve impact . 
• Explicit plans for skills and capacity development will be approved by the general partner of 
Camco REPP SCSp following consultation with Advisory  Board and updated at least annually . 
• Camco to focus on establishment and roll- out of the  TAF. 
REPP 2 interventions are designed to minimise effectively the probability and likely impacts of this 
risk factor .


---
*Page 97*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 93 
   
 F. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
An Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures (E&S Policy) and an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (Framework) have been developed for REPP 2 to manage the environmental and 
social (E&S) impacts and risks of investments made by REPP 2. The  E&S Policy and Framework are in line 
with IFC Performance Standards, and the sustainability principles advocated by the UN Global Compact. 
The Framework is presented in Annex 6.  
E&S risk and impacts of smaller renewable energy projects funded by REPP 2 are anticipated to be limited. 
The magnitude of these impacts is expected to be low and contained within the footprint of the projects. The 
impacts should be largely reversible and readily mitigated through the mitigation measures implemented by investees as identified in their project -specific Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS). 
REPP 2 will not support investments if material negative E&S impacts cannot be satisfactorily mitigated.  
The E&S risk screening process for REPP 2 (elaborated in the Framework) is:  
• Step 1 : The initial E&S risk screening occurs prior to investment approval and involves a Risk 
Assessment Tool and an E&S Initial Screening Checklist to pre- define risk category and eligibility of 
the project;  
• Step 2 : An E&S onboarding with the investee company takes place if the project is approved for 
further consideration and once the initial E&S risk screening has been completed to ensure the company understands E&S requirements and processes  for REPP 2 ; 
• 
Step 3 : An E&S Gap Analysis  (red flag report ) will be completed by the REPP 2 Manager. This will 
entail a review of the project’s documentation (i.e., ESIA and ESMS to the extent that it is available). 
In case of early -stage growth and development funding, the funding may be used for the development 
of the ESIA or the ESMS. In this case REPP 2  will assist in reviewing the Terms of Reference for 
EIAS/ESMS or GAP work and the selection of consultants. In addition, key milestones for 
disbursement of early -stage growth and development funding are agreed; and    
• Step 4: Once the ESIA and ESMS have been finalised, REPP 2  conducts a due diligence site visit 
to verify E&S risks. E&S risks outlined in the ESIA, such as identification of indigenous peoples, 
potential or necessary resettlement, security risks, protected biodiversity impacts and human rights assessments, will be  highlighted in the E&S Red Flag Report, and the extent of the risk will be verified 
during the due diligence trip. The project risk categorisation will also be reassessed to ensure that all project activities align within their allocated category. All pro jects funded by REPP 2  will undertake a 
due diligence trip. The due diligence trip will also serve to assess the investee’s internal E&S 
resources, competence and aptitude for managing E&S risks in accordance with REPP 2  E&S 
standards.  
REPP 2 will be responsible for the implementation of the E&S Policy and the Framework and shall apply an E&S risk categorisation to each potential investment. REPP 2 will have a dedicated impact team which will 
review each individual investment’s E&S risk,  ensure the sufficient quality of the ESIA and the ESMS, assess 
the investee’s capacity and competency to manage E&S risk, and assist them with capacity building, if 
required. The roles and responsibilities related to the implementation of the Framework are described in greater detail in Annex 6.  
The monitoring of REPP 2 will involve:  
• Monitoring of key performance indicators;  
• Monitoring of key E&S indicators to ensure project -level compliance with the Framework;  
• Periodic reporting; and  
• Annual investee performance reviews to assess the fitness of its ESMS.


---
*Page 98*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 94 
   
 The monitoring and reporting obligation s will be included in each  Investment Agreement between REPP 2 
and the investee, who will submit monitoring reports through an impact data management system on a 
quarterly basis. Reports will be reviewed by REPP 2, and corrective action measures discussed with the 
investee where relevant.   
In its capacity as an AE, Camco has been undertaking extensive stakeholder engagement with NDAs, 
energy ministries, agencies and regulators, as well as the private sector and relevant NGOs. This 
engagement will continue throughout the Programme’s implement ation. All REPP 2 investees will be 
required to conduct appropriate site- based stakeholder consultations with communities and project 
beneficiaries in line with the Framework. Stakeholder engagement outcomes and strategy are further 
outlined in Section D5 and Annex 7.  
REPP 2 will require that a grievance mechanism for stakeholders is established to receive and facilitate 
resolution of affected communities’ concerns and grievances about a project’s E&S performance. The 
process s hall be easy, accessible and free of charge, and conducted  in a confidential manner should this be 
preferred. The investee will provide guidelines on how grievances, claims or suggestions from the community 
are promptly managed and effectively resolved to all stakeholders (inclusive of employees, c ommunity 
members, service providers, and suppliers). In addition, Camco in its capacity as an AE, provides a whistle -
blower  hotline and grievance form on its website that will allow submission of grievances in an anonymous 
manner.  
REPP 2 will recognise the critical importance of respecting the rights of Indigenous Peoples and of avoiding 
any adverse impacts on them. The Framework includes an Indigenous Peoples Policy (IPP), which will be applicable in all REPP 2 investments where Indigenous Peoples are present and/or have or had collective 
attachment or rights to the land. The IPP has been guided by the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous, 
IFC Environmental and Social Performance Standards 7, and the Green Climate Fund Indigenous People Policy and is presented in Annex 6. As per the IPP, a stakeholder engagement will take place with Indigenous 
Peoples, and in the case of negative impacts the principle of free, prior and informed consent will be applied.
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
1. Gender assessment  
A gender assessment for REPP 2  was undertaken to explore the relationships between men and women, 
their access to resources and the constraints they face relative to one another in REPP 2 Host Countries 
within the context of climate change and energy access.  
The REPP 2 investment mandate will extend towards some of the most economically and socially vulnerable 
countries in Africa, with the majority (>50%) of the population living below the International Poverty Line in more than half of the Host Countries . However, there is some variation in how REPP 2 Host Countries  rank 
in terms of different gender indexes, as outlined below:  
• Gender Development Index (GDI), which focuses on health, education and economic resources: 
Two-thirds of the countries show low levels of gender equity , whereas Lesotho, Madagascar and 
Malawi all score higher on GDI value, approaching or exceeding the world average.  
• Gender Inequality Index (GII), which measures gender inequalities in reproductive health, 
empowerment and the labour force: All Host Countries  experience higher level of gender inequality 
than the world average and DRC, Niger, Nigeria and Sierra Leone are all below the sub-Saharan 
African average.  
• Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI), which measures gender parity across economic participation 
and opportunity, educational attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment.53 
 
53 World Economic Forum (WEF), 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 .


---
*Page 99*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 95 
   
 Compared with the sub-Saharan Africa as a whole (which ranks in the middle ahead of Middle East 
and North Africa, and South Asia), Cameroon, Lesotho and Madagascar rank above average, while 
most Host Countries  remain on the lower spectrum on gender equity  values.  
According to a 2022 World Bank et al  report on progress towards SDG 7, sub -Saharan Africa remained the 
least electrified region in 2020. While availability of country -level gender -disaggregated data on electricity 
access in the region is limited, thereby making it difficult to assess how this lack of electricity access relates to gender, research by IRENA has shown that women- owned households and enterprises find it harder to 
access modern energy.
54 
While regional and country -level gender -disaggregated data for the energy sector remains scarce, research 
at the global level shows that the share of women employed in the renewable energy sector (32%) is higher than in the oil and gas industry (22%).
55 However, the share of female employees across sub- Saharan Africa 
is substantially higher in non- technical jobs (30 -38%) than in STEM jobs (13%). While women’s participation 
in company leadership globally is substantially lower than men, it is positive to see that there are more 
women on the boards of renewable energy companies in Africa (27%) than on boards in general (Africa’s 
average is 18%).  
At the same time, female renewable energy entrepreneurs are struggling to access the financing and 
business support they need to grow their companies. Although Africa has a  higher share of female- owned 
businesses  than anywhere else - which demonstrates the active and important role women play in the 
continent’s commercial sector - the African Development Bank has estimated that there is a USD42 billion 
financing gap for African women entrepreneurs across business value chains.56 
2. Gender action plan (GAP)  
Access to energy can help individuals, households and business to complete certain time- consuming tasks 
in more efficient manner. Access to electricity may free up time from fuel collection and household tasks to 
enable longer periods of study time or other productive use of time, and thereby decreas e gender gaps in 
key educational and economic areas. A dditionally, access to energy, for example  access to light ing, 
information technologies or connectivity , are linked to  an increase in safety and security  and the perception 
of personal wellbeing.57 Further, in REPP 2 we believe that the funding of women -led and focused 
businesses , empower s women to invest and build companies, teams, products and markets that will produce  
transformati on change for generations to come. This transformational change, driven by gender focused 
financing, is crucial to overcom ing the gender equality gap.  
The REPP 2 GAP includes two main actions that work towards bridging the gender equity  gap:  
Action 1: Integrate a gender equity perspective into the design, implementation, monitoring and 
assessment of all renewable energy activities financed by REPP 2. This means requesting all investees 
to put in place sub- project level GAPs (Activity 9: Non -financial support to promote gender equity) with 
actionable targets to improve gender equality within their operations and project implementation will 
positively im pact the industry and its beneficiaries.  This involves:   
1. Analysing gender equality  in the investee company, country of operation, and targeted sector ;  
 
54 IRENA, 2022. Renewable Energy Market Analysis. Africa and Its Regions . 
55 AfDB and UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa; IRENA, 2020. Global Landscape of Renewable Energy 
Finance 2020 . 
56Global Entrepreneurship Monitoring. 2018/2019 Women’s Entrepreneurship Report . AfD B,2017. Unleashing women's 
entrepreneurship through strategic partnerships . 
 
57 Supported by an initial project -level data collection conducted in Goma, DRC: 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5cc327c55acb9b00019d816a/t/63d16fc81da3f71c853b105a/1674670025093/Asses
sing+the+Peace+effects+of+PRECS_Final_Goma_June+2022_updated.pdf


---
*Page 100*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 96 
   
 2. Establishing an investee -specific GAP by identifying gender performance indicators and gender -
disaggregated targets against an established baseline; and 
3. Integrating the outcomes of (1) and (2) into a monitoring plan. 
 
REPP 2  will provide investee companies with supporting in assessing gender baseline and 
establishing action plan. Such support includes:  
i. Gender equality toolkit for renewable energy companies - an example, provided via the 
REPP 2 gender toolkit ;  
ii. Gender mainstreaming training provided in form of webinars and REPP Phase 1 A cademy 
(i.e. closed training provided to REPP investee only - as an example can be provided 
previous webinars  and REPP Phase 1 Academy training (see appendix 2);  and 
iii. Individual support to investee from the REPP 2 Manager’s impact team in from of review 
of gender baseline and action plan. 
Action 2: Dedicate a target of 30% of all funding towards companies that meet 2X GLI criteria.  These 
are companies that:  
• Are founded by a woman or women or are majority -owned by women; and / or  
• Have at least 30% women in senior management; and / or  
• Provide products or services designed to disproportionately benefit women; and / or  
• Have a workforce that is at least 30% women, together with a progressive human resource policy . 
The funding can be  in from of early -stage growth funding for off-grid companies ( Activity 1), development -
stage funding for grid- connected projects  (activity 2), finance for expansion of SHS businesses ( Activity 3), 
finance for construction of mini -grid portfolios (activity 4) or gap funding for construction of grid- connected 
projects  ( Activity 5)  and can be in from of hybrid equity instruments  or as  senior or subordinated loans, 
subject to the company’s funding needs.  
These actions are anticipated to lead to the following impacts:  
• Total female beneficiaries reached : 290,875  
• Total female beneficiaries adopting improved livelihoods and/or new climate resilient livelihood 
options, through resilient PUE options : 8,295  
• Promotion of gender equity  within renewable energy development companies by working towards 
investing USD7 0 million in companies meeting the 2X GLI criteria. 
• Achievement of numerous co- benefits, including 23,040 female jobs generated, improved lighting 
1.12 million women and girls, improved access to information for 547,687 women and girls , and 26 
developers with improved ESG practices (including GAPs).  
 
The detailed gender assessment and action plan are presented in Annex 8.  
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
REPP 2 will adopt and build upon the policy framework, governance and system architecture that REPP 
Phase 1 has implemented and refined since its inception in 2015. Where necessary, this will be expanded 
and further refined to align with the GCF’s governance standards and will be overseen by Camco in its role 
as Accredited Entity.  
REPP 2 will produce an annual business plan outlining investment and portfolio targets for the year, as well 
as an operational budget produced on an activity basis. This will allow the budget -setting committee to 
determine the activities required to execut e the strategy for the coming year, leaving REPP 2 to effectively


---
*Page 101*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 97 
   
 undertake the activities and deliver value within the budgetary constraints set. The business plan will also 
summarise the previous year’s performance and any actions resulting from analysis of the results.  
REPP 2 will prepare monthly portfolio reports that include:  
• Pipeline, deal -flow and progress against origination targets for the platform 
• Deals in documentation and updates on transactions as they move closer to being contracted and 
ready to disburse  
• Portfolio valuation and movements in disbursements, accrued income, revaluations, impairments and 
disposals  
• Metrics showing portfolio weightings and performance against targets and risk thresholds, as 
required (e.g., technology, country, off -taker etc.)  
 
The portfolio reports will allow effective monitoring of the platform’s performance by the governing 
committees and stakeholders, ensuring corrective action is taken and assisting in developing strategy which 
steers the platform towards its long- term objec tives. 
REPP 2 will also prepare quarterly management accounts, comprising a profit and loss account, balance 
sheet and cashflow statement. These will be prepared in accordance with the relevant Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles, which are the same accounting standards under which the audited annual report and 
financial statements will be prepared.  
Accompanying the Cashflow Statement will be a Cash Forecast, prepared quarterly and providing a detailed 
overview of the platform’s liquidity requirements during the investment period. It will also include a forecast 
of cash returns from the portfolio over  the life of the platform.  
REPP 2 will engage a firm of accountants to undertake an external audit of the platform’s annual financial 
statements. This will confirm independently that the financial statements provide a true and fair view and 
provide transparency to governing committe es and stakeholders, highlighting areas of importance and 
anything which may require attention.  
REPP 2 will open and control bank accounts into which it will receive funds and make disbursements. The 
bank accounts will be reconciled in the REPP 2 accounting system daily or on an ad -hoc basis.  
Disbursements will be controlled through a process that ensures all appropriate milestones have been 
completed. For example:  
• Conditions prior to disbursement in applicable finance agreements have been met  
• For payments to suppliers or service providers, service level agreements or valid contracts exist 
between the platform and beneficiary  
• Projects have fulfilled monitoring obligations and investees are compliant with any platform policies 
and training requirements  
• Beneficiaries have undergone appropriate KYC / AML and sanctions checks  
Cash controls will be established which include dual authority for setting up and approving payments, and 
which have payment limits for approving transactions of different sizes. Material transactions will require 
sign-off from the Depositary Agent . 
REPP 2 will adopt and apply the Accredited Entity's approved procurement policy, which is already in use 
by REPP Phase 1. The policy will be applied throughout the Programme’s activities. Please refer to Annex 
10: Procurement Policy & Plan for further details.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.


---
*Page 102*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 98 
   
 ☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy,  and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.


---
*Page 103*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 99 
   
 
 
  
 G. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (Indigenous People’s Plan)  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement Policy and Procurement P lan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)  
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)  
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting -projects)  
☒ Annex 23  Analysis of potential for overlap and complementarity of GCF funding  
☒ Annex 24 Camco Adaptation and Project Decision Tool (classification of adaptation responses)  
☒ Annex 25 Progress update for REPP 2 Co- financing  
☒ Annex 26 REPP 2 indicative pip eline


---
*Page 104*
---

No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)
Page 104


---
*Page 105*
---

Avenue Papa Ileo (Ex-des Cliniques) n°15 Kinshasa/Gombe
B.P.:12348 KIN I –E-mail : hansandredjamba@gmail.com
Site Web: www.fvc-rdc.comTo: International Financial Corporation
Washington D.C. /USA
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)
Kinshasa, 28 April 2022
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Camco Management Limited (“Camco”) regarding the 
programme– “Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP) 2.0”
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the programme titled “Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP) 2.0”, in 
multiple countries, including the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), as included in the 
funding proposal, and as represented in the concept note submitted by Camco Management 
Limited to us on 25 February 2022.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Coordination of the 
Green Climate Fund, the National Designated Authority of DRC.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal 
and as represented in the concept note.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of DRC has no-objection to the programme as included in the fundi ng
pr
oposal and as represented in the concept note.
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal and as represented in the concept
note is in conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of DRC;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal and as represented in the concept note is in conformit y
w
ith relevant national laws and regulations.République Démocratique du Congo
Ministère de l’Environnement et Développement 
Durable
Secrétariat Général à l’Environnement et Développement 
Durable
Direction de Développement Durable
Coordination Nationale du Mécanisme de Développement 
Propre et du Fonds Vert pour leClimat
L’AutoritéNationaleDésignée
Page 105


---
*Page 106*
---

Avenue Papa Ileo (Ex-des Cliniques) n°15 Kinshasa/Gombe
B.P.:12348 KIN I –E-mail : hansandredjamba@gmail.com
Site Web: www.fvc-rdc.comWe also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programmeas 
included in the funding proposal and as represented in the concept note has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
____________________________
Hans André Lohayo Djamba 
Coordinator
National Coordination of the Green Climate Fund 
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Page 106


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 107


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 108


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 109


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 110


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 111


---
*Page 112*
---

Page 112


---
*Page 113*
---

Page 113


---
*Page 114*
---

Page 114


---
*Page 115*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP) 2 
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  Camco Management Limited  (CAMCO) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Target countries: Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC), Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone and Zambia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, June 7, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, French, and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  English, French, and Portu guese are official languages of  
target countries . 
Link to disclosure  English: https://www.camco.fm/_files/ugd/179ccb_5fb86cc261d5
43dfb08a86776f6a2a34.pdf 
Fr
ench:  
https://www.camco.fm/_files/ugd/179ccb_83c317500734
44f9b2cd63d28b5c0eb0.pdf 
P
ortuguese: 
https://www.camco.fm/_files/ugd/179ccb_464605866990
4c909dc2c70d4ffeef1b.pdf  
Page 115


---
*Page 116*
---

Other link(s)  https://www.camco.fm/environmental -and-social -
disclosure  
Remarks  An ESM S consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF)  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework  
Land Acquisition Plan and Resettlement Action Plan  
 Wednesday, June 7, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, French, and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  English, French, and Portuguese are official languages of 
target countries.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.camco.fm/_files/ugd/179ccb_5fb86cc261d5
43dfb08a86776f6a2a34.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework titled  
“Indigenous Peoples Policy ”, “Land Acquisition Plan ” and 
“Resettlement Action Plan ” are included in the ESMF . 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, July 14, 2023  
Place  Electronic and printed versions  were shared with NDAs in 
target countries . Electronic copies were shared with  the 
CSO and PSO active observer s on 20 September 2023 . 
Printed copies w here mad e available for consultation  at 
NDA offices in respective host countries , in their official 
langue(s) : 
C
ameroon: 
Mr. Paul Tchawa  
Secretary General  
Ministry of Environment, Protection of Nature and 
Sustainable Development (MINEPDED)  
Boulevard du 20 Mai, Immeuble Ministériel No. 2, P.O Box 
320,  
Yaoundé, Cameroon  
Phone : +237 696 939 011  
De
mocratic Republic of the Congo (DRC): 
Prof. Isaac KALONDA KANYAMA  
Coordinateur Fonds vert pour le climat  
Ministere de l’Environnement  
Boulevard palais de la Nation 2895 Kinshasa Gombe  
Kinshasa  
Republique Democratique du Congo (RDC)  
Phone : +243 826 631 495  
L
esotho: 
Mr Habofanoe Augustinus Makopela  
Page 116


---
*Page 117*
---

Deputy Principal Secretary  
Ministry of Natural Resources  
Private Bag A91, Maseru 100, Lesotho  
Phone: +266 59030095/ +266 22322334  
M
adagascar: 
Mme Lovakanto Ravelomanana  
Directeur du Bureau National de Coordination des 
Changements Climatiques,  
Ministère de l'Environnement, de l'Ecologie et des Forêts  
B.P 3948, Rue Toto Radola - Antsahavo la,
A
ntananarivo, Madagascar
Phone : +261 34 86 793 38
M
alawi:  
Mrs Tawonga Mbale -Luka  
Director, Environmental Affairs Department  
Environmental Affairs Department  
Lingadzi House within the Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mining  
Private Bag 394 Lilongwe 3,  Lilongwe, Malawi  
Phone: +265 1 771 111/ +265 1 773 379  
N
iger: 
Dr. Kamaye Maâzou  Secrétaire Exécutif  
Cabinet du Premier Ministre 
Conseil National de l'Environnement pour un 
Développement Durable (CNEDD)  
PL 17 Rue du Gouverneur Jules Brévié, BP 10193,  
Niamey, Niger  
Phone: +227 207 22 559/ +27 9698 7470/ +227 9022 1700  
N
igeria: 
Dr. Salisu Dahiru  
Director General  
National Council on Climate Change  
Department of Climate Change  
Federal Ministry of Environment  
Plot 444 Aguiyi Ironsi Way, Maitama Abuja, Nigeria  
Phone: +234 8030570625  
S
ao Tome and Principe: 
Dr. Fausto Policarpo Abreu das Neves  
Ministério do Planeamento, Finanças e Economia Azul  
Água Grande, São Tomé  
P.O. Box nº 168  
Sao Tome, Sao Tome and Principe  
Phone: +239 222 5707 / +239 222 1410 / +239 992 6009  
Page 117


---
*Page 118*
---

Sierra Leone: 
Dr. Bondi Gevao  
Executive Chairman  
Environment Protection Agency  
92 Dundas Street,  
Freetown, Sierra Leone  
Phone: +23230082924/ +23279049175  
Z
ambia: 
Mr. Francis Mpampi  
National Coordinator - National Designated Authority  
Ministry of Green Economy and Environment  
P.O. Box 50555, Corner of John Mbita and Nationalist Road,  
Lusaka, Zambia  
Phone: +260 21 1 252625  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  TBC  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 23, 2023  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
__
______ 
Page 118


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 119 
 
 
 
 Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP222 
Proposal name:  Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP 2)  
Accredited entity:  Camco Management Limited  (CAMCO)  
Country/(ies):  Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Zambia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
Note: This assessment report is based on a review of the updated and revised proposal received 
from the accredited  entity  (AE) for the thirty -seventh meeting of the Board (B.37). It follows the 
assessment report based on a n earlier version of the funding proposal submitted by the AE for the 
thirty -sixth meeting of the Board ( B.36),  during which it had not  been  endorsed by the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP) . This revised a ssessment report reflects the updates and revisions 
the AE has implemented in response to  the earlier  independent TAP  assessment report  for B.36. It 
also reflects the clarification discussions held between the AE, the Secretariat and  the independent 
TAP on the side  lines of B.36  in Songdo , Korea , and the two follow -up video s calls between the 
parties on 9 August 2023  and 4 September 2023.  
1.1 Overview   
1. In its assessment , the  independent TAP  is guided by d ecision B.33/12  of the GCF Board , 
which explains the principles for demonstrating the impact potential of GCF -supported 
activities as well as other appraisal and assessment guidance in considering these  investment 
criteria and as endorsed by the GCF Board.  
2. The Renewable Energy Performance Platform 2 ( REPP 2 ; the fund)  is a new USD 250  
million  blended finance fund  established  as a société en commandite spéciale  (SCSp) or special 
limited partnership  in Luxembo urg entitled Camco REPP SCSp  and promoted by Camco 
Management Limited  (CAMCO ). The main purpose of the fund is to invest in  the early -stage 
development and construction of on-grid as well as off -grid small -scale renewable energy 
projects in sub-Saharan  Africa , with a focus on least  developed countries . The current list of 
target markets for REPP 2  includes Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Malawi, the Niger, Nigeria,  Sierra Leone, and Zambia.  This list may grow, subject to 
further no-objection letters that the AE may receive from additional African countries.   
3. REPP 2 builds on a predecessor fund , the Renewable Energy Performance Platform 1 
(REPP 1) , which  CAMCO  has been implementing since 2015 with a commitment of 88 million 
pounds sterling (GBP) in grant funding from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development 
Office (FCDO)  of the United Kingdom  of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . Not all funding 
provided by FCDO has been drawn by REPP 1  and the fund is still active but no longer make s 
new investments (except possibly into REPP 2).   
4. The purpose of th e present funding proposal is to request  GCF for fund ing in the form of  
junior equity participation in REPP 2 in the amount of USD 50 million , which CAMCO, as the AE , 
would invest in REPP 2  as a fiduciary for GCF  through a dedicated special purpose vehicle (GCF 
REPP Holdings) . CAMCO  serves as both AE and executing enti ty (EE) for this funding proposal ,


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 120 
 
 
 
 whereby Camco REPP 2  SCSp  would appoint Camco REPP GP S. à.r.l. (wholly owned by Camco 
Management  Limited ) as general partner at first close of the fund .  
5. The junior equity funded by GCF is expected to allow REPP 2  to: (i) leverage private , 
commercial and international financial institution  (IFI) funding tranches into its capital stack 
(both senior equity as well as notes ), based on a risk allocation where losses on the REPP 2 
portfolio would first be absorbed by the junior equity  (and not pari passu  across all equity 
investors in REPP 2 ); and (ii) provide attractive commercial terms to investees due to the fact 
that remuneration of the junior equity tranche does not reflect risk -adjusted pricing .  
6. The main purpose of REPP 2  is to drive a paradigm shift in the development of small-
scale renewable energy projects in sub-Saharan  Africa. REPP 2 proposes to invest in the 
following project types : 
(a) On-grid small -scale renewable energy generation projects (independent power 
producers ) with an installed capacity of up to 25  MW  for small hydropower, and  solar 
power projects  and 50MW for wind ( categor ies B and C risk s only)  and a target 
allocation of 50  per cent  in the REPP 2 portfolio ; and  
(b) Off-grid energy ventures based on renewable energy , including mini- grid operators and 
solar home system (SHS) companies , with  a target allocation of 40  per cent  for mini-
grids and 10 per cent  for SHS companies in the REPP 2 portfolio . 
7. REPP 2 will provide a range of financial instruments to invest in these projects , focusing 
on five different strategies  that seek to address key gaps in the financing market : 
(a) Early -stage growth funding for off -grid companies.  This would include hybrid equity 
(subordinated debt, convertible notes and other similar instruments) to support mini-
grid operators and S HS companies with development expenses , thus addressing the 
shortage of early -stage high -risk equity in the market;  
(b) Development -stage funding for grid-connected projects.  Similar to the above , this 
strategy would include hybrid equity provided to project developers to enable them to 
move new renewable energy projects along the development cycle, with an option to convert financing to construction loans at financial close , recognizing that developers 
have difficulty tapping the commercial market due to perceived and real risks  in project 
development ; 
(c) Expansion of SHS businesses.  This would  include equity as well as debt finance for SHS 
companies that want to grow their businesses and/or to expand into new markets  and 
those  that currently do not have access to financing in the commercial market due to 
their risk profile ; 
(d) Construction of mini -grid portfolios. This would include hybrid equity as well as 
subordinated and senior loans to mini- grid operators to finance construction of new 
facilities to grow their footprint and client base . This funding would also be for mini- grid 
operators  that cannot access commercial sources of finance due to their challenging 
businesses models and undeveloped/untested regulatory environments in target 
markets;  and 
(e) Construction finance.  Through this strategy, REPP 2  would provide hybrid equity, 
subordinated or senior loans to finance construction of small -scale on -grid renewable 
energy projects that otherwise find it challenging to mobilize the required financing 
from the commercial market.  
8. Apart from providing financial instruments to its investees, REPP 2 will further support 
investees/ projects through : (i) risk mitigation support (e.g. facilitating access to political risk 
insurance and off -taker credit enhancement/risk insurance available in the market ); (ii) 
development of strategies to mitigate hard currency risks for investees; (iii) development of


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 121 
 
 
 
 skills and capacit ies of local entrepreneurs and project developers; ( iv) support to 
environmental and social risk management by investees (e.g. providing  assistance in the 
development of environmental and social management systems) ; and ( v) promotion of gender 
equity (e.g. providing assistance i n the development of investee- specific gender action plans , 
which  will be mandatory for all projects ). 
9. REPP 2  also features a technical assistance facility (TAF) that will : (i) support investees 
and entrepreneurs with early -stage development grants to enhance their project development 
capabilities; (ii) work with governments/regulators in target markets to develop a conducive 
enabling environment for investment in small -scale renewable energy projects; and ( iii) provide 
assistance to female entrepreneurs to help close the gender gap in the renewable energy 
industry. The TAF is not a subject of this request f or funding from GCF ; a funding application in 
the amount of USD 5  million  for the TAF is pending with FCDO . The independent TAP  
commends the AE for raising funds for the TAF from other sources . 
10. The proposed fund life is 20 year s, with a 7 -year investment perio d during which it  
would invest in approximately 37 transactions (of which 26 are expected to be innovative 
precedence transactions in target markets) . At the level of REPP 2  itself (and using the proposed 
USD 100  million  junior equity commitment from GCF and REPP 1/FCDO  as leverage) , the fund is 
expect ed to mobilize USD 150  million  in additional funding from private sector investors as well 
as development finance institutions (DFIs ) and IFIs  (mobilization ratio of 1:1 .5).1 At the level of 
the individual assets that the fund will invest in, REPP 2 expects to mobilize a total of USD 786 
million in investment , whereby approximately 50  per cent  (i.e. USD 393  million ) is expected to 
com e from private sector and commercial sources (i.e. DFIs investing on commercial terms), 
translating into an indirect private sector/commercial funding leverage of the junior equity of 
roughly 1:4. ( The independent TAP  assume s that the remaining 50  per cent  of funds mobilized 
at asset level are public sector (non -commercial) contributions,  though the funding proposal 
does not provide details on the source of these funds. ) 
11. In terms of impact , the AE expects REPP 2  to achieve the following targets:  
(a) 330  MW of new renewable energy capacity installed  (translating into 130,580  MWh  of 
electricity produced ); 
(b) 12.7  megaton nes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( Mt CO 2 eq) of avoided or reduced 
greenhouse gas ( GHG)  emissions  (full REPP 2 investment portfolio over technology 
lifetime) ; 
(c) New or improved access to clean energy for  more than 7.7 million people;  
(d) Improved climate resilience of nearly one million beneficiaries;  and 
(e) 76,801 jobs (of which 23,040 jobs  will be for females ). 
1.2 Impact potential                 Scale:  Medium  to high 
12. The funding proposal credibly demonstrates that, if successful, REPP 2 has the potential 
to engender considerable mitigation , adaptation and sustainable development benefits in target 
countries. Overall, the theory of change, results framework and calculation/attribution 
 
1 The funding proposal distinguishes between three different sources of funding that REPP 2 hopes to attract to the 
project : (a) private sector capital  (defined by independent TAP  as funding from entities other than those (i) where 
the majority of shares or ownership in that entity (i.e. more than 50%) are held by public sector entities; or (ii) that 
benefit from an explicit state guarantee or other government support) ; (b) DFI capital invested on commercial 
terms , where such entities source or raise capital on their own balance sheets on a commercial basis including 
directly from private capital markets ; and ( c) IFI capital (possibly with somewhat lower return thresholds than ( a) 
and (b), though the funding proposal does not provide further information on the precise sources/nature of IFI 
contributions).


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 122 
 
 
 
 methodologies proposed for assessing the overall mitigation , adaptation and sustainable 
development impacts are transparent and based on best practice /market  standards  (see annex 
22 B of the funding proposal ). The independent TAP  was able to reconstruct the high -level 
impact targets provided in the funding proposal based on the background information that was 
provided by the AE.  The funding proposal also contains reasonably detailed assessments of 
climate  change hazard s for all target countries and highligh ts climate change vulnerabiliti es (see 
annex 2  of the funding proposal ) that support the overall climate rationale for this funding 
proposal . 
13. Regarding  the expected mitigation impact , the overall GHG emission reduction/  
avoidance target over the lifetime of the program me is expected to be 12,720,297 t  CO 2 eq. The 
calculation is based on the expected pipeline of projects that the f und may finance  (330  MW in 
total across a mix of technologies/ installation sizes ), the expected energy generation (812,771 
MWh  per year  for the entire portfolio)  and the relevant grid emission factor s across target 
jurisdictions, following the clean development  mechanism  methodology – including AMS -IA: 
electricity generation by the user (version 19) ; AMS -ID: grid-connected renewable electricity 
generation (version 18) ; and AMS -IL: electrification of rural communities using renewable 
energy (version 4). In practice, the actual projects funded by REPP 2 will likely be substantially 
different from the ( anonymized ) pipeline of projects contained in the funding proposal, but the 
overall targets presented appear reasonable and achievable. All mitigation targets will be aligned with host -country targets and priorities . The AE has provided detailed studies of the 
target countries, underscoring the relevance of investment in renewable energy c apacity as a 
key mechanism to either replace or avoid fossil fuel- based energy generation alternatives.  
14. More specifically, REPP 2 is expect ed to realize adaptation impact via two channels:  
15. First, by investing in small -scale renewable energy generation (including off -grid 
businesses), REPP 2 is  expect ed to create more resilient power systems by way of 
diversification  and decentralization:  
(a) Diversification away from large -scale hydropower generation that is increasingly 
subject to heightened variability in water availability due to climate change impacts ; and  
(b) Increased decentralization through investment in off -grid solutions, thus reduc ing the 
reliance of energy users on power grids that are becoming increasingly unstable due to 
extreme weather events resulting from climate change.  
16. Second , through investments in off -grid solutions ( e.g., mini- grids, SHS companies), the 
fund expect ed to increase the climate resilience of people and communities (including  micro, 
small and medium -sized enterprises ) by providing them with access to clean energy as an 
alternative to unsustainable fossil fuel/biomass solutions. The total number of beneficiaries 
REPP 2 is expect ed to reach extends to 370,224, based  on its current pipeline.   
17. While the independent TAP  recognizes the potential for REPP 2 to produce these 
positive climate outcomes  under a best -case scenario, there are also various challenges that 
fund will have to successfully navigate to leverage its full potential . 
18. One of the key factors driving  the fund’s potential to have impact at scale is the ability of 
the AE/EE to mobilize significant co -investments from other funding providers beyond the 
requested GCF junior equity contribution to ultimately grow the fund size to USD 250  million . In 
addition to raising USD 100 million in junior equity from public/catalytic investors (including 
the proposed USD 50 million contribution from GCF) , the AE expects to raise an additional USD 
100  million  in senior equity and USD 50  million  in notes (debt) from private  sector , commercial 
and IFI  funding sources , with a resulting leverage ratio of 1:1.5 . The independent TAP  notes 
various concerns regarding  the ability of the AE/EE to mobilize sufficient funding for senior 
equity and  notes for REPP 2 , specifically :


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 123 
 
 
 
 (a) First -time manager and risk profile : While the AE has experience with renewable 
energy investment in s ub-Sahara n Africa, the only real reference is the predecessor fund 
to REPP 2 ( REPP 1 ), which  was funded entirely by grants . (The independent TAP  was 
informed that CAMCO is separately preparing a USD 50 million commercial and 
industrial  fund focusing on promoting solar investments; that fund is in the process of 
closing .) REPP 1  has shown delayed implementation and subdued commercial returns 
(5.1 per cent  on portfolio,  which is  to some extent a consequence of the strong 
develo pmental mandate that was provided to REPP 1  by its only capital provider , 
FCDO ). Consequently , private sector investors as well as DFI s that invest on a 
commercial basis will consider the EE a de facto  first -time manager . In that context, the 
size of the fund (USD 250 million) will  be considered large, with an aggressive risk 
profile (small -scale investment in countries with ratings of “B” or below)  in an overall 
complicated market environment (e.g. , due to rising interest rate levels  and 
deteriorating macro fundamentals in REPP 2 target markets) .  
(b) Returns for investors and liquidity options : The return expectations REPP 2  is 
offering both for senior equity as well as  notes will further narrow the field  of interested 
parties . In its dialogue with  the independent TAP , the AE noted  that a higher hurdle rate 
for the senior equity would be preferable (especially with a view to enticing private 
sector investors) but highlight ed that this could also be achieved through a refinancing 
of the loan book at year 12. In addition to boosting returns, a  refinancing of the loan 
book at year 12 would provide investors (who typically would not want to lock in a 
funding commitment for a period of 20 years ) with a liquidity  option , something the 
independent TAP  also considers crucial for the AE to attract especially private sector 
investors to REPP 2 . The AE highlight ed that there were expression s of interest from 
some commercial banks to participate in refinancing and highlight ed that it seeks to 
negotiate a guarantee (potentially through  Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency ) to provide certainty to senior equity funders that the refinancing 
of the loan book will happen. The independent TAP  strongly encourages the AE to 
prioritize discussions with potential providers of a refinancing guarantee as the independent TAP  believes that,  without certainty on early liquidity , the fund will have 
difficult y attracting investors . If a refinancing of the portfolio is successful (possibly 
enabled by a refinancing guarantee from  the Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency  or another party), REPP 2 would also make a significant 
contribution to secondary market development , something that is sor ely lacking i n 
much of the African continent.   
(c) Fund life  and fee structure : The original funding proposal received for B .36 foresaw a 
fund life of up to 25 years , which the independent TAP  deemed unduly long  with a view 
to raising capital . While  the independent TAP  recognizes that an extended fund life is 
required to provide long -dated debt to target investees , the proposed 25 -year life would 
have further increase d the risk profile of REPP 2  for private  sector  as well as commercial 
DFI funders . It also would have create d a situation where the total fee pool would 
become very large, representing a significant portion of capital commitments.  (For 
clarity, the independent TAP  considers the proposed fee percentages as “within” market . 
The challenge is that the long fund life drives the absolute volume of fees that would 
have to be financed out of fund returns .) In the revised proposal, the AE has reduced the 
fund life to 20 years , which addresses the challenge to a certain extent . The independent 
TAP also notes that the GCF benefits from a Most Favo ured Nation clause in the t erm 
sheet that requires the fund to pass on any reduction in fee levels (e.g. because of  
negotiations with other public and private funders) to GCF.  
19. Overall, the  independent TAP  believes that  few investors will have the ability to consider 
investments  of this nature, leaving a narrow funding market. In the current macro environment, 
even DFIs investing on a commercial basis may find it difficult to commit sizable tickets to REPP


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 124 
 
 
 
 2. The AE has provided a fundraising update to the Secretariat and  the independent TAP  that 
suggests that , despite these overall challenges , there is some decent investor interest in the 
fund, as well as a reasonable response from DFIs and IFIs who are currently evaluating 
investments in senior equity or notes for a first close of the fund with a target volume of USD 60  
million . While t he independent TAP  commends the AE for the significant efforts it is putting into 
fundraising in a difficult market environ ment , the independent TAP  also  notes that there 
remains a risk that the AE will not be able to raise the entire USD 250 million target volume for 
the fund, thus making the achievement of the overall impact targets difficult if not impossible.   
20. Translating additional generation/investment in off -grid companies into actual 
use of clean energy. The main investment strategy of the f und, as noted above, is to invest in 
on-grid and off -grid small -scale renewable energy projects. In the case of investment s into on -
grid renewable energy independent power producers , the positive mitigation impact appears 
relatively straightforward . Most power systems in  the target countries currently lack sufficient 
generation capacity  (and in extreme cases load -shedding) ; therefore,  the additional renewable 
energy will be absorbed/used , thus avoid ing use of fossil fuel alternatives . However, for 
investments in off-grid companies, the logic may not be that straightforward. The AE implies in 
the funding proposal that investments in mini -grid operators and SHS businesses will , by 
definition , translate into new connections and actual use of electricity. On the other hand, d ata 
on the ability and willingness to pay in the target markets of REPP 2  show that many 
households (and many microbu sinesses) will find it difficult to access energy service offers due 
to the high initial connection charges (in particular for mini -grids , which is 40 per cent  of the 
target allocation  of REPP 2 ). Others, and especially vulnerable groups, will likely struggle to 
meet the credit profile expectations of most SHS businesses (10 per cent  of the target allocation  
of REPP 2 ). If that indeed materializes, and investments don’t translate into new connections 
and use of clean electricity, the  fund will struggle not just in achieving its mitigation but also its 
adaptation targets.  
21. This is a challenge not specific to REPP 2 , and addressing it is to some extent outside its 
immediate sphere of influence. independent TAP  notes with appreciation that the AE, in the 
revised funding proposal , makes a dedicated commitment (under activity 6) to work with its 
clients to promote access to existing schemes that provide access subsidies (e.g. Sustainable 
Energy for All's Universal Energy  Facility) , with a particular focus  on vulnerable groups and 
micro -businesses . The independent TAP  is also very  much encouraged by the fact that the AE is 
actively engaged in the design of various minimum review guarantee schemes relevant for min i-
grids, and thus has deep insight into the evolving landscape of potential guarantee providers  
that can then also be leveraged to its clients . The independent TAP  recognizes that REPP 2, as a 
fund that works on commercial principles, cannot provide connection subsidies or minimum 
revenue guarantees from its own balance sheet.  
22. Overall,  the independent TAP  regards the f und’s impact potential as medium to high . 
1.3 Paradigm shift potential                  Scale : Medium  
23. The main mission of REPP  2 is to deploy capital into a series of small -scale renewable 
energy generation projects  (up to 37  transactions) . The success (or impact) of the fund should 
thus in the first instance be judged against  the quality of the portfolio  that it will build , 
considering its mitigation , adaptation and sustainable development outcomes as well as its 
commercial performance.  
24. However, the funding proposal suggests that REPP 2 will also offer transformational 
potential that goes beyond the immediate impact of its investee portfolio , principally through 
three channels :


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 125 
 
 
 
 (a) First, the funding proposal highlights that REPP 2 will build local developer and 
business capacity, thus resulting in a larger and higher quality deal flow that will 
ultimately precipitate the growth of the local renewable energy industry beyond the 
fund  and provid e the basis for general industry growth  and follow -on investments ; 
(b) Second, the funding proposal notes that the increase in renewable energy capacity will 
result in enhanced energy security  in the context of increased climate hazards , thus 
contributing  to climate -proofing the energy sector ; and  
(c) Third , according to the funding proposal , the use of clean energy produced by REPP 2 
investees will trigger more income -generating activities, help improve social service 
delivery  and thus drive overall socio economic development and growth.  
25. The independent TAP  recognizes the importance of these “ transfo rmation channels” as 
part of the theory of change but  would like to emphasize that , in its view , the transformational 
impact (and thus paradigm shift) of REPP 2 in the small -scale renewable energy market of its 
target countries will depend to a large extent on three interrelated factors : 
(a) The ability of REPP 2 to develop and utiliz e appropriate transaction models that work 
for small -scale investments and the challenging market contexts that the fund will 
operate in , as well as models that could provide the basis for replication and scali ng up ;  
(b) The ability of REPP 2  to attract private sector investment (as defined in footnote 1 
above)  at the level of the fund on the back of a clear product offering and reasonable 
risk-return profile.  Attracting such private sector investment is an important test of the 
extent to which the market understands the REPP 2 product , and a crucial basis for any 
scaled follow -on investments from the private sector ; and  
(c) The ability of REPP 2 to successfully leverage especially local capital providers ( local 
commercial banks, pension fund managers , etc.) into projects that REPP 2 will finance in 
the on -grid or off -grid space. For the growth of the small -scale renewable energy market 
to go to scale and to become “self- perpetuating” (i.e.,  not reliant on international funding 
with concessional terms ), the local funding market will  ultimately  have to come to the 
table .  
26. On the first factor , in the funding proposal t he AE emphasizes the importance of 
deploying tailored financing approaches  to small -scale renewable energy projects in the target 
region (and has significant experience with this from REPP 1) . In the revised proposal, the AE 
provides some tangible examples of its approach to “project finance light ,” emphasizing the 
philosophy of innovation and flexibility that it will bring to the transactions  it will pursue . 
However, there is a tension between being  flexible in tailoring bespoke solutions and, at the 
same time , having the ambi tion to establish replicable transaction models in the market that 
could then be adopted and scaled up by others. For fundraising with private sector investors, 
the focus on flexibility and bespoke solutions may also be a challenging selling proposition as 
they typically look for a clear and efficient “product suite” to be executed. Finally, the 
independent TAP  believes  it will be difficult to refinance a portfolio of loans to projects at a later 
stage (as discussed above) if the transaction structures vary widely.  
27. The AE has noted that t he fund (based also on its experience with REPP 1) will establish 
specific investment standards (e.g. for its lending to SHS businesses), and will not allow a 
proliferation of transaction models. The independent TAP  welcomes th is and encourages the 
AE, as part of its knowledge management and outreach with the market, to share lessons 
learned and best practices of what type s of transaction models and standardized documentation 
work and have potential for replication and scale. This c ould be of particular relevance in the 
work  of the AE  with the local funding market  (as foreseen under outcome 5: contributing to 
stronger technology deployment, innovation and market transformation ).


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 126 
 
 
 
 28. On the second  factor , for reasons already highlighted above, the independent TAP  
believes that few private sector investors will consider investing in REPP 2. As a result, this will 
leave DFIs and IFIs  (International Finance Corporation , African Development Bank , etc.) as the 
main sources of funding, with GCF then effectively providing risk mitigation and subsidy 
(because of the submarket hurdle rate for junior equity investors) to these DFIs/IFIs rather 
than to private sector investors. The AE acknowledges that realit y in the revised  funding 
proposal  and notes that , due to the difficulties of raising funding  (especially from the private 
sector ) for REPP 2, it does not stipulate specific private sector fundraising targets at the level of 
the fund. Also, the GCF investment criteria do not prescribe any co -financing requirements or, 
for that matter, private sector leverage targets for GCF investmen ts. However, the independent 
TAP believes that the fund’s ability to attract private sector investment is an important 
precondition for it to effect paradigm shift. A scaling up of the scope and impact of the programme , or a replication of its approach in other regi ons, is only likely if the approach 
demonstrates its ability to leverage private sector investors into the capital structure of the 
fund.  
29. In this context, the independent TAP  welcomes the introduction of a tiered pricing 
structure for different investor categories  in the revised and updated term sheet ( annex 14 of 
the funding proposal ) that may provide additional incentives for private sector investors to 
make funding available.  If implemented, t his would reflect the reality that private sector 
investors in the current macroeconomic environment will find it otherwise difficult to make a 
long -term funding commitment to REPP 2 without attractive returns. Even considering the risk 
mitigation provided by the junior equity layer, a  senior preferred return of 15 per cent  cannot 
be considered excessive. The independent TAP  recommends includ ing a clear definition of 
private sector investors (following the definition in footnote 1 of this a ssessment report) to 
ensure that any additional senior preferred returns accrue only to private sector investors.  
30. In order to ensure that REPP 2 can unfold its full paradigm shift potential, the 
independent TAP  recommends to the Board to include the following condition to its potential 
approval of this funding proposal:  “Other than in relation to the first disbursement of the GCF 
Proceeds, delivery by the Accredited Entity to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of written evidence confirming that Co -financing from private sources of an 
amo unt not less than ten per cent (10%) of the tota l capital commitments to Camco REPP SCSp 
(including the requested disbursement) is either already committed or expected to be 
committed, to Camco REPP SCSp, at the same time as the GCF Proceeds from the requested 
disbursement. Such private sources shall ex clude co -financing which is ultimately provided by 
entities (i) where the majority of shares or ownership in that entity (i.e. more than 50%) are 
held by public sector entities; or (ii) that benefit from an explicit state guarantee or other 
government supp ort agreement.”    
31. More broadly speaking, the mobilization of private sector funding for climate action is 
identified as an important objective of the GCF Private Sector Strategy. In that context, the 
independent TAP  tries to focus on the specific private sector leverage targets (e.g., at portfolio 
level, or for certain categories of investments) presented in GCF funding proposals. However, 
writing a mobilization target into funding proposals is not the same as actual  mobilization in the 
real world, and in the markets as we find it. We would suggest that the Secretariat explore ways 
to better diligence claims of private sector leverage in funding proposals , as basis for the 
independent TAP  review. We would also suggest exploring incentive mechanisms for AEs to 
ensure that they industriously pursue these private sector leverage targets after having secured 
GCF funding. GCF is not the only funding institution grappling with this issue; many public 
climate finance providers are trying to develop pathways to turn billions into trillions by way of 
leveraging private sector capital. The independent TAP  believes that, in order for GCF to 
successfully achieve the Private Sector Strategy’s objective “to catal yse private climate finance 
in a manner fully aligned with a country- driven approach to meet developing countries’ needs 
and the objectives of the USP” (updated Strategic Plan for GCF), specifying leverage targets and


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 127 
 
 
 
 introducing incentive mechanisms to drive these targets could be one powerful way to underpin 
the Private Sector Strategy with concrete action.  
32. On the third and final factor , in the funding proposal the AE suggests that,  at the level of 
individual assets , it expects to  raise roughly USD 393 million (or 50 per cent  of the total funds 
expected to be mobilized by REPP 2) from private sector and commercial sources. (The funding 
proposal is unclear  about  where the balance in mobilized funding would come from.  The 
independent TAP  assumes that it  would  come from public sector sources,  such as development 
aid, concessional funding from development banks,  and government contributions. ) Considering 
the complexity of the asset profiles and the target markets, this relatively low share of mobilized funding from private sector and commercial sources may not come as a surprise.  The estimate is 
based on the actual track record of REPP 1 , which has mobilized USD 460 million in co -
financing, with roughly 50  per cent  of that coming from private sector and commercial sources. 
The independent TAP  would strongly encourage the AE/EE to make every effort to increase the 
share of co-financing  from local private sector sources.  The independent TAP  recognizes that  
local  private sector financing is harder to obtain and more expensive (thus driving, for example,  
the levelized cost of electricity  for small -scale on -grid renewables and other small -scale 
projects) , but the independent TAP  believes  it is essential to ensuring that the local funding 
market engage s in this market segment  to achieve paradigm shift . The proposed refinancing of 
assets after 10 –12 years via a commercial bank is an additional way to achieve the objective of 
involving commercial banks  but, as discussed earlier, it is far from assured.  
33. The independent TAP  appreciates the differentiated and detailed treatment of the issues 
surrounding local currency financing by REPP 2 in the funding proposal . The independent TAP  
agrees that local currency risk can be more efficiently managed at the level of the fund than at 
the level of individual assets.  The independent TAP  also recognizes that the fund needs to 
balance, on the one hand, providing financing products that clients/projects can afford (thus 
generally favo uring local currency financing) and , on the other hand , ensuring that the  risk 
profile of REPP 2 remains attractive particular ly to private  sector  investors (which would mean 
carrying as little currency mismatch on the balance sheet as possible). In actual practice, it would appear that , for a large part of the targeted portfolio,  the AE/EE will transfer  the currency 
risk to investees (as hedge/swap opportunities are limited/too expensive and the programme may not be able to carry the associated risk). The independent TAP  encourages the AE to also 
consider partnerships with local investors in some key markets to determine whether there may be alternative ways for the f und to provide local currency solutions to projects . In addition, 
the AE could explore partnerships with other concessional capital providers ( such as the 
European Commission, Nordic Development Facility , and  KfW Development Bank ) to raise  
additional local currency shares to mitigate local currency risk at level. This is being 
implemented very effectively in other blended finance funds such as the SANAD Fund , the 
European Fund for Southeast Europe , and  the Green for Growth Fund.  A sustain able approach to 
local currency investing is another key factor driving the potential for paradigm shift.  
34. The EE proposes to engage with governments and regulators in key target markets with 
the aim  to structure transactions for REPP 2  that may require government/regulatory 
consents /changes . The EE also intends to provide support to governments/regulators in target 
markets via the TAF  (which is outside the scope of this proposal ) to address enabling 
environment constraints , although the precise scope of that remains somewhat unclear. In light 
of this , the independent TAP  acknowledges that the EE goes beyond the scope of the mandate of 
a typical investment manager  and recognizes that structuring small -scale renewable energy 
transactions in the target marke ts wi ll be challenging  and will require consistent engagement 
with public sector authorities . The funding proposal argues that the “precedence” nature of the 
transactions that the f und will support will create a model for follow -on transactions to occur. 
The funding proposal, as well as the question -and-answer  documentation , also point s to 
transactions in the REPP 1 portfolio and how such model transactions with REPP 1 involvement 
had been instrumental in triggering additional investment activity in the respective markets


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 128 
 
 
 
 (e.g. in Burundi after the investment of REPP 1 into the Mubuga Solar Project). However, the 
independent TAP  believes that , to drive transformational change, the f und’s investments and 
activities would have to provide a credible pathway for follow -on investments by systematically 
addressing enabling environment constraints in target markets. This is not the focus of the f und 
(and may well be outside its sphere of influence) , but the constraints  ultimately limit t he 
potential  of REPP 2  to advance regulatory/legislative frameworks to systematically promote 
investment in small -scale renewable energy projects.  
35. Overall , the independent TAP  rate s the potential for REPP 2 to effect paradigm shift as 
medium, with potential for improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately 
addressed . 
1.4 Sustainable development potential             Scale:  High  
36. The funding proposal presents a credible pathway for REPP 2 to generate significant 
sustainable development benefits:  
(a) Economic co -benefits:  The funding proposal notes that the programme is expected  to 
create more than 76,801 jobs. The impact model provided by the AE (annex 22  of the 
funding proposal ) as well as the explanations provided in the Q+A session  point to the 
reality that a significant share of this estimate is based on indirect job creation effects from  new generation capacity supported by REPP 2  investments. The funding proposal 
notes that “The ex -ante estimate of the number of jobs is based on the average numbe r 
of jobs required by MW [megawatt] build, multiplied by MWs financed. The job numbers 
are technology specific and have been driven from IRENA: Renewable Energy and Jobs, 
Annual Review 2021 .”; 
(b) Social co-benefits : The funding proposal highlights multiple social co -benefits resulting 
from programme investments, mostly due to  improved access to lighting, the 
electrification of health facilities, access to refrigeration, etc. The independent TAP  notes 
that those benefits (much like the e conomic co -benefits) only accrue if the investment in 
generation capacity or off -grid companies translates  into more connections and actual 
use of clean energy by beneficiaries ; and 
(c) Gender -sensitive development co -benefits : Finally, the funding proposal argues that 
the benefits from additional investment in small -scale renewable energy generation will 
disproportionately benefit women and girls  as, at present, they tend to be responsible 
for sourcing alternative sources of fuel (e.g. firewood) , and obtaining access to clean 
electricity will enable them to  use their time more productively (e.g. schooling). REPP 2 
will also make g ender action plans mandatory for all investees, and drive c ompliance 
with the 2X gender lens investing  criteria.  Because  the due diligence on the f und 
pipeline has not commenced yet, it is unclear how the projects in the pipeline currently perform against the 2X gender lens investing  criteria.  However, in the funding proposal, 
the AE states that “ at the end of 2022 phase -1 of REPP had committed $21m, which is 
30%, of its funding to female -owned and led companies, which indicates that REPP  2 
will similarly be able to source 2X aligned deals ”; and  
37. In accordance with  item 7 (results management framework)  of the GCF t erm sheet, all 
impacts delivered through REPP 2 are captured in the logical framework, which forms the basis 
of all monitoring and reporting under the p rogramme . 
38. Overall,  the independent TAP  rates the sustainable development impact potential of 
REPP 2  as high . 
1.5 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 129 
 
 
 
 39. The funding proposal credibly demonstrates the increasing climate change hazards 
afflicting the target cou ntries, and the significant vulnerabilit ies of relevant populations (section 
6 and annex 2  of the funding proposal ). While climate change hazards and vulnerabilities vary 
across and within these countries, there is no doubt that all of them are  significantly impacted 
by climate change . These impacts are  aggravated by the realities of other socioeconomic 
development challenges in the s ub-Saharan African region  (as also emphasized by the Sixth 
Assessment Report  of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) . 
40. While the poorest segments of society in  the target markets may not be able to access 
clean electricity , either on -grid or off -grid , even after REPP 2 support  due to economic 
constraints (ability to pay) , there are indirect benefits that will accrue (e.g. electrification of 
social institutions like schools and health cent res).  
41. The funding requirements for renewable energy generation (on -grid and off -grid) in the 
region are considerable and well -documented (closing the energy access gap in sub -Saharan 
African countries will require an estimated annual investment of USD  28 billion up to 2030, 
according to the  International Energy Agency) . Considering slow growth , low tax revenues and 
stretched government budgets /high sovereign indebtedness  in the target markets, the public 
sector will not be able to mobilize the required infrastructure investment . Multilateral 
development banks and other development partners are providing support but not at the scale 
required to close the investment gap. Local commercial sources of funding (e.g. commercial 
banks, pension funds) exist but typically do not finance infrastructure projects due to lack of 
familiarity with the asset class and /or statutory investment restrictions. The independent TAP  
recommends that the EE make a systematic effort in its investment activities to engage with local commercial capital provider s, which would also open opportunities for leveraging local 
currency to projects. The independent TAP  also encourages the EE to use the TAF strategically 
to strengthen links with local capital providers and leverage them into transactions.  
42. Overall, the independent TAP  rates the potential for REPP 2 to serve the needs of the 
recipients as high . 
1.6 Country ownership                Scale:  Medium  to high 
43. Coherence with existing policies : The funding proposal ( annex 2) provides 
comprehensive evidence that REPP 2 is broadly aligned with the priorities of host governments 
in target markets with regard to:  
(a) Nationally determined contributions  and associated implementation targets ; 
(b) National climate policies ; 
(c) National energy p olicies and legislative/regulatory environment for private investment 
in renewable energy ; 
(d) General national development policies ; and 
(e) National gender policies.  
44. While the scope and depth of alignment varies across countries , the overall impact and 
investment focus of REPP 2 is aligned  and supportive of national objectives.  
45. Capacity of the AE: Since 2015, the AE has been implementing REPP 1, a fund similar in 
objectives ( investment in small -scale renewable energy generation) but with some notable 
differences . While REPP 1 is entirely funded by grants  (no commercial investor involvement  in 
the capital structure of the fund) , REPP 2 invests by committing debt or equity products (but  it 
cannot be considered a fully commercial fund vehicle ). REPP 2 also features a n extended 
selection of target countries.


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 130 
 
 
 
 46. The independent TAP  recognizes that the AE will be able to leverage many learnings 
from REPP 1 to REPP 2 , but also views the significant changes in the capital structure (especially 
with expected participation of private sector and commercial investors) and the extended 
geography of REPP 2  as new challenges the AE must successfully manage.  
47. The independent TAP  also notes that REPP 2  – while predominantly a debt fund -  would 
make investments with quasi -equity instruments. Prior experience would suggest that driving 
an investment portfolio consisting of different asset classes is generally challenging . Different 
asset classes require a variety of skill  sets and , typically , equity investment involves a very 
different approach  and mindset  than debt investment s. In combination with the complexity of  
the target markets and considering the size of the fund, the AE/EE will have to successfully 
navigate the resulting challenges.  
48. As previously noted, the AE will also function as the EE for REPP 2 . As detailed in the 
funding proposal and the term sheet, C AMCO  would both invest any potential GCF contribution 
as fiduciary into the f und  and would also be contracted by the f und as its investment manager  
under the terms of the proposed investment management agreement . In the funding proposal , 
the resulting potential conflicts of interest are discussed in section F (Risk Assessment and Management). During the question -and-answer  session with the AE , it noted that , as a regulated 
manager , CAMCO has strong conflict of interest policies and procedures in place, and that it is 
confident that it would adequately manage potential challenges. However, i t is worth pointing 
out that the realities of ethical walls (virtual barriers) in a small organization (~30 employees) 
are at least questionable . In addition , it is worth pointing out that the expected fee income from 
managing REPP 2 would constitute a very significant source of income for CAMCO  (~30  per cent  
according to their estimates) , which would exacerbate the potential challenge. This challenge is 
not specific to this funding proposal but constitutes a general issue that the GCF Secretariat would need to consider in its overall approach.  
49. The independent TAP  considers the alignment of REPP 2 with host country government 
priorities high , but assesses the AE track record as medium. Overall, the independent TAP  rate s 
the country ownership of the funding proposal as medium -high . 
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness               Scale:  Medium  to high 
50. As also noted in the funding proposal , the estimated cost per t  CO 2 eq mitigated/avoided 
is relatively high  (USD  18.35 per t  CO 2 eq). This is not surprising considering the fact that the 
inve stment focus is on small -scale renewable energy projects that typically feature higher fixed 
investment cost  than large -scale infrastructure , resulting in higher levelized cost and thus lower 
efficiencies with regard to emissions avoided/reduced.  
51. The long fund life ( 20 year s) and  the likely implications of this for fundraising potential 
with private sector and commercial investors  were discussed  earlier in this assessment  report . 
As a potential junior equity investor, GCF would be the first in and last out of the f und, while 
private sector and commercial equity providers may find liquidity earlier (if a viable path is 
developed). This is a very long -term commitment; however, it is impossible to evaluate the 
counterfactual (what GCF could do with the funds if the  fund life was shortened ). 
52. The independent TAP  assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the funding proposal 
as medium- high . 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
53. The independent TAP  endorse s this funding proposal.


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/ B.37/02/Add. 13 
Page 131 
 
 
 
 54. Overall, the funding proposal  is ambitious and  has potential to generate significant 
mitigation, adaptation as well as broader sustainable development benefits for the target 
countries through projects that will receive investments from the fund. In focusing on the small -
scale segment of the renewable energy market, REPP 2 has the potential to play an instrumental 
role in closing the well -documented gap , especially in access to high -risk equity capital that is 
required for more project development (and ultimately investment) activity t o occur. The focus 
of the f und on least developed countrie s, and thus on markets that have mostly seen little or no 
private investment thus far in small -scale renewable energy projects , is particularly welcome.  
55. The independent TAP  also welcome s the graduation from grant funding for the capital 
stack of the f und (as was the case in REPP 1) to a blended finance structure that opens the 
potential for private sector and commercial leverage at portfolio level. The independent TAP  
views this as important to help engender the emergence of a truly sustainable market for small -
scale renewable energy in s ub-Saharan  Africa by gradually making private sector investors in 
particular more familiar with investing in this new asset class in jurisdictions that are 
unfamiliar  to them . CAMCO  has considerable experience in the target region and thus appears 
well -positioned to execute the investment mandate of REPP 2 . 
56. In order to ensure that REPP 2 can unfold its full paradigm shift potential, the 
independent TAP  recommends to the Board to include the following condition to its potential 
approval of this funding proposal:  
57. “Other than in relation to the first disbursement of the GCF Proceeds, delivery by the 
Accredited Entity to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of 
written evidence confirming that Co -financing from private sources of an amo unt not less than 
ten per cent (10%) of the total capital commitments to Camco REPP SCSp (including the 
requested disbursement) is either already committed or expected to be committed, to Camco 
REPP SCSp, at the same time as the GCF Proceeds from the reque sted disbursement. Such 
private sources shall exclude co -financing which is ultimately provided by entities (i) where the 
majority of shares or ownership in that entity (i.e. more than 50%) are held by public sector entities; or (ii) that benefit from an e xplicit state guarantee or other government support 
agreement.”


---
*Page 132*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.13 
Page 132 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP222 ) 
Proposal name:  Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP 2)  
Accredited entity:  Camco Management Limited  
Country/(ies):  Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Zambia  
Project/Programme size:  Medium (Up to USD 250 million)  
 
Impact potential  
The iTAP assessment of the impact potential as medium -high is noted with appreciation.  
The AE acknowledges the challenges highlighted by the iTAP in mobilizing significant co -
investment for REPP 2. The AE is pleased to note that since the date of discussions with iTAP, 
the Renewable Energy Performance Platform has executed a term sheet for a junior equity 
interest of USD50m to REPP 2. Further positive discussions with potential investors have 
continued since the date of the submission of the revised FP to iTAP.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The iTAP assessment of the paradigm shift potential as medium is noted with appreciation.  
As noted in paragraph 27, the AE is committed to sharing the lessons learnt and best practices 
developed during the lifetime of REPP 2, particularly in relation to workable transaction 
models and replicable documentation.  
The AE agrees with the iTAP assessment that the leveraging of private capital is key to the 
paradigm shift potential of REPP 2. In relation to the proposed condition in paragraph 30 (repeated in paragraph 57), the AE strong believes that it is involvement of the private sector 
by final close that is the appropriate measure of success – 
particularly in the current 
challenging fundraising environment. Accordingly, the AE proposed to iTAP a slight revision of 
the proposed condition as follows:  
“The final disbursement of the GCF Proceeds  shall be conditional on the delivery by the Accredited 
Entity to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of written evidence 
confirming that Co -financing from private sources of an amount not less than ten per cent (10%) 
of th e total capital commitments to Camco REPP SCSp (including the requested disbursement) is 
either already committed or expected to be committed, to Camco REPP SCSp, at the same time as 
the GCF Proceeds from the requ ested disbursement. Such private sources shall exclude co -
financing which is ultimately provided by entities (i) where the majority of shares or ownership 
in that entity (i.e. more than 50%) are held by public sector entities; or (ii) that benefit from an 
explicit state guarantee or other government support agreement .” 
This revision was not accepted by iTAP and the AE accepts the condition as proposed by iTAP.  
The AE welcomes the suggestion of iTAP contained in paragraph 31.  
The AE notes the encouragement of the iTAP to increase the role of local private finance 
sources and will seek to do so in implementing REPP 2. Similarly, the AE will actively seek to 
build partnerships with providers of local currency solutions (paragraph  33).


---
*Page 133*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.13 
Page 133 
 
 
  
Sustainable development potential  
The iTAP assessment of the sustainable development potential as high is noted with 
appreciation.  
Needs of the recipient  
The iTAP assessment of the needs of the recipient criteria as high is noted with appreciation.  
 
Country ownership  
The iTAP assessment of the country ownership criteria as medium -high is noted with 
appreciation.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The iTAP assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness criteria as medium- high is noted with 
appreciation.  
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The AE welcomes the assessment report of the independent technical assessment panel 
(“iTAP”) in response to the resubmission of the funding proposal for REPP 2.


---
*Page 134*
---

1 Gender Assessment  
Gender 
Assessment  
REPP 2 
10 April 2023  
Author: Camco Management Limited  
Version: 1 
Gender documentation for FP222
Page 134


---
*Page 135*
---

2 Gender Assessment  
Table of c ontents  
1 Executive summary  3 
2 Overview of the target countries  3 
3 Gender gap  6 
3.1 Indicators and indexes  6 
3.2 Health and wellbeing  8 
3.3 Education 10 
3.4 Economic opportunities  13 
3.5 Participation in decision -making and leadership  18 
3.6 Legal status of women and gender stereotypes  18 
4 Gender inclusivity in the energy sector  21 
4.1 Women as employees  22 
4.2 Women as energy users  25 
4.3 Limited funding to women -owned/led companies  28 
5 Gender Action Plan  29 
5.1 Actions  29 
Page 135


---
*Page 136*
---

3 Gender Assessment  1 Executive summary  
 
This gender assessment explores the relationships between men and women, their access to resources and the 
constraints they face relative to one an other in REPP 2 target countries within the context of climate change 
and energy access.  
REPP 2’s target countries have made progress in integrating the gender dimension at the political, strategic and 
legal levels and in some indicators REPP 2 target countries  rank better than the world average. However, there 
are still significant gaps in achieving parity and women and girls are disproportionately affected by inadequate 
energy infrastructure and services , as well as unequal chances  to engage in economic opportunities presented 
by renewable energy access. The following key barriers  have been i dentified:  
• Women face hurdles  accessing modern energy  
• Women’s employment opportunities in renewable energy are limited  
• Women’s access to funding at the individual and company level is limited . 
The Gender Action Plan (GAP)  presented in Section 6 consist s of two main actions : 1) dedicate 30% of REPP 2 
funding  towards companies that meet the 2X Challenge’s G ender Lens Investing (2X GLI) criteria , and 2) 
integrat e a gender equality perspective into the design, implementation  and monitoring of all renewable energy 
activities funded by REPP 2. These activities will  assist in designing products and services for the most 
vulnerable groups of the population, as well as  overcom ing the existing inequalities that exist in the renewable 
energy sector , which are  presented in more detail in Section 4.  
 
2 Overview of the target 
countries  
 
REPP 2’s investment mandate will extend towards some of the most economically and socially vulnerable 
countries in Africa, most of which fall into the low human development category under the 2021 Human 
Development Index (HDI) ; specifically,  Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, 
Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Lesotho ). Despite Cameroon making it into the medium human development cohort, it 
is still ranked 151 out of 191 countries and frequently fall s below group averages on key development indicators 
as presented below in Table 1.1  
Table 1: Human development indicators for target countries2 
Country/Indicator  HDI 2021  Average annual 
overall HDI growth 
2010 -2021  (%)  Rank 
2021  Overall  Female  Male  
World  - 0.732  0.715  0.747  0.45 
Sub-Saharan Africa  - 0.547  0.519  0.572  0.77 
Medium human 
development  - 0.636  0.586  0.666  0.81 
 
1 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022.  
2 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022. 
Page 136


---
*Page 137*
---

4 Gender Assessment  Country/Indicator  HDI 2021  Average annual 
overall HDI growth 
2010 -2021  (%)  Rank 
2021  Overall  Female  Male  
Low human 
development  - 0.518 0.477  0.552  0.75 
Least developed 
countries  - 0.540 0.508  0.568  0.94 
Cameroon  151 0.576  0.540  0.610  1.06 
DRC 179 0.479  0.449  0.507  1.01 
Lesotho  168 0.514  0.511  0.519  0.88 
Madagascar  173 0.501  0.490  0.512  0.16 
Malawi  169 0.512  0.502  0.519  1.06 
Niger  189 0.400  0.364  0.436  1.54 
Nigeria 163 0.535  0.495  0.574  0.95 
Sierra Leone  181 0.477  0.452  0.506  1.01 
Zambia  154 0.565  0.554  0.574  0.60 
B
ased on the UNDP data presented in the Human Development Report 2021/2022, the majority (>50%) of the 
population in more than half of REPP 2 target countries lives below the International Poverty Line , which is 
defined as having less than US D 1.90 a day  to live on .3 Low-income levels hinder the access to , and availability 
of, most basic services, including  electricity, information, clean water, transport, healthcare and education.  
Table 2: Economic wellbeing indicators4 
Country/ Indicator Gross National 
Income (GNI) per 
capita, 2021  
(2017 PPP5 USD) Population living below 
income poverty line 2008 -
2019  (%)  Gini coefficient  
2010 -2021 
Female  Male  National 
poverty line  PPP 2011 USD 
1.90 a day6 
World  12,241  21,210  - - - 
Sub-Saharan Africa  2,970  4,429  43.4 45.7 - 
Medium human 
development  2,912  9,668  - - - 
Low human development  1,907  4,107  - - - 
Least developed 
countries  1,993  3,777  - - - 
3 At 2011 international prices calculated based on 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates. The 
International Poverty Line corresponds to the mean of the poverty lines found in the poorest 15 countries ranked by per capita consumption.  
4 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022. 
5 Purchasing power parity.  
6 Population living below PPP $1.90 a day: Percentage of the population living below the international poverty line of 
$1.90 (in purchasing power parity terms) a day.  
Page 137


---
*Page 138*
---

5 Gender Assessment  Country/ Indicator Gross National 
Income (GNI) per 
capita, 2021  
(2017 PPP5 USD) Population living below 
income poverty line 2008 -
2019  (%)  Gini coefficient  
2010 -2021 
Female  Male  National 
poverty line  PPP 2011 USD 
1.90 a day6 
Cameroon  2,981  4,264  37.5 23.8 46.6 
DRC 896 1,259  63.9 76.6 42.1 
Lesotho  2,107  3,310  49.7 26.9 44.9 
Madagascar  1,284  1,682  70.7 77.6 42.6 
Malawi  1,232  1,713  51.5 70.3 38.5 
Niger  936 1,535  44.5 44.5 37.3 
Nigeria 3,759  5,800  46 53.5 35.1 
Sierra Leone  1,453  1,789  52.9 40.1 35.7 
Zambia  2,615  3,837  54.4 58.7 57.1 
 
Indexes presented in Tables 1 and 2 place REPP 2 target countries among the poorest in the world , with 
women being disproportionately disadvantaged in terms of the opportunities and benefits that the countries and 
their economies have to offer, which results in lower values in general development indicators for women 
compared to men. This highlights the importance of gender -disaggregated data for the assessment of women’s 
empowerment and economic development in the target countries.  
Lack of gender -disaggregated data is especially distorting in generalised indicators such as the World Bank’s 
International Poverty Line . Recent studies show that the way the indicator is calculated fails to consider  
differences between men and women.7 The World Bank’s approach to assessing poverty relies on two main 
variables : consumption and income. The values for these variables are obtained through household surveys, 
which provide information on consumption and income at the household level, whereas statistics on the 
population living below the International Poverty Line seek to assess poverty at the individual level. Hence, 
individual indicators are calculated by dividing household -level data by the number of household members.  
The World Bank recognises that this approach involves several important assumptions, such as that household 
resources are shared equally across family members; that family members have identical needs ; that two 
individuals with the same per capita consumption level enjoy the same living standard; and that there are no 
differential costs of reaching a given welfare level per person for households of different sizes.8 These 
assumptions do not correspond to realities, as gender inequalities often make women and girls more vulnerable 
than men and boys to poverty. This is largely due to prevailing gender norms, the intra‐household division of 
assets, work and responsibilities , and power relations that drive these disparities.9 
With this in mind, REPP 2’s gender assessment and respective GAP have been drawn up based on available 
gender- disaggregated data, which has allowed us to place women and men in the context of their respective 
countries and communities and to assess gender inequalities pertaining to the energy sector. The data source s 
 
7 World Bank, 2018. Gender Differences in Poverty and Household Composition through the Life -cycle: A Global 
Perspective . 
8 World Bank, 2015. A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity: Concepts, Data, and 
the Twin Goals . 
9 World Bank, 2018. Gender Differences in Poverty and Household Composition through the Life -cycle: A Global 
Perspective . 
Page 138


---
*Page 139*
---

6 Gender Assessment  used do not currently provide data on other gender identities and contain fragmented data on other 
marginalised groups with limited applicability to REPP 2. 
3 Gender gap  
Gender equality is measured by a number of international indexes , as presented below. Despite relative 
variability , African countries generally seem to have the lowest scores not only in terms of human development, 
but also gender equality and other related  indicators.  
This assessment consider s the most recent indicators from UNDP Human Development Reports, World 
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Reports  and OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index Regional 
Reports for Africa, as well as a comprehensive body of data and qualitative assessments gathered and published  
by the World Bank Group. A lthough these sources provide a comprehensive outlook onto gender issues of the 
region, including REPP 2 target countries, it is recognised that these indicators and assessments d o not fully 
address the role of women in the energy sector (as service providers, employees , and end users), since they 
lack sufficient country -level statistical data. Where such data is not available, the assessment herein has been 
made based on generalised data for the region and/or broader sectors (such as industry as opposed to energy) 
as well as latest available country -level data derived from other verified sources. 
3.1 Indicators an d indexes  
Gender Development Index (GDI ) measures gender inequalities in three basic dimensions of human 
development: health (based on life expectancy at birth), education (expected years of schooling and mean years of schooling) and command over economic resources (GNI per capita) . 
Gender Inequality Index (GII)  measures gender inequalities in other three basic dimensions: reproductive 
health (maternal mortality ration and adolescent birth rate), empowerment (share of parliamentary seats held 
by each gender and population with at least some secondary education) and the labour market (labour force participation rate), are two main gender inequality indexes calculated by UNDP in its human development  
reports.
10 
Global Gender Gap Index  (GGGI)  benchmarks the current state and evolution of gender parity across four 
key dimensions, namely economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment).
11  The GGGI adopts a more holistic approach, integrating GDI and GII indicators 
as well as additional indicators relevant for the energy sector, such as level of enrolment in tertiary education, involvement of women as professional and technical workers, number of female legislators, senior officials and 
managers etc . 
REPP 2 target countries  perform differently in these indicators as presented below in Table 3  and 4 . 
GDI: Target countries have varying indicators of gender equality with two -thirds of the countries showing low 
levels of gender equality with absolute deviation from gender parity of more than 10 %.12 Whereas Madagascar, 
10 UNDP, 2020. Technical notes to Human Development Report 2020 . 
11 World Economic Forum (WEF), 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . 
12 Methodology for calculating indices for the Human Development Report 2021/2022 uses absolute deviation of GDI 
from gender parity, 100 ∙ |GDI – 1| <WHAT IS THIS – A FORMULA?>, to determine each country’s level of gender 
equality and place it into a respective GDI group. Countries with absolute deviation from gender parity of 2.5% or 
less are considered countries with high equality in HDI achievements between women and men and are classified as 
Group 1. Group 2 (medium -high equality) includes countries with 2.5-5% deviation, and Group 3 (medium equality) 
Page 139


---
*Page 140*
---

7 Gender Assessment  Malawi and Lesotho score higher on GDI value, approaching or exceeding the world average and ranking  
among top -rated countries in the Sub -Saharan Africa region and the world.13 
GII presents a different picture, where all of REPP 2 target countries experience higher level of gender 
inequality than the world average and some of the host countries, i.e. , DRC, Niger, Nigeria , and Sierra Leone, 
are below the Sub -Saharan Africa average.  
Table 3: Gender Development Index and Gender Inequality Index14 
Country/Indicator  GDI 2021  GDI 2014  GII 202115 GII 2014  
World  0.958  0.924  0.465  0.449  
Sub-Saharan Africa  0.907  0.872  0.569  0.575  
Least developed 
countries  0.894  0.866  0.562  0.566  
Cameroon  0.885  0.879  0.565  0.587  
DRC 0.885  0.833  0.601  0.673  
Lesotho  0.985  0.953  0.557  0.541  
Madagascar  0.956  0.945  0.556  - 
Malawi  0.968  0.907  0.554  0.611  
Niger  0.835  0.729  0.611  0.713  
Nigeria 0.863  0.841  0.680  - 
Sierra Leone  0.893  0.814  0.633  0.650  
Zambia  0.965  0.917  0.540  0.587  
GGGI : Sub-Saharan Africa as a region has the sixth  highest regional score  - ranking ahead of Middle East and 
North Africa , and South Asia  - and has bridged 67.9% of its gender gap.16   However, it is estimated that at the 
present rate it would take 98 years to close the gender gap in the region.17 At the country level, Cameroon, 
Madagascar and Lesotho show better results than the rest of REPP 2 target countries by virtue of high scores in 
the economic participation and opportunity (Cameroon and Madagascar), educational attainment (Lesotho) and 
includes countries with 5 -7.5% deviation. Countries with medium -low (7.5- 10% deviation) and low (more than 10% 
deviation) equality are classified as Group 4 and Group 5 , respectively.  
13 For reference, the world average GDI of 0.958 falls within Group 2 limits (medium -high equality) with absolute 
deviation from gender parity of 4.2%. Group 1 countries, such as the UK and Finland, have 1.3& and 1.1% of 
absolute deviation, respectively. Hig h-performing REPP 2 countries, i.e., Madagascar, Malawi and Lesotho, have 
absolute deviations from gender parity in HDI -attainment equal to 4.4%, 3.2% and 1.5% respectively, placing 
Madagascar and Malawi into the medium- high equality group and Lesotho into  the high gender equality group.  
14 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022. UNDP, 2015. Human Development Report 2015 .  
15  Ranges from 0, where women and men fare equally, to 1, where one gender fares as poorly as possible in all 
measured dimensions.  
16 The Global Gender Gap Report 2022 classifies countries into eight regions: North America, Europe, Latin America 
and the Caribbean, Central Asia, East Asia and the Pacific, Sub -Saharan Africa, Middle East and North Africa, and 
South Asia. North America and  Europe lead all regions with 76.9% and 76.6% of the gender gap closed, respectively. 
Middle East and North Africa (63.4% gender gap closed) and South Asia (62.4% gender gap closed) show the lowest performance in the key dimensions of the report. By compar ison, in 2006 Asia, Sub- Saharan Africa and the Middle 
East and North Africa had a little over 55% of their gender gaps closed (according to the Global Gender Gap Report 
2006). It should be noted that regional classification and countries covered in the Global Gender Gap reports vary 
from year to year. Regional classifications for the Global Gender Gap Report 2022 are available in Appendix A of the 
report.  
17 WEF, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . 
Page 140


---
*Page 141*
---

8 Gender Assessment  health and survival (Cameroon and Lesotho) dimensions  (see Table 4) . Other target countries remain on the 
lower spectrum of gender equality values.  
Table 4. Global Gender Gap Index18 
Country/Indicator  Global gender gap 
2022 Regional 
gender gap 
rating 2021 Global gender 
gap 2020  Regional 
gender gap 
rating 2020 Index  Rating  Index  Rating  
World  0.677  - - 0.685  - - 
Sub-Saharan Africa  0.672  - - 0.680  - - 
Cameroon  0.692  97 19 0.686  96 16 
DRC 0.575  144 36 0.578  149 34 
Lesotho  0.700  87 17 0.695  88 15 
Madagascar  0.735  48 7 0.719  62 9 
Malawi  0.632  132 30 0.664  116 23 
Niger  0.635  128 29 - - - 
Nigeria 0.639  123 27 0.635  128 27 
Sierra Leone  0.672  109 22 0.668  111 21 
Zambia  0.723  62 12 0.731  45 5 
3.2 Health and wellbeing  
Despite the progress that has been made in recent years  (see Table 5 ), REPP 2 target countries still experience 
high maternal and infant mortality rates, as well as a lower life expectancy at birth compared to world averages.  
Harmful practices such as gender -based violence and child marriages are also persistent across the countries, 
which lack sufficient legal basis for the protection for women. With the exception of DRC and Malawi, a ll of the 
target countries have legislative exemptions  regarding the minimum legal age of marriage, such as the consent 
of parents, guardians, judges and/or courts.19 For instance, in Sierra Leone , where  marriage is governed by the 
customary law as well as the statutory law, the Registration of Customary Marriage and Divorce Act 2007 allows 
for underage customary marriages if they happen with parents’ consent.20 
Table 5. Health indicators21 
Country//Indicator  Life expectancy at birth  Maternal mortality 
ratio (deaths per  
100,000 live 
births)  Infant mortality 
rate ( deaths per 
1,000 live births)  2020  2014  
Female  Male Female  Male 2017  2010  2020  2014  
World  75 71 74 70 204 248 27 32 
Sub-Saharan Africa  64 60 61 58 535 626 50 58 
18 WEF, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . WEF, 2020. Global Gender Gap Report 2020 . 
19 Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD), 2021. SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa, 
Social Institutions and Gender Index . 
20 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Sierra Leone.  
21 World Bank, 2022. Life expectancy at birth, female (years) . World Bank, 2022. Life expectancy at birth, male 
(years) . World Bank, 2022. Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) . World Bank, 2022. 
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births) . 
Page 141


---
*Page 142*
---

9 Gender Assessment  Country//Indicator  Life expectancy at birth  Maternal mortality 
ratio (deaths per  
100,000 live 
births)  Infant mortality 
rate ( deaths per 
1,000 live births)  2020  2014  
Female  Male Female  Male 2017  2010  2020  2014  
Cameroon  61 58 58 56 529 597 48 60 
DRC 63 59 60 57 473 542 64 75 
Madagascar  69 66 67 64 335 453 36 42 
Malawi  68 62 64 58 349 444 29 39 
Niger  64 62 61 59 509 663 46 53 
Nigeria 56 54 61 52 917 978 72 80 
Sierra Leone  56 54 53 51 1,120  1,360  80 96 
Lesotho  58 52 53 47 544 594 70 72 
Zambia  67 61 63 58 213 305 42 46 
Th
e adolescent  fertility rate in the target countries also remains the highest in the world, with some countries 
exceeding the world average by a factor of three, as shown in Table 6  below . 
Table 6. Health indicators (continued)22 
Country/Indicator  Adolescent fertility rate (births 
per 1,000 women ages 15 -19) 
2020  2014  
World  41 45 
Sub-Saharan Africa  98 108 
Cameroon  99 115 
DRC 119 127 
Madagascar  104 116 
Malawi  131 140 
Niger  177 195 
Nigeria 102 113 
Sierra Leone  105 121 
Lesotho  92 90 
Zambia  115 130 
A
s discussed in the next section, early marriages and motherhood have a detrimental effect on educational 
attainment among women  and girls , which in turn limits the number of females capable of joining the skilled 
workforce or entrepreneurship sector.  
22 World Bank, 2022. Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15 -19). 
Page 142


---
*Page 143*
---

10 Gender Assessment   
3.3 Education 
According to the available data, relative progress has been made in REPP 2 target countries  and the rest of Sub -
Saharan Africa with regards to overall access to , and the attainment of , education by both men and women. At 
the same time, this progress has not been significant enough for the indicators to catch up with world averages 
and the recorded gender gap remains persistent across all levels and fields of education.  
Fewer  than half of REPP 2 target countries (Cameroon, Lesotho, and Madagascarhave female literacy rates 
comparable to those of the male population while also closely approaching or exceeding world averages. In 
other countries, women are at least 20% less likely to be literate, with only 27% of Niger’s adult females being 
able to both read and write with understanding a short simple statement about their everyda y life, as presented 
in Table 7 below.  
Table 7. Education attainment indicators  
Country/Indicator  Literacy rate, adults 
(15+), %23 Mean years of schooling24 
Female  Male  2021  2014  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
World  83 (2020)  90 (2020)  8.4 8.9 6.2 7.9 
Sub-Saharan Africa  59 (2020)  72 (2020)  5.1 6.9 4.2 6.0 
       
Cameroon  72 (2018)  83 (2018)  4.8 7.5 5.3 6.7 
DRC 66 (2016)  89 (2016)  5.6 8.5 4.5 7.7 
Lesotho  85 (2014)  68 (2014)  6.6 6.0 6.5 5.2 
Madagascar  75 (2018)  78(2018)  4.9 5.3 6.6 6.1 
Malawi  55 (2015)  70 (2015)  4.1 4.7 3.4 5.2 
Niger  27 (2018)  44 (2018)  1.7 2.8 0.8 2 
Nigeria  53 (2018)  71 (2018)  6.1 8.2 4.9 7.1 
Sierra Leone  35 (2018)  52 (2018)  3.5 5.8 2.2 4.0 
Zambia  83 (2018)  91 (2018)  7.2 7.2 5.8 7.3 
 
Low literacy rates have a direct correlation with educational attainment by boys and girls. Across REPP 2 target 
countries , 40% or fewer female adults aged 25 and older have reached (but not necessarily completed) a 
secondary level of education, as presented in Table 8. The actual  number of adults that have ultimately 
completed upper secondary education is estimated at 27.5% for Sub -Saharan Africa in 2022 , with a persistent 
gap between males (30.2%) and female s (27.1%).25 
The Global Education Monitoring Report 2022 includes survey results of secondary school -age adolescents or 
their parents in Malawi, Nigeria and Sierra Leone showing  their reasons for not being in school.26 Among those 
 
23 World Bank, 2022. Literacy rate, adult female (% of females aged 15 and above) . World Bank, 2022.  Literacy rate, 
adult male (% of males aged 15 and above) . 
24 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022  
25 The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation’s (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics, 2022. 
Regional and income group average estimates  for completion rates of different levels of education.  
26 UNESCO classifies the reasons for not completing secondary education or failing to ever attend school into three 
types: situational (life circumstances), dispositional (personal attitudes) and institutional (structural conditions).  
Page 143


---
*Page 144*
---

11 Gender Assessment  who have never attended school, dispositional reasons are predominant, with half of those surveyed citing a 
lack of value or interest in education as their main reason for being out of school. Amongst those who no longer 
attend school, it is situational barriers  - notably , the lack of resources  - that keep at least 40% of adolescents 
from going back to school in Nigeria and Sierra Leone. Marriage and pregnancy were the reason s for 
approximately 20% of adolescents, mostly girls, dropping out of education in Nigeria, and about 10% in Sierra 
Leone and 5% in Malawi.27 
Table 8. Education attainment indicators (continued)28 
Country/Indicator  Expected years of schooling  Adults aged 25+ with at 
least some secondary 
education (%) 
2021  2014  2021  2005 -2014  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
World  12.9 12.7 12.2 12.4 64.2 70.3 54.5 65.4 
Sub-Saharan Africa  10.0 10.6 9.1 10.3 31.1 44.3 22.1 31.5 
Cameroon  12.4 13.8 9.5 11.2 36.8 55.0 21.3 34.9 
DRC 9.6 10.1 8.6 10.8 40.3 69.1 12.8 32.4 
Lesotho  12.4 11.7 11.7 10.6 27.2 24.6 21.9 19.0 
Madagascar  10.2 10.1 10.2 10.5 27.3 29.8 - - 
Malawi  12.8 12.5 10.8 10.7 21.3 28.4 11.1 21.6 
Niger  6.3 7.6 4.8 6.1 9.2 15.2 2.4 7.8 
Nigeria 9.6 10.8 8.2 9.8 40.4 55.3 - - 
Sierra Leone  9.6 9.9 7.2 10.0 34.7 51.5 10.0 21.7 
Zambia  10.9 11.0 13.0 13.9 47.1 56.8 25.8 44.0 
W
hen it comes to tertiary education, Sub -Saharan Africa is performing poorly with regard to gender parity, with 
women still remaining at a disadvantage, as compared to the rest of the world where gender disparity in tertiary 
education exists at the expense  of men. The  ratio of women to men that enrolled at tertiary level  education  for 
the region remained  between 0.6 and 0.8 between 2000 and 2020 , where the world average value increased 
from just under 0.7 to above 1.0 over the period .29 
Despite region al averages, some REPP 2 target countries have shown significant increase s in the female/male 
tertiary education enrolment ratio , howe ver. According to the available data, the adjusted gender parity index 
value has increased from 0.6 in 2000 to almost 0.9 in 2020 in Cameroon, almost reached 1.0 in Madagascar and 
remained at approximately 1.4 value in Lesotho, leaving men at a disadvantage.30 
Nevertheless, for other REPP 2 target countries, such as Niger, Malawi and DRC, female enrolment in tertiary 
education remains almost two times lower than male enrolment, as evidenced by data presented in Table 9.  
Table 9. Tertiary education indicators31 
27 UNESCO, 2021. Global Education Monitoring Report 2021/2: Non-state actors in education: Who chooses? Who 
loses?  
28 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022. UNDP, 2015. Human Development Report 2015 . 
29 UNESCO, 2021. Global Education Monitoring Report 2021/2: Non- state actors in education: Who chooses? Who loses?  
30 UNESCO, 2021. Global Education Monitoring Report 2021/2: Non- state actors in education: Who chooses? Who loses?  
31 WEF, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . 
Page 144


---
*Page 145*
---

12 Gender Assessment  Country/Indicator  Enrolment in tertiary 
education, %  STEMS 
attainment , % Business, admin  and 
law attainment , % 
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male   
Cameroon  13.40  15.12  32.28  67.72  54.37  45.63   
DRC 4.73 8.47 25.10  74.90  38.34  61.66   
Lesotho  12.40  8.02 24.82  75.18  - -  
Madagascar  5.43 5.62 31.02  68.98  53.79  46.21   
Malawi  1.29 2.17 - - - -  
Niger  2.82 5.87 18.03  81.97  - -  
Nigeria 10.13  14.01  - - - -  
Sierra Leone  - - - - - -  
Zambia  3.50 4.75 - - - -  
 
Table 10. Tertiary education indicators (continued)32 
Country/Indicator  Engineering, 
manufactu ring and  
construction attainment , 
% Natural sciences ., 
mathematics and 
statistics  
attainment , % Vocational training 
attainment , % 
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Cameroon  25.19  74.81  36.26  63.74  5.21 9.11 
DRC 9.80 90.20  32.61  67.39  - - 
Lesotho  18.44  81.56  45.16  54.84  1.01 0.57 
Madagascar  - - - - 0.51 0.95 
Malawi  - - - - - - 
Niger  7.45 92.55  20.68  79.32  0.92 1.00 
Nigeria - - - - - - 
Sierra Leone  - - - - - - 
Zambia  - - - - - - 
 
Out of the few women who do enrol in tertiary education in Sub -Saharan Africa, most opt for traditionally more 
“female” fields, such as arts and humanities or business, administration and law. According to the data collected 
in the Global Gender Gap Report  2022 and presented in Tables 9 and 10, all STEM specialties, as well as 
engineering, manufacturing, construction, natural sciences, mathematics and statistics have a significantly lower 
female enrolment rate compared to the male one.  
Gender stereotypes and societal views on traditional gender roles in Sub -Saharan Africa have been shown to 
play a role in such distribution of enrolment between men and women. A 2019 IFC report, for example, found  
women who enrol led in technical or engineering program mes were viewed unfavourably.33  
All of the above contribute to the  disadvantaged position of women when considering employment in the 
energy sector . Women’s l ow literacy rate s and general  lack of education plus the low STEM enrolment rates of 
 
32 WEF, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . 
33 International Finance Corporation (IFC), 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -
Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers and Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
Page 145


---
*Page 146*
---

13 Gender Assessment  those few women who do sign up for  tertiary program mes, means  fewer  women than men have  sufficient 
qualifications for entering energy workforce in any capacity, but especially in technical roles.  
 
3.4 Economic opportunities  
3.4.1 Employment  
In most REPP 2 target countries , working -aged women are less likely than men to engage in the labour market, 
either by working or actively looking for work, as presented in Table 11. Female unemployment i s also generally 
higher than male unemployment , and has increased compared to 2014 indicators, likely as one of the negative 
consequences of the COVID -19 pandemic.  
Table 11. Employment indicators  
Country/Indicator  Labour f orce participation rate  
among  15+, % Unemployment,  
%34 
202135 201336 2021  2014  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
World  46.2 71.7 50.3 76.7 6.4 6.1 5.8 5.5 
Sub-Saharan Africa  62.1 72.3 65.4 76.6 8.0 7.4 6.3 5.4 
         
Cameroon  70.2 80.7 63.8 76.8 4.5 3.3 4.1 3.1 
DRC 61.2 69.1 70.7 73.2 4.7 6.1 3.6 5.2 
Lesotho  56.1 71.3 59.0 73.5 24.8 24.5 26.2 22.6 
Madagascar  81.5 87.6 86.6 90.5 2.7 2.5 1.4 1.4 
Malawi  71.6 80.0 84.6 81.5 8.9 5.2 7.1 4.8 
Niger  61.7 84.3 40.0 89.7 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.6 
Nigeria 47.9 59.6 48.2 63.7 8.8 10.6 5.4 3.9 
Sierra Leone  56.1 55.9 65.7 69.0 4.7 6.0 3.8 5.5 
Zambia  69.2 77.8 73.1 85.6 13.8 12.3 9.9 8.9 
 
At the same time, the female labour force participation rate in REPP 2 target countries remains significantly 
higher than the world average of 46.2% . with the gap sometimes exceeding 30 % points, such as in Madagascar 
where the rate is  81.5%. This corresponds to the overall trend for Sub -Saharan Africa and highlights the 
important role that women play in contributing toward s household income. In many cases, however, as 
evidenced by statistical data presented in Tables 12 and 13, women’s employment is characterised by high 
vulnerability, increased informality and lower job status compared to men.  
Women  tend to be engaged as contributing family workers or through informal arrangements. The share of 
informal employment in total employment in REPP 2 target countries is high and for women it is recorded to be 
higher than for men, with 89.7% of female workers employed through informal arrangements as compared to 
 
34 World Bank, 2022. Unemployment, female (% of female labour force) (modeled ILO estimate). World Bank, 2022.  
Unemployment, male (% of male labour force) (modeled ILO estimate) . 
35 UNDP, 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022. 
36 UNDP, 2015. Human Development Report 2015 . 
Page 146


---
*Page 147*
---

14 Gender Assessment  82.7% of male workers.37 At the same time , available country -level data presented in Table 12 indicates that in 
Malawi and Sierra Leone a slightly bigger share of men are informally employed compared to women. 
Nevertheless, the International Labour Organisation  (ILO) argues that women in the informal economy are still 
more disadvantaged than men, as they more often find themselves in the most vulnerable situations, for 
instance as domestic workers, home -based workers or contributing family workers, than their male 
counterparts.38 For instance, in some REPP 2 target countries the gender gap in being engaged as a family 
worker amounts to double the percentage points for women as compared to those for men (e.g. , in DRC , 
26.2% of female workers contributed to the household income as family workers in 2019 compared to 5.3% of men engaged in the same type of employment). It is recorded that such distribution of labour is particularly strong in rural area, where women often work on the family’s plot and contribute to the production of both cash 
crops and subsistence farming.
39 
The burden of household responsibilities that fall overwhelmingly on women makes them more likely to jeopardi se their jobs and careers.
40  
Table 12. Employment indicators (continued)  
Country/Indicator  Vulnerable 
employment41 - % 
female/male 
employment, 201942 Contributing 
family workers  
- % 
female/male 
employment, 
201943 Share of informal 
employment  - % 
of total 
female/male 
employment44 
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
World  44 43 15.5 5.7 - - 
Sub-Saharan Africa  80 67 25.0 10.6 - - 
       
Cameroon  81 63 15.1 6.3 95.2 86.6 
DRC 88 67 26.2 5.3 97.2 86.6 
Lesotho  56 40 6.9 3.2 - - 
Madagascar  87 80 52.1 18.8 95.2 91.9 
Malawi  68 54 7.4 4.3 82.4 83.7 
Niger  98 92 46.9 24.1 95.9 87.4 
Nigeria 85 75 7.1 3.1 95.1 90.8 
Sierra Leone  93 82 8.5 6.7 92.1 92.9 
Zambia  82 65 35.7 9.4 93.6 81.6 
 
 
37 International Labour Organisation (ILO), 2018. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. 
Third Edition . 
38 ILO, 2018. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. Third Edition . 
39 OECD, 2021. SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa, Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
40 OECD, 2021. SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa, Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
41 Vulnerable employment is contributing family workers and own -account workers as a % of total employment.  
42 World Bank, 2022. Vulnerable employment, female (% of female employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World 
Bank, 2022. Vulnerable employment, male (% of male employment) (modeled ILO estimate).  
43 World Bank, 2022. Contributing family workers, female (% of female employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World 
Bank, 2022. Contributing family workers, male (% of male employment) (modeled ILO estimate) . 
44 ILO, 2018. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. Third Edition . 
Page 147


---
*Page 148*
---

15 Gender Assessment  Women are also more likely to be employed in low -income jobs, especially in the agricultural sector. Based on 
ILO estimates , the agricultural sector dominates female employment in REPP 2 target countries. In more than 
half of the countries, the sector accounts for more than 50% of total female employment, reaching as much as 
82% in Malawi. Nigeria is  the only REPP 2 target countr y where distribution of labour between men and 
women is following general world trends, as presented in Table 13.  
There is evidence to suggest that women earn less than men due in part to the high rate of informal 
employment and the dominance of women in the agricultural sector.45 In addition, work in industry and services 
sectors is likely to require a degree of literacy and education that women in Africa and REPP 2 target countries 
are less likely to have access to, as evidenced by the assessment of female educational achievements in the previous section.  
Table 13. Employment indicators (continued)  
Country/  
Indicator  Employment by sector, 2019  
(% of female/male employment)46 Time spent on unpaid 
domestic chores  and 
care work,  female to 
male ratio, 202147 Agriculture  Industry  Services  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
World  25 28 16 27 59 45 - 
Sub-Saharan 
Africa  53 53 8 13 40 34 - 
        
Cameroon  48 40 11 17 41 43 2.87 
DRC 72 57 3 16 25 27 - 
Lesotho  40 48 12 14 48 38 2.52 
Madagascar  60 68 9 9 31 23 4.85 
Malawi  82 71 3 8 15 21 6.94 
Niger  69 75 9 5 21 20 - 
Nigeria 24 44 13 11 64 44 1.51 
Sierra Leone  51 58 2 12 47 30 2.99 
Zambia  55 45 4 16 41 39 - 
 
3.4.2 Access to land  
Women’s ability to participate in a labour market, especially as entrepreneurs or own -account workers, as well 
as their ability to access financial services largely depends on ownership of assets, and real estate in particular.  
Asset ownership has a multidimensional impact on the life and economic empowerment of women. The ability 
to administer assets and use them for productive gain purposes, the ability to use the assets as collateral for 
credit or as a resource base for starting a business by enhancing liquidity through rental or sale, independence 
 
45 OECD, 2021. SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa, Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
46 World Bank, 2022. Employment in agriculture, female (% of female employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World 
Bank, 2022. Employment in agriculture, male (% of male employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World Bank, 2022. 
Employment in industry, female (% of female employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World Bank, 2022. Employment 
in industry, male (% of male employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World Bank, 2022. Employment in services, 
female (% of female employment) (modeled ILO estimate). World Bank, 2022. Employment in services, male (% of 
male employment) (modeled ILO estimate).   
47 WEF, 2021. Global Gender Gap Report 2021 . 
Page 148


---
*Page 149*
---

16 Gender Assessment  from male family members and having confidence in the ability to make a living are all important prerequisites 
for women’s economic empowerments.  
Assets ownership in Africa and involves the issue of women’s legal ability to own real estate. As described in 
Section 3.6 below, three of REPP 2 target countries  (Cameroon, DRC and Niger) significantly limits women’s 
rights to own immovable property and grants a husband all administrative rights over assets during marriage.  
In practice, available statistical data, presented in Tables 14 and 15, shows that there is a significant 
disproportion in the amount of land owned and/or effectively managed by men and women in REPP 2 target 
countries. In particular, women do not have a substantial share in agricultural holding s, which amounts to 
making major decisions regarding resource use and exercises management control over the agricultural holding, not necessarily due to ownership rights. In addition, even though distribution of agri cultural landownership by 
gender in certain countries is more favourable for women (e.g. , 57.3% of landowners in Malawi were recorded 
to be women), the area of land actually owned solely by women and the value of this land is statistically smaller than the area and value of land owned solely by male landowners, as presented in Table 15.  
In addition, even in the countries where women are legally  granted equal rights to own and administer the 
property, matters related to real estate and family are in some of the host countries governed by customary law, which operates in parallel to statutory law and often disadvantages women.  
Table 14. Land ownership rights48 
Country/Indicator  Distribution of 
agricultural holders by 
gender  (%) Distribution of agricultural 
landowners (joint or sole 
ownership) by gender  (%)  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
DRC 8.9 91.1 - - 
Lesotho  30.8 69.2 - - 
Madagascar  15.3 84.7 - - 
Malawi  32.1 67.9 57.3 42.7 
Niger  - - 39.5 60.5 
Nigeria 10.0 90.0 15.8 84.2 
Zambia  19.2 80.8 - - 
Table 15. Land ownership rights (continued)49 
Country/Indicator  Distribution of land area, 
% of total agricultural 
land area  Distribution of land value, 
% of total agricultural land 
area  
Female  Male  Joint  Female  Male  Joint  
Malawi  40 42 18 39 39 23 
Niger  9 62 29 5 59 36 
Nigeria 4 87 9 10 78 11 
 
3.4.3 Financial inclusion  
Despite  an overall increase in account ownership and access to formal financial services, vulnerable groups such 
as women, poor people and less educated adults continue to make up the majority of people excluded from the 
 
48 Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), 2022. Gender and Land Rights Database . 
49 FAO, 2022. Gender and Land Rights Database . 
Page 149


---
*Page 150*
---

17 Gender Assessment  formal financial sector. Women are often excluded from formal banking services because they lack official forms 
of identification, do not own a mobile phone or other form of technology  that enables mobile banking , and have 
lower financial capability.50 In fact, nearly 60 % of unbanked adults in Sub -Saharan Africa who took part in a 
2022 survey said they did not have enough money to open an account in a financial institution. The other 
reasons for not having a mobile money account were the lack of a mobile phone and the lack of necessary 
documentation. There barriers are especially critical for women, who have lower economic security, are less 
likely to be able  to obtain a mobile phone or experience a heavier documentation burden compared to men. In 
addition, many REPP 2 target countries lack sufficient legal protection for women willing to enter formal 
financial services sector , as described in Section 3.6 . 
This gender gap is particularly evident from the statistics, which indicate  that the gap in account ownership as 
being between 5 to 20 perce ntage points for half of REPP 2 target countries, as well as generally decreased 
instances of women’s borrowing from formal financial institutions and increased reliance on savings club s, (see 
Table 16 ). 
Table 16. Access to financial services51 
Country 
/ 
Indicator  Bank account ownership 
(%) Source of borrowed money (%)  
Formal financial 
institution or 
using mobile 
money account  Family or 
friends  Savings club  
Female  Male  Urban  Rural  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Cameroon  49.25  54.15  60.91  41.33  8.10 15.02  40.36  46.73  15.38  14.41  
DRC - - - - - - - - - - 
Lesotho  - - - - - - - - - - 
Madagascar  - - - - - - - - - - 
Malawi  38.14  47.75  51.32  38.74  10.10  10.00  20.73  30.21  23.47  10.89  
Niger  - - - - - - - - - - 
Nigeria  34.96  55.45  53.99  33.92  6.32 7.74 41.83  47.53  4.55 4.47 
Sierra 
Leone  24.76  33.35  38.71  22.40  5.93 5.29 37.25  40.96  14.14  14.53  
Zambia  44.98  52.48  62.77  36.43  11.52  18.43  38.20  48.54  11.12  7.94 
 
Women’s limited  access to banking services reduces their economic independence from male family members, 
as well as their ability to formally save money and administer savings at their own discretion.  This results in 
additional barriers for women who want to engage in entrepreneurship, vocational training or any other activity 
that would enhance their financial standing, unless fully supported by the husband.  
 
  
 
50 World Bank, 2022. The Global Findex Database 2021. Financial Inclusion, Digital Payments, and Resilience in the 
Age of COVID -2019. 
51 World Bank, 2021. The Global Findex Database 2021 . 
Page 150


---
*Page 151*
---

18 Gender Assessment  3.5 Participation in decision -making and leadership  
Table 17. Indicators of female participation in leadership  
Country / 
Indicator  Share of seats 
held by women 
in parliaments, 
%52 Share of seats 
held by 
women in local 
government  
from  2017 -
2019 , %53 Women in 
ministerial 
positions  in 
2022 , %54 Firms with 
female 
participation 
in 
ownership, 
%55 Firms with 
female top 
managers  
in 
2021 , %56 2021  2014  
World  26 22 - - 33.1 (2020)  - 
Sub-Saharan 
Africa  26 22 - - 28.0 (2020)  - 
Lesotho  23 27 39.0 22.2 39.1 (2016)  36.20  
Cameroon  34 31 25.3 14.9 39.7 (2016)  22.90  
DRC 13 11 - 17.8 15.1 (2013)  10.80  
Madagascar  18 21 - 34.8 41.6 (2013)  28.20  
Malawi  23 17 14.6 17.4 28.1 (2014)  14.20  
Niger  26 13 15.8 15.8 14.5 (2017)  10.60  
Nigeria 4 7 9.8 10.3 16.2 (2014)  13.90  
Sierra Leone  12 12 18.2 13.8 18.8 (2017)  15.90  
Zambia  15 11 7.1 32.26  41.5 (2019)  12.90  
 
3.6 Legal status of women and gender stereotypes  
All REPP 2 target countries have made significant improvements in promoting gender equality in law. (Based on 
the World Bank Group study, DRC isin the world’s top 10 most improved economies since 1970 in relation to 
gender equality in law. )57 Furthermore, the  statutory law does not differentiate between genders in granting 
individual rights to a person in all of REPP 2’s target  countries.  
Nevertheless, all target countries are characteri sed by a dual legal system, which allows for customary law to 
largely govern societal life  - especially with regard to family and marital matters as well as property and 
economic inclusion  - rendering statutory provisions on gender equality inapplicable and unenforceable.  
Women are disadvantaged in a vast number of areas due to their persistent de-valuation by local customs and 
gender stereotypes, the effects of customary law , and also gaps in statutory law. Common restrictions that 
prevent economic development and empowerment of women in REPP 2 target countries are further described in 
Table 18 below.  
 
52 World Bank, 2022. Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments . 
53 UNDP, 2020. Human Development Report 2020 . 
54 WEF, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022 . 
55 World Bank, 2022. Firms with female participation in ownership (% of firms) . 
56 WEF, 2021. Global Gender Gap Report 2021 . 
57 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Regional Profile. Eastern and Southern Africa . 
Page 151


---
*Page 152*
---

19 Gender Assessment  Table 18. Legal restrictions for women in REPP 2 target countries  
Restriction  Description  
Right to movement and 
mobility  Cameroon, Malawi, Niger and Nigeria do not grant women the same freedom of 
movement as is afforded to men.58 In Cameroon, although both genders are 
recogni sed as equals by the Constitution, the Civil Code designates the husband 
as the head of the household, who has the final decision on the family’s domicile, contradicting the woman’s constitutional rights to freedom of movement and residence within the border.
59 
In addition, married women cannot obtain a passport in the same way as men in 
Cameroon, Madagascar, Malawi and Nigeria.60 In Malawi and Madagascar, they 
are required to submit a marriage certificate with their husband’s name 
included.61 
Formal employment 
sector  Under Cameroon’s  Labour Code both men and women have equal rights to 
work. At the same time, the Family Code allows the husband to challenge his 
wife’s rights to work if it is in the interest s of the marriage and the children.62 
In Nigeria, statutory law does not contain a specific prohibition of gender -based 
discrimination in the workplace.63 
Remuneration and 
employment in 
industry  Among REPP 2 target countries, only Malawi and Niger have legislation mandating equal remuneration for work of equal value.
64 
Cameroon, DRC, Madagascar and Niger impose restrictions on women’s ability to 
work in a job deemed dangerous, while Cameroon, Madagascar, Nigeria, Sierra 
Leone and Lesotho restrict women’s right to work in industrial jobs.65 
Head of household  In Cameroon66, DRC67, Madagascar68 and Niger69, under both statutory and  
customary law  a woman can become a head of a household only under special 
circumstances, thus depriving women of rights and opportunities which head of 
a household status grants.  
 
58 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022.  Malawi . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Niger . World Bank, 2022. Women, 
Business and the Law 2022. Nigeria . 
59 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Cameroon . 
60 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022.  Malawi . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Madagascar . World Bank, 2022. Women, 
Business and the Law 2022. Nigeria . 
61 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Malawi . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and 
Gender Index. Country Profile  Madagascar . 
62 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index. Country Profile. Cameroon . 
63 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Nigeria . World Bank, 2021. Women, Business and the Law 
2021. Economy Summary. Nigeria . 
64 Based on country data in the World Bank Group’s Women, Business and the Law 2022 study.  
65 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022. DRC. World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Madagascar . World Bank, 2022. Women, 
Business and the Law 2022. Niger. World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Nigeria . World Bank, 
2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Sierra Leone . 
66 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index. Country Profile. Cameroon . 
67 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. DRC . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
Country Profile. DRC . 
68 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Madagascar . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index. Country Profile. Madagascar . 
69 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Niger . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
Country Profile. Niger . 
Page 152


---
*Page 153*
---

20 Gender Assessment  Restriction  Description  
Entrepreneurship and 
access to financial 
services  Gender -based discrimination with regards to access to credit is not prohibited in 
Cameroon, Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, and  Lesotho.70 
In addition, women typically lack knowledge of legislation governing credit 
relationships, have limited access to financial resources and have neither credit 
history nor banking skills to attempt to access formal credit on their own.  
Opening a bank account for women in Cameroon and Niger is also more 
complicated for women than it is for men, as women are required to obtain their 
husband’s permission.71 
Assets A number of restrictions on property ownership by women is in place in REPP 2 
target countries. Most of them pertain to cultural norms and customary law, 
which forbid women to own and/or inherit property, especially land. Also, in 
Cameroon, Madagascar and Niger even the statutory law recogni ses a husband’s 
ultimate decision -making power with regard to administering assets during 
marriage .72 
Examples of the type of restrictions women face include:  
In Cameroon, both civil and customary legal regimes do not allow married 
women to own or manage land and assets. Under civil law, marital property is 
under the authority of the husband who may manage and make decisions 
without the consent of his spouse. Under customary law, only men have the 
right to own the land ; women are often regarded as the property of the husband 
and are thus excluded from land ownership.73 
In DRC, no distinction is made in the provision of land rights between women 
and men  under statutory law . Yet under customary law, traditional chiefs, who 
are largely men, hold the authority on land rights guided by patrilineal lineages. 
By these principles, inherited land is almost always given to sons rather than 
daughters and women’s access to land becomes dependent on their husband. 
Also, given deeply embedd ed stereotypes surrounding the roles of women and 
men, a married couple’s property is often regis tered in the husband’s name, and 
it is more likely to see joint land titling among unrelated men than husband and 
wife.74 
 In Zambia, where c ustomary land accounts for the majority of land (96%)  and 
governed by traditional authorities, only men have the right to own and 
power to dispose of customary land, while wife or children may only have 
access to it.75 
 
According to the 2019 Social Inclusion and Gender Index ’s country profiles, REPP2 target countries  for which 
data is available have medium (DRC, Lesotho) to very high gender -based discrimination in social institutions,  
 
70 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022. Malawi . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Madagascar . World Bank, 2022. Women, 
Business and the Law 2022. Niger. World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022.  Nigeria . World Bank, 
2022. World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Lesotho . 
71 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022. Niger. World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Regional Profile. Western and Central 
Africa . 
72 World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Cameroon . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the 
Law 2022. Madagascar . World Bank, 2022. Women, Business and the Law 2022. Niger.  
73 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Cameroon . 
74 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. DRC.  
75 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Zambia . 
Page 153


---
*Page 154*
---

21 Gender Assessment  which beyond the structural and legal barriers also include norms, attitudes, stereotypes and fundamental 
customs and traditions restricting women’s independence and economic empowerment.76 
SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa77 summari ses the role played by these discriminatory social institutions in 
women’s access to employment and other economic opportunities as follows:  
• Discriminatory gender roles within the household constrain women’s access to the 
labour market.  In addition to an increased burden on women in the form of unpaid domestic and care 
work, the proportion of people  declaring that it is not acceptable for a woman in their family to do any 
paid work outside of the home is significant, ranging from 15% in Nigeria to 28% in Niger. Earning 
money and providing for the family is considered an integral part of masculine identity, and not seen as 
favourable in women.  
• Perception of women’s abilities and discriminatory educational norms tend to confine 
women to low -status jobs in specific sectors of the economy.  In Africa, men tend to be 
overrepresented in “manly” sectors such as construction, mining and quarrying or transport, storage and 
communication. Women are predominant in sectors such as accommodation, wholesale and retail trade or 
household services. This is also evident from the quantitative data analysed in Section 3.4 above and 
takes its origins from the choice  of educational path and vocational trainings. The implications for 
economic empowerment are far -reaching, as women in Africa seem to be largely drawn to sectors that 
are less profitable or where wages are lower simply because they are considered “female” sectors.  
• Men’s traditional status and roles, household decision- making practices and 
discriminatory inheritance practices limit women’s ownership of agricultural land and 
constrain their economic independence. Customs and traditions related to land ownership are 
deeply rooted in African societies and often in practice supersede formal civil or common law in REPP 2 
target countries.  
• Various discriminatory social norms and biases related to access to markets, finance, training and networks hamper women’s entrepreneurship in Africa. 
These norms and biases  
result in limited attempts by women to even enter the credit market due to self -perceived lack of 
creditworthiness, as well as in actual constraint s over access to credit due to lack of sufficient economic 
resources , lower income and high informality rates in employment.  
 
4 Gender inclusivity in the 
energy sector  
 
Energy, especially electricity, is an invaluable basic commodity that the quality of people’s livelihoods is 
indispensably dependent on. From the gender perspective, the energy sector can be viewed as an important 
provider of the resource base necessary for the everyday life and economic activity of either the household as 
 
76 OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Cameroon . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and 
Gender Index. Country Profile. DRC. OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Malawi . OECD, 
2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Madagascar . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index. Country Profile. Niger . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Nigeria .. OECD, 2019. 
Social Institutions and Gender Index. Country Profile. Sierra Leone . OECD, 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
Country Profile. Lesotho . 
77 OECD, 2021. SIGI 2021 Regional Report for Africa, Social Institutions and Gender Index. 
Page 154


---
*Page 155*
---

22 Gender Assessment  one social unit or of separate household members . It can also be seen as a field of economic activity with 
potential opportunities for women’s empowerment through employment and entrepreneur ship. 
 
4.1 Women as employees 
The energy sector is dominated by men . Women are underrepresented  in the sector. It is also a relatively small 
sector in Sub -Saharan Africa and  therefore  not a big employer on the country - and region -wide scale  compared 
with the world’s most developed countries . The African Development Bank has estimated that in 2021 , 
electricity, gas  and water activities account ed for an estimated 1.8 % of GDP in Sub -Saharan Africa.78 Total 
employment in the sector constitutes a small percentage  of the total employment in the  target  countries, 
ranging from 0.6% of Malawi’s total workforce to 4.6% of Lesotho ’s, as presented in  Table 19. The distribution 
of the already limited number of jobs on offer in the sector  by gender  shows significant disparities, with female 
employment generally not exceeding one third of total sector employment and dropping to one tenth of the 
sector  in the case of Lesotho.  
Table 19. Employment in the energy sector79 
Country/Indicator  Employment in mining and quarrying, 
and electricity , gas and water supply 
(aggregated) - 000’s  Total 
employment 
in the sector  
– 000’s  Total country 
workforce  – 
000’s  
Urban  Rural  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
Cameroon (2014)  5.7 32.2 12.8 30.4 81.1 8,434.8  
DRC (2012)  13.4 152.3  64.1 452.1  681.9  27,405.3  
Lesotho (2019)  2 12.9 0.8 14.2 29.9 645.4  
Madagascar (2015)  - 13.9 40.7 59.4 114 11,051.8  
Malawi (2013)  4.3 8.1 6.5 17.9 36.8 6,154.2  
Niger (2017)  - 12 8 15.1 35.1 2,125.7  
Nigeria (2019)  78.7 222.2  80.2 211.2  592.3  65,512.2  
Sierra Leone (2018)  8 29.7 6.2 28.7 72.6 2,570  
Zambia (2020)  9.4 57 1.2 10.7 78.4 9905.1  
 
Despite the currently insignificant value added by the energy sector to the GDP of African countries, the 
renewable energy subsector has been booming. Between  2007- 2019, African countries were attracting 65% of 
the total off-grid renewable energy investment.80 The positive effects of such investment included not only an 
increase in electrification levels for rural and remote communities, but also enhanced opportunities for the 
economic empowerment of women.  
While regional and country -level gender -disaggregated data for the energy sector remains scarce, especially in 
relation to the renewable energy subsector, IRENA reports that at the global level the share of women 
employed in the renewable energy sector (32%) is higher than in the oil and gas industry (22%).81 Renewable 
energy projects and companies are therefore more likely to attract women professionals than traditional energy 
 
78 African Development Bank (AfDB), UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa . 
79 ILOSTAT, 2022. Database.  
80 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), 2020. Global Landscape of Renewable Energy Finance 2020 . 
81 AfDB, UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa . IRENA, 2020. Global Landscape of Renewable Energy 
Finance 2020. 
Page 155


---
*Page 156*
---

23 Gender Assessment  companies. The study conducted by the UN Women and AfDB on women ’s employment opportunities in the 
“green ” economy argues that the main reason for this is the multidimensionality of renewable energy (when 
compared with conventional energy production), which presents more employment opportunities for women in 
non-STEM positions, such as finance, law, environmental sciences, economics, etc.82 Moreover, a range of 
support services, such as consulting, research and development, and the creation of permits, regulations and 
policies, are projected to emerge along with the sector’s development.83 This allows for an easier increase in 
female employment and economic independence without challenging the skills -related gender stereotypes that 
persist in REPP 2 target countries.  
 
4.1.1 Female employment profile in renewable energy companies  
The share of female employees across Sub -Saharan Africa is higher in non- technical departments, such as 
administration (38%), communications (34%), finance (30%) and sales (31%). At the same time, technical STEM and non -STEM departments only have  a 13% and 16% share of female employees respectively , 
according to IFC research .
84 
Women are also more likely to be employed in renewable energy companies that provide solutions in small -
scale, decentralis ed energy systems (37% of full -time employees) compared to large- scale, on -grid, centrali sed 
energy systems (22% of full -time employees).85  
When looking at executive positions, women on average ma ke up 30% of chief executive officers (CEOs), 16 % 
of vice presidents and directors, and 26 % of middle - and lower -level managers  in renewable energy companies 
in Sub -Saharan Africa . Comparing CEOs across sectors, McKinsey found that 6 % of African CEOs were 
women,86 while a UN study found that 3.5% of women from the leading publicly traded companies in G -20 
countries were women.87 The researchers also found that there were more women on the boards of renewable 
energy companies in Africa (27% ) than the G -20 country average (20 %) and the African average (18 %). By 
comparison, women comprised only 6% of the executive -level employees and 21% of board members in energy 
utilities in Sub -Saharan Africa in 2019.88 
 
4.1.2 Employment barriers for women in renewable energy industry  
Barriers to women’s participation in the renewable energy sector exist both at the recruitment stage and at career progression. At the same time, there is a notable difference in the perception of these barriers by men 
and women  too. According to a study conducted  among managers and employees of renewable energy 
companies in Sub -Saharan Africa, only 28% of men - compared to 40% of women  - believed that women faced 
more barriers than men when seeking to enter the sector. The gap increased further to 30% when  considering  
the perceived barriers to advancing women’s careers in the sector, with 45% of interviewed women and only 
 
82 AfDB, UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa . 
83 AfDB, UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa . 
84 IFC, 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers 
and Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
85 IFC, 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers 
and Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
86 McKinsey Global Institute, 2019. The power of parity. Advancing women’s equality in Africa . 
87 IFC, 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers 
and Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
88 International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 2019. Energizing Equality: Unlocking the potential of 
women’s participation in sub -Saharan African energy utilities.  
Page 156


---
*Page 157*
---

24 Gender Assessment  15% of interviewed men feeling that women faced more barriers to their career advancement.89 Table 20 
presents main barriers facing women and men in the renewable energy workforce.  
According to IFC research in 2019, men were less likely than women to consider societal and cultural gender 
norms as a barrier. Men were also less likely to believe  women’s household and family responsibilities and 
existing gender discrimination had negative effects and posed additional obstacles for women to advance their 
careers in renewable energy compared to men. In contrast, more men than women identified lack o f skills, 
training opportunities and women’s self -perception as the main reasons for women being less likely to receive 
promotion.  
Table 20. Perception of the barriers facing women in the renewable energy sector90 
 Women  (%) Men (%) 
Barriers to entering  
Concerns about societal and/or cultural 
gender norms  68 38 
Lack of gender diversity targets in 
companies  53 15 
Prevalent male -biased hiring practices  53 15 
Women’s self -perception  42 38 
Lack of awareness of opportunities in 
renewable energy  32 54 
Lack of STEM education or skills  26 54 
Barriers to advancing  
Women’s burden balancing work and 
family  48 29 
Discrimination on the basis of gender, 
age, disability, sexual identity, race, etc.  48 14 
Lack of mentoring opportunities  43 57 
Women’s self -perception  38 71 
Lack of training opportunities  29 57 
Lack of the required skills and  
qualifications  14 43 
 
The barriers vary from country to country and each renewable energy subsector. For example , women’s 
participation in the wind energy sector is just 21% globally and even less in Africa at 8%.91 Despite this and the 
fact that the majority of jobs in the sector are of a technical nature (construction and manufacturing), a n IRENA 
survey of the sector involving  72 countries found that skills were not a barrier for women’s entry and retention 
in the wind industry; instead it was  social norms and perceptions, followed by a lack of suitable corporate 
policies, including work -life balance, care solutions, etc.  that were the barriers.92  
A USAID -funded study provides another example,  having in 2020 identif ied significant gaps in female 
representation in solar home system (SHS) market research, production and most field positions (i.e. , 
 
89 IFC, 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers 
and Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
90 IFC, 2019. Women’s participation in the renewable energy workforce in Sub -Saharan Africa. Identifying Barriers and 
Opportunities for Women as Leaders and Employees . 
91 AfDB, UN Women, 2021. Green Jobs for Women in Africa . 
92 IRENA, 2020. Wind energy: A gender perspective . 
Page 157


---
*Page 158*
---

25 Gender Assessment  technicians who provide installation and after -sales support).93 And a 2021 study  of training institutions in 
Nigeria found evidence that the gender gap started before women and men join ed the workforce, referencing 
the lack of gender diversity among students.94 
Based on the literature review, the following have been  identified as the  key barriers for women’s employment 
and progression  in general , including in Sub-Saharan Africa’s  renewable energy sector : 
• Workplace policies and practices , including : 
– The absence of effective recruitment and promotion policies with specific gender diversity targets, 
which would exclude gender biases ;  
– The lack of access to field work, which impedes women’s career advancement by limiting their 
opportunities to  increase their understanding of renewable energy value chain and technical 
matters ; 
– Gender pay gap; 
– Sexual harassment and violence in the workplace;  and  
– The lack of access to mentoring and training opportunities . 
• Social norms and gender stereotypes , which affect girls and boys from an early age, often 
impeding their opportunities for future employment in any sector, not just  renewable energy. Such norms 
and stereotypes relate to traditional gender roles in society and at the household level and are linked to 
low school and university enrolment rates, the widespread misconception of women not being suited for 
technical roles, the unfavourable treatment of female employment , and the increased burden of unpaid 
household duties and responsibilities.  
• Legal barriers , which relate to restrictions of women ’s involvement in the work force. Such restrictions 
exist through general limitations such as the right of a husband to make decisions on his wife ’s 
employment, which is afforded to men in Cameroon, or indirectly through lack of prohibition of gender -
based discrimination in employment, as is the case of Nigeria. Labour legislation in a selection of 
countries in Africa, including REPP 2 target countries, such as Cameroon, DRC, Madagascar, Nigeria, 
Sierra Leone and Lesotho, also contains more specific restrictions on women ’s employment in dangerous 
and industrial jobs, which constitute core business functions in the renewable energy sector. It is argued that denial of access for women to opportunities in these jobs impedes their ability to reach leadership positions.  
 
4.2 Women as energy users  
Interconnections between the empowerment of women and the energy sector exist not only in employment 
opportunities afforded to women in the sector, but also in electricity access and its impact on the everyday life of women.  
It is widely recogni sed that where physical energy access is translated into actual use of energy services, it can 
help reduce women’s poverty by: (i) saving time (by substituting for manual labour) and enhancing convenience and comfort; (ii) reducing the use of polluting ener gy forms such as wood fuel  and kerosene; (iii) creating 
opportunities for new income generation options  and for enhancing existing ones; (iv) building social capital in 
education and health, a precondition for women’s empowerment; and (v) providing access to information and 
entertainment.  
 
93 Deloitte, 2020. Nigeria Power Sector Program. Gender Mainstreaming in the Solar Home System Value Chain . 
94 Deloitte, 2021. Power Africa. Nigeria Power Sector Program. Social Inclusion and Diversity in Nigeria’s Power Sector. 
Page 158


---
*Page 159*
---

26 Gender Assessment  However, in Africa access to electricity is limited due to the absence of sufficient energy infrastructure, and 
even where such infrastructure is physically available the stability of the grid is often vulnerable. Furthermore,  
marginalised groups, including women and poor  people , are often hindered in their use of modern clean energy 
by lack of finance, appliances, information, and training or education.95  
According to a World Bank report, Sub- Saharan Africa remained the world’s least electrified region in 2020 and 
accounted for 77% of the global population lacking access to electricity. More than one  third of REPP 2 target 
countries are among the top 20 countries with the largest deficit in energy access: Nigeria (92 million people), 
DRC (72 million), Niger (20 million) and Madagascar (18 million), with Nigeria and DRC being world leaders in 
the total number of unserved people.  
While availability of country -level gender -disaggregated data on electricity access in Sub -Saharan Africa is 
limited and it is difficult to assess the extent to which lack of electricity access can be attributed to women in male-headed households ,
 studies have nonetheless s hown that women -owned households and enterprises find 
it harder to access modern energy. 96  The reasons for existing disparities in access can be attributed to the 
traditional distribution of gender roles , as well as differences in access to finance. Funding schemes for  
electricity  connections that take gender into account have been known to significantly increase overall 
connection rates.97 
Country -level studies have been performed for two REPP 2 target countries  – Nige and Zambia  - yielding  
different results for each. In Niger, female -headed households were less likely to have electricity access, either 
through grid -connection or off -grid solutions, as presented in Table 21. In Zambia, female -headed households 
were more likely to have electricity access through grid connection in both rural and urban areas, while male -
headed households were more likely to utilize off -grid solutions. At the sam e time, more female -headed 
households (93.1%) did not have electricity access at all in Zambian rural areas  compared to male -headed 
households (86.7% ) but were slightly more likely to have electricity access in urban areas than male -headed 
households, as shown in Table 23 below.  
Table 21. Electricity access by gender of the household head in Niger98 
Niger No electricity  (%) Grid access  (%) Off-grid access  (%) 
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Nationwide  84.4 80.2 15.9 15.78  0.7 4.0 
Urban  59.2 49.5 38.2 46.1 2.6 4.4 
Rural 93.0 88.8 7.0 7.3 0 3.9 
Table 2 3. Electricity access by gender of the household head in Zambia99 
Zambia  No electricity (%)  Grid access (%)  Off-grid access (%)  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Nationwide  57.9 57.5 40.7 36.8 1.5 5.7 
Urban  23.7 24.1 75.5 74.5 0.8 1.4 
Rural 93.1 86.7 4.7 3.9 2.1 9.4 
 
 
95 World Bank, 2017. Energy Access and Gender: Getting the Right Balance . 
96 IRENA, 2022. Renewable Energy Market Analysis. Africa and Its Regions. 
97 IRENA, 2022. Renewable Energy Market Analysis. Africa and Its Regions. 
98 World Bank, 2020. Niger. Beyond Connections: Energy Access Diagnostic Report Based on the Multi -Tier 
Framework.  
99 World Bank, 2019. Zambia. Beyond Connections: Energy Access Diagnostic Report Based on the Multi-Tier 
Framework . 
Page 159


---
*Page 160*
---

27 Gender Assessment  The primary  reasons for the lack of electricity connectivity also differed between the countries. In Niger, for 
both female - and male -headed households, the main reason for not being connected to the grid was that the 
grid was too far away or not available (82.4% and 87.4%, respectively), as presented in Table 2 4. This is 
equally an issue for female - and male -headed households in rural areas. However, it is more likely that female -
headed households will be unable to pay for the connection cost compared with their male  counterparts (8.8% 
versus 6.2%). This is especially true in urban areas, where 31.7% of female -headed households reported the 
connection cost as the main issue, compared with 23.6% of male -headed households.100 
In Zambia, both male -headed households and female -headed households identified “grid too far or unavailable” 
as the main reason they were not connected to the grid.  At the same time, as presented in Table 26 below, 
financial burden of interconnection cost was a bigger barrier for female -headed households than for male -
headed  households.  
Table 24. Niger. Barriers to gaining access to the electricity grid in Niger101 
 Grid too 
far Expensive 
connectio
n cost  Complicated 
administrativ
e procedure  Monthly 
fee too 
expensiv
e Renting, 
landlord’
s 
decision  Applied, 
waiting 
for 
connectio
n Other  
Female 82.4 8.8 2.7 1.6 1.5 0.6 2.4 
Male 87.4 6.2 3.7 0.4 1.2 0.6 0.6 
Table 26. Zambia. Barriers to gaining access to the electricity grid in Zambia102 
 Connection 
cost too 
expensive  Grid too 
far Renting, 
landlord’s 
decision  Other  
Female  42.1 48.8 5.2 3.8 
Male 36.7 53.7 6.2 3.4 
 
Regarding  cooking technologies, higher disparities were present in Niger, where female -headed households 
were slightly more likely to use three -stone stoves and less likely to use traditional stoves103 compared to male -
headed households, while there was no gender gap in the use of LPG stoves. In Zambia , male-headed 
households and female -headed households use d similar cooking technologies.  
At the same time, in both countries women aged 15 and older spent considerably longer  cooking or in the 
cooking area (more than two hours per day in Niger  and on average 10.6 hours per week in Zambia) than 
either men, girls, or boys. Women are thus much more likely to be affected by indoor air pollution.  
The above statistics supports aggregated global and regional findings that limited electricity access and the 
reliance on solid fuels for cooking and other household energy -demanding chores – as well as informal 
economic sector activities – has a higher toll on women, contributing to their “time poverty” and health 
issues.104  
 
100 World Bank, 2020. Niger. Beyond Connections: Energy Access Diagnostic Report Based on the Multi -Tier Framework.  
101 World Bank, 2020. Niger. Beyond Connections: Energy Access Diagnostic Report Based on the Multi -Tier Framework.  
102 World Bank, 2019. Zambia. Beyond Connections: Energy Access Diagnostic Report Based on the Multi -Tier 
Framework . 
103 For classification of cookstoves in Niger, a traditional stove is defined as basic wood stoves, charcoal burning 
stoves , and mineral coal stoves fall within this category. The pot sits for the most part on the fuel, has a low 
combustion temperature due to poor insulation, and a lot of cold excess primary air because of too many openings.  
104 UNDP, 2016. Policy Brief. Gender and sustainable energy . 
Page 160


---
*Page 161*
---

28 Gender Assessment  Increasing both genders ’ access to modern energy services has the capacity to (i) help women save time by 
substituting manual labour and reducing workloads, (ii) reduce indoor air pollution and enable other health 
benefits for women and children, (iii) improve education by enabling children to study and women to have 
greater flexibility in the organi sation of their work patterns, (iv) boost income generation, and (v) offer social 
benefits such as increased funding of households’ well -being and the education of children, including girls , as a 
result of the increased income of female members of the household, who reinvest most of their income in their 
families .105 
4.3 Limited funding to women -owned/led 
companies  
Africa has a higher share of female -owned businesses than other regions, yet women entrepreneurs still face 
multiple challenges access ing the  finance and support they need to grow their businesses.106 There is an estimated 
USD 42 billion financing gap for African women entrepreneurs across business value chains.107  In 2021, less than 
1% of funding raised by starts -ups in Africa went to female -only teams, and only 18% to teams that received 
funding were considered gender -diverse.108  
Based on Global Banking Alliance’s review of various government and private sector financing models, there are 
only a few examples of programmes geared specifically to increase access for women owned micro, small and 
medium enterprises . In 2017, only  16-20% of women  in West, Central, East and Southern Africa had access to 
long-term financing from financial institutions.109  
This is further confirmed by research undertaken by the Investment Manager, which suggests that currently there 
are no dedicated funding facilities that would directly target : 1) African women entrepreneurs in the clean energy 
space or 2) businesses that specifically address women’s needs through their business model design.  
 
  
 
105 World Bank, 2017. Energy Access and Gender: Getting the Right Balance .  
106 Global Entrepreneurship  Monitoring, 2019.  Women’s Entrepreneurship Report . 
107 AfDB, 2017. Unleashing women's entrepreneurship through strategic partnerships . 
108 Africa: The Big Deal . 
109 AfDB, 2017. Unleashing women's entrepreneurship through strategic partnerships . 
 
Page 161


---
*Page 162*
---

29 Gender Assessment  5 Gender Action P lan 
 
REPP 2’s investment mandate extends towards some of the most economically and socially vulnerable countries 
in Africa, with the majority (>50%) of the population living below the International Poverty Line in more than half 
of the target countries . The REPP 2 G ender Action Plan (GAP) summarises the actions that need to be implemented  
at the  facility level to ensure gender equality considerations are integrated at the investment level.  
As discussed above, gender gap s exist across key aspects of society  – from economic s and politics to health, 
education and involvement in the energy sector . Women in Sub -Saharan Africa find it hard to access modern 
energy, yet they are often burdened with domestic chores that prevent them from pursuing education or income -
generating activities . Access to energy can help individuals, households and business to complete certain time -
consuming tasks in more efficient manner . Access to electricity may free up time from fuel collection and 
household tasks for longer periods of study time or other productive use of time, decreas ing gender gaps in key 
educational and economic areas.  Also access to energy, through access to lights, information, mobile phones, are 
linked to increase perceived feeling  of safety and security.110  
Furthermore, t here is limited funding available to female -owned or female -led businesses in the region’s  
renewable energy sector . REPP 2 is taking direct action to increase the number of renewable energy companies 
that are aligned with 2X Challenge’s Gender Lens Investing (2X GLI) criteria  by allocating a portion  (minim 30%)  
of the Programme’s funding to these  companies . And since it is imperative to  designing and deliver products and 
services that better serve women’s  needs , REPP 2 also works  with its investees to integrate gender equality 
perspectives into the design, implementation, monitoring and assessment of all of their  renewable energy 
initiatives . 
We believe that funding women, empower s them to be invested and build companies, teams, products and 
markets they see transformative for the generations to come . This is a meaningful step to overcome the gender 
equality gap.  
 
5.1 Actions  
Two main actions have been identified to bridge the gender equality gap:  
 Action 1: Integrate a gender equality perspective into the design, implementation, monitoring and 
assessment of all renewable energy activities financed by REPP 2. This means requesting all investees 
to put in place sub -project level GAPs (Activity 9: Non -financial support to promote gender equity) with actionable 
targets to improve gender equality within their operations and project implementation will positively impact the 
industry and its beneficiaries.  This  involves:  
1. Analysing gender equality in the investee company, country of operation, and targeted sector ;  
2. Establishing an investee -specific GAP by identifying gender performance indicators and gender -
disaggregated targets against an established baseline; and  
3. Integrating the outcomes of (1) and (2) into a monitoring plan.  
 
REPP 2 will provide investee companies with supporting in assessing gender baseline and establishing 
action plan. Such support includes:  
 
110 Supported by an initial project -level data collection conducted in Goma DRC : 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5cc327c55acb9b00019d816a/t/63d16fc81da3f71c853b105a/1674670025093/A
ssessing+the+Peace+effects+of+PRECS_Final_Goma_June+2022_updated.pdf  
Page 162


---
*Page 163*
---

30 Gender Assessment  i. Gender equality toolkit for renewable energy companies - as an example can be provided 
REPP’s current gender toolkit ;  
ii. Gender mainstreaming training provided  in form of webinars and REPP academy (i.e. closed 
training provided to REPP investee only - as an example can be provided previous webinars  
and REPP Academy training (see appendix 2);  
iii. Individual support to investee from the Investment Manager ’s impact team in from of review 
of gender baseline and action plan  
iv. Funding:  growth and development funding (activity 1 and 2) can be used to finance the 
establishment of sub-project GAP  by investee, where relevant.  
 
The REPP 2 investees will form gender action plans at two levels:  
• Corporate  in which the review and action plan focuses on  leadership commitment , support for gender 
equality and women’s  and vulnerable individuals ’ empowerment  and ensuring non-discrimination and equal 
opportunity policies and procedures  are in place to ensure equal recruitment, employment, and procurement. 
Guidance for establishment of the GAP at corporate level will be provided in a REPP 2  gender toolkit.  
• Project  in which the review will focus on gender -specific risks at the project level, ensuring stakeholder 
consultations on the project , its objectives  and design  with women, girls, men, and boys in the project 
area, gender advocates, and women’s civil society organisations (appendix 1 provide list of organisations 
to consider for collaboration in REPP 2 target countries), and relevant local and national authorities, as 
well as assessing the root causes, structural barriers and inequalities that put underrepresente d groups at 
disadvantage. The project level gap will focus , for example,  on inclusive stakeholder engagement, 
ensuring the safety and security of female employees and community members during construction 
activities (where relevant) as well as operation, ensuring effective grievance mechanism , marketing/ 
messaging strategy for female customers. Guidance for establishment of the GAP at corporate level will be provided in a REPP 2 gender toolkit. The chapter 10 of the annex 6 ESMF give guidance to inclusive 
stakeholder engagement. The results of this engagement should be used to formulate project level actions 
in the GAP.  
Growth and development funding (activit ies 1 and 2) do not require  the development of  a project level GAP (or 
ESMS) as this funding is only intended to help the project to prove its feasibility. However, growth and 
development funding (activity 1 and 2) can be used to finance the establishment of GAP (and/or ESMS).  See 
below figure . 
 
Figure 1. Gender sensitivity screening for growth and development funding  
Page 163


---
*Page 164*
---

31 Gender Assessment   
The GAP submitted by investee companies together with the Environmental and Social Management System 
(ESMS) prior investment reaching financial close. Therefore, both ESMS and GAP are conditions precedent prior 
funding for construction funding (activity 4 and 5) and expansion funding (activity 3).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Gender sensitivity screening for construction and expansion funding.  
 
Action 2: Dedicate a target of 30% of all funding towards companies that meet 2X GLI criteria. These 
are companies that:  
• Are founded by a woman or women or are majority -owned by women; and / or  
• Have at least 30% women in senior management; and / or  
• Provide products or services designed to disproportionately benefit women; and / or  
• Have a workforce that is at least 30% women, together with a progressive human resource policy.  
The funding can be  in from of early -stage growth funding for off- grid companies (activity 1), development -stage 
funding for grid -connected projects  (activity 2), finance for expansion of SHS businesses (activity 3), finance for 
construction of mini -grid portfolios (activity 4) or gap funding for construction of grid -connected projects  (activity 
5)  and can be in from of debt, equity or hybrid instruments, subject to the compa ny’s funding needs.  
The above  actions are further defined in Table 25 along with indicators that will be monitored and the expected 
targets. For ex -ante target setting the simple assumption has been made that 30 % 2X GLI aligned funding will 
lead to 30 % of female owned and led companies benefiting, 30 % of jobs being dedicated to women and  30 % 
end beneficiaries at household and business leve l to be women  in line with the 2X GLI Criteria. This is anticipated 
to be a conservative assumption as at household level female to male ratio is typically 50 -50.  
 
In line with REPP2 monitoring plan, gender indictors, actions and results are monitored  and reviewed and where 
relevant this action plan or its underlying actions and targets are updated accordingly.  
Page 164


---
*Page 165*
---

32 Gender Assessment  Table  25. REPP 2 Gender Action Plan  
Activities  Indicators and t argets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs 
Impact statement:  
REPP 2 will aim to create a paradigm shift by leveraging private sector funding to promote investments in small -scale renewable energy projects in LDCs and other sub -Saharan 
African countries. As result of this, local populations of some of the world's most vulnerable communities , including women and girls,  will have improved access to clean energy, 
improved access to climate resilient solutions and information, and the Host Countries will transition towards low -emission resilient development pathways, meeting their NDC targets. 
Accordingly, with increased investment, the GHG emissions from electricity generation will be reduced, climate resilience of the energy infrastructure is enhanced, and clima te 
resilience of vulnerable people and communities will be improved.  
Outcome statements:  
Outcome statement 3: Improved climate resilience for vulnerable people and communities, through access to clean energy solution which improves resilience and builds gender 
equity.  
Outcome statement 4: Increased private sector investment in renewable energy projects that enables local developers, builds gender equity and drives a market for smaller -scale 
renewables.  
Outcome statement 5: Contributing to stronger technology deployment, innovation and market transformation  
 
Outputs  statements:  
Output 1: Increased commercial viability  
All REPP 2 activities, including early -stage growth and development funding, gap funding for construction and support for market development combine to demonstrate the potential 
for technical and commercial viability of smaller -scale renewable energy businesses and projects including female owned and led businesses in Host Countries  and across the 
region.    
Output 2: Increased renewable energy capacity and generation  
Early- stage and construction funding from REPP 2 ensures that new renewable energy capacity and generation is realised. Renewable energy capacity and generation financed by REPP 
2 contributes directly to improved access to clean electricity for women and men and host -country priorities as outlined in their policy frameworks as well as their Nationally -Determined 
Contributions and National Adaptation Plans.   
Output 3: Improved skills and capacity  
REPP 2 support for project developers establish a more active and commercially -viable market for smaller -scale renewables, which is better -able to attract both public and private 
finance in future. These impacts accrue to Host Countries and more broadly throughout sub -Saharan Africa, with a demonstration impact for other emerging markets and with developers 
being better placed to expand to those markets. REPP 2 will directly contribute to improved gender equity through a focus on gender mainstreaming within  investee projects and 
businesses.  
 
Action 1: I ntegration of a gender equ ity perspective into the design, implementation, monitoring and assessment of all renewable energy activities.  
Action 1  is aligned with the below 
activities:  
  
Number of investee companies with an approved 
gender action plan (GAP (estimated at 100% ex 
ante):  Targets111 are 
presented for : Investment Manager  will 
be responsible for reviewing and approving Estimated USD 10,000 -
35,000 per project for the 
gender analysis and 
 
111 Annual targets  are presented in annex 22 in the REPP2 targets  tab, country specific targets (also for each year) are presented in annex 22 in the underlying country tabs .  
Page 165


---
*Page 166*
---

33 Gender Assessment  Activities  Indicators and t argets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs 
• Activity 1: Provide early -stage 
growth funding for off- grid 
companies  (to fund GAP 
development, where relevant)  
• Activity 2: Provide development 
funding for grid -connected 
projects  (to fund GAP 
development, where relevant)  
• Activity 8: Improve environmental 
and social risk mitigation  
• Activity 9: Non -financial support 
to promote gender equity  (sub-
project level GAPs  - 15 companies  
- 37 companies 
 
The following additional evidence of its 
implementation must be provided ex -post: 
- Number of investee company employees who have completed gender awareness 
and skills training.  
- Number of investee companies who have designed products and services specifically 
to support women and girls, and/or other 
vulnerable groups.  
 Number of ESIA processes designed and 
implemented to consult with a range of vulnerable 
groups incl. women and girls (estimated at 100% ex 
ante):  
- 15 companies 
- 37 companies  - mid-term (4 years) 
and - final term (7 
years) of the fund.  
 
The first target value 
provided under each 
indicator if for mid -
term, the second for final term.  the GAPs prepared by 
investees.  
 
Investees will be 
responsible for the 
implementation of GAPs 
and gender -disaggregated 
monitoring and reporting.  implementation of action 
plan.  
 
Estimated USD 25,000-
75,000 per project for the 
ESIA (which will include a 
gender expert).  
 
Action 2: A target of 30% of the underlying activity funding will be dedicated towards companies that meet the 2X GLI criteria  
Action 2 is implemented through 
following activities: 
• Activity 1: Provide early -stage 
growth funding for off- grid 
companies 
• Activity 2: Provide development funding for grid -connected 
projects 
• Activity 3: Finance expansion of 
SHS businesses 
• Activity 4: Finance construction of 
mini-grid portfolios  
• Activity 5: Provide gap funding 
for construction of grid -connected 
projects Beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender:  
- Total beneficiaries: 291,939  
- Total female beneficiaries: 116,350 
- Total beneficiaries: 729,847  
- Total female beneficiaries : 290,875 
 
Beneficiaries with improved access to lighting:  
- Total beneficiaries: 1,490,336  
- Total female beneficiaries:  447,101 
- Total beneficiaries: 3,725,840  
- Total female beneficiaries:  1,117,752  
 Beneficiaries with improved access to information:  
- Total beneficiaries: 730,250  
- Total female beneficiaries:  219,075 
- Total beneficiaries: 1,825,625  
- Total female beneficiaries:  547,687 
 
 Targets112 are 
presented for : 
- mid-term (4 years ) 
and 
- final term ( 7 years ) of 
the fund.  
The first target value 
provided under each 
indicator is for mid -
term, the second for final term.  The REPP 2 General 
Partner  will be asked to 
approve  a funding target in 
line with 2X GLI criteria.  
 
Investment Manager will 
be responsible for 
committing funding in line 
with 2X GLI criteria.  
 
Investees will be 
responsible for gender 
disaggregated monitoring 
and reporting.  REPP 2 staff and resources  
 
112 Annual targets are presented in annex 22 in the REPP2 targets tab, country specific targets (also for each year) are presente d in annex 22 in the underlying country tabs . 
Page 166


---
*Page 167*
---

34 Gender Assessment  Activities  Indicators and t argets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs 
Beneficiaries adopting improved livelihoods and/or 
new climate resilient livelihood options , through 
resilient PUE options:  
- PUE customers: 11,061  
- PUE female customers: 3,318  
- PUE customers : 27,652   
- PUE female customers : 8,295  
USD funding committed to 2X GLI criteria -aligned 
companies:  
- USD 28 million  
- USD 7 0 million  
Number of jobs disaggregated by gender: 
- 9,216 female jobs  
- 23,040 female jobs  
 
 
 
Page 167


---
*Page 168*
---

35 Gender Assessment  Appendix 1 
Table 26. List of organisations working locally with issues regarding GBV and SAH.  
Following is a list of organis ations which are in in different ways working with issues regarding GBV and gender equality. The list includes international organi sations as well as businesses that 
only work on a regional level. The primary objective of each organi sation is to teach and inform about inequality, as well as give information on how to approach the subject. The organi sations  
are suggested to be contacted by investee companies to assist with project level gender baseline setting, stakeholder engagement as well as establishing gender sensitive grievance 
mechanism. This list is not exclusive, and investee may consider partner ing with a different organisation working on gender equality issues in the project community.  
 
Country  Organisations working on gender equality and GBV issues  URL or contact details  
Cameroon  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN )http://www.anppcan.org/  
 
International Republican Institute  https://www.iri.org/wdn/?utm_source=www.wdn.org&path=%2F  
 
 
UN Women  https://africa.unwomen.org/en/news -and-events/stories/2018/11/gender -based -violence -in-
cameroon  
 
 
 
WFAC Cameroon https://wfaccameroon.org/about -wfac/  http://www.anppcan.org/ 
 https://www.iri.org/wdn/?utm_sourc
e=www.wdn.org&path=%2F  
 
https://africa.unwomen.org/en/news
-and-events/stories/2018/11/gender -
based -violence -in-
cameroon
https://africa.unwome
n.org/en/news -and-
events/stories/2018/11/gender-
based -violence -in-cameroon  
 
https://wfaccameroon.org/about -
wfac/  
 
DRC Peace Women  http://peacewomen.org/content/drc -reducing -gender -based -violence -drc-through -behaviour -
change -strategies  
 
 
UN Women  
 
https://africa.unwomen.org/en/news -and-events/stories/2020/09/drc -takes-a-step- towards -zero-tolerance -against-
gender -based -violence  http://peacewomen.org/content/drc-
reducing -gender -based -violence -drc-
through- behaviour -change -strategies  
 
https://africa.unwomen.org/en/news
-and-events/stories/2020/09/drc-
takes-a-step-towards -zero-tolerance -
against -gender -based -violence  
Page 168


---
*Page 169*
---

36 Gender Assessment  Country  Organisations working on gender equality and GBV issues  URL or contact details  
Lesotho  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)  
T
ogether for Girls   
https://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/countries/lesotho  
U
N Women  https://africa.unwomen.org/en/where -we-are/eastern -and-southern-africa/south- africa -mco http://www.anppcan.org/ http://
www.anppcan.org/  
h
ttps://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/
countries/lesotho  
h
ttps://africa.unwomen.org/en/wher
e-we-are/eastern -and-southern-
africa/south -africa-mco
Madagascar  UNICEF 
https://www.unicef.org/madagascar/en  
Women Strong International  https://www.womenstrong.org/  https://www.unicef.org/madagascar/
en 
h
ttps://www.womenstrong.org/ 
Malawi  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)  
T
ogether for Girls   
https://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/countries/malawi  
UNICEF  
U
N Women  https://africa.unwomen.org/en  http://www.anppcan.org/ 
https://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/
countries/malawi   
ht
tps://www.unicef.org/malawi/  
h
ttps://africa.unwomen.org/en  
https://www.unicef.org/malawi
/ 
Niger  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)  
U
N Women  https://africa.unwomen.org/en  http://www.anppcan.org/ 
h
ttps://africa.unwomen.org/en  
Nigeria  ActionAid https://nigeria.actionaid.org/  
P
roject Alert on Violence Against Women https://projectalertnig.org/  
W
omen at Risk International Foundation (WARIF) https://warifng.org/  
W
omen Empowerment and Legal Aid (WELA)  https://welaonline.org/  https://nigeria.actionaid.org/  
h
ttps://projectalertnig.org/  
h
ttps://warifng.org/  
h
ttps://welaonline.org/  
Page 169


---
*Page 170*
---

37 Gender Assessment  Country  Organisations working on gender equality and GBV issues  URL or contact details  
Sierra Leone  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)  
M
en’s Association for Gender Equality  
https://www.menengagesierraleone.org/  
U
NFPA https://sierraleone.unfpa.org/en  
U
N Women  http://www.anppcan.org/ 
h
ttps://www.menengagesierraleone.
org/ 
h
ttps://sierraleone.unfpa.org/en  
https://sierraleone.unfpa.org/e
n 
h
ttps://africa.unwomen.org/en  
Zambia  African Network for the Prevention against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)   
Gi
rl Empowerment Alliance for Change https://www.facebook.com/GEAC2007/  
T
ogether for Girls  https://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/countries/zambia UNICEF https://www.unicef.org/zambia/  http://www.anppcan.org/Telephone : 
+260 972006717
Email: 
girlempowermentalliance4change@gmail.com  
h
ttps://www.togetherforgirls.org/en/
countries/zambia  
https://www.unicef.org/zambia/  
Page 170


---
*Page 171*
---

REPP Academy 2021
Session 8: 
Aligning mini -grid development with the 2X Challenge 
Gender Lens Investment criteria (GLI) 
Inka Schomer
Wednesday 13 October, 12:15 -13:30


---
*Page 172*
---

•Doyoufeellikeyouhave enough knowledge about
gender equality andhowitlinks tomini-grids and
yourcompany?
•Doyouthink mini-gridcompanies, likeyour own,
canplay arole inaddressing gender equality
issues? Please reflect onanyideas andthoughts .
•Does your company have any existing
commitments togender equality? Ifso,what are
they?
•Have youconsidered monitoring gender equality at
thecompany level orcommunity/site level? Ifso,
what parameters have youconsidered? Ifnot,why
not?
•Doyoucollect anysex-disaggregated data? Ifyes,
what data doyoucollect? Inwhat areas would you
liketoexpand yourdatacollection efforts?
•Apart from reporting tolenders/investors, what
have youused thistypeofdatafor?Overarching Questions on the Table
Design and pre -
construction
Construction and 
commissioning
Logistics and 
management 
Operations and 
maintenanceCompany 
Operations
Project CycleThemes:
•Women’s Employment
•Understanding Customers andProductive Uses ofEnergy
•RiskManagement :Gender -Based Violence (GBV)


---
*Page 173*
---

Women’s Employment 
Women have anunder‐recognized role asenergy
consumers, producers andasenergy entrepreneurs .
Thisprovides agood foundation fortheir engagement
inmini-grid operations .The business case for
women’s employment canbemade both attheHQ
andthecommunity level:
•Performance :Firms with greater diversity and
presence offemale leaders have exhibited stronger
performance andreturn oninvestments .
•Innovation :Companies withalarger footprint of
female employees arelikely tobemore innovative
(and bring those ideas tomarket) .Women score
aswellasmeninabilities liked toinnovation (e.g.
motivating others andinspiring their team) .
•Improved Service Delivery :Workforce diversity
roots acompany initscustomer base and can
improve service quality .
•Safer Operating Environment :Diverse teams
can enhance the safety culture and ensure
protocols arefollowed .
•Community buy-in:Enhanced community
engagement and employment cancreate greater
social license tooperate .Opportunities to enhance talent 
pool and enhance equality Mlinda’s community mini-grid
deployment in India created
approximately 986 jobs.These jobs
include 180direct full-time jobs, 131full-
time equivalent jobs from contractual
work, and 675 productive -use jobs
through additional entrepreneurial
activities .


---
*Page 174*
---

Women’s Employment 
Education
School -to-work 
transition
Retention
Advancement
•Increase girls and women’s exposure to the energy sector (e.g. 
on-site internship)
•Mentoring and connection to role -models
•Changing the study environment, and looking at bias in 
curricular and in teaching
•Working with parents 
•Designing vocational programs
•Engaging women through school -to-work transition career 
choices and through exposure to the sector
•Job advertisements: looking at language and company image 
•Engaging women’s professional networks
•Assess bias in recruitment process and engaging men 
•Setting quotas 
•Addressing biases in workplace and work culture (e.g. policies)
•Accommodating care responsibilities (e.g. travel distances, 
working hours)
•Paid family leave
•Offering appropriate workplace facilities 
•Address gender wage gaps
•Sexual harassment
•Standardizing job performance reviews and skills assessments
•Offering effective career progression training
•Ensuring women leaders have sponsors 
•Addressing and discussing discrimination 
Image sources: Kalahari GeoEnergy , LTDVoltalia Burundi, Microsoft Stock Images


---
*Page 175*
---

Women’s Employment 
•What recruitment strategies have youconsidered foryourcompany?
•What arethekinds ofgender gaps youhave observed (e.g.whoisemployed in
technical roles orinleadership?)
•Have younoticed anycultural orsocietal norms that exist about theroleof
women versus men attheproject site? Ifso,areyouabletoshare anydetails
andyourobservations?
Additional questions :
•Does your company promote apositive working environment forwomen? What
would enhance thework environment forwomen?
•Doyouhave anycompany policies orbenefits that aredesigned toenhance
women’s employment (e.g.sexual harassment policies, flexible working hours,
safer transport, upskilling opportunities etc.)?
•What could your organization bedoing toencourage women towork atyour
company? Have youengaged employees ontheissue? What have theysaid?
•What type ofinterventions thatwere mentioned above could work bestatyour
company internally toaddress thebottlenecks towomen’s employment?
•Arewomen perceived tohave theright skillsets? What could bedone toaddress
skills gaps, ifany?
•What could youdodifferently toprovide opportunities atthecommunity level?


---
*Page 176*
---

Women’s Employment 
Resources
•ICRW. 2021. Off -Grid Energy Gender Opportunities 
Explorer
•IRENA. 2019. Renewable Energy. A Gender Perspective
•GWNET. 2020. Women for Sustainable Energy 
Strategies to Foster Women’s Talent for 
Transformational Change
•IFC. 2018. A Toolkit of Actions and Strategies for Oil, 
Gas, and Mining Companies: Increasing Gender 
Diversity from the Workforce to the Boardroom
•Schomer, I and Hammond, A. 2020. Stepping Up 
Women’s STEM Careers in Infrastructure


---
*Page 177*
---

Understanding Customers and Productive Uses of Energy
Mini-gridcompanies have aninherent interest inlocal consumers andtheutilisation of
locally -generated power .
Withaccess toenergy services, localentrepreneurs, micro -enterprises, andfarmers can
generate local jobs andincome, andenhance livelihoods .However, given inherent
gender -gaps atthecommunity level, specific attention needs tobepaid toensure
productive useofenergy gains areequitably distributed .
Barriers toequitable distribution ofbenefits include :
•Women have inequitable access toresources, such asland, collateral, andfinance,
indicating aneed fortailored approaches (e.g.mobile money, subsidies, ready
boards) .
•Women areinvolved indifferent enterprises andaccess tolivelihoods given cultural
expectations andnorms .
•Cultural norms, limited participation incommunity andhousehold decision -making .
•Women have fewer opportunities toattend trainings andhave less access to
information given different mobility patterns .
•Unequal labor burden interms ofhousehold andcarework (unpaid) andfuelwood
collection which leads totimepoverty
Adeeper understanding ofthewomen’s segment canhelp acompany increase its
customer base andmarket size, enhance loyalty andmanage risks (e.g.payment,
community ownership) .


---
*Page 178*
---

Understanding Customers and Productive -Uses of Energy
Prepare
Engagement 
and data 
collection
Develop 
actions and 
monitor•Staffing and budgeting for understanding customers 
•Who to engage (e.g. female famers, business owners, male partners, 
service providers, local officials, and partners)•How to engage (e.g. FGD, interviews, community mapping, and 
roundtable (including tools))
•What to engage on (e.g. energy needs and value chains, willingness to 
pay, access to finance etc.)•When to engage (e.g. times, location, partner consent, season etc.)
•Finalize specific research approach, methods, and tools to undertake 
data collection•Test and finalize data collection tools (questionnaires, surveys) to 
collect data
•Areas you may consider collecting data on include:
-Women’s role in key sectors and value -chains (e.g. agribusiness) 
and in the households -Women’s energy needs to do current tasks and reduce 
labor/costs and meet energy use aspirations-Investigate affordability constraints and ability to pay (e.g. 
seasonal income with crop harvests etc.)-Access to finance (for connection, services and appliances 
adoption)
-Access to information and business development opportunities
-Identify key stakeholders that women trust or that could be 
engaged to form partnerships
•Identification of key gender gaps with regards to demand and supply 
gives company detailed description of possible issues to address•Verify findings at the company level through workshops/discussions•Commit to company action, set targets, allocate budget, and monitor 
progress


---
*Page 179*
---

Understanding Customers and Productive Uses of Energy
•Could youshare anyobservations orexperiences onengaging male versus female
customers (household consumers, enterprises orfamers) inservice provision?
•Whohasaccess toenergy technologies andservices? What kindofbusinesses are
menversus women involved inattheproject sites youhave worked at?
•Gender gaps areoften apparent inproductive uses ofenergy .What actions could
close thisgapatthemini-gridsitelevel?
Additional questions :
•Doyouincorporate adifferent approach inengaging female andmale customers
inyourbusiness model? Ifso,how? Ifnot,whynot?
•Inyour outreach tonewcustomers, have youdeveloped different approaches to
understand andtarget women andmenin,forexample, marketing, information,
orcustomer feedback?
•What changes could bemade around therequirement togainaccess toenergy
services (e.g.theupfront connection fee/down payment, documentation, price
point andtimeline forpayment forconnection?)
•Doyoucurrently partner with anyother stakeholders (e.g.female -leaders,
women’s groups, NGO’s etc.)toenhance outreach tofemale customers?


---
*Page 180*
---

Customer Engagement and Productive Uses of Energy
Resources
•Green -Energy Help Desk. 2020. Module 2: Mini -grid 
Community Engagement
•World Bank. 2019. Mini Grids for Half a Billion People: 
Market Outlook and Handbook for Decision Makers
•USAID. 2018. Guide to Community Engagement for 
Power Projects in Kenya
•Eales. A. 2018. Social Impacts of Mini -grids: Towards 
an Evaluation Methodology
•World Bank. 2017. Mini -Grids and Gender Equality: 
Inclusive Design, Better Development Outcomes
•Aggarwal, V. et al.2014.  Rural Energy Alternatives in 
India: Opportunities in Financing and Community 
Engagement for Renewable Energy Microgrid Projects


---
*Page 181*
---

Risk Management: Gender -based Violence 
Gender -based violence (GBV) isanumbrella
term foranyharmful actperpetrated against a
person based onsocially ascribed (i.e.gender)
differences between males and females .It
includes acts that inflict physical, sexual, or
mental harm orsuffering, threats ofsuch acts,
coercion, andother deprivations ofliberty .These
acts canoccur inpublic orinprivate spaces .
Common forms ofGBVinclude sexual violence
(rape, attempted rape, unwanted touching,
sexual exploitation, and sexual harassment),
intimate partner violence (also called
domestic violence, including physical, emotional,
sexual, andeconomic abuse), forced andearly
marriage, and female genital
mutilation .(IASC 2015).
Violence against women isamanifestation of
historically unequal power relations between
men andwomen, which have ledtodomination
over, anddiscrimination against, women bymen
andtotheprevention ofthefulladvancement of
women (UNDeclaration ontheElimination of
Violence Against Women 1993).Workplace Sexual 
Harassment Sexual 
Exploitation and 
Abuse (SEA)
•Unwanted sexual 
advances
•Request for 
sexual favors
•Sexual physical 
contact•Exploitation of a 
vulnerable 
position, 
differential 
power or trust 
for sexual 
purpose 
•Actual or 
threatened 
sexual physical 
intrusion 
Company and 
Project -Site RiskSource: WBG Good Practice Note -Environmental & Social Framework 
for IPF Operations: Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and 
Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment  Project Financing 
Involving Major Civil Works


---
*Page 182*
---

Risk Management: Gender -based Violence 
Project Design AssessProject 
ImplementationAddressProject
ImplementationRespond
•Social risk assessment of 
community -level risks 
(child marriage, gender 
norms, girls drop -out rate)
•Assess labor influx and 
duration of project 
timelines
•Assessment of services for 
survivors (e.g. clinics, 
NGO’s, national hotlines)
•Review internal company 
capacity to respond to risks
•Use risk assessment tool 
and leverage safeguard 
instruments 
•Reflect on and update risk 
assessments during project 
implementation•Establish mitigation, 
reporting, and monitoring 
measures
•Based on risks identified, 
identify the corresponding 
mitigation, including 
adopting GBV policies and 
CoC, and have staff sign 
these (including 
contractors), reporting 
procedures, trainings,  
engage community, and 
raising awareness
•Monitor the effectiveness of 
the mitigation measures 
and adapt/make changes as 
appropriate•Provide essential services 
for survivors
•Report case through the 
reporting mechanism 
(survivor -centered)
•Cases brought forward 
documented and closed 
(focus on intake process)
•Check -in with community 
(Hire an expert)


---
*Page 183*
---

Risk Management: Gender -Based Violence 
•Canyoushare anyreflections onthepossible GBVrisks involved inmini-grid
construction andoperation? Doyouthink therisks ofGBVareincreased?
Additional questions :
•How long willconstruction take? What isthelevel oflabor hired forthis
project? Areemployees transient andworking away from families?
•Have discussions taken place withcommunity andlocal groups thatfocus on
fortherights ofwomen, children, andadolescents attheproject site?
•Arecommunity members likely toprovide goods orservices toworkers and
contractors (e.g.entertainment venues, food, materials)?
•Arethere anyschools neartheproject site? Ifyes.What agearestudents?
•Have youasacompany putinplace anyGBV mitigation andresponse
measures?
•What willbethesupervision arrangement atsiteduring construction? How
hardissupervision (e.g.remote, inaFCVlocation etc.)?
•Isthere anybody withabackground inGBVthatcould assists withtheGBV
related work inyourcompany?


---
*Page 184*
---

Risk Management: Gender -Based Violence 
Resources
•IFC. 2020. COVID -19 and Gender -Based Violence 
Workplace Risks and Responses
•EBRD, IFC and CDC Group, Addressing Gender -Based 
Violence and Harassment: Emerging Good Practice for 
the Private Sector. 2020.  Addressing Gender -Based 
Violence and Harassment Emerging Good Practice for 
the Private Sector
•Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development’s 
(ICED). 2019. Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and 
Harassment in Infrastructure Tool
•World Bank. 2019. Good Practice Note: Environmental 
& Social Framework for IPF Operations: Addressing 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment 
(SEA/SH) in Investment Project Financing Involving 
Major Civil Works
•USAID. 2015. Toolkit for Integrating GBV Prevention 
and Response into USAID Energy and Infrastructure 
Projects


---
*Page 185*
---

Contact Details: 
Inka Schomer: Senior Gender and Energy Advisor
Inkaschomer @gmail.com
linkedin.com/in/inka -schomer -319710a9
__________