=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20231002140915+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.6.20320
/ModDate: D:20231003085653+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.6.20320
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October  2023  
Tbilisi, Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12 GCF/B.3 7/02/Add.1 1 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  XI 
Funding proposal package f or FP22 0 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a) A funding proposal  summary  titled "Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance 
Mechanism (ARCAFIM) for East Africa region” submitted by International Fund for 
Agricultural Development;  
b) No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
asse ssment; and  
f) Gender documentation  of the funding proposal . 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure P olicy 
of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “ Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM) 
for East Africa region ” submitted by International Fund for Agricultural Development  is being circulated on 
a limited distribution basis only to B oard Members and Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality 
of certain proprietary, legally privileged,  or commercially sensitive  information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.11  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  1 
No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  71 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  78 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   81 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  90 
Gender documentation  93


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM) 
for East Africa  region  
Country(ies):  Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda  
Accredited Entity:  IFAD  
Date of first submission:  [2023 /05/25]  
Date of current submission  [2023 /09/29]  
Version number  [V.1]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of  GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total   
☐  Energy generation and access    
☐  Low-emission transport    
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances    
☐  Forestry and land use    
Adaptation total   
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  50 % 50 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  50 % 50 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment    
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services    
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  N/A A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
 1.427 million people  (direct and 
indirect beneficiaries)  
1.16 million 
people  (direct)   0.267 million 
people  (indirect)  
0.7 % of total 
population  0.16 % of total 
population   
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  200 000 000  USD  
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  55 000 000  USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒  Grant  10 000 000   
☒  Loan  45 000 000  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  12 years  A.12. Total lifespan  12 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.   
 
12/15/2023  
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
I-2


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information   
In this Funding Proposal (FP), “Executing Entity (EE)” refers to the entity that will sign a 
Subsidiary Agreement with IFAD to execute, carry out or implement the Funded 
Activity. IFAD has assessed the capacity of the EE in accordance with IFAD policies 
and procedures . IFAD (AE) acts as a co -EE and will implement solely the activities 
related to the CCA Rural Finance Policy Dialogues, Knowledge Managem ent and 
Programme Coordination , which are detailed in Component 2 under Output 2.3.  
 
 
Executing Entity 1: Equity Bank (Kenya ) Limited  
- Subsidiary of Equity Group Holdings Plc, p ublicly listed regional financial 
services company , headquartered in Nairobi, Kenya  
 
Executing Entity 2: IFAD  
- IFAD ( AE) acts as a co -EE solely for Output 2.3.   
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or 
programme descr ibed in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 3 
 A.21. Executive summary  
A progressive but rapid shift in agricultural practices in Africa will be critical as harsh climatic conditions will increase i n 
most countries of the region  and new climatic threats for crop production and livestock keeping are projected to emerge. 
By 2030  - 2040, new and innovative agricultural systems need to be implemented in many regions where the climate 
will soon be no longer suitable for current practi ces. The lack of adequate and appropriate private sector financing for 
Climate Change Adaptation ( CCA ) investments jeopardizes  the materialization of this transformation process in Sub -
Saharan Africa.  Currently, there is a gap of  well-functioning and repli cable, significant scale private sector CCA finance 
programmes  across  the Africa n region s, although some new interventions are emerging. The CCA finance efforts led 
by public sector , on the other hand, are often  grant -based  and have limited capacity to leverage sustainable long term 
market driven financing . 
With the Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM) , IFAD’s  aim is to introduce a practical, widely 
implementable model for achieving  a paradigm shift towards systematic large -scale use of private financial resources 
for rural CCA investment s, the impact of which would go well beyond the direct impacts and time frame of the 
Programme. The key implementing/executing partners of IFAD are the  regional ARCAFIM “ Host Banks”, which are 
leading commercial banks in the regions and which co -finance the programme investments. IFAD, as a GCF Accredited 
Entity, will on-lend the funds provided for ARCAFIM by GCF and other international financiers and be  the lender of 
record of the ARCAFIM funds to the Host Banks. IFAD will disburse the funds for ARCAFIM on -lending to the regional 
Host Banks.  The IFAD ARCAFIM loans will be matched 1:1 by the Host Banks, thus doubling the ARCAFIM financing 
resources. Suppo rted by a ppropriate  tracking and monitoring arrangement , IFAD will monitor and oversee that Host 
Banks will use the loan proceeds exclusively for on -lending under the ARCAFIM programme to the targeted 
beneficiaries based on agreements and definitions of th e Loan Agreements between IFAD and the Host Banks.  
Operating with a projected total budget of US$ 600 million , the ARCAFIM  overall development goal is “ Wider  use of 
commercial resources for Climate Change Adaptation  in the region, enhancing  the well-being of rural communities 
through climate resilient livelihoods ”. To achieve this, the two programme Outcomes are: (i) ARCAFIM PFIs expand 
and mainstream CCA finance in the region resulting in increased CC resilience and improved food security levels  of 
rural communities ; and (ii) Improved capacity of PFIs and agriculture value chain participants to adapt to risks imposed 
by climatic changes . These Outcomes are achieved by a set of activities that include deployment of tailored financial 
products and offer of dedicated technical assistance to all stakeholders in the targeted African countries. .  
With this application  to GCF , IFAD seeks from the Green Climate Fund the approval for GCF financing share of 
US$ 55 million (US$ 45 million loan, US$  10 millio n TA grant) for the ARCAFIM Phase 1 operations in the East Africa 
Region . The planned, phased expansion of ARCAFIM and the progress in programme preparations in the four regions 
is described in the table below.  IFAD also seek s a confirmation on the GCF’s interest in co -financing this systematic 
large -scale promotion of private sector CCA finance with the next phases of ARCAFIM in the four African regions (East, 
South, North and West/Central).  
Target Region  Partner 
Selection  Country 
Studies  Climate 
Justification  Financing 
Structure  Results 
Frame  Target 
Budget  Target 
Schedule  
Phase 1:  
Eastern Africa  
(Concept Note 
approved)  Done  Done  Done  Done  Done  USD 200 
mil Approval 
in 2023  
Phase 2:  
Southern 
Africa  (Concept 
Note approved)  Done  Done  Done  In 
progress  In 
progress  USD 100 
mil Approval 
in 2024  
Phase 3:  
Northern 
Africa  In 
progress  To be 
done  To be done  To be 
done  To be 
done  USD 150 
mil (tbc)  Approval 
in 2025  
Phase 4:  West -
Central Africa  To be 
done  To be 
done  To be done  To be 
done  To be 
done  USD 150 
mil (tbc)  Approval 
in 2026


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 4 
 Under the ARCAFIM framework, the same model, programme structure and key activities will be used in each region 
to achieve the programme targets, with adjustments to the local climatical, economic and financial sector environments. 
This model is scalable a nd replicable with a vision to become a leading co -investment platform  for CCA finance targeting 
small producers and rural poo r. The key objective is to achieve a demonstration effect and paradigm shift by designing 
approaches and methodologies for private  sector CCA lending targeting small producers and rural poo r, and proof of 
concept for implementation at scale.  
For Phase 1 to be implemented in the East Africa Region  with the total budget of US$  200 million (GCF share 
US$ 55 million) , the target ARCAFIM Phase 1 countries are Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda  and Rwanda, selected for the 
reasons that (i) they are either Low Income Countries or Lower Middle Income Countries; (ii) all are under severe 
climate change stress, higher compared to average in develo ping countries as stated by the IPCC 2022 report on 
Climate Change Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability; and finally (iii) in the target countries, there is a substantial 
market of small -scale agriculture production with high potential for rural CCA finan cing.  The Host Bank for the ARCAFIM  
Phase 1 operations will be Equity Bank (Kenya ) Limited  (EBK), subsidiary of Equity Group Holdings PLC  (EGH) . EBK 
is the Borrower as well as the Executing Entity for ARCAFIM for East Africa . EBK will on -lend the loan received from 
IFAD to Equity Bank Uganda  Limited (EBUL) , Equity Bank Rwanda  PLC (EBR) , and Equity Bank (Tanzania ) Limited  
(EBTL)  through sub -loan agreements to be executed between EBK and each of the three country subsidiaries  of EGH . 
EGH  is the largest ba nking group in the region  with a high level of ESG integration in its operations, a strategic focus 
to increase its rural and  agricultural portfolio,  track -record of micro lending in the agriculture sector,  a strong balance 
sheet  to match the international capital investments , and ability  to hedge funding in US$ and disburse loans to low -
income borrowers in local currencies.   
To achieve the ARCAFIM obj ectives, the programme activities in East African and later in other regions are structured 
into two mutually reinforcing components: (a) Component  1: Effective Financing for Rural Adaptation Targeting Small 
Producers and Rural MSMEs; and (b) Component 2:  Innovations and Capacity for Rural Adaptation  (collectively, the 
Funded Activities) .  
In East Africa, Component 1  will provide catalytic international financial resources of US$ 90 million (50%  - US$ 45 
million - from the GCF, 50%  - US$ 45 million - from the IFAD -organized  co-financiers) to the Host Bank for on -lending 
for CCA purposes in the programme target countries. The total ARCAFIM on -lending resources  in this region will  be 
US$ 180 million, which includes a matching amount o f US$ 90 million financed by the Host Bank. The delivery of the 
CCA loans to the final target groups will take place either directly through the Host Bank branch/agency networks or 
through different types of rural on -lending financial intermediaries. To su pport Component  1 implementation, ARCAFIM 
will provide a Taxonomy of  investment categories which are justified and eligible for CCA finance end -use in this private 
sector operation. The developed CCA Taxonomy will be critical for the later mainstreaming and replication of the 
ARCAFIM CCA finance model. To further encourage the active use of ARCAFIM lending capital, t he proposed financial 
structure of the programme includes credit risk sharing between  IFAD, financially supported by  international partners , 
including GCF  and the Host Bank.  
Component 2 , with grant -based funding of US$ 20 million  in East Africa , will promote critical innovations and address 
non-financial barriers currently preventing greater CCA financing in the ARCAFIM target regions. Firstly , it will 
strengthen the awareness and capacity of Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to offer CCA fina ncial services  to 
the small prod ucer and MSME markets in the climate -vulnerable rural areas . Secondly , it will develop the CCA 
investment capacities and financial literacy skills of small -scale producers and rural MSMEs. Thirdly , ARCAFIM will 
improve climate finance enabling environment through CCA finance policy dialogues.  Gender and social inclusion 
(GESI) dimensions will be mainstreamed throughout this process,  To promote wider  application of the ARCAFIM model 
outside the direct ARCAFIM stakeholders, IFAD, the other co -financiers , and the Host Bank will proactively share 
knowledge and information of the ARCAFIM performance and achieved results through various  regio nal and 
international networks.  Successful implementation of the programme is expected to encourage African financial 
institutions and international financiers to re -visit their policies on climate finance and seek new rural business 
opportunities based on climate smart agricultural practices and modern CC adaptation technologies , designed and 
delivered with a GESI lens . 
The overall Programme description presented below provides a framework for the ARCAFIM Mechanism 
implementation in all the four AFRICAN regions. The presentation also includes the climate context, detailed budgets, 
implementation targets and expected programme results for the Phase 1 operations in East Africa, for which GCF co -
financing is sought under this application.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text 
1. ARCAFIM  mechanism will target climate vulnerable economies in  African continent in sequenced phases.  ARCAFIM 
Phase 1  will be rolled out in four countries in East Africa, for which GCF financing is sought under this Funding 
Proposal. The targeted countries are Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania  and Rwanda, (Figure 1) . They  are all low -income 
or lower middle -income and have significant agriculture sectors of small producers that face severe climate risk as 
described below.  
 
Figure 1. ARCAFIM target countries in East ern Africa


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 6 
 
  
3 Daron, JD. 2014. “Regional Climate Messages: East Africa”. Scientific report from the CARIAA Adaptation at Scale in Semi -Arid Regions 
(ASSAR) project, December 2014. Online available: 
http://www.assar.uct.ac.za/sites/default/files/image_tool/images/138/RDS_reports/climat e_messages/East%20Africa%20Climate%20Messa
ges%20 -%20Version%201%20 -%20Regional%20Level.pdf     
4 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa. Online available: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East-Africa -Regional.pdf  
5 Online Available: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021 -01/15724 -WB_Kenya%20Country%20Profile -
WEB.pdf  
6 Online Available: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/rwanda/climate -data-historical  
7 Online available: https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/118/docs/EB -2016 -118-R-19-Project -design -report.pdf   
8 Online Available: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/tzanc2.pdf  Climate Baseline  
 
2. In East Africa,  the climate zones covering the programme’s target countries (Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda) 
are diverse, ranging from arid to temperate to tropical. Temperatures are high and characterized by little seasonal 
variation across much of the region. Temperatur es are lower in the highland regions of Kenya and Tanzania. The 
highest temperatures are experienced in the drier interior regions towards the north and east, where average 
summer temperatures exceed 30°C3, cooling to around 26°C in coastal areas . There are three main rainfall regimes 
— in equatorial regions (much of the area described), there are two rainy seasons with peaks in October and April; 
in the north, the primary rainy season is June to August; and in the south the primary rainy season is  December to 
February. These seasons are linked to the annual north –south movement of the precipitation -inducing Inter Tropical 
Convergence Zone (ITCZ), which shifts toward warmer air bringing rainy seasons in the respective warm months 
of areas north and south of the equator. Additionally, precipitation is periodically influenced (every two to seven 
years) by the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), leading to alternate periods of above - and below -average 
rainfall. Annual rainfall averages from nearly 0 mm  in parts of northwest Kenya to over 2,000 mm in highland areas 
of the region. There is substantial interannual and interdecadal rainfall variability, and both droughts and floods are 
common4. 
 
Table 1. Baseline climatic conditions  in ARCAFIM’s target countries  
Country  Climate overview  Average  temperature  Average  rainfall  
Kenya5 • Variation in climate due to proximity to 
the ocean, with the eastern coastal 
regions having a humid, tropical 
climate, and the northern region being 
arid.  
• Central highlands have a cooler, 
moderate climate.  • Average annual 
temperatures range from 
18ºC in the central 
highlands to 26ºC along 
the coast.  • Average  annual rainfall is 668 mm, with 
most of precipitation occurring from March 
to June and October to December.  
• Western and highland regions receiv e 
2,000 and 1,000 mm of precipitation per 
year respectively, compared to northern 
regions which receive less than 250 mm 
annually . 
Rwanda6,7 • Tropical climate with four distinct 
climatic zones: eastern plains, central 
plateau, highlands, and regions 
around Lake Kivu.  • Rwanda’s annual average 
temperature is 19.4°C.  • Most parts of the country receive 
precipitation throughout the year, however, 
there are two main rainfall seasons : Feb to 
May and Sep to De c. 
• Average annual precipitation amounts to 
1,178 mm.  
• The eastern plains , central plateau, 
highlands and Lake Kivu areas  receive 
average annual precipitation of 700 to 
1,100 mm , 1,100 to 1,300 mm , 1,300 to 
1,600 mm and 1,200 to 1,500 mm , 
respectively.  
Tanzania8 • Climate is varied due to the country’s 
proximity to the ocean, the presence 
of large inland lakes as well as 
diverse altitude ranges.  
• Tanzania has four basic climatic 
zones: lowland coastal, highlands, 
plateau and semi -arid zone.  • Temperatures vary 
dependi ng on altitude and 
proximity to the coast.  
• Coastal regions have 
average monthly 
temperatures of 27°C – 
29ºC, whereas averages 
in central and northern 
semi -arid regions are 
20ºC to 30ºC.  • Rainfall is primarily bimodal;  however, the 
central, south and western regions 
experien ce unimodal rainfall. These 
regions have prolonged rainfall from 
November to April, whereas the Lake 
Victoria basin, North -eastern highlands, 
and northern coastal regions of the country 
experience ra infall from March to May , as 
well as October to December.  
• Tanzania receives less than 1,000 mm 
rainfall on average per year.  
• The highland, southern and western 
regions of the country receive on average 
a maximum of 2,000 mm rainfall per year, 
compared to t he central regions receiving 
an average of 600 mm rainfall annually .


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 7 
 
  
9 Climate Risk Profile: Uganda (2021): The World Bank Group. Online Available: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021 -05/15464 -WB_Uganda%20Country%20Profile -
WEB%20%281%29.pdf  
10 Given the page and word limits of the Funding Proposal template, Table 2 is kept short. Ho wever, details on the observed trends have 
been provided per country and more details are available in the Annex 23.  
11 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa. Online available: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East-Africa -Regional.pdf  
12 OCHA (2022). Climate Change Profile: Mozambique. Available from https://reliefweb.int/report/mozambique/climate -change -profile -
mozambique   
13 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa. Online available: 
https://www.climatel inks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East-Africa -Regional.pdf  Uganda9 • Uganda’s climate is mostly tropical 
and includes two rainy seasons in a 
calendar year, extending from March 
to May and September to December, 
respectively.  • The average  annual 
temperature for Uganda is 
22.8ºC.  • Southern regions have two rainy seasons, 
receiving an average minimum of 600 mm 
and an average maximum of 2,200 mm per 
year.  
• Northern regions are characterized by one 
rainy season (March –October) averaging 
400 mm –1,600 mm/year.  
 
 
B.1.b. Climate change problem  
 
Observed Climate Change  
 
3. There has been a clear trend of increasing average temperatures across East Africa  since the 1960s, while 
precipitation trends have been weak and variable. Observed trends for the regions with a focus on the project’s 
target countries is presented in  Table 2 .  
 
Table 2 Summary of observed climate change trends for East  Africa 10, 11, 12 
Climate variable  Observed trends  
Temperature  • Increased average temperatures of 1°C to 1.5°C since the 1960s, with the greatest warming in the 
region’s north and centre and least warming along coastal Kenya .  
• In Rwanda ’s south -west and eastern regions, temperatures increased by between 1.4°C and 2.6°C 
from 1971 to 2016.  
• Between 1960 and 2006, average temperatures in Tanzania  have increased by 1 ºC. 
• Average annual temperatures in Uganda  have increased by as much as 1.3°C since the 1950s.  
Rainfall  • Precipitation trends are weak and variable across th e region; however, evidence suggests a decrease 
in precipitation in the March –May period since the late 1970s in some areas (i.e., Central Kenya , and 
Uganda ). 
• Across the region, increased frequency, duration and intensity of heavy rainfall events.  
Drought and dry spells  • Increased frequency and severity of droughts since the 1990s (most notably in Kenya, Tanzania  and 
Uganda ). 
Glaciers  • Glacial surface area loss of 80% across Mt. Kenya (0.5 km2 to 0.1 km2), Mt. Kilimanjaro (6 km2 to ~1 
km2) and the Ru wenzori Mountains (~10.6 km2 to ~1.7 km2) from 1900 to 2010 . 
Sea-level rise  • From 1984 to 2016, observed average rise in sea level of 1.58 mm per year for Tanzania  (Zanzibar).  
• From 1986 to 2016, observed average rise in sea level of 3.46 mm per year for Kenya  (Mombasa) . 
 
Projected Climate Change   
4. In East Africa, climate models  indicate continued increases in average temperatures (and heat waves), as well as 
the frequency and intensity of heavy rainfall events. The future of overall precipitation changes is less certain, with 
most models showing increased precipitation for much of the region (with the exception of southern Tanzania) but 
with shifts in seasonality. Despite potential precipitation increases shown in some models, droughts are expected 
to intensify in the 21st century due to longer dry spells combined with increased evaporation and a greater proportion 
of precipitation coming in heavy rainfall events.  
 
5. Table  3 below outlines projected climate trends throughout the target countries.  
 
 
 
Table 3. Summary of projected climate trends for East  Africa 13  
Climate variable  Projected trends


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 8 
 
  
14  Online Available: https://interactive -atlas.ipcc.ch  
15  Source: https://interactive -atlas.ipcc.ch  
16 Gebremedhin, GH. et al. 2020. Projected impacts of climate change on drought patterns over East Africa. Earth’s Future, Volum e 8, Issue 
7, July 2020. https://doi.org/1 0.1029/2020EF001502   
17  Online Available: https://interactive -atlas.ipcc.ch  
18 Online Available: https://interactive -atlas.ipcc.ch   
19 Ibid Temperature  • Under the SSP 2 4.5 mid -emission scenario, Average temperatures in the near term (2021 –2040) 
are expected to increase by between 0.7°C and 1.3°C in Kenya  and Rwanda , and by between 0.7°C 
and 1.2°C in Tanzania and Uganda  (IPCC AR6).  
• Number of days per annum with maximum temperatures above 35°C will increase by between 8 and 
24  in Kenya , and 2.7 and 10.6 in Rwanda, Tanzania  and Uganda  by 2040 (SSP2 4.5 scenario; 
IPCC AR6).  
• There is high confidence that extreme heat will intensify, and  surface temperatures will increase 
across East Africa by 205014. 
Rainfall  • Uncertain trend for average annual precipitation; most models point to an increase across the region 
by 2050, particularly during the northeast monsoon period (except for southern Tanzania ) and with 
the greatest potential increases for Kenya . Under a mid -emissions scenario (SSP2 4.5), near term 
(2021 –2040) total precipitation is expected to increase by between 1.4% and 9.9% in Kenya  and 
Rwanda  and between 0.7% and 10.4%, in Tanzania  and Uganda  relative to a baseline period of 
1981 to 2010, as modelled for the IPCC’s AR6.  
• Shifts in rainfall seasonality for much of the region, including increased precipitation during October –
December (the short rainy season north of the equator) and de creased March –May precipitation (the 
long rainy season north of the equator).  
• An increase in interseasonal and interannual rainfall variability.  
Heavy rainfall  • Increased frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events. Models project that maximum one -
day precipitation in Kenya under the SSP2 4.5 mid -emissions scenario, in the near term (2021 –
2040), will increase by 4.2% –16.5%, while in Rwanda, Tanzania  and Uganda  it will increase by 
2.6% –16.4%.  
• There is high confidence that extreme precipitation events will intensify across East Africa by 205015. 
Drought and dry spells  • Intensified drought occurrences.  
• Drought area in East Africa is likely to increase at the  end of the 21st century by 16%, 36%, and 54% 
under RCP 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5, respectively, with the areas affected by extreme drought increasing 
more rapidly than severe and moderate droughts.  
• Spatially, drought event, duration, frequency and intensity would increase in Tanzania, but generally 
decrease in Kenya, Uganda, and Rwanda16 
• There is high confidence that glaciers will disappear from East Africa by 2050.  
Glaciers  • There is high confidence that glaciers will disappear from East Africa by 2050.  
Sea-level rise  • There is high confidence that sea levels along the East African coastline will rise by 205017, with 
estimations varying between 16 cm to 46 cm ( Kenya  and Tanzania ) 
*The confidence relating to the Climatic Impact Drivers (CID) future changes summarized in this table, refers to the regional synthesis compiled by 
IPCC WGI. CIDs and confidence trends refer to a 20 -to-30-year period centred around 2050 and/or consistent with 2°C global warming, compared 
to a similar pe riod within 1960 -2014 or 1850 -190018. 
 
Climate change vulnerabilities and impacts  
6. Climate variability and change pose major obstacles to resilience in East Africa, where increasing temperatures and 
shifting rainfall patterns are already affecting economic growth, small producer livelihoods, food security, health, 
and ecosystems. The region is characterized by rapid urbanization at 4.0% –6.2% annually for much of the region, 
higher than sub -Saharan Africa as a whole, which is one of the world’s most rapidly urbanizing areas. More than 
70% of the population, however, still live in rural areas where population growth continues and people rely heavily 
on climate -sensitive rainfed agriculture  and pastoralism , especially small producers. Overall, agricultu re exceeds 
24% of GDP in all the region’s countries. Projections indicate that reduced crop productivity in much of the region 
is expected to increase poverty and food insecurity among populations, particularly among the already low -income 
small producers.  The combination of urbanization and declining agricultural productivity  and pastoralism  will 
adversely affect livelihoods, health, infrastructure, and food security. In the Lake Victoria Basin, home to 
approximately 45 million people across areas of Kenya , Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda, drought in recent years 
has already pushed more than 10% of the population toward chronic food insecurity. At the same time climate -
sensitive diseases like malaria are poised to expand into the warming East African highlands  and Lake Victoria 
region19.  
 
7. Crop Production:  Warming temperatures and changing precipitation patterns are expected to decrease subsistence 
and cash crop production, which remain a critical source of small producer livelihoods and economic activity acros s 
the region. Small producer farms account for up to 90% of crop production across the region and the main source 
of employment for the region’s 297 million rural residents. The dominant crops are a cereal –legume mix that 
includes maize, millet, sorghum, w heat, and beans; major cash crops include coffee and tea. The already low yields


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 9 
 
  
20 Parkinson, V.(2013). Climate Learning for African Agriculture: Working Paper No.6 Climate Learning for African Agriculture: T he Case of 
Mozambique. Available from https://www.nri.org/images/documents/developmen t-
programmes/climate_change/publications/WorkingPaper6Mozambique.pdf  
20 Parkinson, V.(2013). Climate Learning for African Agriculture: Working Paper No.6 Climate Learning for African Agriculture: T he Case of 
Mozambique. Available from https://www.nri.org/im ages/documents/development -
programmes/climate_change/publications/WorkingPaper6Mozambique.pd  
21 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa. Online available: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East-Africa -Regional.pdf  
22 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa. Online available: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East-Africa -Regional.pdf  
23 Available at: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 2017_USAID -PREPARED -TetraTech_Vulnerability -Impacts -
Adaptation -Assessment -East-Africa -Food -Security -Agriculture.pdf   resulting from low -input rainfed production with limited processing, storage, and transportation infrastructure make 
the vast majority of crop production highly vulnerable to changes in temperature and rainfall. Heat and unreliable 
rainfall  are expected to reduce maize, bean, banana, and plantain yields at lower elevations by the 2030s to 2050s. 
However, in higher elevations, temperature increases are projected to expand the areas for crop production 
potential. This expanded production poten tial could increase to cultivation pressure on mountain slopes and in 
protected areas , with implications for ecosystem services and biodiversity.  
  
8. Maize, which accounts for nearly half of calories consumed in the region, is expected to experience yield re ductions 
of 8% –37% across East Africa by the 2090s.  An average of between 600 mm and 1,200 mm of rainfall annually is 
generally sufficient for maize or cassava cultivation. Yet, with the projected increased irregularities in rain patterns , 
these crops are expected to be highly vulnerable to climate change20. Lowland bean production, vital for nutritional 
security, is expected to become unviable due to rising temperatures sometime after mid -century, particularly 
affecting Tanzania and Uganda. In drier areas of East Africa, even drought -resilient millet, sorghum, and cassava 
yields may become increasingly marginal. Wetter rainy seasons could prevent staple crops (e.g., maize, sweet 
potatoes) from maturing, although increased rainfall would be favourable for ot her crops (e.g., perennials and a 
range of fruits and vegetables). A warmer, wetter climate may also raise crop and postharvest losses due to 
heightened risk of mildew, leaf spot, and bacterial stem and root rot and increased fungus growth in stored seeds.  
Increasing heat and pest stress (e.g., coffee berry borer) are expected to diminish the area suitable for coffee and 
tea production by 20% -40% across countries including Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda by 2100. However, the areas 
suitable for coffee production a re expected to expand into higher elevations as well, which may have substantial 
negative environmental implications (e.g., deforestation, reduced water availability, nutrient loading in streams). For 
East Africa’s water -intensive cut flower industry, heat  and water stress, heavy rainfall resulting in soil degradation, 
and growing tensions over access to limited water resources threaten production. Along the coast, sea level rise is 
expected to increase water logging, salinization, and inundation of agricul tural lands with particular risk for mango, 
cashew, and coconut harvests21. 
 
9. Livestock : Rising temperatures, shifting rainfall patterns, droughts, and increased erratic heavy rainfall events are the 
most significant stressors facing the region’s main lives tock species: cattle, sheep, goats, camels, and poultry. East 
Africa’s livestock are integral for the region’s culture, as well as food security and livelihoods, particularly in arid and 
semi -arid lands, and contribute significantly to GDP. Increasingly un reliable rainfall patterns and frequently occurring 
droughts have had a considerable impact on grazing availability, fodder quality and livestock production in these 
regions. As climate variability and change, including heat and water stress, make crop pro duction more tenuous, 
livestock production is expected to replace areas of mixed crop –livestock systems in some coastal and mid -
elevation areas by the 2050s. While typically more resilient to climate variability and shocks than crops, livestock 
are suscept ible to heat stress, and their viability is affected by the productivity and availability of pasture, feed 
production, water availability, and pest and disease dynamics. Recurrent climate -related shocks are already leading 
to critical livestock losses.  Rising temperatures and flooding could also increase the incidence of diseases, such as 
anthrax and Rift Valley Fever, and expand the range of ticks carrying diseases such as East Coast Fever. Increased 
seasonal and drought -related water stress, alongside warming trends, have already impacted pastures, fodder 
crops, and water availability in some areas, including the Lake Victoria Basin. For pastoralist communities, climate -
related changes in pasture and water availability could alter pastoral mobility, exa cerbating the already on -going 
tensions over land and water resources in the region22. 
 
10. Fisheries:  Climate change will affect fisheries in the ARCAFIM target areas in diverse ways. The key variables 
affecting marine and inland fisheries in East Africa inc lude changes in water temperature, precipitation, salinity, river 
flow, nutrient levels, lake levels, storm frequency and intensity, and flooding. Aquaculture, increasingly important to 
food security in the region, is highly sensitive to climate change var iables because cultured fish are less able to 
adapt to changes by migrating or by changing their ranges to occupy more favourable conditions23. The continuing 
reliance on marine resources has placed strain on the fisheries productivity along the western In dian Ocean, with


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 10 
 
  
24 https://www.ifpri.org/blog/how -small -businesses -are-driving -growth -across -african -agriculture  
25 Sourc e: https://csis -website -prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs -
public/publication/210830_Runde_SMEs_Climate_Change.pdf?XkQTGGFUIFQC7zQjisClApyo0Kjo89Ce   
26 Source: https://csis -website -prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs -
public/publication/210830_Runde_SMEs_Climate_Change.pdf?XkQTGGFUIFQC7zQjisClApyo0Kjo89Ce   30% of oceans in this region being fished at biologically unsustainable levels. In the last decades,  increasing  ocean 
temperatures, rising sea levels and intensified tropical storms have been of notable concerns for artisanal fishing 
activities on the coastline. Overall, adverse climate change impacts threaten the sustained growth of the fisheries 
sector in the targ eted East African countries that simultaneously face major challenges in feeding their fast -growing 
populations with the products from the crop cultivation  and livestock sub -sectors.  
 
11. Rural lives:  Climate change is not only one of the greatest environmental and development challenges facing the 
world today, but also one that will have critical impacts on human rights and inequalities, including gender inequality. 
Women and girls are impacted dispro portionately from the effects of climate change due to factors such as 
entrenched discriminatory social and cultural norms, a lack of entitlements to land and other credit assets and 
unequal access to land, water and productive assets, compounded by limite d mobility and decision -making power 
in many contexts. Their mortality from climate -related disasters is higher than that of men and climate -induced 
floods and droughts exacerbate women’s poverty and unpaid domestic and care work burdens.  Yet in many Afri can 
countries, women are recognized as agents of change who make valuable contributions to climate change 
mitigation and adaptation efforts.  
 
Micro, Small and Medium Sized Enterprises in Food Systems  
12. The majority of businesses involved in food systems in East Africa are Micro, Small and Medium Size Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and perform various functions in the food value chains . According to a recent study by AGRA24, trading , 
logistics  and processing constitute about 40% of the total gross value of the agri -food system in the region, equal 
to the share coming from farms , while  retailers constitute the remaining 20% . Increased weather unpredictability 
and frequency of extreme events will continue to have an acute impact on the se critical  MSME operations in the 
food system, especially when  they are  involved with small primary producers across the crop production, livestock 
and fisheries sectors. For the MSMEs in particular, the impacts include disruptions in raw material supply chain 
planning, increased prices of pr imary producer outputs, and destabilized markets for agriculture services including 
mechanization, logistics, storage and trade.25 As temperatures rise and extreme weather events come more 
frequent due to climate change, the already -insufficient transporta tion infrastructure will become more vulnerable 
and further complicate the operations of rural MSMEs.  The ability of MSMEs in food value chains to adapt and 
respond to climate change will be critically important considering their importance to the Eastern African econom ies 
in their roles of providers of services and employment in rural communities26.  
 
Demand and Supply of Rural and Agriculture Finance for Climate Adaptation  
13. In order to estimate the CCA finance demand in the targeted countries,  a demand side analysis has been conducted 
through  both top-down macroeconomic modelling and a comprehensive and extensive stakeholder consultation in 
each country. The below summary of  the top-down macroeconomic modelling shows that the potential  for CCA 
investments in agriculture is at a significantly higher level compared to resources made available by ARCAFIM :.  
 
Parameter (US$)   Kenya  Uganda  Tanzania  Rwanda  
Estimated demand for CCA irrigation, 
rainwater harvesting, sustainable land 
practices and CCA agronomy solutions  6 010 mil  16 120 mil  30 170 mil  2 730 mil  
Regional Total  55.03  Billion US$  
  
A supply -side analysis  was also conducted, as part of the same study,  to identify the gap between supply and 
demand in the targeted countries. Overall, the landscape for agricultural finance in East Africa is nascent. Although 
an increasing number financial institutions (FIs) (including commercial banks, microfinance instit utions and 
SACCOs) are offering agricultural lending products,  the conditions for accessing these loans including high -interest 
rates, collateral requirements, and short repayment periods often excluded smallholder farmers, and indicated a 
reluctance by FI s to lend to this segment of the market. High interest rates and short repayment periods were both 
also commonly cited as barriers by smallholder farmer associations in the four East African countries. Data collected 
through interviews with financial insti tutions indicated that there are currently very limited financial products targeted 
to climate change adaptation. The interest rates and loan tenors given by FIs and those perceived by farmers’ 
association are different, with farmers often perceiving them to be higher and shorter than FI’s information. Interest 
rates noted by respondents in the region vary widely,  but in most cases, stated annual interest rates are between


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 11 
 
  
27 The most relevant GCF and IFAD baseline projects with direct complementarities with ARCAFIM are presented in Section D5 below  
when discussing the country ownership and the practical ways the proposed ARCAFIM programme can co -operate with the on -going GC F 
and IFAD interventions in the target countries.  
28 Only 1.7% of the global CC financing targets small -scale agriculture producers. See: IFAD /CPI, 2020: Examining the Climate Finance 
Gap for Small -Scale Agriculture , https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/42157470/climate -finance -gap_smallscale_agr.pdf/34b2e25b -
7572 -b31d -6d0c -d5ea5ea 8f96f   
29 The mentioned sub -activity numbering refers to activities described below at section E.6  20% - 35%. FIs offering interest rates at the lower end of the scale benefit from acc ess concessional lending (from 
governments and development FIs).  
 
B.1.c. Proposed solution : Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM)  
 
14. A progressive but rapid shift in agricultural practices in East Africa will be critical as harsh climatic conditions will 
increase in most countries of the region and new climatic threats for crop production, livestock keeping, and fisheries 
are projected t o emerge , as described in the above sections B.1.a and B.1.b . By 2030  - 2040, new and innovative 
agricultural systems need to be implemented in many regions where the climate will soon be no longer suitable for 
current practices. The lack of adequate and a ppropriate private sector financing for CCA investments is a serious 
threat for the materialization of this transformation process.  
 
15. Building on l essons learned and best practices from  ongoing climate change adaptation programming27, mainly 
through the pub lic sector, IFAD proposes a new private sector led  Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance 
Mechanism (ARCAFIM) , with the  aim is to introduce a practical, widely implementable model for achieving a 
paradigm shift towards systematic large -scale use of privat e financial resources for rural CCA investments . Through 
the projected paradigm shift, t he impact of ARCAFIM  would go well beyond the direct impacts and time frame of 
the Programme. In the next Section, t he identified underlying overall key barriers for increasing the volumes of CCA 
financing and investments in the target area are described, leading to the prese ntation of the ARCAFIM Theory of 
Change (TOC) and the Programme’s overreaching impact logic. This is followed by the detailed descriptions of the 
ARCAFIM targets, its key components and activities, implementation approach and resource use, as well as longe r 
term strategies in reaching the wider paradigm change objectives.   
 
16. The overall Programme description presented below provides a  framework for the ARCAFIM  Mechanism  
implementation across the AF RICAN regions . The presentation also includes detailed budgets, 
implementation targets and expected programme results for the Phase 1 operations in East Africa, for 
which GCF co -financing sought under this application .   
 
 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  
17. Only very limited financing is currently allocated to small producers’ CC adaptation investments28, despite urgent 
need for increased invest ment volumes  in low -income and lower middle -income countries in the Eastern Africa , 
facing high climate stress. Particularly, financing by private sector financial institutions (FIs)  rarely includes loans 
for rural adaptation projects of  small producers. This leads  to a low overall level of CC adaptation investments 
especially in the food systems and rural value chains .  In addition, the international community pledged to support 
indigenous peoples’ efforts as stewards of mother earth and lessening interlinked factors of vulnerability.  Underlying  
key barriers for increasing the volumes of CCA financing and investments  are identified and presented in Table 4 
below , together with solutions  that ARCAFIM programme can provide . 
Table 4: Key Barriers for Inclusive CCA Financing for Small -Scale Rural Producers and MSMEs29 
Category  Barriers   ARCAFIM Solutions  
General 
Barriers  for 
Inclusive 
Rural 
Finance  • Real and perceived high risks of financing 
investments by small -scale producers and rural 
MSMEs  
• Weak financial infrastructure to help inform risk 
assessments  
• Small ticket sizes and high transaction costs in 
rural operations  
• Lack of credit/banking histories among small -
scale producers and MSMEs  • Risk sharing embedded into the financing 
solution. Demonstration effect.  (Activity 1.1.2)  
• Risk assessment capacities of FIs 
strengthened  (Activity 2.1.2)  
• Digital solutions to reduce transaction costs for 
small ticket size loans  (Activity 2.1.3)  
• Business management training support to 
small producers and MSMEs to generate 
financial reports  (Activities 2.2.2)


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 • Legal and governance barriers including 
regulations on collaterals and risk ratings for 
banks  
• Lack of financial literacy skills among small 
producers  
• Cultural barriers against entrepreneurship  
• Unwillingness to covert traditional livelihood 
assets into tradable goods  
• Lack of collateral in the form of titles to land  
• Women’s ability to invest in CCA technologies 
and practices compromised by many factors  
• Hesitancy to regard women smallholders and 
small entrepreneurs as ‘safe’ borrowers  • Development of a dedicated taxonomy 
instrument for CCA finance governance, and 
policy dialogue to identify and resolve legal 
barriers during implementation  (Activity 2.3.1)  
• Financial literacy trainings to all ARCAFIM 
clients  (Activity 2.2.2)  
• Implementation of ARCAFIM’s gender and 
social inclusion action plan to address barriers 
including social and cul tural norms , which 
perpetuate GESI inequalities  
Additional 
demand -
side barriers 
of CCA 
financing  • Limited awareness and lack of understanding 
of CCA investment opportunities, technologies, 
and benefits among small -scale producers and 
MSMEs  
• Prevailing small producer preference for near -
term benefits instead of medium to long -term 
savings and revenue streams by CCA 
investment options  
• Lack of borrower capacity to develop sound 
CCA investment proposals for financial 
institutions to assess the fi nancial benefits 
compared to costs, and to meet the customary 
collateral requirements  
• Low risk appetite by small -scale producers for 
borrowing money for less known CCA 
investment approaches  • Capacity building and awareness raising of 
pipeline of client groups  (Activity 2.2.1)  
• Identification and promotion of CCA 
investment solutions that provide both near -
term and long -term benefits and sustainability  
(Activity 2.1.2)  
• Technical assistance to project borrowers on 
CCA investment proposal preparation 
including cost -benefit assessments, joint 
group investments and contract farming  
(Activities 2.2.2 and 2.2.3)  
• Promotion of profitable CCA models through 
technical assistance, awareness raising 
materials and demonstration effect  (Activity 
2.2.1)  
Additional 
supply -side 
barriers of 
CCA 
financing  • Lack of access to long -term capital by local 
financial institutions to support CCA investment 
activities  
• Low awareness in CCA  finance by local 
financial institutions  
• Lack of staff capacity to assess, price a nd 
monitor CCA loans  
• Lack among banks and non -bank FIs of 
suitable lending products that would match the 
requirements of private CCA investments of 
small producers  
• Lack of appropriate risk management solutions, 
including credit ratings and risk transfer an d 
pooling instruments required in CCA lending  
• High up -front costs and risks for developing 
new business lines in green and particularly in 
CC adaptation finance  • Project offers  long term CCA finance capital  
(Activities 1.1.2 and 1.2.2)  
• Capacity building of participating financial 
institutions in CCA finance  (Activity 2.1.2)  
• Training of financial institution staff on CCA 
loan assessments, pricing and monitoring  
(Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2)  
• Development of dedicated climate finance 
lending products that meet the requirements of 
international funders as well as clients  (Activity 
2.1.2)  
• Risk sharing solution in the CCA loan portfolio 
which includes  risk cover  (Activity 1.1.2)  
• Capacity building support to participating 
financial institutions in  development of new CC 
adaptation finance business lines (Activity 
2.1.2)  
 
18. ARCAFIM will offer such solutions by supporting the project Host Bank and Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) with 
financial and technical capacities to deploy tailored CCA financial products; offering targeted TA to Host Banks, 
PFIs (supply) and smallholder farmers and MSMEs (demand) to scale up both the availability and uptake of CCA 
finance; and facilitating improvements in the enabling environment for CCA finance in the p rogramme countries. 
These activities are expected to increase the availability of appropriate and gender - responsive   CCA finance in the 
region, improve the capacity of PFIs to deliver and report on CCA finance, and improve the capacity of male and 
female smallholder farmers and MSMEs to access and manage CCA finance. As a result, smallholder farmers and 
MSMEs will use CCA finance to implement effective climate change adaptation and resilience practices. These 
practices are expected to increase the resilien cy of rural communities to climate change, which in turn will increase 
agricultural productivity and thus food and water security, incomes and employment; all of which will enhance the 
well-being of rural communities. In addition, by strengthening the opti mal use of natural, social and human assets, 
biodiversity benefits will be achieved; and by improving the efficiency of resource use and renewable energy options 
in the agriculture sector, the project will ensure that GHG emissions will not be increased, h owever to ensure focus 
on adaptation benefits there will not be comprehensive Climate Change Mitigation objectives and measurement 
structure in the programme. ARCAFIM will also facilitate an enabling environment for ARCAFIM’s PFIs and other 
financial insti tutions to design, deliver and report of CCA finance; will share best practices in CCA finance learned


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 13 
 
   from the program’s partners; and engage in continuous dialogue with policymakers and influencers to address 
emerging challenges or risks identified durin g program implementation. These activities are expected result in an 
expansion of commercial CCA finance models for low -income rural populations.   The ARCAFIM programme will 
use the twin -track approach to mainstream gender empowerment and social inclusion considerations into its 
operations, complemented by targeted interventions to overcome any specific barriers as necessary. This approach 
will enable programme opportunities to be expanded to women, youth and persons with disabilities, while also 
addressing  the main gaps and barriers they face to inclusion.  
19. As result of the ARCAFIM interventions , the two key outcomes of the programme  include (i) ARCAFIM PFIs expand 
and mainstream CCA finance in the region resulting in increased CC resilience and improved food security levels 
of rural communities ; and (ii) Improved capacity of PFIs and agriculture value chain participants to adapt to risks 
imposed by climatic changes . Closely related to these, the important co -benefits from successful ARCAFIM 
imple mentation include increased rural household incomes, employment generation , improved biodiversity and 
climate change mitigation in the targeted communities.  The outcomes  for women and youth as a result of accessing 
CCA finance will be securing climate chan ge-resilient livelihoods with the benefits of food and water security 
(including reduced workloads associated with household tasks); improved business and employment opportunities 
and incomes; gains in voice and decision -making over the use of assets and o utputs, including income generated; 
and reductions in harmful practices and domestic violence.   
20. Diagram 1 below presents the ARCAFIM Theory of Change (TOC) and overreaching logic. In summary,  the logic 
underlying the programme ’s overall goal, impact and paradigm change function s as follows: IF adequate climate 
adaptation financial services are offered and the capacity of both small producers and rural MSMEs active in food 
systems (demand) and financial institutions (supply) are built, demonstrating a viab le CCA finance ecosystem, 
THEN  there will be a shift towards wider use of commercial resources for CCA in the region, enhancing the well -
being of rural communities through climate resilient livelihoods BECAUSE  smallholder farmers  and MSMEs will use 
CCA fin ance to adopt appropriate and effective climate change adaptation and resilience practices, increasing 
incomes, improving food security and creating and preserving jobs . In medium - to long term, the creation of 
ARCAFIM’s viable CCA finance ecosystem and it s demonstration effect will lead to a paradigm shift towards 
significantly wider use of commercial resources for CCA investments in the target regions.  
21. The Theory of Change link s ARCAFIM closely to GCF ’s key Adaptation Result Areas (ARAs) and Core Indicators. 
The ARCAFIM operations are directly aligned with GCF’s ARA1 (most vulnerable people and communities) and 
ARA2 (health, well -being, food and water security). Regarding the GCF Core Indicators , the TOC  together with the 
ARCAFIM design documents show the way the programme will contribute to climate resilient technology 
development, dissemination and innovation (Core Indicator 6), to market development/transformation at the local, 
sectoral and national le vel (Core Indicator 7), and to effective CCA knowledge generation and learning processes, 
and the use of good CCA practices, methodologies and standards (Core Indicator  8). These links to GCF ARAs 
and Core Indicators form a key element when presenting  the comprehensive Logical Framework in Section E, to 
guide the ARCAFIM operations and the monitoring of its results.  
22. There is a need to identify and address social norms that perpetuate gender empowerment and social inclusion 
(GESI) inequalities and exacerbate  barriers on both the supply and demand sides of CCA financial inclusion.  Unless 
negative norms and behaviours are addressed, women still face challenges in accessing formal financial products 
even when customized financial products and services are avail able.  GESI activities are present in programme 
component 2 (which addresses the non -financial barriers to CCA financing) and programme implementation 
arrangements. Early programme implementation arrangements will ensure there is sufficient capacity and ski lls to 
deliver and track GESI performance through the recruitment of specialists, selection of implementing partners, 
strengthening capacity of those responsible for programme delivery, and the monitoring, evaluation and learning 
system.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 14 
 
  
Diagram 1: ARCAFIM Theory of Change


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 15 
 
  
30 IFAD and FAO 2019: https://www.fao.org/3/ca4672en/ca4672en.pdf ; FAO 2014: https://www.fao.org/3/i4040e/i4040e.pdf   
31 IFAD/CPI, 2020: Examining the Climate Finance Gap for Small -Scale Agriculture , 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/42157470/climate -finance -gap_smallscale_agr.pdf/34b2e25b -7572 -b31d -6d0c -d5ea5ea8f96f   B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Fill in the  GCF results area  table below to map each project/programme outcome  identified in section B.2(a)  to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.   
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 2  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
If any co -benefits have been identif ied in section B .2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below  to map each co -benefit  to the 
corresponding category as defined  in the FP guidance note.  
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1  ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2  ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 3 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 4  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description  
ARCAFIM Overview  
 
1. Overall ARCAFIM Approach.  Rural small producers are responsible for estimated average of 80% of food 
production in Sub -Saharan African  countries30, while  MSMEs involved in food systems provide services and 
valuable jobs and income opportunities to rural low -income population. Due to environmental, technical, 
economic, social and political factors, these small producers and MSMEs disproportionately experience the 
effects of climate change and external shocks on their livelihoods. To maintain and improve their levels of 
productivity,  they urgently need dedicated investment resources to build stronger resilience to climate change , 
but have been struggling so far to attract sufficient financing  for the purpose . While the exact share of climate 
finance for adaptation activities by small producers in ARCAFIM target countries is  unknown , evidence 
suggests that it is very low, in view of the limited share (1.7%) of small -scale agriculture producers’ share of 
the global CC financing  which includes both adaptation and mitigation resource s 31.  
 
2. As discussed in B.1 above, various barriers, including both demand and supply side challenges, restrict the 
expansion of CCA financing across all markets in Africa. The Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance 
Mechanism (ARCAFIM)  will address these barriers causing limited CCA financing from formal financial sector 
targeting small producers in Africa, by deploying catalytic financial instruments  (i.e. risk sharing facility)  into the 
mainstream  private  financial sector in each participating country co mbined with well targeted technical support 
interventions that address both supply and demand side non-financial barriers to greater CCA financing. By 
doing so, ARCAFIM seeks to achieve a demonstration effect and paradigm shift towards large -scale 
implementation of financing models for increased climate change resilience among the economically active 
low-income rural populations and small producers, notably women and youth.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 16 
 
  
32 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth -assessment -report -working -group -ii/   
3. IFAD, as a GCF Accredited Entity and a global leading organisation w ith over 40 years of successful track record 
investing in rural poor and small producers, will act as the manager of ARCAFIM ensuring overall programme 
oversight and coordination. The ARCAFIM is designed to be scalable and replicable, with the ambition is to roll 
it out to other African regions following a gradual phased approach starting with Phase 1 implementation in  
East Africa .  
4. Country Selection.  The ARCAFIM target countries under Phase 1 in East Africa region are Kenya, Tanzania, 
Uganda  and Rwanda, selected for the reasons that (i) they are either Low Income Countries or Lower Middle 
Income Countries; (ii) all are under severe climate change stress, higher compared to average in developing 
countries as stated by the IPCC 2022 report on Clima te Change  Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability32; (iii) in 
the target countries, there is a substantial market of small -scale agriculture production with high potential for 
rural CCA financing , and (iv) the Host Bank has significant operations and suitabl e delivery networks to reach 
the intended ARCAFIM target groups with CCA finance products . 
5. The regional approach, based on strong regional Host Bank , will allow to achieve economies of scale , efficiency 
and significant demonstration effect by leveraging on  the strengths of a large -scale regional partner 
organization with a high level of ESG integration in their operations, a strong balance sheet , appropriate 
operational capacities , and ability  to hedge funding in US$ and offer loans to low -income borrowers in local 
currencies. The phased approach will also enable learning by testing the implementability of the model with 
strong partner organisations in East Africa  and integrate lessons learnt into effective messages on how to 
promote CCA finance on a wider scale over the African continent.  
6. Host Banks . ARCAFIM’s main Partner Financial  Institutions, “ Host Banks ”, will at regional level manage both the 
financial and non -financial ARCAFIM services to the programme target groups based on ARCAFIM eligibility 
criteria and other terms and conditions, agreed upon in the programme design and included in the financing  
agreements between IFAD and the Host Banks. Financial resources provided by  IFAD, financially supported 
by its international partners,  to the Host Banks will be exclusively on -lent to small producers and those rural 
MSMEs that provide services  and jobs to rural low-income people  in the food systems , directly from the Host 
Bank subsidiaries or indirectly through intermediary financial institutions . The CCA lending methods developed 
and used under ARCAFIM will follow each  Host Bank’s operational structure and network, rural and agricult ure 
finance strategy, and their digital tools development approach.  
7. Based on IFAD’s extensive rural finance experience in Africa and reviews of financial markets in the targeted 
countries as well as interviews with several candidate  banks , the Equity Group  was selected as ARCAFIM the 
Host Bank  for East Africa . The criteria for Host Bank identification included: (a) status of a leading commercial 
bank in the targeted countries, (b) solid institutional and financial conditions, (c) strong interest in agr iculture 
and rural finance operations as reflected in the size of portfolio or foreseen strategies to scale up lending to the 
sector, (d) corporate objective to develop and scale -up the bank’s climate finance and particularly climate 
adaptation finance ope rations, (e) a regional branch or agency network to operate in at least 4-5 countries 
relevant for ARCAFIM, (f) strong expressed interest to manage and co -finance the ARCAFIM programme, and 
(g) established governance, social and environmental management st ructures.  
8. Expected Outreach, Results and Targeting . ARCAFIM will achieve its goal and outcomes, described in the 
Theory of Change above, by deploying tailored financial products and targeted TA to scale up CCA finance 
through the local private financial se ctor in the targeted countries. For East Africa, through the 12 years of 
implementation, the projected volume of increased small producer and MSME access to CCA lending is 
US$ 266 million through four -five revolved investment cycles for small producers and  three investment cycles 
for MSMEs of the total capital base of US$ 180 million with expected 6% average loss and 20% share of new 
clients per cycle . 
9. The expected outreach to households, through the revolved investment capital, is based on the expected level 
of agreement of ARCAFIM investment channels and the climate finance taxonomy of investment types 
described at Section B3, Component 1. Investment v alues at small scale producer level will range between 
US$ 50 – US$ 7,500 per farm and the MSME investment values will range between US$ 1,000 – US$ 300,000. 
The average investment per client is projected at US$ 716 for small producers and US$ 150,000 for the 
MSMEs. With the minimum of 70% of small producer investments (and maximum 30% of MSME investments) 
of the total ARCAFIM investments, the expected number of loans will be about 260,000 for small producers 
and 500 for MSMEs.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 10. Therefore, as result of ARCA FIM by programme completion, about 260,000 small producers at Africa will invest 
in improved or new climate resilient production systems and directly access the ARCAFIM adaptation benefits. 
Through the 500 MSME loans, an additional 60,000 small producer ho useholds will benefit indirectly (assumed 
average 120 per MSME) through their linkages in the value chains, and 15,000 rural people will benefit from 
job creation (assumed average 30 per MSME). By project completion the total outreach is estimated at about  
335,000 households with 1.494 million people. The expected outreach will be continuously monitored through 
the ARCAFIM M&E system including the MIS quarterly financial reports, Host Bank annual reports, and through 
the household surveys at project years 3 , 6, 9 and 12 . 
11. The ARCAFIM ultimate beneficiaries are low -income, economically active rural households and small 
producers, with specific target on women and youth. IFAD has strong capacities in targeting investments to 
rural small producers and the linked  MSMEs, as well as in measurement of achieved development impact. 
ARCAFIM’s core target groups, small -scale agriculture producers and rural MSMEs, are aligned  with the 
targeting strategies of IFAD and its ongoing projects in the target countries . In summar y, the ARCAFIM 
targeting and beneficiary profiles include small scale producers, rural microenterprises and agribusiness -SMEs 
which are critical to the development of sustainable food systems and agriculture value chains:  
• Small scale producers and rural microenterprises  in the project targeted rural areas with exposure to 
climate change hazards. This target group is the final beneficiary of all ARCAFIM activities and 
investments. These producers and micro -entrepreneurs have limited access to CCA fin ancial services and 
products. The final composition of this core target group is specified by demand for the ARCAFIM micro - 
and small financing packages, including willingness to implement CCA finance products.  
 
• Agribusiness -SMEs  that have viable and small holder -inclusive business models  such as post -harvest 
processing, local service and input material provision, logistics, storage and distribution, with potential to 
create climate resilient production opportunities and stable jobs for small -scale agricultu re producers. Due 
to risks inherent in the agriculture sector, as well as insufficient business planning capacities, agro -
businesses have limited access to finance to expand their outreach in smallholder communities and 
employment creation in the VCs. All ARCAFIM supported agri -businesses are involved in and promote 
inclusive value chains development, establish market opportunities for small producers, and provide 
employment for under -employed  rural men, women and youth  in the targeted rural areas. Their ro le is 
critical in the development of rural value chains and food systems, vital for sustainable small producer 
livelihoods.  
 
ARCAFIM Components  
12. To achieve the ARCAFIM objectives, the programme activities are structured into two mutually reinforcing 
components: (a) Component  1: Effective Financing for Rural Adaptation Targeting Small Producers and Rural 
MSMEs ; and (b) Component 2:  Innovations and Capacity for Rural Adaptation  Investments . The Component 
2 capacity building activities are al igned as a required element for the CCA investments under Component 1.  
Component 1: Effective Financing for Rural Adaptation Targeting Small Producers and Rural MSMEs  
13. Under Component 1 in East Africa Region, ARCAFIM will provide catalytic international fin ancial resources of 
US$ 90 million (50% from the GCF, 50% from the IFAD -organized co-financiers) to the selected Host Bank  
(Equity Group)  for on -lending for CCA purposes in the programme target countries. The total ARCAFIM on -
lending resources, which are dedicated for CCA loans targeting small producers and rural MSMEs active in 
food systems, are US$ 180 million, which includes a matching a mount of US$ 90 million financed by the Host 
Bank.  
14. The delivery of the CCA loans to the final target groups will take place either directly through the Host Bank 
branch /agency  network or through different types of rural financial intermediaries . The loan delivery channels 
at the start-up of the operations (to be adjusted during implementation) are categorized under Outputs 1.1 and 
1.2, and will include:  
Output 1.1:  Regional Host Bank accesses resources to provide CCA loans to smallholders and 
MSMEs  
• Direct micro -lending through  Host Bank branches  and agent networks . Target: small-scale crop , livestock 
and aquaculture producers. 3 -12 month s’ seasonal input loans  and 6 - 60 months’  long-term investment 
loans  of US$ 50 – US$ 7,500.


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 18 
 
  
33 In-kind loan by a value chain lead company refers to its offer of physical inputs  to supply chain farmers on loan basis 
and monitored in their nomina l value . The company can provide tailored  quality materials  for the specific production 
system and with a lower price compared to local market . Repayment schedule is tailored to production system harvests 
and sales to the lead company, per agreement betwee n the lead company and its supplier farmers . • Direct SME loans by Host Bank branches  and agent networks . Target: Value Chain MSMEs, input 
material providers, technical service providers, CC information providers.  1 - 12 month s’ seasonal  input 
loans  and 6 - 60 m onths’ long -term investment loans  of US$ 1,000 – US$ 300,000.  
 
Output 1.2: Local intermediaries have access to wholesale credit lines to provide CCA loans  
• Indirect micro -lending  via wholesale loans to  Microfinance Institutions ( MFIs ), Savings and Credit 
Cooperatives ( SACCOs ) and  Fintechs.  For on -lending to small-scale crop , livestock and aquaculture 
producers. 2-5 year s wholesale loans . Wholesale loan size US$ 50,000 – US$ 3,500,000 . End user loans 
US$ 50 – US$ 7,500. 
• Indirect micro -lending via wholesale loans to value chain  lead companies . End investment target: small-
scale farmers  on outgrower/contracted schemes. Lead company loans US$ 50,000 – US$ 1,000,000 . 
End user loans US$ 50 – US$ 7,500 in cash/kind33. 
 
15. Selection criteria for intermediaries.  The organizations to operate wholesale lending resources will be 
selected by the Host Bank in consultation with IFAD. The selection criteria will include:  (a) sound  institutional 
and financial condition, ( b) focus on agriculture and /or rural finance opera tions  that includes collaboration with 
small scale producers ,  with a proven commitment to poverty reduction and gender equality, (c) objective to 
develop and scale -up climate finance and particularly climate adaptation finance operations  and the capacity 
to develop and appraise a pipeline of CCA investments , (d) sufficient network to operate in rural areas with 
climate change effected small producers , (e) strong expressed interest to participate in the  ARCAFIM 
programme, ( f) appropriate quality  governance,  social and environmental management structures , and (g) 
registration under the appropriate national legal framework and supervision structures . In addition to screening 
against ARCAFIM criteria, the Host Bank will perform its regular credit risk assessmen t, and the full method 
will be documented in the ARCAFIM Operations Manual.  
16. For all loan delivery channels , the lending methods to effectively reach the final target group of ARCAFIM 
will vary between the target countries . For the East Africa region  overall , the survey -based projected shares  as 
measured in US$ volume  are (a) direct micro -loans by the Host Bank: 4 0%, (b) direct SME loans by the Host 
Bank  and their subsidiaries : 30%, and (c) wholesale loans through  MFIs, SACCOs  and value chain companies : 
30%.End-use of CCA Finance . One of the main barriers to mobilization of private sector financing into CCA 
investments is that there is no clear mutual  understanding and agreement on what types of investments can 
be considered for the end -use of climate adaptation finance  that is like ly to be commercially viable for farmers . 
Without such agreement, it has remained challenging for private sector to mobilize CCA funds and especially 
challenging to implement projects and report back on CCA results.  
17. To overcome this barrier , ARCAFIM introd uces a new operational framework with the title: “ Climate Change 
Adaptation Finance Taxonomy for Sub-Saharan African  Food Systems ”. The draft Ta xonomy  includ es firstly 
an overall presentation  and justification  for eligible CCA investment types for the PFIs, and secondly, a localized 
financial and technical viability assessment for a subset of CCA solutions that are recommended for PFI 
investment s at country and agroecological zone level. The Taxonomy documentation  has been developed 
following an analyti cal process : (i) categorization of SSA CC risks in rural and agriculture sector, (ii) mapping 
of CCA models as adverse impact reduction measures for the CC risk categories, (iii) mapping of CCA models 
with private sector accountability and ownership, (iv) assessment of viability by private sector (farms, MSMEs) 
to implement CCA models, (v) categorization of FI -viable CCA models per CC risk,  and (vii) at country level, 
categorization of the taxonomy by agronomic geographic al zone s and crops for technically a nd financially 
viable CCA models .  The framework will adopt a holistic livelihood approach and will include technologies and 
practices that make not only the productive activities more climate change resilient but also the domestic 
aspects of rural livelihoods, such as water collection/harvesting, storage and use; fuel collection and use; food 
processing and preparation; and energy.  
18. Table 5 below summarizes  the categorization of eligible CCA investment types for each potential borrower 
group and risk  type.  This Table will be included in legal agreements to be signed between IFAD and the Host 
Bank, defining the general categories of eligible end -borrower adaptation investments that can be financed 
with ARCAFIM support.  The Taxonomy should be considered  a living document that can be revised and 
expanded through consensus between ARCAFIM stakeholders. The operationalization and broad distribution


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 of the T axonomy development will continue during  the ARCAFIM implementation as a joint exercise between 
IFAD, the Host Bank and other ARCAFIM stakeholders , including the National Designated Authorities  and the  
PFIs. The wider objective is that the Taxonomy will be applied as a mainstream ed tool by ARCAFIM 
participating financial institutions, as well as by other financial institutions and international financiers 
supporting CC adaptation in Africa (see more in Component 2).


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 20 
 
  
Table 5: Rural CCA investment options summary


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 19. In addition to the CCA taxonomy, commercial  viability assessments of CCA measures and trade -offs between 
options has been conducted, and based on the assessments, an indicative list of main adaptation activities for 
each crop in each  agro-climatic zone is summarized in Table 6 below , together with the sectors, hazards, 
associated climate change risk/impact . At individual sub -project level, the final set of interventions will be 
identified by the end clients themselves based on ARCAFIM  viability analysis of alternative options, and 
trainings provided . 
Table 6: Indicative list of main adaptation activities  
1). Crop producer (applicable GCF result areas: ARA 1 and ARA 2)  
Agro -
climatologic
al zone  Hazard  Risk/Impact  Adaptatio
n activity  Adaptation benefit  Crop by country  
Tropical dry  • Water deficit  
• Heavy wind  
• Water 
excess  
• Soil 
depletion  
• Temperature 
stress  Yield 
change:  
from 0% 
(Cassava) to 
-10% (Millet, 
Maize) 
against 
2001 -2020 
period within 
the 2041 -
2060 period  Shading & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Millet (30%), Cassava 
(40%), Tea (60%), 
Sorghum (70%) to Sweet 
potato (90%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
heat stress and water 
deficit  Kenya:  
Coffee arabica, Cassava, 
Sweet potato, Tea, Millet, 
Sorghum  
Uganda:  Coffee arabica, 
Sweet potato  
Tanzania:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica, Cassava, 
Common beans, Sweet 
poato  
Mulching & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Cassava (40%), Tea 
(90%), Sweet potato 
(90%), Sorghum, Maize, 
Coffee arabica and Millet 
(+100%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, water deficit, 
water exces s Kenya:  
Coffee arabica, Cassava, 
Sweet potato, Tea, Maize, 
Millet, Sorghum  
Uganda:  Coffee arabica, 
Cassava, Maize, Sweet 
potato, Tea  
Rwanda:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica, Common Beans, 
Cassava, Sorghum  
Tanzania:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica, Cassava, 
Common beans, Maize, 
Tree cotton, Soyabean  Wind 
Breaking & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Cassava (30%), Pearl 
millet (40%), Tea (50%), 
Coffee arabica, Sweet 
potato, Maize (60%) and 
Sorghum (70%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, heavy wind, 
water deficit  
Tropical 
humid  • Water deficit  
• Water 
excess  
• Temperature 
stress  
• Soil 
depletion  
• Heavy wind  Yield 
change:  
about -10% 
against 
2001 -2020 
period for 
most crops 
within the 
2041 -2060 
period. With 
common 
beans the 
most 
affected 
crop.  Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Pearl millet, Sweet potato, 
Coffee arabica, Maize, 
Banana (20%) and 
Soyabean, Tree cot ton, 
Cassava and Common 
Bean (30%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, water deficit  Kenya:  Coffee arabica, 
Cassava, Sweet potato, 
Tea, Maize, Millet, Sorghum  
Uganda:  Coffee arabica, 
Cassava, Maize, Sweet 
potato, Tea  
Rwanda:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica, Common Beans, 
Cassava, Sorghum  
Tanzania:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica, Cassava, 
Common beans, Maize, 
Tree cotton, Soyabean  
Wind 
Breaking & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Coffee arabica (10%), 
Sorghum, Sweet potato, 
Banana (20%),  Tree 
cotton, Common Bean, Kenya:  Coffee arabica, 
Sweet potato  
Uganda:  Coffee arabica, 
Cassava,


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 Maize (30%), Pearl millet 
and Cassava (40%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, heavy wind,  
water deficit  Rwanda:  Banana, Coffee 
Arabica,  Cassava  
 
Tanzania:  Banana,  
Cassava, Maize, Tree 
cotton  
Mulching & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: from 
Pearl millet, Sweet potato, 
Coffee arabica, Banana 
(20%), Cassava, Maize, 
Common Bean and Tree 
cotton (30%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, water 
excess, water deficit  
Temperate  • Water deficit  
• Water 
excess  
• Temperature 
stress  
• Soil 
depletion  
• Heavy wind  Yield 
change:  
about -5% 
within the 
2041 -2060 
period,  
beans is the 
most 
affected 
crop.  Wind 
Breaking  • Increase in yield: Coffee 
arabica (12%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, heavy wind  
 Kenya:  Coffee arabica, Tea  
Uganda:  none  
Rwanda:  Banana  
Tanzania:  Banana, 
Cassava  
Shading & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: Sorghum, 
Banana (10%), Common 
Bean, Tea, Coffee arabica, 
Sweet potato (30%) and 
Cassava (40%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, temperature 
stress, water deficit  Kenya:  Coffee arabica, 
Cassava, Sweet potato, 
Tea 
Uganda : Coffee arabica, 
Sweet potato, Tea  
Rwanda : Banana  
Tanzania : Banana, 
Cassava  Mulching & 
Micro 
Water 
Harvesting  • Increase in yield: Banana 
(10%), Tea, Common 
Bean (40%), Cassava, 
Coffee arabica (50%), 
Sweet potato (60%)  
• Reduction in negative yield 
volatility induced by 
climate -related hazards: 
soil depletion, heavy wind  
 
2). Livestock producer (applicable GCF result areas: ARA 1 and ARA 2)  
Agro -
climatologic
al zone  Hazard  Risk/Impact  Sector ot 
typology  Adaptation activity  Adaptation 
benefit  
Tropical dry  • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Temperat
ure stress  
• Heavy 
winds  
• Soil 
depletion  Heat stress:  average 
of 1°C increase of the 
mean temperature 
(severe THI for sheep 
and poultry).  
Climatic suitability: 
reduction of 1 to 4%.  
RVF risk:  increased 
RVF risk from 10 to 
40%.  
TBDs risk:  reduced 
TBDs risk from 28% to 
an increase to 10%.  Grassland 
Sedentary  • Veterinary prophylaxis  • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
Landless 
system  • Micro harvesting  
• Veterinary prophylaxis  
• Variety selection  
• Agroforestry  • CBR: 1.5 - 
1.55 (Micro 
harvesting)  
• CBR: 2.85 - 
3.16  
(agroforestry)  
Grassland 
Nomadic  • Veterinary prophylaxis  • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 • Silvo -pastoral and 
rotational grazing 
systems (including 
Movement)  • Low cost 
effectiveness  
Tropical 
humid  • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Temperat
ure stress  
• Heavy 
winds  
• Soil 
depletion  Heat stress: average 
of 1°C increase of the 
mean temperature 
(severe THI for sheep 
and poultry).  
Climatic suitability: 
reduction of 1 to 3%.  
RVF risk:  increased 
from 18 to 29%.  
TBDs risk: reduced 
from 8 to 59%.  Grassland 
Sedentary  • Veterinary prophylaxis and 
vaccination facilities  • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
Landless 
system  • Micro water harvesting  
• Veterinary prophylaxis 
and vaccination facilities  
• Drought and heat 
tolerant fodder varieties  • CBR: 1.5 - 
1.55 (Micro 
harvesting)  
• CBR: 2.85 - 
3.16  
(agroforestry)  
Grassland 
Nomadic  • Veterinary prophylaxis 
and vaccination facilities  
• Silvo -pastoral and 
rotational grazing 
systems (including 
Movement)  • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
Temperate  • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Temperat
ure stress  
• Heavy 
winds  
• Soil 
depletion  Heat stress: average 
of 1°C increase of the 
mean temperature 
(severe THI for sheep 
and poultry).  
Climatic suitability: 
reduction between 1 
to 12%.  
RVF risk: increased 
RVF risk from 12 to 
29%.  
TBDs risk: outbreak 
risk from a 17% 
reduction to a 14% 
increase.  Grassland 
Sedentary  • Veterinary prophylaxis 
and vaccination facilities  
• Drainage systems  
 • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
• CBR: 1.045 
(drainage 
system)  
Landless 
system  • Micro water harvesting  
• Veterinary prophylaxis 
and vaccination facilities  
• Drainage systems  
• Drought and heat 
tolerant fodder varieties  • CBR: 1.5 - 
1.55 (Micro 
harvesting)  
• CBR: 1.045 
(drainage 
system)  
• Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
• CBR: 2.01 
(variety 
selection)  
Grassland 
Nomadic  • Veterinary prophylaxis 
and vaccination facilities  
• Movement  • Constant 
monitoring of 
outbreak risk  
• Low cost 
effectiveness  
 
3). Aquaculture producer (applicable GCF result areas: ARA 1 and ARA 2)  
Lake type  Hazard  Risk/Impact  Adaptation activity  Adaptation benefit  
Seasonal 
Southern 
Hot • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Water 
temperatu
re stress  
• Heavy 
winds  Water temperarture 
stress : average of 
0.78°C increase of the 
mean temperature.  
Dissolved Oxygen 
stress:  reduction of -
0.15 ppm.  
Wind Speed : 
increased wind speed 
from 2.52 m/s to 2.59 Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions:  Water drainage  
Integrated farm systems with 
aquaculture : 
Agroforestry/vegetation 
practices  • Shade and reduces direct 
sunlight, thereby lowering 
water temperature  
• Avoid waterlogging and 
excess water 
accumulation, leading to 
higher temperatures a nd 
oxygen depletion  
Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions  : Pond oxygen • Adequate oxygen levels in 
the water, promoting fish 
health and growth.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 24 
 
  
34 As part of this budget, IFAD is  negotiating with the Government of Denmark to co -finance the ARCAFIM TA 
component costs, together with GCF and IFAD contributions.  m/s with maximum up 
to 8.05 m/s.  stone s or water movement 
systems (hoses)  • Improve the overall well -
being of value chain.  
Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions:  Conventional 
cages or fixed cages as a 
more cost -effective option  • Fish well being and safety  
• Low cost effectiveness  
Southern 
Hot • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Water 
temperatu
re stress  
• Heavy 
winds  Water temperarture 
stress : average of 
0.78°C increase of the 
mean temperature.  
Dissolved Oxygen 
stress: reduction of -
0.15 ppm.  
Wind Speed : 
increased wind speed 
from 2.52 m/s with 
maximum up to 8.05 
m/s. Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions:  Water drainage  
Integrated farm systems with 
aquaculture:  
Agroforestry/vegetation 
practices  • Shade and reduces direct 
sunlight, thereby lowering 
water temperature  
• Avoid waterlogging and 
excess water accumulation, 
leading to higher 
temperatures and oxygen 
depletion  
Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions:  Pond oxygen 
stones  
or water movement systems 
(hoses)  • Adequate oxygen levels in 
the water, promoting fish 
health and growth  
• Improve the overall well -
being of value chain.  
Climate resilient  aquaculture 
solutions:  Conventional 
cages or fixed cages as a 
more cost -effective option  • Fish well being and safety  
• Low cost effectiveness  
Tropical Hot  • Water 
deficit  
• Water 
excess, 
floods  
• Water 
temperatu
re stress  
• Heavy 
winds  
 Water temperarture 
stress : average of 
1°C increase of the 
mean temperature.  
Dissolved Oxygen 
stress: decrease of -
0.14 ppm.  
Wind Speed : 
increased wind speed 
from 2.87 m/s to 2.96 
m/s with maximum up 
to 8.05 m/s.  Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions Water drainage  
Integrated farm systems with 
aquaculture:  
Agroforestry/vegetation 
practices  • Shade and reduces direct 
sunlight, thereby lowering 
water temperature  
• Avoid waterlogging and 
excess water accumulation, 
leading to higher 
temperatures and  oxygen 
depletion  
Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions: Pond oxygen 
stones or water movement 
systems (hoses)  • Adequate oxygen levels in 
the water, promoting fish 
health and growth.  
• Improve the overall well -
being of value chain.  
Climate resilient aquaculture 
solutions:  Conventional 
cages or fixed cages as a 
more cost -effective option  • Fish well being and safet  
• Low cost effectiveness  
20. ARCAFIM r isk management solution . The ARCAFIM financial structure is based on a blended finance risk 
sharing structure that unlocks international capital (including from GCF as the key international financier ) and 
crowds in regional capital for the ARCAFIM CCA financing operations at scale. Th e favourable financing terms 
of the international ARCAFIM loans to the Host Bank, together with non -financial support will make it possible 
to provide competitive financing for CCA investments at affordable terms to the target groups, including 
adequate re payment and grace periods.  
Component 2: Innovations and Capacity for Rural Adaptation Investments  
21. As a required element to support the Component 1 investments , Component 2 will address non -financial 
barriers currently preventing greater CCA financing  in the ARCAFIM target regions . With a total technical 
assistance budget  of US$ 20 million34, firstly, ARCAFIM  will strengthen the awareness and capacity of 
Participating Financial Institutions to offer rural CCA finance services  and secondly , the project  will develop the  
CCA investment capacities and financial literacy skills of small -scale producers and rural MSMEs  that will apply 
for ARCAFIM financing . Thirdly , ARCAFIM will improve climate finance enabling environment through CCA 
finance policy d ialogues and the development of a Taxonomy for CCA Rural Finance that can be implemented 
in East Africa  and more widely , in all regions of  Africa.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 22. Output  2.1: Improved readiness and capacities of all PFIs to make appropriate climate finance investments . 
ARCAFIM will provide global top end expertise to the regional Host Bank – Equity Bank Group – and its network 
of subsidiaries  and branches  in the four target countries,  as well as an estimated 20 other PFIs that will perform 
as local intermediary financial service providers (see Component 1 on the respective lending  roles and 
selection criteria  for the intermediaries ). The capacity building service will ensure that the provided credit will 
deliver real, effective and transformati onal adaptation impact and is channelled to the intended purposes and 
beneficiaries. The Host Ban k with IFAD support will recruit  systematic support to establish the ARCAFIM 
programme management systems, to coordinate the programme implementation and repor t on the 
performance. All ARCAFIM PFIs will be sensitized to the importance of CCA and receive a demand -driven 
package of technical support and innovation services, with the aim to develop and offer appropriate CCA rural 
financial services, appropriate ris k management practices in CCA financing, and reduce transaction costs  by 
strengthened delivery channels . Initiation of the Technical Assistance to PFIs is a condition to access to 
ARCAFIM financing for on -lending.  
23. The Output will be managed by the Host Bank . The implementation will be  through competitively selected 
external service providers and through the Equity Bank Foundation , which is dedicated for social transformation 
through inclusive finance  and has a strong network and track record on the same . The external  service provider 
selection process is conducted jointly by the Host Bank  and IFAD to ensure mobilization of global top end 
capacities for the task.  The Host Bank and its Equity Bank Foundation will share 50% of the costs of the 
activities  implemented through the Foundation .  
24. Participatin g FIs (Host Bank ’s branch network as well as  local intermediaries) involved in ARCAFIM financing 
activities will receive technical support packages tailored for their specific needs. A preliminary demand 
analysis for the capacity building services was conducted during the ARCAFIM  design , confirming that in the 
financial sector there is limited understanding of CCA finance for agriculture value chains  however a high 
interest to initiate climate finance portfolios with available appropriate support . The ARCAFIM capacity building  
to PFIs will be launche d at project start up to support the Host Bank  Group and  branches and subsequently to 
other PFIs against their expressions of demand to participate in the ARCAFIM implementation . Technical 
support areas will include: (i) development of CCA finance strategy  and costing of its implementation, (ii) 
development or strengthening of CCA lending products that comply with the eligibility criteria under ARCAFIM 
Taxonomy, that are reported as a separate category in the Host Bank’s management information system, and 
that target small producers, rural poor and MSMEs active in food systems, (iii) support rural outre ach and social 
inclusion strategies, including CCA finance advisory capacities, (iv) strengthen Digital Finance Services by 
inclusion of functions for climate, rural and agricultural finance, to enable data driven, affordable and effective 
risk management and support functions for CCA lending, (v) support improved Management Information 
Systems (MIS), (vi) develop agriculture and climate insurance products and solutions such as bundled service 
packages, and (vii) support strengthened ESG standards and manag ement systems including CC risk 
management  structures  for each PFI to comply with IFAD , GCF and other co -financier safeguards.  
Furthermore, ARCAFIM will work with the PFIs to develop technical assistance packages delivered to small 
producers and MSMEs unde r Output 2.2. 
25. Tech nology -enabled innovative solutions . Technical support to PFIs will also be provided to identify and pilot 
digital technologies which reduce transaction costs, and/or improve the credit assessment and risk 
management of small CCA loans. The solutions to be implemented directly under the ARCA FIM Host Bank 
delivery channels or by intermediary financial service providers, including Fintechs, can include but are not 
limited  to: (i) location services for farmer plots and GIS -based information of the agriculture models and 
expected yields contribut ing to client risk assessments in a cost -effective manner, (ii) digital payments/mobile 
wallet transaction histor ies of small producers, contributing to the cost-effective client risk assessment, (iii) data 
analytics capabilities of PFIs to include new typ es of data like farm  boundaries and soil health incorporated into 
the credit assessment to improve accessibility of potential borrowers including women and youth who typically 
lack credit histories and collateral, (iv) cost -effective transactions of small -scale financing to small producers 
by utilization of mobile money systems including savings, credit and payment services, (v) tracking of the 
utilization of ARCAFIM investment resources through mobile payment systems, and (vi) integration of technical 
advisory packages and weather information into the mobile banking financial service interface. Details of 
selected solutions will be developed and contracts with digital service providers launched in the project initiation 
period  and during Programme Year 1.  
26. GESI. The CCA finance strategy (including CCA financial advisory capacities) and rural outreach and social 
inclusion strategies will specifically address how the CCA products and services will developed and 
disseminated to women, youth and people with disa bilities. Methods for community engagement and outreach 
will be inclusive and gender responsive . CCA lending products and services (including climate risk insurance ,


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 26 
 
  
35 https://www.safinetwork.org/   digital technologies and advisory services ) will be tailored to the needs, resources and capacities of women 
and youth who are small producers or micro/small entrepreneurs in the food system.   
 
27. Output  2.2: Improved CCA investment capacities of smallholder farmers and MSMEs . Recognizing the urgent 
need to stimulate CCA finance demand among rural small producers and MSMEs  involved in food systems , 
ARCAFIM will offer targeted and practical technical assistance to the se target groups.  The pipeline generated 
through the capacity building directly builds to the investment outreach of the PFIs, ensuring effective and 
appropriate utilisation of the ARCAFIM Component 1 financial resources.  In the four East African target 
countries, the Output activities will reach an estimated 325,000  small producers and 625 agribusinesses. The 
selection criteria and identification process for the target groups is explained above under Component 1.  
28. This Output will also be managed by the Host Bank. Its execution will be mainly through the Equity Bank 
Foundation that has extensive experience in implementation of technical assistance operations to prospective 
financial service clients. For the  activities implemented through the Foundation , 50% of the costs  will be 
covered by the Foundation.  To bridge gaps in the Foundation’s technical capacity related to Climate Change 
Adaptation as well as the Foundation’s outreach potential in areas with thinner footprint, external technical 
assistance partners will be co mpetitively recruited by the Host Bank with IFAD support and oversight.  
29. Small -Scale Agriculture Producer CCA Investment Promotion and Financial Literacy Services.  An estimated 
16,000 rural producer groups will be trained, with average 20 participants in ea ch group. The activity will 
increase knowledge of viable CCA options and financial services among small producers, and enhance the 
financial literacy skills and savings culture among the supported households, leading to increased volumes and 
sustainability  of CCA investments. Capacity building topics will include: CCA investment options, basic banking 
skills, “Saving for a Purpose”, managing resources, borrowing with special focus on the medium to long -term 
perspective required in the CCA loans, interest ra tes, collateral, bank transactions and payments, and the use 
of mobile and digital banking services. Furthermore, a targeted module for women empowerment in the use of 
financial services will be developed . 
30. Agribusiness CCA Business Development Services (BD S). The aim of the CCA BDS is to strengthen the 
knowledge of rural enterprises  of viable CCA options , benefits  and related financial services, and to develop 
their business planning , investment start -up and financial management capacity,  thereby  increasing the 
demand for CCA finance and  lower ing the investment risk for the PFIs. Furthermore, bankability assessments 
can be completed for agribusinesses, helping to inform the PFIs of the  real investment risks and opportunities. 
The BDS services to the targeted 625 agribusinesses will be organized as training of small groups and as 
individual consulting service, depending on demand,  with the aim to ensure that ARCAFIM financing will target  
well planned productive and screened investments in the rural agricultural sectors, to ensure highest possible 
positive impact on climate change resilience.  During BDS initiation, MSME participation fees will be piloted and 
progressively introduced with t he objective of 25% cost coverage.  
31. GESI. Under output 2.2, the gender action plan will ensure that GESI considerations are mainstreamed into the 
provision of targeted and practical technical assistance to stimulate the demand for CCA finance. Participatory  
engagement with the community, will ensure CCA products and services meet the priority needs and resources 
of different groups within the food system, including women, youth and people with disabilities.  
32. Output  2.3: Improved enabling environment of CCA through application of taxonomy and best practices by 
climate finance ecosystem . Policy dialogue on rural CCA finance  enabling environment , especially to create 
functioning private sector investment mechanisms, will be supported by the A RCAFIM team, implemented  by 
IFAD  as the  Executing Entity for this Output . The deliverables will include: (i) continuous technical backstopping 
by IFAD to support the ARCAFIM Host Bank and PFIs in the climate adaptation finance operations, (ii) semi -
annual  technical working papers on emerging topics on climate finance in East Africa region, and on the same 
topic s, semi -annual high -level regional policy workshops , and (iii) regular updates, dissemination and 
operationalization of the ARCAFIM Taxonomy framewor k as a key governance tool for CCA finance.  
33. For this work, IFAD will closely engage with the GCF -led network of National Designated Authorities and with 
regional intergovernmental organizations to ensure that the developed best practises will become broadly 
known and utilized for climate change adaptation programming in the region. Furthe rmore, to enable effective 
replication, the ARCAFIM core implementing group will capitalize IFAD’s knowledge and networks in  
international privat e and public sector stakeholder groups and platforms , including the IFAD -hosted 
Smallholder and Agri -SME Financ e and Investment Network (SAFIN)35, Public Development Banks Platform


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 27 
 
  
36 https://financeincommon.org/sites/default/files/2021 -
10/IFAD%20Finance%20in%20Common%20Declaration%202021%20Final.pdf   
37 https://www.rfilc.org/   for Green and Inclusive Food Systems36, the Rural Finance and Investment Learning Centre (RFILC -
CABFIN)37, as well as the IFAD -supported Rural Finance Investment Projects at country leve l and the ongoing 
COMESA –EAC–SADC Climate Change Program.  The objective is to ensure continued enabling environment 
for climate finance and dialogues to adjust policy frameworks in case of emerging challenges or risks that may 
prevent ARCAFIM effective imp lementation and scaling up of its best practices.  
34. In particular, d uring the ARCAFIM  start-up period IFAD will, together with the key implementing partners, lead 
the operationalization  of the framework for private sector CCA financing applicable across the Sub -Saharan 
region  (“Climate Change Adaptation Finance Taxonomy for Sub-Saharan African  Food Systems  ”) and support 
the related policy dialogue on rural CCA finance enabling environment . The developed Taxonomy  will 
immediately serve as the core  framework for end-borrower investment eligibility under ARCAFIM, but more 
broadly, help the climate finance ecosystem at international, regional, national and local levels to justify, monitor 
and report back on private sector  CCA investments.  In addition to the overall eligibility framework , IFAD has 
prepared technical and financial assessments of a subset of eligible investment options and provides 
investment recommendations to the PFIs for each country and agroecological zon e. The steps in the 
development of t he methodology are described under Component 1 above.  Following  the methodology 
development and  technical groundwork, a series of regional workshops, both virtual and physical, will be 
organised  to complete, agree upon, and disseminate the agreed  version of the Taxonomy , as well as 
continuously update the CCA investment option viability recommendations at local levels . IFAD will lead this 
effort, joined by the ARCAFIM financiers, including international financing partners , the regional Host Banks, 
local FIs, local value chain stakeholders as well as the relevant national policy makers and authorities. 
Technical synergies will be sought with other GCF -financed IFAD projects in Africa with similar types of 
activities , including in particular the secon d phase of IGREENFIN programme , and also with climate change 
adaptation programmes by other development partners.  
35. GESI. The policy dialogue on CCA rural finance presents a unique opportunity to engage govern ment and 
policy makers with GESI challenges and opportunities linked to inclusive CCA finance.  Engagement will be 
broaden ed to encourage collaboration and exchange between government, NGOs and civil society on the 
nexus between GESI, climate change and fi nancial services.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
36. Overall Implementation Structure.  Diagram 2 shows  the overall ARCAFIM implementation structure.  Below 
in this Section, the key implementation roles and approaches of IFAD and the Host Bank are summarised, as 
well as the core elements of the M&E arrangements and the implementation model of the TA services. The 
Section is closed with the description o f the key elements and practices in the  ARCAFIM financial structure 
and its legal framework . 
Diagram 2: ARCAFIM Implementation Structure


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 28 
 
  
 
37. Role of IFAD.  In additio n to the co -EE role for output 2.3, IFAD , as a GCF PSF Accredited Entity,  will manage 
the funds provided for ARCAFIM by GCF and other international financiers and be the lender of record of the 
ARCAFIM funds to the Host Bank. IFAD will disburse the funds for ARCAFIM on -lending to the regional Host 
Bank subject to satisfaction o f the agreed Conditions Precedents for the  drawdown.  The IFAD ARCAFIM loans 
will be matched 1:1 by the Host Bank, thus doubling the ARCAFIM financing resources.   The IFAD loans  to the 
Host Bank serve as risk protection for the underlying Qualifying Loans i n the blended finance structure. IFAD 
will monitor and oversee that the Host Bank will use the loan proceeds exclusively for on -lending under the 
ARCAFIM programme to the targeted beneficiaries based on agreements and definitions of the Loan 
Agreements bet ween IFAD and the Host Bank.  
38. Based on monitoring and reporting procedures to be included in the loan agreement between IFAD and the 
Host Bank , IFAD will provide regular progress reports to GCF and other co -financiers to keep them informed 
of the ARCAFIM  performance including both financial aspects and development results as well as social, 
environmental and governance safeguards  developed for th e programme . IFAD will undertake regular 
supervision s and commission periodical evaluation studies  on ARCAFIM development impact . IFAD will also 
coordinate the development and implementation of the CCA finance taxonomy and policy dialogues under 
Output 2.3. These functions will be performed by dedicated IFAD staff for the ARCAFIM operation as well as 
by recruited part -time consultants, all financed with the management fees earned on the loans and grants  
provided by GCF and other international financiers to I FAD for ARCAFIM.  
39. Role and Approach of Host Bank.  The regional Host Bank , in East Africa the Equity Group,  will manage the 
investment of the ARCAFIM resources and services (financial and non -financial) to the programme target 
groups, based on ARCAFIM eligibility criteria and other terms and conditions, agreed upon at the programme 
design and included in the loan agreement between IFAD and the Host Bank. The  Host Bank  will also perform 
the role of the GCF Executing Entities for ARCAFIM. The Host Bank  will ensure utilization  of ARCAFIM 
resources exclusively to agreed targets , detailed monitoring of the investment s, and periodic reporting of the 
ARCAFIM progress against agreed key indicators. The Host Bank  will also coordinate the ARCAFIM -financed 
technical assistance support to the end target groups to improve their capabilities to participate in CCA finance 
opera tions. There are three layers of project management activities under the ARCAFIM program me – i.e. 
IFAD  
GCF PSF Accredited Entity (AE)             
IFAD organized
international 
cofinanciers
Execution Entity (Equity Bank Kenya )  
-through other subs
PMU at EBK / ARCAFIM Focal points at subs
Window 1 (output 1.1)
direct investmentsWindow 2 (output 1.2)
wholesale lending
CCadaptation financing US$ 180 mLoan with credit 
protection US$ 90 m
TATA Facility
TAGrant USD 15.5 mIFAD PSFPLoan US$ 45 m
Grant US$ 10 m
Smallholder
farmersMFIs/ 
SACCOsGCF
VC lead cos. 
MSMEsTA Facility 
for output 
2.3EE for output 2.3
Loan US$ 45 m
Grant US$ 10 m
EE for output 2.1 and 2.2EE for output 1.1and 1.2
output 1.1 output 1.2


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 ARCAFIM Coordination Unit at IFAD, Project Management Unit (PMU) at Host Bank , and ARCAFIM Focal 
Points at Equity Group  Country Subsidiaries. Main roles and responsibilities of  each layer are described in 
Table 7 below. The details of the roles of the Banking Group Head Offices, Country Subsidiaries, and different 
technical departments of the Host Bank  in the ARCAFIM lending operations and in TA provision will be  defined 
in detail in the ARCAFIM Operations Manuals  to be  developed for  Equity Group .    
Table 7: Roles and Responsibilities for project management activities under ARCAFIM Project  
ARCAFIM Facility Coordination 
Unit at IFAD  PMU at Host Bank  ARCAFIM Focal Points at country 
subsidiaries  
Manage the fund flows and 
reporting requirements of 
ARCAFIM Facility to the financiers  
Maintain close relationship and 
interface with PMU at HB as well 
as financiers  
Support  the setting up ARCAFIM 
Database syst em in Host Bank, 
and manage the data collection 
from the system  
Retention and maintenance of 
quality filing system of ARCAFIM 
loan agreement  
Preparation of regular and ad hoc 
reports for use by various internal 
stakeholders and financiers  
Support and oversight in the 
analysis and reporting on the 
impact data, including the ESMS 
and CCA data for the HBs  
Review and provide feedback if 
necessary progress on 
implementation of GESI plan  Manage the fund flows and reporting of ARCAFIM 
Facility  
Maintain close relationship and interface with IFAD 
ARCAFIM Facility Coordination Unit, as well as with 
the HB’s ARCAFIM Focal points at country subsidiary  
Setting up ARCAFIM Database system in HB, and 
manage the data collection from the system  
Supporting  initial roll out of the ARCAFIM information 
system / database to country subsidiaries  
Retention and maintenance of quality filing system of 
ARCAFIM loan agreement and risk sharing 
agreements between HB and subsidiaries  
Maintain a database of ARCAFIM elig ible 
transactions under the program me 
Receive and report on the impact data from the 
investments, including environmental and social 
management and climate adaptation benefit data  
Manage external audit exercise for the Facility  
Oversee implementation of a nd reporting on GESI 
action plan; provide advice and assistance as 
necessary  Manage the fund flows and reporting 
requirements of ARCAFIM Facility  
Maintain close relationship and interface 
with PMU at HB  
Setting up ARCAFIM Database system 
in country subsidi ary, and manage the 
data collection from the system  
Retention and maintenance of quality 
filing system of risk sharing agreements 
between HB and subsidiaries  
Maintain a database of ARCAFIM 
eligible transactions under the program  
Collect the impact data fro m the 
investments, including environmental 
and social management and climate 
adaptation benefit data  
Manage external audit exercise for the 
Facility  
Guide the implementation of and 
reporting on the GESI action plan by 
PFIs and other service providers; 
provide advice and assistance as 
necessary  
40. As described under Component 1, the Host Bank  can utilise various alternative channels to effectively reach 
the ARCAFIM target group with the CCA financing services. In the East Africa Region, the Equity Group 
operates in ARCAFIM target countries with a wide rural branch network supported by a large number of banking 
agent s. In total, the Group has over 330 branch offices and over 53,000 agen ts in the ARCAFIM target 
countries . With this significant outreach and its history as an active lender to small -scale farmers, the Equity 
Group is well equipped t o provide CCA loans direct to smallholders and rural MSMEs. Therefore, direct loans 
to end borrowers are expected to have a large share of  the ARCAFIM portfolio in East Africa . There will , 
however,  also be loans issued through the wholesale lenders such as  rural Savings and Credit Cooperatives 
(SACCOs ) and Microfinance Institutions ( MFIs ), which operate with large rural clienteles in this region.   
41. ARCAFIM Technical Advisory Services . The implementation and management modality of the ARCAFIM 
technical support services under Component 2 will be tailored  for each  type and recipient of these services. 
For technical support to the Host Bank and to the intermediary PFIs, to develop their  CCA  lending  operations , 
IFAD will, jointly with the Host Bank, select the external service providers/consultants to provide the required 
services.  The Host Bank will manage the recruitment of these service providers while  IFAD  no objection will be 
required to  oversee that the services provided meet the expectations  agreed in the ARCAFIM design . 
42. Regarding the TA services to the end borrowers, the Hos t Bank will directly manage the service delivery, 
utilizing either the service units  under Equity Bank Foundation,  with ARCAFIM support , and recruiting external 
technical service providers  when needed . This is a preferred solution t o ensure full alignment between the 
financing  and capacity building aspects  of ARCAFIM  and thereby increase the effectiveness of capacity 
building in increased access to finance results . To further emphasise ARCAFIM capacity building, all e xternal 
service provider contracts will be outcome -based . IFAD , as the programme manager , will leverage its


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 experience and knowledge of relevant farmer organization networks , NGOs  and other service providers to 
identify the most appropriate capacity buildi ng partners  for a CCA financing programme of the ARCAFIM type.  
43. For the services and development tasks related to policy dialogue and the CCA taxonomy, IFAD has the key 
implementation responsibility. The tasks in this important area  will require close co -operation between IFAD 
and the financial institutions implementing ARCAFIM, who are also direct beneficiaries and immediate users 
of the  developed  taxonomy in their portfolio operations with the rural clientele.  
44. Preliminary Implementation Activities Leading to ARCAFIM Launch.   During the period leading to 
ARCAFIM effectiveness and official launch, the ARCAFIM -related staff at IFAD and the Host Bank  will closely 
co-operate to ensure a smooth take -off of the programme activities. In East Africa, t o support and co -ordinate 
these activities, a CCA Finance Specialist will be recruited at the banking group level to Equity Group , with 
funding from the ARCA FIM design grants. The expert  will (a) support the design of appropriate CCA loan 
products for the bank to be launched under ARCAFIM, based on the developed CCA finance taxonomy, (b) 
co-ordinate the development of the lending mechanism appropriate for these CCA loan products, and (c) 
support the planning and organising of appropriate in -house training programmes and training/marketing 
materials for the Host Bank on ARCAFIM -financed lending. At the same time IFAD and the Host Bank w ill 
finalise the preparations for the selection and training of appropriate local wholesale on -lending institutions to 
take part in the ARCAFIM lending and develop the framework and action plans for capacity building of small 
producers, their organisations, and the borrowing MSMEs in the CCA operations.   Under the guidance of a 
GESI expert appointed to the PMU, gender and social norms diagnostic studies will be undertaken in t he four 
participating countries  during early implementation and the findings will guide the development of the detailed 
GESI action plan.   
45. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).   The overall M&E approach for ARCAFIM is built around its Theory of 
Change and Log  Frame and builds in adaptive management so that the program me can regularly assess, learn 
and adapt to improve  its climate adaptation  outcomes. Details  on the Monitoring , Reporting and  Evaluation 
System are proposed in Section E .7, and the system will be  further refined during the inception phase with the 
necessary inputs of stakeholders in the M&E process . While IFAD will lead the M&E  reporting to GCF  for the 
program me, the Host Bank , as key implementer of the programme, will have a prominent  role in data collection 
and analysi s. 
    
46. ARCAFIM Contractual Arrangement.  ARCAFIM has two level of contractual arrangements – upstream and 
downstream. In the upstream arrangement, the IFAD intends to receive financial resources from the 
international financiers, including GCF, based on bilateral financin g agreements to be entered into between the 
international financiers and IFAD. In the downstream arrangement, the Host Bank (Equity Bank (Kenya ) 
Limited ) will receive the loan from IFAD and make a contribution  equal to the amount of the loan that the Host 
Bank received from IFAD, to be on -lent to the final beneficiaries or financial intermediaries through Host Bank  
or other country subsidiaries ( EBUL , EBR, and EBTL ). 
Upstream:  
1. Limited recourse f unding agreement s with the international financiers (including the FAA with GCF).  
2. Grant agreements with GCF and international financiers.  
3. An inter -creditor agreement between the international financiers and IFAD (if agreed with all other 
international financiers).  
 
Downstream:  
1. IFAD loan agreement with the Host Bank  (i.e. Equity Bank (Kenya ) Limited ), including the risk-sharing 
arrangement between IFAD and the Host Bank  (the “ Subsidiary  Loan Agreement”) . 
2. IFAD technical assistance and grant agreements with the Host Bank . 
Upstream ARCAFIM Contractual Arrangement  with GCF . IFAD will enter into a FAA with GCF under which IFAD, 
in its capacity as Accredited Entity, shall administer the releva nt GCF Proceeds to be used for the financing of ARCAFIM 
and channel such GCF Proceeds to Host Bank , in accordance with the AMA and the terms and conditions to be agreed 
in the FAA.  The requested GCF Loan amount is USD 45 million, which consists of USD 21 million to be utilized for the 
1st loss tranche and USD 24 million for mezzanine tranche under the risk sharing arrangement in the loan agreement 
between IFAD and Host Bank . IFAD’s repayment obligation to GCF is limited to obligations to principal, interest , fees 
and any other costs related to the GC F Loans  (the “Reflowed Funds”) received from Host Bank  by way of repayment


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 31 
 
  
38 CPI, Landscape of Climate Finance in Africa, September 2022.  under the Subsidiary  Loan Agreement  (limited recourse) , and such repayment obligations  will be subject to the 
operation of the risk sharing mechanism.  
Downstream ARCAFIM Contractual Arrangement  with Equity Bank (Kenya ) Limited (EBKL) .  Equity Bank 
(Kenya ) Limited is the Borrower as well as the Executing Entity for ARCAFIM for East Africa. EBKL  will on -lend the 
loan received from IFAD to Equity Bank Uganda, Equity Bank Rwanda , and Equity Bank Tanzania  through sub -loan 
agreements to be executed between EBKL  and each of the three country subsidiaries.  The country allocation among 
four countries is expected as follows – Kenya: 55%, Uganda: 25%, Rwanda: 10%, and Tanzania: 10%.   The Subsidiary  
Loan Agreement will provide for  the risk sharing arrangement between IFAD and Host Bank. The risk sharing 
mechanism is further described in the next section  and the risk -sharing agreement may equally be a stand -alone 
agreement for the convenience purposes .  
47. Risk Sharing Mechanism under the Subsidiary  Loan Agreement. In order for the Host Bank to recognize 
the credit protection, a risk-sharing application  process  will be  introduced and stipulated  in the Subsidiary  Loan 
Agreement  (or in a separate stand -alone agreement if advised by legal counsel) . It operates as a reduction of 
the Host Bank’s loan repayment obligation to IFAD, and the process is similar to the claim s process in unfunded 
guarantee products.  The loan repayment obli gation from the Host Bank to IFAD changes through the risk-
sharing application  requested by the Host Bank and approved by IFAD, based on the materialized loss of the 
underlying loans through the pre -agreed request/approval process .  
48. Disbursement / Recyclin g / Repayment process  with EBKL . During the availability period of the first 5 years, 
the Host Bank will make a disbursement request to IFAD based on the disbursement projection every six 
months. Each participating  country subsidiar y will be able to make a disbursement for the Loans qualifying 
under the ARCAFIM eligibility criteria and CCA taxonomy (the “Qualifying Loans”) from the fund s that received 
from IFAD, and its own contribution equal to the fund.  Once the Qualifying Loan is d isbursed, the Host Bank 
should submit the inclusion request to IFAD to notify IFAD of the Qualifying Loan, so that IFAD can monitor the 
portfolio.  During the investment period of the first ten years, the Host Bank is allowed to recycle the principal 
repayments of the Qualifying Loans, as a revolving facility. During the repayment period of the last 5 years , the 
Host Bank will repay the principal amount to IFAD in accordance with the repayment schedule under the 
Subsidiary  Loan Agreement .  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
49. Requirement of GCF Funding: Limited Alternative  Options for CCA Financing.  As discussed above in 
detail, ARCAFIM, with financing from the GCF and the programme co -financiers, will provide resources for the 
financing o f the type of CCA adaptation investments, for which very limited alternative finance is available in 
the target countries.  Low Income Countries only received 8% of all climate financing compared to 70% invested 
in Middle Income Countries (UNEP 2022 Adaptat ion Gap Report). Furthermore , according to the Climate Policy 
Initiative 38, climate financing in Africa is US $ 29.5 billion annually , far short of the  US$ 277 billion needed 
annually for countries to meet their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) by 2030 . In East Africa, annual 
flows total USD 10 billion compared to an annual demand of 82 billion. Climate financing on the continent is  
more balance d between adaptation and mitigation than in other regions:  mitigation activities represented 49% 
(USD 14.6 billion) of climate finance flows compared to 39% (USD 11.4 billion) in adaptation, and 12% (USD 
3.5 billion) in activities generating dual benefits. Still, adaptation funding would need to increase six -fold to meet 
the estimated USD 62 billon annual need . In terms of sectors, funding of adaptation activities in AFOLU 
(agriculture, forestry and other land use) totalled USD 2.8 billion, or just 10%  of tota l climate finance flows . The 
private sector investments, that are urgently needed to scale adaptation solutions, represented only 14% (USD 
4.2 billion) of climate finance in Africa . This is lower than in other regions, and was invested primarily in 
mitigation projects (81%) .  
50. The barriers for rural CCA financing are high and relatively similar in all the targeted economies. General 
economic and legal barriers include insufficient financial sector regulations and debt resolution regimes 
curtailing cli mate credit creation. Lack of borrower knowledge of CCA options and skills to develop sound 
investment proposals reduce the bankable demand for CCA finance. On the supply side, lack of climate finance 
and especially CCA finance knowledge and capacity in pr ivate financial institutions; lack of access to medium 
and long -term capital by local financial institutions; and lack of appropriate risk management solutions reduce 
the private FI interest to invest in rural CCA projects. High up -front costs and risks fo r developing new business 
lines in green and particularly CCA adaptation finance further decrease this investment interest .


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 32 
 
  
39 https://aceliafrica.org/bridging -the-financing -gap-unlocking -the-impact -potential -of-agricultural -smes -in-africa/   51. The ARCAFIM interventions provide financial and non -financial solutions and offer risk cover for the Host Bank 
in the ARCAFIM regio nal facilities together with competitive long -term funding, which aim to remove the above 
type of barriers for mainstreaming CCA adaptation finance in the financial sectors of the participating countries.  
52. Considering the substantial and multi -dimensional nature of the current barriers, it is highly unlikely that CCA 
finance mainstreaming will happen in the private financial sectors in Africa without support from programmes 
such as  ARCAFIM.  At the same time the interest by the leading  commercial  bank in the region to partner with 
international financiers in the ARCAFIM initiative clearly shows that paradigm change towards more private 
sector CCA funding is possible if appropriate types of in centives are provided to the private banks to enter this 
market.   
53. Rationale and Level of Concessionality.  Higher default rates in CCA financing targeting small producers and 
rural SMEs involved in food systems, in combination with high acquisition and tra nsaction costs, serve as a 
deterrent for commercial banks and other intermediaries to engage in such lending in low -income regions of 
Africa. According to a recent study by Aceli Africa39 on agri -lending in Sub -Saharan Africa, the average agri -
lending portfolio default rate of commercial banks are estimated a t 6% and in the 4.9-7.7% range, 3-5% higher 
than commercial lending in other sectors.  The perception among commercial banks for agriculture climate 
resilience and adaptation financing is that it is even riskier, although it may prove to be exactly the contrary: 
increased climate resilience can increase the long -term ability of the borrowers to serve their loans, however 
this is yet  to be proven to the financial sector operators. Therefore, one of the goals of ARCAFIM is to gather 
comprehensive data sets for climate adaptation finance and make it available for commercial lenders in the 
target countries to make more informed choices i n the future.  
54. Given the sizable unmet annual need for adaptation financing in Africa, the marginal role currently played by 
the private sector  in financing climate adaptation activities , and the perceived risks of financing agriculture 
climate adaptation a nd resilience, and thus considered higher than standard agri -lending, the concessional 
elements of ARCAFIM are justifiable to incentivize the Host Bank to dedicate resources and effort to enter this 
field.  
55.  Regarding pricing of the loans to end clients, t he Host Bank and other PFIs in the ARCAFIM financial 
ecosystem will charge sufficient margins to ensure financial sustainability of the operation. Due to the 
concessional elements  provided by ARCAFIM to the Host Ban k, the ARCAFIM  end borrower interest rate will 
be at the low end of existing market rates in the target countries , which under normal conditions would not be 
possible to micro -level clients in rural areas. According to ARCAFIM Supply and Demand assessment, an 
increasing  number of financial institutions (including commercial banks, microfinance institutions and SACCOs) 
offer agricultural lending products,  however  the conditions for accessing the more competitive  loans  often 
exclude smallholder farmers. The pricing varies significantly in the region and between financial institutions,  
ranging from 8% - 96% per year  among the surveyed institutions. Those financial institutions that  offer lower 
interest rates to the agriculture sector, especially to small -scale farmers, can i n most cases only do so with 
support of concessional capital. See below table with summary of annual interest rates in the target region:  
Table 1 2: Interest Rate Survey Results Summary


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 33 
 
  
56. With the ARCAFIM preferential lending terms and risk management solutions offered to the Host Bank , it is 
expected that (i) the participating financial institutions are incentivised to develop a CCA product portfolio, (ii) 
the rural CC vulnerable groups ca n have access to the developed CCA finance products, and (iii) the interest 
rates offered by the Host Bank  and their on -lending PFIs to end borrowers will be competitive and at the low 
end of current market -based interest rates charged this market segment in the target countries. During the 
annual ARCAFIM performance assessments, IFAD will conduct a comparative review of the  ARCAFIM interest 
rates against the  going market in each target country and provide guidelines for the ARCAFIM interest rates . 
57. GCF Grant Element for CCA Finance Innovations and Capacity Building . The ARCAFIM proposal for East 
Africa includes an element of US$ 20 million grant financing for strategic technical advisory and capacity 
building services, to ensure effective delivery of cli mate change adaptation financial services to the vulnerable 
target groups. CCA finance is an emerging field, especially for the ARCAFIM types of micro -scale investments 
through private financing channels. Therefore, significant non -financial support is req uired to foster innovation 
in the CCA finance delivery methodology including the introduction of the appropriate CCA finance taxonomy 
and the adoption of digital technology -based solutions  to encourage wider rural outreach. At the same time 
grant finance i s required to ensure effective demand for the offered CCA services  to increase end -borrower 
knowledge of CCA adaptation options and thereby to stimulate the CCA finance demand . 
58. Within the US$ 20 million of ARCAFIM non -financial services  in the East Africa region , the proposal is to include 
a US$ 1 0 million TA grant from GCF. This is 18 per  cent of the total requested GCF financing or 5 per  cent of 
the total ARCAFIM budget, which will be matched by additional grant financing by  other  international financiers 
of ARCAFIM  and cost -sharing by the PFIs (see below  Section C1 – Financing by Components). The proposed 
level of GCF grant support is highly justified due to the large unmet demand  for CCA financing among 
ARCAFIM target groups and th e need to develop new technical approaches that can be replicated elsewhere 
to substantially increase private sector participation in CCA finance in Africa . 
59. COVID -19 and War in Ukraine C ontext.  As a consequence of the COVID -19 pandemic and the measures 
prescribed globally to prevent its spread  since 2020 , GDP growth rates across all ARCAFIM target countries 
started to  drop.  Since the beginning of 2022, the Russian invasion in Ukraine and subsequent, on -going conflict 
have made the livelihoods of rural low -income people even more fragile in Eastern and southern Africa.  In such  
a situation,  in which many lenders withdrew from the rural sector they deemed risky and unprofitable, 
interventions such as those proposed by ARCAFIM are essential to facilitate and re -establish lending to 
investments by the agri -MSMEs and smallholders, thereby helping them build back better and in a sustainable 
manner. By investing US$  200 million in maki ng the agricultural sector in the East Africa region  more resilient, 
ARCAFIM will act as counter -cyclical financier to reduce the consequences not only of the current crisis but 
also future climate -related or other external shocks on the agriculture sector  and the overall economy. 
Furthermore,  ARCAFIM will contribute to rural job creation, more stable incomes and food security in the target 
countries at a time when food commodity prices are rapidly increasing in wake of the war in Ukraine . 
 Country  Commercial Banks  Microfinance institutions  SACCOS and Fintechs  
Av. Annual interest 
rate Av maturity  Av. Annual interest 
rate Av maturity  Av. Annual interest 
rate Av maturity  
FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  FI’s info  Farmer’
s view  
 
Kenya   
13% 16.3%  Up to 5 
years 12 
months   
18% - 24% 22.7%  Up to 48 
months  24  
8% - 10% 12.7%  No data  12 
months  
 
Uganda  10% - 18% 22% Up to 15 
years 18 
months   
12% - 48% 24% Up to 36 
months  24 30% 18% Short -
term 21 
months  
 
Tanzania   
9% to 25%  10.3%  Up to 15 
years 11 
months   
18% - 96% 24.3%  Short -
term 
(several 
months)  12 24% - 36% 20% Short -
term 12 
months  
 
Rwanda  15% to 
18% 16.25%  Up to 15 
years 12.5 
months  18% - 25% No data  Up to 10 
years No data  22% 24%  21.3%  Short -
term 10 
months


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 60. The current crisis clearly strengthens the justification of the GCF and other international financiers for their 
investments in ARCAFIM. This support has been critical in ensuring the commitment of the leading commercial 
bank in this climate change adaptat ion programme during  the time when private banks have generally been 
conservative in their engagement in new type of ventures. If successfully implemented in the current, 
demanding economic environment, the chances of major expansion and replication of the  developed CCA 
finance approach es are obvious when the overall economic conditions will again start to improve in the region.  
  
B.6. Exit strategy  
61. The exit strategies and related s ustainability of the ARCAFIM benefits and results need to  be approached at 
various levels. Below, the key sustainability and exit strategy elements of ARCAFIM are summarised.  
62. End Beneficiary Impact Sustainability . At small scale producers and MSME level, ARCAFIM will promote and 
support modernised CCA production systems that are market driven and suitable to local agro -ecological zones 
and climatic conditions. The comprehensive ARCAFIM approach to mentoring and tr aining in technical aspects 
of climate -smart farming and in relevant business skills is expected to significantly improve small -scale 
agricultur al producers’ potential to sustain the benefits from ARCAFIM interventions even when the project 
support ends. A t the farmer group and cooperative level, the ARCAFIM interventions aim at training these 
organisations to professionally conduct their business and to be more financially robust and self -managing 
partners in the environmentally friendly value chain operat ions. Being successful in this area will be a key factor 
for sustaining the ARCAFIM results and benefits in the period after the project closure , including continued and 
expanded access to financial services for working capital and investments, based on im proved skills base and 
linkages with the financial sector and markets.   A strong GESI focus, addressing both the symptoms and 
underlying causes of inequality and exclusion, will enable women and youth to engage fully in the range of 
CCA finance opportunities and thereby contribute to the sustainability of programme outcomes.  
63. Sustainability of Impact in Participating Private Sector Financial Institutions  is in the core of ARCAFIM’s 
operational sustainability and exit strategy. ARCAFIM will provide global top -end expertise to the regional Host 
Bank  and its wholesale borrower ins titutions, to ensure that the financial and non -financial services provided 
will deliver effective, sustainable and transformational adaptation finance solutions. Through its analytical work 
on CCA finance supply and demand and its related capacity and sys tems development interventions, 
ARCAFIM will significantly contribute to reducing the PFIs’ risk perception associated to this sector’s lending. 
At the same time the ARCAFIM blended credit facility with its risk management solutions will enable the Host 
Bank and its local partne r FIs to invest at scale in profitable climate compatible agriculture solutions and 
technologies and to identify new climate -smart business opportunities in this sector. With skills developed and 
experience gained , participating fina ncial institutions will be in a position to profitably continue with the 
adaptation finance operations even  when the direct support to them from ARCAFIM ends.  
64. Environmental Sustainability . The identification and promotion of the use of the best available CC adaptation 
technologies and inputs will maximize the environmental sustainability of the ARCAFIM -supported agricultural 
activities. The recommended and prioritized adaptation measures w ill ensure the protection of natural 
resources, maintain soil nutrient balance, reduce land degradation and pollution, and improve biodiversity. The 
used CCA technologies will strengthen the optimal use of natural, social, and human assets and reduce the 
negative impact of food production on the environment. This will make it possible to increase rural production 
and incomes of the ARCAFIM target group without cultivating more land or adversely affecting the environment, 
ensuring the longer -term sustainabil ity of these activities even in a situation in which the overall adverse climate 
trends in the region are likely to continue. Furthermore, a ll physical investments are carried out by private sector 
stakeholders, including MSMEs and small -scale agriculture producers, and they have full ownership of the 
installed equipment, machinery, infrastructure or land improvements. All maintenance functions, as well as 
renewal of investments as required, will be under the responsibility of the private owners.  
65. Sustainabl e Access to Financial Services . As a n additional sustainability element for the end -beneficiaries, the 
ARCAFIM CCA finance operations will be implemented in association with capable and interested partners 
from the financial sector such as the Host Bank an d loca l FIs. All financial transactions will be conducted 
through the bank accounts in financial institutions. The participating small producers and MSMEs will thus 
increasingly gain knowledge of and familiarity with the banking services and importantly , develop credit 
histories which will facilitate their ability to access bank funding in the future and in that way support the 
continued  development of their climate -smart farming and business operations .


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.1.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 66. Exit Strategy for International Financing and ARCAFIM Replicability . The Host Bank  will repay the loans  to 
IFAD  according to the Subsidiary  Loan Agreement signed between the  Host Bank  and IFAD , including for 
successful repayments from end clients and  recoveries from defaulted clients during a defi ned period after the 
programme completion .  Subsequently, IFAD will distribute the proceeds among the international financiers in 
accordance with the loan agreements and envisaged Inter-creditor Agreement . With successful ARCAFIM 
implementation, t he capacit y of the Host Bank  will be strengthened to independently mobilize climate finance 
and manage CCA programmes, potentially in the capacity of GCF Direct Access Entit ies. 
67. The ARCAFIM implementation will create substantial replication opportunities. Following the ARCAFIM design 
and launch in East Africa, the plan is to replicate this climate finance mechanism in other regions of the 
continent including North,  South and Centr al/Wes Africa.   Further, the successful implementation of this project 
would encourage other financial institutions in the identification of new business opportunities in climate finance 
and change their risk perception of agriculture adaptation financing (see the discussion below  on paradigm 
shift potential ), using ARCAFIM’s basic concepts of blended funding, appropriate CCA taxonomies and top -
class TA .


---
*Page 40*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
55.0 million  million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior Loans  0”    
(ii)   
Loans  45.0 12 years  7 years   
(iii) Equity  0    
(iv) Guarantees  0    
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  0    
(vi) Grants  10.0    
(vii) Results -based 
payments  0    
(b) Co-financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
145.0 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
IFAD PSFP   Loans   30.0 million USD 
($) 12 years  
7 years   Options  
IFAD PSFP   Loans  15.0 million USD 
($) 12 years   Options  
IFAD PSF P,  Grant  10.0 million USD 
($) 12 years  0 %  
Equity Bank Kenya 
and other 
subsidiaries 
(Uganda, Rwanda, 
Tanzania)  Loans  90.0 million USD  
($) - - - 
Total financ ing 
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
200.0 million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions   
C.2. Financing by component  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component  Output  Indicativ
e cost  
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions


---
*Page 41*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 Component 1: 
Effective 
Financing for 
Rural Adaptation 
Targeting Small 
Producers and 
Rural MSMEs  Output 1.1 
Regional Host 
Bank accesses 
resources to 
provide CCA 
loans to 
smallholders 
and MSMEs  
 
Output 1.2 
Local 
intermediaries 
have access to 
wholesale 
credit lines to 
provide CCA 
loans  180 45  
Loan  45  
Loan  IFAD PSFP  
90 Loan  Equity Bank  
Component 2: 
Innovations and 
Capacity for 
Rural Adaptation 
Investments  Output 2.1 
Improved 
readiness and 
capacities of all 
PFIs to make 
appropriate 
climate finance 
investments  4.99 2.495 Grants  2.495 Grants  IFAD PSFP  
Output 2.2 
Improved CCA 
investment 
capacities of 
smallholder 
farmers and 
MSMEs  9 4.5 Grants  4.5 Grants  IFAD PFSP  
Output 2.3 
Improved 
enabling 
environment of 
CCA through 
application of 
taxonomy and 
best practices 
by climate 
finance 
ecosystem  1.494  0.747  Grants  0.747  Grants  IFAD PSFP  
Programme 
Management 
Cost PMC  
4.516  2.258  Grants  2.258  Grants  IFAD PSFP  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  200 55 145 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 42*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 68. Capacity building and rural CC adaptation technology transfer are integral parts of the ARCAFIM 
programme. It will address non -financial barriers currently preventing greater CCA financing in the 
ARCAFIM target regions with three general types of capacity building and technology -related interventions. 
Firstly , it will strengthen the awareness and capacity of Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to offer 
rural CCA finance services  and strengthen innovative technology enabled solutions of the PFIs to r each out 
to small producers , including capacity building to address deep -rooted social and gender norms . Secondly , 
it will develop the capacities and skills of small -scale producers and rural MSMEs  to invest into technologies 
and solutions that are proven to improve their climate change resilience . Thirdly , ARCAFIM East Africa will 
provide investment resources of US$  180 million exclusively targeting CCA solutions and technologies. 
Fourthly , ARCAFIM will improve climate finance enabling environment through CCA finance policy 
dialogues and the development of a Taxonomy for CCA Rural Finance that can be imp lemented in East 
Africa and more widely in other developing regions . The details of these planned technical support and 
technology trans fer activities and implementation plans are presented above in Sections B.3 and B.4.  
69. Within the US$ 20 million of ARCAFIM non -financial services  in East Africa , the proposal is to include a 
US$ 10 million TA grant from GCF. This is 18 per cent of the total  requested GCF financing or 5 per cent of 
the total ARCAFIM budget, which will be matched by additional grant financing by other ARCAFIM financiers 
and cost -sharing by the PFIs (see Section C1 – Financing by Components). The proposed level of GCF 
grant sup port is highly justified due to the large unmet demand for CCA financing among ARCAFIM target 
groups and the need to develop CCA capacities and new technical approaches that could significantly speed 
up the expansion of private sector CCA finance activitie s in the target regions from their current low base.


---
*Page 43*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
70. ARCAFIM will contribute to increased climate -resilient sustainable development and its outcomes are directly 
aligned with GCF’s ARA1 : Most vulnerable people and communities and ARA2:  Health, well -being, food and 
water security. The key outcomes of ARCAFIM include  (i) ARCAFIM PFIs expand and mainstream CCA finance 
in the region resulting in increased CC resilience and improved food secur ity levels of rural communities ; and 
(ii) Improved capacity of PFIs and agriculture value chain participants to adapt to risks imposed by climatic 
changes . Co-benefits from successful ARCAFIM implementation include increased rural household incomes, 
employment generation , improved biodiversity  and climate change mitigation  in the targeted communities . 
71. Small -scale producers, microenterprises and other rural p oor involved in local food systems  are the main end -
beneficiary target group of this program. Due to environmental, technical, economic, social and political factors, 
these small producers and MSMEs disproportionately experience the effects of climate chan ge and external 
shocks on their livelihoods. To maintain and improve their levels of productivity, they urgently need dedicated 
investment resources to build stronger resilience to climate change  but have been struggling so far to attract 
sufficient financing for this purpose. By making appropriate climate adaptation finance available to these target 
groups and improving the capacity of both demand and supply side actors to invest in climate adapta tion 
technologies and practices, ARCAFIM will improve the capacity of agriculture value chain participants to 
anticipate, absorb and adapt to risks imposed by climatic changes.  
72. As a result, the target groups will experience the following imp acts:  
(i) Stronger adaptive capacity and climate resilience  through better  technical capacity and ability to invest in 
climate resilient agricultural technologies and methods that reduce vulnerability to risks and future losses 
from climate change . 
(ii) Improved continuo us access to private sector CCA finance for small producers.  
(iii) Improved food security through investment in climate resilient agricultural technologies and methods which 
improve production practices and reduce risks and crop losses from climate change and contribute to 
increased crop yields.  
(iv) Co-benefits of  increased and more stable incomes through adoption of modern adaptation solutions which 
increase productivity , job preservatio n and new green job creation  for vulnerable groups through increased 
investments and economic activity in agribusinesses , biodiversity benefits  through strengthening the 
optimal use of natural, social and human assets , and climate change mitigation  through  enhanced 
agriculture technologies that also reduce emissions . 
73. Through  revolving loans during the implementation period of 12 years, the program is expected to provide 
260,000 loans worth US$ 266,000,000 across four East African countries, benefitting over 1.5 million people  
directly and indirectly . The impacts for the target group will include:   
• 208,000  households and MSMEs will adopt improved and/or new climate -resilient livelihood options  
• 268,000 households with 1,195,000 perso ns will experienc e improved food security as a benefit  
• 50% of beneficiaries are expected to be women and 30% youth  
• 208,000 ha  of natural resources will be brought under improved climate -resilient management practices . 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
74. A progressive but rapid shift in agricultural practices in  East will be critical as harsh climatic conditions will 
increase in many  regions  and new climatic threats for crop production and livestock keeping are projected to 
emerge. By 2030  - 2040, new and innovative agricultural systems need to be implemented in many regions 
where the climate will soon be no longer suitable for current practices. The lack of adequate and appropriate 
private sector financing for CCA investments is a serious threat  for the materialization of this transformation 
process.  Currently, there is a significant gap of  well-functioning private sector CCA finance programmes in 
ARCAFIM target regions with clear replication potential. Public CCA financing efforts are heavily grant -based, 
short -term focused and small in scale.  By making ARCAFIM a successful example and a showcase of 
commercial CCA finance, a paradigm shift  in climate chang e adaptation finance  can be achieved with the 
financiers as well as in the mindset of borrowers.


---
*Page 44*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 75. With ARCAFIM, the aim is to introduce a practical, widely implementable model for achieving  a paradigm shift 
towards systematic large -scale use of private financial resources for rural CCA investment s, the impact of which 
would go well beyond the direct impacts and time frame of the Programme . ARCAFIM’s TOC and its investment 
logic recognise that despite urgent need for increased investment volumes in low -income and lower middle -
income countries in Africa that are facing high climate stress, only very limited financing is currently allocated 
to CC adaptation investments. Particularly, financing by private sector financial institutions rarely includes loans 
for the rural adaptation projects of small producers. This has led to a very low overall level of CC adaptation 
investments in the food systems and rural value chains.   
76. The ARCAFIM interventions aim to change th is situation by introducing a CCA financing model that tackles the 
key barriers for CCA finance expansion and which at the same time is both sustainable , scalable  and replicable.  
Its interventions include blended financial resources for CCA finance investm ents to the Host Bank and to its 
local on -lending partners; appropriate risk management solutions; and targeted and focused capacity building 
and TA to both the participating financial institutions and the end -users of the CCA finance. Particularly, 
ARCAFIM will support the analytical development of the taxonomy for CCA finance operations that will support 
and guide the future implementation  of private CCA finance operations in different types of environments in 
Africa.  
77. While the direct ARCAFIM benefits w ill include the increased CC resil ience of the targeted small -scale 
producers and MSMEs, improved food and water security levels of rural communities , and increased and 
sustainable rural household incomes,  the obvious scaling -up and replication opportunities are expected to 
create a basis for a much wider longer -term impact through the  ARCAFIM -related  paradigm shift. With the 
successful ARCAFIM implementation, the capacity of the Host Bank will be strengthened to actively participate 
with its own resources in CCA finance operations on a much wider scale, and  independently mobilize climate 
finance and manage CCA programmes . In East Africa,  this learning opportunity is an openly expressed 
strategic reason for the partnering of the Equity Group with ARCAFIM, which  is expected to support the wider 
climate finance expansion strategies of th is leading commercial bank  in its region .  
78. For wider application of the ARCAFIM model o utside the direct ARCAFIM stakeholders, IFAD, the other co -
financiers , and the Host Bank  will proactively use different types of regional and international networks  to share 
knowledge and information of the ARCAFIM performance and achieved results.  When s ystematically carried 
out, the successful implementation of this programme  is expected to  encourage other African financial 
institutions  and international financiers  to re-visit their policies on climate finance and seek new rural business 
opportunities based on climate smart agricultural practices and modern CC adaptation technologies. It is 
expected that the key role in ARCAFIM of the leading commercial bank in the East Africa region (the Equity 
Group) will substantially increase this demonstration effect and encourage other financial institutions to 
increasingly participate in CC A finance operations . Furthermore, following the ARCAFIM design and launch in 
East Africa, the IFAD plan is , as indicated,  to replicate this private climate finance mechanism in other regions 
of the continent including South ern, North,  and West /Central Afri ca. 
79. Finally, to  further facilitate the materialisation  of this paradigm change, IFAD will lead the ARCAFIM -related  
efforts to improv e the  enabling environment  for CCA Finance  in Africa. IFAD would work closely with GCF -led 
network of National Designated Authorities to ensure that the developed CCA finance best practises will 
become broadly known and utilized. At policy level, the work will focus on incorporation of Climate Adaptation 
Finance Taxonomy developed by ARCAFIM into the national frameworks for the management and tracking of 
climate finance at country level.   
 
D.3. Sustainable development  
80. The proposed ARCAFIM programme is fully aligned with relevant Sustainable Development Goals  and the GCF 
approach and req uirement s on sustainable development potential in a CC adaptation programme of the 
ARCAFIM type.  Particularly important are the sustainable development potential and co -benefits of the 
programme in the areas of gender - responsive  development, economic benefits, soc ial benefits, and 
environmental co -benefits.  
81. Gender - Responsive  Development. ARCAFIM will take a deliberate, proactive, and positive approach towards 
gender equality and women ’s empowerment. To maximize the economic and social benefits at household level, 
capacity building and behaviour change communication to initiate critical reflection on deep -rooted social and 
gender norms , which perpetuate inequalities will be conducted  at all levels (from individuals, households, 
communities and groups, through to the host bank, PFIs and service providers). This will bring about a critical


---
*Page 45*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 41 
   
 paradigm shift towards GESI -inclusive CCA finance. . Through the network of PFIs, ARCAFIM will apply 
methods and approaches to increase financial and technical services targeting small -scale female farm 
operators and women -led agribusinesses. The programme technical advisory services will have a required 
gender balance of end beneficiaries, aiming at 50/50 ratio in service delivery , and at PFI level , include activities 
to design appropriate CCA financing products for women. The investment component target is to invest 50% 
of programme resources to women -led investments and to investments generating employmen t for women. 
Overall, ARCAFIM  will promote opportunities to address equitable access to and control over resources, 
opening greater opportunit ies for equal  socioeconomic participation , including girls' and women’s increased 
engagement in economic diversification.  
82. Economic Benefits.  Through successful Implementation of its activities, ARCAFIM is expected to result in 
major economic benefits to its rural target  group.  Immediate economic benefits will be gained at household 
level due access to finance  and markets  and with  improved technical capacity and ability to invest in increased 
production volumes and in modern production systems, which will increase the  crop yields  and lead to higher 
incomes for farmers . At the same time the v ulnerability to future losses will decrease and food insecurity due 
to climatic hazards will be avoided by adopting climate resilient agricultur al methods technologies. For the 
SMEs  in food value chains, ARCAFIM will improve incomes and sustainability with  investments to resource 
use efficiency and productivity -enhancing technologies , which will make possible the systematic expansion of 
these small enterprises serving the rural sector.  
83. Social Co -Benefits. The development and promotion of sustainable and adaptive farms and agribusinesses 
will contribute to several social benefits. Higher returns of land and labour will lead to improved psychological 
and moral well -being in the farming communities and relieve pre ssures associated with climate change -related 
hardships. Successfully implemented ARCAFIM interventions based on promoting the decent work agenda 
can also increase employment among vulnerable populations of women and youth, limit migration to towns and 
cities, and reduce conflicts over land and other limited resources. Higher and sustainable incomes levels would 
improve the opportunities to effectively use education and health services in the rural areas. Finally, 
participation in the rural savings and cred it arrangements, SACCOs and MFIs with support of programmes of 
the ARCAFIM type has proven to be one of the most effective women  and youth empowerment methods in 
Africa, often leading to substantial improvement of their economic and social position in rura l communities . 
84. Environmental Co-Benefits.  With the ARCAFIM investments, the selected, prioritised adaptation measures 
will ensure the protection of natural resources, maintain soil nutrient balance, reduce land degradation, improve 
biodiversity , and reduce pollution. At the same time the use of best available adaptation technologies and inputs 
will minimise environmental damage  as well as have a positive impact to climate change mitigation . These co -
benefits of ARCAFIM will contribute to increase d production with out cultivation of more land or affecting the 
environment. Overall, t he ARCAFIM -supported technologies and farm management solutions aim to strengthen 
the optimal use of natural, social and human assets; reduce the negative impact of food production to 
environment; and narrow the output gap.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipien ts 
85. As discussed above in various sections of this Funding Proposal, the proposed ARCAFIM activities are 
designed to directly respond to the needs of the recipients when financing CC adaptation investments of low -
income rural populations experiencing CC stress  in target countries. In Table 13 below, a  summary on the 
population, average incomes , and rural poverty in the four focal countries is presented, indicating low overall 
income levels and high concentration of poverty in rural areas.  
Table 13: Population and Income  in ARCAFIM East Africa n Target Countries40 
Country  Population  
(Million ) Of Which Rural 
Population  GDP per Capita 
(US$)  Rural Poverty 
Rate  (%)  
Kenya  52.6 72% 4,573  39 %41 
Uganda  44.3 84% 2,183  49 %42 
 
40 Source: World Development Indicators (W B-WDI) https://datatopics.worldbank.org/world -development -indicators/   
41 World Bank  using IHBS/SSAPOV/GMD , Poverty rate in the rural area (2015)  
42 World Bank using IHBS/SSAPOV/GMD , Poverty rate in the rural area (2019)


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 42 
   
 Rwanda  12.6 82% 2,270  63 %43 
Tanzania  58.0 64% 2,669  59 %44 
86. The scale and intensity of climate risks and vulnerability to climate change within the target group are assessed 
in detail in the Country Vulnerability Assessments, summarised in Section B1 of this Funding Proposal. Based 
on these Assessments, the CCA tax onomy on eligible and bankable CCA investments for the needs of 
ARCAFIM client was developed  during the design .  
87. Considering the substantial and multi -dimensional nature of the current barriers for CCA finance, it is highly 
unlikely that CCA finance mainstreaming to the planned recipient s would happen in the private financial sectors 
of the targeted countries without support from programmes of the ARCAFIM type. The commitment of the 
leading commercial bank to manage the programme and to co -invest its own resources  into it increase s the 
chances of successfully reaching the planned recipients with appropriate services. The developed CCA 
taxonomy and substantial ARCAFIM technical support are aimed to increase the chances for implementation 
success and lat er, create a basis for  the scaling up and replication of the ARCAFIM model.  
D.5. Country ownership  
88. Climate  change adaptation is a priority for all ARCAFIM participating countries. In particular, ARCAFIM will 
contribute to targets and commitments in National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), National Climate Change Policies 
and Strategies, National Communications (NCs),  SDGs National Strategies for Disaster Risk Reduction and 
the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). Each of the target countries has reiterated the importance of 
adaptation in their revised NDCs and the agriculture sector is a priority to ensure clim ate change resilience of 
communities. For the agriculture and rural development sectors, the scope for adaptation includes protecting, 
managing and restoration of rangelands; ensuring resilient access to water supply for productive purposes; 
promoting sust ainable water harvesting and storage; scaling -up Integrated Water Resources Management 
approach and use efficiency; promoting use of renewable energy sources and energy efficient technologies; 
scaling up climate smart agriculture including agroecology; pro moting climate resilient capture fisheries; 
promoting highly adaptive and productive livestock breeds; promoting development of climate resilient crop 
varieties and expanding postharvest handling, storage, value addition and marketing, among others.  
 
89. These  priorities are part of the initial taxonomy being developed for ARCAFIM that financial institutions can 
apply in the selection of investments. Through the adaptation options being financed, ARCAFIM will contribute 
to meeting the targets and commitments in  the NDCs and national climate strategic priorities of all selected 
countries, as summarised in Table 14 below, covering the ARCAFIM target countries in East Africa region.  
 
Table 14: Priorities of Participating Countries’ NDCs.  
Country  NDC Targets aligned with ARCAFIM  
Kenya  Updated NDC priorities include promoting green investments, nature -based 
solutions, climate change resilience enterprises, climate -smart agriculture (CSA) and 
clean and efficient livelihood strategies, which enhance the climate resilience of 
communities through investments in locally -led climate change adaptation actions. 
The role of the private sector in climate actions is recognized for climate resilient 
develo pment pathways.  
Rwanda  Adaptation and resilience priorities draw upon the Green Growth and Climate 
Resilience Strategy adopted in 2011 with a time horizon of 2050. Promoting green 
foreign and domestic direct investment and other capital inflows (strengthe ning 
environment & climate financial mechanisms for more efficiency, effectiveness and 
impact and strengthening climate -proofing capital inflow in national economic 
planning).  
Tanzania  To reduce the impacts of climate change variability and associated extremes such 
as droughts and floods, which have long -term implications to all productive sectors 
and ecosystems, particularly the agricultural sector.  
 
43 World Bank using IHBS/SSAPOV/GMD , Poverty rate in the rural area (201 6) 
44 World Bank using IHBS/SSAPOV/GMD , Poverty rate in the rural area (2018)


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 Uganda  Adaptation is the priority response measure to addressing climate change. Priorities 
include building adaptive capacity at all levels, addressing loss and damage and 
increasing the resilience of communities, infrastructure and ecosystems.  
 
 
90. IFAD, as the accredited entity, has experience in climate change adaptation with a focus on agricu lture and 
rural development.  IFAD invests in building resilience of rural populations and promotes better targeting of 
climate finance and inclusive rural finance for small -scale producers. Through the Adaptation for Smallholder 
Agriculture Programme and rural finance investments, IFAD has developed strong capacities in targeting 
investments to small -scale rural producers and MSMEs for climate change adaptation. Through ARCAFIM, 
IFAD will collaborate in East Africa with Equity Group , which has a strong Afr ican footprint and appropriate 
climate change -related strategies and action plans. The due diligence confirms the bank’s capacities to deliver 
on the ARCAFIM objectives with the strengthening of some areas such as the reporting on adaptation benefits 
accru ing from the investments.  
 
91. To increase country -level ownership beyond the participation in the ARCAFIM proposal development and 
implementation, governance support and alignment with regional and national climate change strategies and 
polices will be instru mental. The NDAs from the participating countries have been engaged through the 
Concept Note and F ull Funding  Proposal development. The ARCAFIM concept was presented and discussed 
with each NDA to confirm the inclusion of their countries in the Programme a nd also obtain their inputs to shape 
the Programme. The presentation and discussion with the Kenya NDA was held in April 2023; for Rwanda the 
presentation and discussion was done in August and September 2022; for Tanzania the presentation and 
discussions w ere in February 2022 and for Uganda the presentation and discussion were held in October 2022. 
The NDAs confirmed the alignment of ARCAFIM with their national priorities  such as mobilization of climate 
finance  and the opportunities presented for private se ctor engagement. They reiterated the relevance of the 
ARCAFIM to identify viable climate change adaptation investments for the agriculture and rural development 
sectors.  The inputs received from the NDAs were on the potential strategies for gender, youth a nd social 
inclusion in the programme; type of technical assistance that would be required particularly by the small scale 
producers and MSMEs; strategies for building synergies with existing programmes and projects and; capacity 
development potential for n ational agencies working with climate finance.  
 
92. Alignment to and potential complementarity with GCF and IFAD financed initiatives in the target 
countries. In the ARCAFIM target countries, the project will benefit from synergies with IFAD and GCF 
investment portfolios. In particular , linkages will be bui lt with country strategies and ongoing and upcoming 
projects that support development of climate resilient production systems and value chains for small -scale 
producers.  In terms of IFAD country strategies in each of the four countries, which are developed  alongside 
Governments, t heir strategic objectives focus on promoting  sustainable production, marketing, access to 
finance, and climate adaptation and resilience , to which ARCAFIM is highly complementary .  
 
93. In terms of projects, t he synergies will be mutua l between existing GCF and IFAD projects , helping to enhance 
the impact of ARCAFIM and vice -versa. Key ways that the existing projects will complement ARCAFIM will be 
to identify pipeline investees and collaborating partners for ARCAFIM -supported financing  institutions. At the 
same time ARCAFIM can enhance the impact of existing IFAD and GCF projects by providing technical 
assistance and complementary financing to beneficiaries, in particular for the various projects aiming to develop 
value chains but in wh ich access to finance remains a barrier.  
 
94. In both directions, lessons and expertise from experience can be fed into the design and implementation of the 
ongoing and future initiatives. Of particular note in this regard is the green financing taxonomy to be developed 
through ARCAFIM that can serve as a resource for other green financial inclusion projects. Below in Table 15, 
GCF and IFAD projects in target countries in ARCAFIM East Africa with obvious synergy potential with 
ARCAFIM are listed.  
 
 
Table 15: GCF and IFAD financed initiatives with ARCAF IM complementarity potential  in East Africa  
 
Country  Initiative  Potential areas of complementarity  
GCF -financed projects


---
*Page 48*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 Kenya  FP113: Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based 
Adaptation of Kenya’s Arid and Semi -Arid Rangelands : Increase 
capacities of communities and local institutions to develop evidence -
based landscape planning, by increasing accessibility to climate data and 
information; an d enhancing the ability of community -based cottage 
industries to access markets and financial services.  • Data access for ARCAFIM borrowers  
• Collaboration on financial services activities  
• Strengthened local institutions in ARCAFIM areas  
Kenya  Transforming Livelihoods through Climate Resilient, Low Carbon, 
Sustainable Agricultural Value Chains in the Lake Regi on Economic Bloc : 
Upcoming project through FAO to promote adaptation and mitigation 
technologies and practices, working through cooperatives and county 
governments, and promoting access to adaptation loans through 
technic al assistance and de -risking with 2 -3 local banks (including Equity 
Group ).  • Alignment on technical assistance to Equity Bank 
to ensure complementarity  
• Potential collaboration on de -risking support  
• ARCAFIM finance as option for beneficiaries  
• Financial ser vice activities benefitting from 
ARCAFIM green finance taxonomy  
Kenya and 
Uganda  FP078: Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund : Support innovative private 
social entre preneurs by providing aggregator, digital platform, and 
innovative financial services to smallholder farmers, with the aim of 
enabling smallholders to respond to climate change more efficiently and 
effectively.  • Digital technologies and aggregator platforms  can 
complement ARCAFIM investments and vice -
versa  
• Collaboration on financial services activities  
Rwanda  FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in 
Northern Rwanda : Restore and enhance ecosystems in degraded 
watersheds and increase the capacity of communities to sustainably 
manage forest resources.  • Potential pipeline for ARCAFIM  
• ARCAFIM finance can complement landscape 
management activities  
FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation : Restore 
ecosystems and transform fragile and degraded landscapes, and develop 
markets and value chains in climate -resilient agricultural and tree 
products that are sustainably managed. Local microfinance institutions 
and investors will co -finance initial funds.  • Collaboration on financial services activities  
• ARCAFIM finance can compleme nt sustainable 
value chain development activities and vice -versa  
Tanzania  FP041: Simiyu Climate Resilient Project : Strengthen government’s 
community -based adaptation planning, along with the climate resilience 
of water supply infrastructure, sanitation services and agricultural 
practices.  • Strengthened local institutions in ARCAFIM areas  
• ARCAFIM finance can complement infrastructure 
and capacity building investments and vice -versa  
FP179: Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment 
Programme : Facilitate access to agricultural climate adaptation 
technologies through a lending/de -risking facility, plus technical 
assistance.  Strengthen also awareness of climate threats and risk -
reduction for government, industry actors and fin ancial sector.  • Collaboration on financial services activities  
• Awareness raising can complement ARCAFIM 
activities  
Kenya,  
Rwanda, 
Tanzania,  
Uganda  Pathways to Dairy Net Zero in East Africa  currently under pipeline 
planning to be submitted to GCF consideration, implemented and co -
financed by IFAD. The project will include a range of technical and 
financial support interventions to reduce  emissions and increase climate 
resilience of the dairy sector. Includes Green Dairy Financing Facility for 
medium to large companies, and would rely on ARCAFIM for the small 
producer financing.  • Mutually complementary technical assistance 
activities for producers and financial service 
provider beneficiaries from both projects  
• Shared pipelines for the financing products of 
both projects  
• Efforts to ensure complementarity of financial 
offerings rather than competition  
IFAD -financed projects  
Kenya  Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility : Capacity building for rural 
finance institutions, combined with Business De velopment Services, and 
a Green Financing Facility and Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme. Also 
awaiting approval for supplementary funds for separate technical 
assistance and de -risking facility for green financing for youth 
employment.  • Collaboration on financial services activities and 
between participating rural financing institutions  
• Project will develop taxonomy of green finance 
models for youth that can be used by ARCAFIM 
host bank  
Kenya  Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme (Climate Resilient Agricultural 
Livelihoods Window):  Capacity building for climate resilient production 
and natur al resource management, along with marketing support and 
support to link farmers to financial services.  • ARCAFIM finance can complement climate 
resilience activities and vice -versa  
• Potential pipeline for ARCAFIM institutions  
Kenya  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project : Support small -scale climate -
smart livestock production through improved infrastructure, capacity 
building, e -vouchers, matching g rants for entrepreneurs, and an investor 
forum.  • ARCAFIM finance can complement climate smart 
livestock activities and vice -versa  
• ARCAFIM finance as graduation for matching 
grant recipients  
• ARCAFIM promoted through investor forum  
Tanzania  Agriculture and Fisheries Development Programme : Seed system 
development and promotion of Private -Public Producer Partnerships as 
well as other support to promote s ustainable fishery development.  • ARCAFIM finance can complement across all 
activities and vice -versa  
• Potential pipeline for ARCAFIM institutions  
Rwanda  Promoting Smallholder Export Agriculture Competitiveness:   Enhance 
climate smart production in selected export -driven value chains, including 
infras tructure and Business Development Services.  • ARCAFIM finance can complement climate smart 
production and marketing and vice -versa  
• Potential pipeline for ARCAFIM institutions  
Rwanda  Rwanda Dairy Development Project  (current phase completing at end of 
2023, Phase 2 currently under design): Phase 2 will include promoting 
access to finance for dairy producers and fostering productive alliances.  • Collabor ation on financial services activities  
• ARCAFIM finance could benefit members of 
productive alliances  
Uganda  Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas : Range of support including 
partnership and capacity building support for SACCOs and local credit 
and savings groups.  • Collaboration on financial services activities  
• Participating local institutions as recipients of 
ARCAFIM financing


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 95. Commitment and Capacity of Executing Agencies to Deliver ARCAFIM. As described in detail in Sections 
B.3 (Programme Description) and B.4 (Implementation Arrangements), the Executive Agen cy for ARCAFIM  
East Africa , Equity Group,  is a leading commercial bank in the  region . Both at the Group and the country 
subsidiary level, th is bank is fully committed to the implementation of ARCAFIM. The bank  sees the programme 
as an important and integral part of its overall environmental and climat e change strategy  and as an instrument 
to develop and expand their climate change adaptation finance operations to all levels of the key food value 
chains, including particularly the smallholder production activities. The due diligence processes conducted by 
IFAD confirmed the Equity Group’s operational and financial status and capabilities suitable for operating both 
the financial and non -financial components of ARCAFIM, as well as the bank’s capability to manage the foreign 
exchange risk related to the pr ogramme loans.  Furthermore, to ensure the successful implementation of 
ARCAFIM by the Executing Agenc y, substantial high quality TA support will be provided from ARCAFIM -related 
budgets both to the Host Bank and its on-lending local partner FIs to further develop the skills of the participating 
financial institutions to implement this large -scale CCA finance programme and to appropriately monitor and 
report on its performance and impact.    
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
 
96. ARCAFIM Blended Finance structure . The Blended Finance Structure is used for the ARCAFIM in order to 
mobilize local private sector financing (i.e. Host Bank ) for CCA by means of de -risking structures. The Blended 
Finance structure of ARCAFIM will consist of USD 180 million for Ea st Africa, consisting USD 45 million from 
GCF (USD 21 million for 1 st loss, and USD 24 million for mezzanine/2 nd loss), USD 45 million from IFAD or 
IFAD organized international co -financiers, and USD 90 million from Equity Group . Therefore, the expected 
mobilization ratio of GCF funding is 1:4 at the Facility level. There is further mobilization expected at the 
unde rlying portfolio if the  end-beneficiaries are able to attract further financing from local financial institutions. 
The IFAD adheres to the DFI enhanced blended finance principles  to ensure crowding -in private sector 
financing and minimum concessionality, w ithout crowding out private finance.  
 
97. Reinforcing markets (Principle 4 under the DFI blended finance principle) . The ARCAFIM financial 
structure aims to develop a market that addresses the root causes of market failure, while providing adequate 
incentive to financiers. From the Host Bank perspective, credit risks are mitigated by the credit protection 
provided by IFA D with the financial support of international financiers (partners) . Therefore, financial institutions 
are incentivized to make prudent credit decisions towards the final borrowers. At the same time, the Host Bank 
is contractually obliged to on -lend directly or indirectly to small producers and rural MSMEs for CCA 
investments in order to promote lending to that particular niche. In addition, Technical Assistance provision 
address lack of sector -specific capacity and st rengthen the potential for greater private sector participation over 
time, and eventually create and drive bankable demand in the target groups in collaboration with the Host Bank .


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 46 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
 
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  While green finance and 
CC mitigation finance 
volumes are increasing, 
finance for CC 
adaptation  finance 
remains very limited 
both globally and 
especially in Sub -
Saharan Africa. Strong 
demand and supply side 
barriers for increasing 
the volumes exist (see 
TOC). Awareness by 
private financial 
institutions of how to 
enter or expand to CCA 
finance is very limited in 
ARCA FIM target area.    Low Effective paradigm change would involve 
proactive involvement of the private 
sector financial institutions in CCA 
finance and raising the appetite of private 
financiers in active involvement in th is 
area of financial intermediatio n. 
Analytical assessment of eligible and 
bankable CCA projects and increased 
awareness of these investment 
opportunities among the borrowers and 
lenders can stimulate the market and 
start the process that would lead to 
increasingly considering CCA finance as 
part of the mainstream financial services.   
The capacity of the Host Bank will be 
strengthened to actively participate with 
their own resources in CCA finance 
operations on a much wider scale, and 
independently mobilize climate finance  
The Programme will introduce catalytic 
international and local private sector 
resources to CCA f inance that aim to 
transform the market and introduce 
commercial efficiencies and increase the 
scale of operations. The change making 
interventions will include: (i) blended 
financial resources for CCA finance to the 
Host Banks selected for each region, (ii) 
earmarked CCA financial resources to 
the on -lending local FIs that lack liquid 
investment capital, (iii) risk management 
solutions through the blended finance 
structure of the programme, (iv) focused 
capacity building and TA to both the 
participating financial institutions and the 
end-users of the CCA finance, and (v) the 
development of taxonomy for CCA 
finance for Africa.  These interventions will 
result in an i ncrease in direct and indirect 
lending to small producers and MSMEs


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 47 
  
  
 and manage CCA programmes. The 
successful implementation of this 
programme is also expected to create a  
demonstration effect and encourage other 
financial institutions  in the region  to scale 
up their  CCA finance operations.  using appropriate climate finance 
products; which will increase their ability 
to adapt to risk imposed by climatic 
changes, thus improving resilience and 
food security in vulnerable commun ities.  
 
Replicability  Currently, there are in 
practice no well -
functioning private 
sector CCA finance 
programmes in target 
regions  with clear 
replication potential , 
although some are new 
interventions are 
emerging. Public CCA  
finance  efforts are 
heavily grant -based , 
short -term focused  and 
small in scale.  Low By making ARCAFIM a successful 
example and a showcase of commercial 
CCA finance, paradigm shift can be 
achieved with the financiers as well as in 
the mindset of borrowers. The successful 
implementation of this programme is 
expected to encourage other African 
financial institutions and international 
financiers to identify new business 
opportunities i n climate finance and 
change their risk perception of agriculture 
adaptation financing, using ARCAFIM’s 
basic concepts of blended funding , 
appropriate CCA taxonomies and top -
class technical assistance.  
Also, w ith the learning generated through 
ARCAFIM, an d to provide more evidence 
to support paradigm change potential, 
the IFAD plan is to replicate this private 
climate adaptation finance mechanism in 
other regions of the continent including 
North, West and Central Africa.   ARCAFIM’s model is to test and 
introduce a practical, widely 
implementable model for large -scale use 
of private financial resources for rural 
CCA investments. IFAD, the other co -
financiers and the Host Bank will use 
regional and international networks to 
proactively share knowledge and 
information of the ARCAFIM performance 
and achieved results.  The key role in 
ARCAFIM of the leading commercial 
bank in the region is to substantially 
strengthen th e demonstration effect and 
encourage other financial instituti ons to 
replicate success ful approaches and 
methodologies to  increasingly participate 
in CC finance operations.  The successful 
implementation of this programme is 
expected to encourage other African 
financial institutions to re -visit their 
policies and enga ge actively in  climate 
adaptation finance.  
Sustainability  Because of the high 
subsidy level and grant 
finance domination, 
current CCA finance Low Paradigm shift towards more 
sustainability can be achieved by more 
analytic approach in eligibility criteria 
definitions for the financed investments The use of blended funding, appropriate 
CCA taxonomies and top -class technical 
assistance will increase regional bank’s 
ability to provide appropriate CCA loans


---
*Page 52*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 48 
  
  
 programmes tend to 
end when the project s 
supporting them close . 
Bankability and 
sustainability of 
financed interventions 
are often weakly 
analysed and 
monitored.  and by stressing the longer -term nature 
of this type of transformative financing.  
Through its analytical work on CCA 
finance supply and demand and its 
related capacity  and systems 
development interventions, ARCAFIM will 
significantly contribute to reducing the 
PFIs’ risk perception associated to this 
sector’s lending. With skills developed 
and experience gained, participating 
financial institutions will be in a position  
to profitably continue with the adaptation 
finance operations even when the direct 
support to them from ARCAFIM ends.  
 to small producers and rural MSMEs 
after ARCAFIM support ends. The 
engagement of private sector financial 
service providers and experienced TA 
providers would emphasise that the 
efforts aim at introducing a sustainable 
development path to rural produces and 
small firms, as opposed to very short -
term grant -based solutions. At small 
scale producers and MSME leve l, 
ARCAFIM will promote and support 
modernised CCA production systems 
that are market driven and suitable to 
local agro -ecological zones and climatic 
conditions. The comprehensive 
ARCAFIM approach to mentoring and 
training in technical aspects of climate -
smart farming and in relevant business 
skills is expected to significantly improve 
small -scale agricultural producers’ 
potential to sustain the benefits from 
ARCAFIM interventions even when the 
project support ends.


---
*Page 53*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 49 
  
  
 E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emiss ions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Note s / Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final45 
Adaptation (All result 
areas)  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiary reached  PFI data systems and reporting  
Household surveys  
 0 Total: 160,000 
households  
- 130,000 d irect 
small producer 
households  
- 30,000 i ndirect  
small producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by 
country, type of 
beneficiary (direct or 
indirect), gender and 
youth  
 
Total: 713,600 
individuals in the 
target households 
(average hh: 4.46)  
 Total: 3 20,000 
households  
- 260,000 direct 
small producer 
households  
- 60,000 indirect 
small producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by 
country, type of 
beneficiary (direct or 
indirect), gender and 
youth  
Total: 1,427,200 
individuals in the 
target households 
(average hh: 4.46)  
 This line is to demonstrate  total outreach 
across result areas without double 
counting. ARA1 and A RA2 total outreach  
numbers are  within this number of 
households in order to present an overall 
total outreach target.  
Note that 15,000 indirect jobs created is 
an additional outreach, reported under 
co-benefits.  
 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  
 Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  PFI data systems will record 
and report on the number of 
unique clients receiving and 
repaying CCA loans;  
Household surveys  at project  
years 3, 6, 9 and 12 measure 
benefit s experienced as a 
result of CCA loans  0 
 Total: 160,000 
households  
- 130,000 d irect 
small producer 
households  
- 30,000 i ndirect  
small producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by 
country, type of 
beneficiary (direct or Total: 3 20,000 
households  
- 260,000 direct 
small producer 
households  
- 60,000 indirect 
small producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by 
country, type of 
beneficiary (direct or - ARA1 and ARA2 total outreach 
numbers are within this number of 
households in order to present an overall 
total outreach target.  Note that 15,000 
indirect jobs created is an additional 
outreach, reported under co -benefits.  
- The direct households receive financial 
and technical assistance services. The 
indire ct households are supported by 
value chain opportunities or employment 
created through MSME investments  
- Mid-term and final results will be 
measured using data collected through 
PFI records of completed loans, and 
 
45 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the 
target v alue at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the in vestment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 54*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 50 
  
  
 indirect), gender and 
youth  
 
Total: 713,600 
individuals in the 
target households 
(average hh: 4.46)  
 indirect), gender and 
youth  
Total: 1,427,200 
individuals in the 
target households 
(average hh: 4.46)  measurable adaptation benefits will be 
captured in a representative household 
survey of the loan recipients.    
-  At least 50% and 30% the household 
representatives receiving project support 
will be women and youth, respectively  
- Assumptions: political stability, market 
price stability, no global financial crisis, 
no major pandemics  
- Average household size 4.46 is used to 
estimate beneficia ry numbers. The small 
producer households number is 
multiplied with the average size of 
household to calculate the direct and 
indirect individual beneficiaries  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  
 Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  Household surveys  at years 3, 
6, 9 and 12 to measure the 
actual rate of adoption of CCA 
practices as a result of the 
CCA loans.  
 0  104,000 small 
producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by 
country, type of 
beneficiary (direct or 
indirect), gender and 
youth  
 
464,000 household 
members  
 208,000 small 
producer 
households  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by : 
- Type of beneficiary 
(direct or indirect)  
- Gender (male of 
female)  
- Youth / non -youth  
- Country  
 
928,000 household 
members  
 Targets are calculated using 80% of 
directly supported small producer 
households , counting only those who 
have received CCA loans and apply 
improved or new livelihood options  -  At 
least 50% and 30% the household 
representatives that successfully 
received project support are women and 
youth, respectively  
- Mid-term and final results will be 
measured using data collected through 
PFI records of completed loans, and 
adoption of climate -resilient livelihood 
options will be captured in a 
representative household survey of the 
loan recipients.   
- Assumptions: Climate resilient 
agricultural solutions financially viable, no 
major financial crisis, sustained interest 
from beneficiaries to ad opt options, 
sustained viability of financial service 
providers  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  
 Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low -emission and/or 
climate -resilient management 
practice  Household surveys  at 3, 6, 9 
and 12 years to measure the 
total number of HA of 
households that adopted CCA 
practices  
 0 Total: 104,000 HA  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by  
- crop/agric  land 
- pasture s 
- agroforestry  
- forestry production Total: 208,000 HA  
 
Reports 
disaggregated by  
- crop/agric  land 
- pasture s 
- agroforestry  
- forestry production - Targets calculated using an a verage  of 
1ha improved management per small 
producer household that adopted 
improved options . 
- Mid-term and final results on the actual 
land size to which climate resilient 
practices are applied will be measured 
using data collected from representative 
household s urvey of the loan recipients


---
*Page 55*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 51 
  
  
 for commercial 
purposes  
 for commercial 
purposes  
 and following guidance in the Integrated 
Results Management Framework: 
Results Handbook December 2022.  
- All values will be disaggregated by 
country  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Supplementary 4.2: Number of 
livestock brought under 
sustainable management 
practices  Household surveys  at years 3, 
6, 9 and 12  0 Target to be defined 
at project inception 
phase  
Disaggregat ed by 
species (based on 
the LSU category): 
cattle, buffalo, 
sheep, goats, pigs,  
asses, horses, 
mules, camels, 
chickens.  
 
Disaggregat ed by 
country  
 Target to be defined 
at project inception 
phase  
 
Disaggregat ed by 
species (based on 
the LSU category): 
cattle, buffalo, 
sheep, goats, pigs,  
asses, horses, 
mules, camels, 
chickens.  
 
Disaggregat ed by 
country  Mid-term and final results on the actual 
number of livestock brought  under 
sustainable management practices will 
be measured using data collected from 
representative household survey of the 
loan recipients  and applying LSU 
coefficients according to the guidance in 
the Integrated Results Management 
Framework: Results Handbo ok 
December 2022.  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Supplementary 4.3: Tonnes of 
fish stock brought under 
sustainable management 
practices  
 Household surveys  at years 3, 
6, 9 and 12  0 Target to be defined 
at project inception 
phase  
 
Disaggregated by 
Fisheries vs 
aquaculture  
Disaggregated by 
Marine and coastal 
areas vs freshwater  
 
Disaggregated by 
country  Target to be defined 
at project inception 
phase  
 
Disaggregated by 
Fisheries vs 
aquaculture  
Disaggregated by 
Marine and coastal 
areas  vs freshwater  
 
Disaggregated by 
country  Mid-term and final results on the actual 
number of fish stock  brought  under 
sustainable management practices will 
be measured using data collected from 
representative household survey of the 
loan recipients following  guidance in the 
Integrated Results Management 
Framework: Results Handbook 
December 2022.  
ARA2 Health, well -being, 
food and water security  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Household surveys  at years 3, 
6, 9 and 12 years to measure 
benefit experienced as a result 
of CCA loans  
 
 0 134,000 
Households  
 
598,000 household 
members  268,000 
Households  
 
1,195 ,000 household 
members  
 
Report 
disaggregated by:  
- Type of beneficiary 
(direct or indirect)  - PFI data systems will re cord and report 
on the number of unique clients receiving 
and repaying CCA loans


---
*Page 56*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 52 
  
  
 - Gender (male of 
female)  
- Youth / non -youth  
- Country  
- improvement of 
status to “no food 
insecurity” (target 
established after 
completion of 
baseline)  
- improvement of 
status to 
“households with 
mild food insecurity”  
ARA2 Health, well -being, 
food and water security  
 Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with improved food security  Household surveys  at 3, 6 and 
12 years to measure the 
number of loan recipients that 
have experienced improved 
food security according to the 
FIES methodology.  
 Baseline 
conducted 
using 
rolling 
collection 
at time of 
loan 
application 
or through 
year 3 
household 
survey  134,000 
Households  
 
598,000 household 
members  268,000 
Households  
 
1,195 ,000 household 
members  
 
Report 
disaggregated by:  
- Type of beneficiary 
(direct or indirect)  
- Gender (male of 
female)  
- Youth / non -youth  
- Country  
- improvement of 
status to “no food 
insecurity” (target 
established after 
completion of 
baseline)  
- improvement of 
status to 
“households with 
mild food insecurity”  - 80% of ARCAFIM PFI clients and 
households benefitting through 
supported value chains  
-  At least 50% and 30% the household 
representatives that successfully 
received project support are women and 
youth, respectively  
- The household survey will incorporate 
the FIES method survey questions at 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12, either using a rolling 
baseline collected at the time o f loan 
application, or using data collected at 3 
years to retroactively construct a 
baseline.


---
*Page 57*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 53 
  
  
 E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer and 
innovation  There is limited awareness 
and lack of understanding of 
climate change adaptation 
investment opportunities, 
technologies, and benefits 
among small producers and 
MSMEs. There is limited 
knowledge on climate change 
adaptation in the private 
financial sector,  and a lack of 
incentives, which  has resulted 
in a lack of suitable lending 
products (resources) offered to 
finance climate change 
adaptation technologies and 
practices.  low PFIs (and other financial 
institutions) have incentives, 
skills, and resources t o 
incorporate CCA financial 
products as a part of their 
mainstream finance offering, 
which results in small 
producers and MSMEs 
accessing and using 
appropriate financial products 
to adopt CCA technologies 
and practices.  ARCAFIM will provide financial 
and n on-financial support to 
develop  and deploy  tailored 
financial products to scale up 
CCA finance; and will share 
lessons learned and best 
practices to encourage wider 
adoption of CCA finance in the 
region.  
 Multi -countries  
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformation at 
the sectoral, local, or national 
level While there are some 
initiatives in the region 
facilitating the development of 
a climate finance market, there 
is still limited use of private 
financial resources for rural 
CCA i nvestments and the 
market’s ability to serve small 
rural producers and MSMEs 
remains limited due to: a lack 
of information on the market 
potential, low demand, a lack 
of appropriate long -term 
financing, and an unfavourable 
investment environment with a 
lack of incentives for 
sustainable development of 
the market.  low The Host Bank is actively 
participating with their own 
resources in CCA finance 
operations on a much wider 
scale, independently 
mobilizing CCA programmes. 
There is increased demand 
and uptake amongst small 
producers and MSMEs of new 
appropriate financial products 
for climate smart agricultural 
practices and modern CC A 
technologies. The success of 
these products and sharing of 
best practices  with other  
financial institutions in the 
region  further  expand s the 
availability of  CCA finance  to 
small rural producers and 
MSMEs.  ARCAFIM will help 
mainstream CCA finance by 
testing the implement -ability of 
the model with  private entit y, 
promote competitiveness and 
most appropriate CCA finance 
imple mentation models, and 
integrate lessons learnt from 
one sub-region into effective 
messages on how to promote 
CCA finance on a wider scale 
over the African continent.  Multi -countries  
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and There is limited awareness 
and knowledge within private 
financial institutions o f best 
practices in implementing and low Best practices in CCA finance 
for small rural producers and 
MSMEs is used to improve 
and expand CCA finance by ARCAFIM provides financial 
and non -financial (technical) 
support to Partner Financial 
Instit utions to improve and Multi -countries


---
*Page 58*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 54 
  
  
 learning processes, and use of 
good practices, methodologies 
and standards  monitoring CCA finance for 
small rural producers and 
MSMEs.  the PFIs supported directly by 
ARCAFIM; an d those lessons 
and practices are routinely 
shared regionally with other 
CCA stakeholders, who use 
the information to improve and 
expand CCA lending in the 
region.  innovate the climate finance 
services they offer; and a 
robust M&E system will be 
developed by the program to 
generate and share evidence 
and learning on effective CCA 
finance.  ARCAFIM also has 
specific activities in 
Component 2 to develop 
knowledge products and a 
CCA finance taxonomy to 
share with  other programs and 
stakeholders throughout the 
region.


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 55 
  
  
  
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme  
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1  
ARCAFIM PFIs expand and 
mainstream CCA finance in 
the region  resulting in 
increased CC resilience and 
improved food security levels 
of rural communities  
 1.1 Cumulated volume 
and number of CCA 
loans disbursed to 
ARCAFIM target 
groups, disaggregated 
by: 
- Type of recipient  
- Gender  
- Age (Youth)  
- Country  
- Subsector  MIS quarterly financial report  0 Total US$ 133 mil 
including:  
- 130,000 new 
small producer 
loans of US$ 96 mil  
- 250 new SME 
loans of US$ 37 mil  
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 Total US$ 266 mil 
including:  
- 260,000 new 
small producer 
loans of US$ 192 
mil 
- 500 new SME 
loans of US$ 74 mil  
- Female:  
target  50% 
(130 000 small 
producers and 250 
SMEs)  
- Youth:  
target  30% (78 000 
small producers 
and 150 SMEs)  
 Calculated as a sum of the 
volume and number of loans 
disbursed to end clients by the 
Host Bank and through 
wholesale partners, assuming 
up to 5 loan cycles, 20% new 
clients per cycle, 6% loss per 
cycle, and an average loan size 
of $150,000 for SME 
agribusinesses, and $ 716 for 
small producers. Data will be 
collected through the MIS of the 
Host Bank and reported 
quarterly  
Assumptions: Climate resilient 
agricultural solutions of interest 
to producers, no major financial, 
political, economic, 
environmen tal, or health crisis, 
sustained trust in financial 
institutions, sustained viability of 
financial service providers.  
1.2 Number of PFIs 
continue and expand  
CCA finance without 
ARCAFIM support  Final evaluation qualitative 
assessments and Completion 
report  0 0 4 Host Bank 
subsidiaries  
16 other PFIs  Assumption: all Host Bank 
subsidiaries and 80% of other 
ARCAFIM PFIs  
1.3 Number of directly 
reached clients that report 
improved resilience  
- By type of 
recipient  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth 
vs. non -Youth)  
- By Country  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0 104,000 small 
producer 
households  
 
200 SMEs  208,000 small 
producer 
households  
 
400 SMEs  - 80% of ARCAFIM PFI clients  
-  At least 50% and 30% the 
household representatives that 
successfully received project 
support are women and youth, 
respectively  
- ARCAFIM will develop a 
resilience measurement tool, 
adapted from IFAD’s resilience 
scorecard.


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
 - By Subsector   
1.4 Number of households 
report improved food 
security  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth 
vs. non -Youth)  
- By Country  
- By Subsector  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0% 134,000 
Households  
 
598,000 household 
members  268,000 
Households  
 
1,195,000 
household 
members  
  - 80% of ARCAFIM PFI clients 
and households benefitting 
through supported value chains  
-  At least 50% and 30% the 
household representatives that 
successfully received project 
support are women and youth, 
respectively  
Output 1.1  
Regional Host Bank accesses 
resources to provide CCA 
loans to smallholders and 
MSMEs  
 
All indicators 1.1.1 to 1.1.4 
disaggregated by:  
- Type of recipient  
(MSME or small 
producer)  
- Gender  
- Age (Youth vs. 
non-Youth)  
- Country  
- Subsector  1.1.1  Cumulated volume 
and number of CCA 
loans disbursed by 
host bank to 
ARCAFIM end target 
groups  MIS quarterly financial report  0 Total US $ 92 mil 
including:  
- 37,000 new small 
producer loans o f 
US$ 55 mil  
- 250 new SME 
loans of US$ 37 mil  
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 Total  US$ 184 mil 
including:  
- 74,000 new small 
producer loans of  
US$ 110 mil  
- 500 new SME 
loans of US$ 74 mil  
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 Calculated as a sum of the 
volume and number of loans 
disbursed directly to end clients 
by the Host Banks, assuming up 
to 5 loan cycles, 20% new 
clients per cycle, 6% loss per 
cycle, and an average loan size 
of $150,000 for SME 
agribusinesses, and $1,500 f or 
small producers.  
 
1.1.2  Average loan size of 
CCA loans disbursed 
(US$) to end 
beneficiaries  MIS quarterly financial report  0 -  US$ 1,500 for 
small producer 
loans  
-  US$ 150,000 for 
SME loans  -  US$ 1,500 for 
small producer 
loans  
-  US$ 150,000 for 
SME loans  Calculated average Host Bank 
direct loan size for small 
producers and for SMEs, 
respectively.  Loans range 
between  US$ 50 – US$ 7,500 
per farm and US$ 1,000 – 
US$ 300,000  per SME.  
1.1.3  CCA loan default rate 
(%) – including PAR 
30, PAR 60, and PAR 
90 MIS quarterly financial report  0 Target: below 6%  Target: below 6%  CCA loans in default divided by 
the total number of CCA loans. 
To be updated once Host Bank 
default rates are known for first 
investment cycle.  
1.1.4  Actual Interest Rates 
charged for CCA loans 
(%) MIS quarterly financial report  0 tbd tbd No targets set, but data will be 
reported by banks and analysed 
against market rates and 
conditions.  
Output 1.2  
Local intermediaries have 
access to wholesale credit 
lines to provide CCA loans  
 1.2.1  Cumulated volume and 
number of CCA loans 
disbursed through 
wholesale partners to MIS quarterly financial report  0 Total US$ 41 mil 
including:  
- 93,000 new small 
producer loans  Total US$ 82 mil 
including:  
- 186,000 new 
small producer 
loans  Calculated as a sum of the 
volume and number of loans 
disbursed through wholesale 
partners to end clients, 
assuming up to 5 loan cycles,


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
 All indicators 1.2.1 to 1.2.4 
disaggregated by:  
- Type of recipient  
- Gender  
- Age (Youth vs. 
non-Youth)  
- Country  
- Subsector  ARCAFIM end target 
groups  - Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 - Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 20% new clients per cycle, 6% 
loss per cycle, and an average 
loan size of $ 500. The loan 
sizes  
 
1.2.2  Average loan size of 
CCA loans disbursed 
(US$) to end 
beneficiaries  MIS quarterly financial report  0 -  US$ 500 for 
small producer 
loans  -  US$ 500 for 
small producer 
loans  Calculated average loan size 
from all the financial 
intermediaries’ small producer 
loans.  Loans range between  
US$ 50 – US$ 7,500 per farm . 
1.2.3  CCA loan default rate 
(%) – including PAR 
30, PAR 60, and PAR 
90 MIS quarterly financial report  0 Target: below 6%  Target: below 6%  CCA loans in default divided by 
the total number of CCA loans. 
To be updated once Host Bank 
default rates are known for first 
investment cycle.  
1.2.4  Actual Interest Rates 
charged for CCA loans 
(%) MIS quarterly financial report  
Household surveys and interest 
rate surveys at project years 3, 
6, 9 and 12  
 0 tbd tbd No targets set, but data will be 
reported by banks and analysed 
against market rates and 
conditions.  
Outcome 2  
Improved capacity of PFIs and 
agriculture value chain 
participants to adapt to risks 
imposed by climatic changes  2.1 Number of trained PFIs 
offer appropriate CCA rural 
financial services  
- By type of 
financial 
institution  
- By Country  Host Bank annual report  0 14 24 Assumption: all trained PFIs 
offer appropriate CCA rural 
financial services  
 
Disaggregated by type of PFI:  
(Host Bank, bank, SACCO, MFI, 
Fintech) and by country.  
Assumptions: Climate resilient 
agricultural solutions remain 
viable and of interest to PFIs 
and producers, no major 
financial, political, economic, 
environmental, or health crisis, 
sustained trust in financial 
institutions, su stained viability of 
financial service providers.  
2.2 Number of individuals 
with increased 
skills/capacity in CCA 
investment and financial 
literacy  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth)  
- By Country  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0 146,250 small 
producers  
 
280 MSMEs  
 
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 292,500 small 
producers  
 
560 MSMEs  
 
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% Assumption: 90% of trained 
report increased skills and 
capacity.


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
   
Output 2.1  
Improved readiness and 
capacities of all PFIs to make 
appropriate climate finance 
investments  2.1.1 Number of trained 
PFIs implement CCA 
lending products and 
technology solutions  Host Bank annual report  0  
4 Equity Group  
Subsidiaries  
 
10 other PFI 
partners   
4 Equity  Group  
Subsidiaries  
 
20 other PFI 
partners  Assumption: all trained PFIs will 
implement appropriate CCA 
lending products  
2.1.2  Number of trained 
PFIs have a functioning 
CCA finance appraisal 
toolkit and are  capable to 
design and operate a 
portfolio reporting system 
against the CCA Taxonomy  Host Bank annual report  0  
4 Equity  Group  
Subsidiaries  
 
10 other PFI 
partners   
4 Equity  Group  
Subsidiaries  
 
20 other PFI 
partners  Assumption: all trained PFIs will 
implement a CCA Taxonomy 
reporting framework  
Output 2.2  
Improved CCA investment 
capacities of smallholder 
farmers and MSMEs  
 2.2.1 Number of potential 
borrower small producers 
that receive technical 
support for CCA investment 
and financial literacy, 
including  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth 
vs. non -Youth)  
- By Country  TA annual report  0  
162,500 small 
producers  
 
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 
  
325,000 small 
producers  
 
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 
 Estimated 80% of trained 
access lending  
2.2.2 Number of potential 
borrower SME managers 
that receive CCA 
investment and business 
planning technical support  TA annual report  0 313 625 Estimated 80% of trained 
access lending  
Output 2.3  
Improved enabling 
environment of CCA through 
application of taxonomy and 
best practices by climate 
finance ecosystem  2.3.1 Number of non-
participating Financial 
institutions replicating 
ARCAFIM methods and/or 
using taxonomy  Stakeholder interviews  at mid 
term and final evaluations  0 - - Project to monitor policy 
dialogues impact. No objective 
set. 
2.3.2 Number of local and 
international institutions 
benefitting from ARCAFIM 
CCA finance best practices 
including CCA Taxonomy  Stakeholder interviews  at mid 
term and final evaluations  0 - - Project to monitor policy 
dialogues impact. No objective 
set. 
Project/programme co -benefit indicators


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
 Co-benefit 1  
Increased income  CB1 Number of 
beneficiaries directly 
reached that have reported 
an increase in income  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth 
vs. non -Youth)  
- By Country  
- By Subsector  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0 134,000 
Households  268,000 
Households  - 80% of ARCAFIM PFI clients 
and households benefitting 
through supported value chains  
 
Co-benefit 2  
Increased employment  CB2. Number of formal 
jobs created by the 
program’s private sector 
recipients  
- By Gender  
- By Age (Youth 
vs. non -Youth)  
- By Country  
- By Subsector  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0 7,500 jobs  
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 15,000 jobs 
- Female:  
target  50% 
- Youth:  
target  30% 
 - Number of off -farm jobs 
generated by the MSMEs 
benefitting from CCA finance 
(does not include small producer 
value chain opportunities)  
- Assuming an average of 30 
employed per successful MSME 
investment  
 
Co-benefit 3  
Improved biodiversity  CB3.  Biodiversity 
improvements at 
ecosystem -level using Area 
of Intact Biodiversity in ha 
(AIB) and Average Natural 
Capital in USD/ha (ANC) 
(IFAD CI 3.2.4)  Remotely assessed via FAO’s 
ABC-Map tool  conducted at 
year 1, 6 and 12 of 
implementation  TBD AIB and ANC are 
held constant  
 Either AIB or ANC 
show positive 
change, while the 
other is held 
constant  Note: Given the scope and 
scale of ARCAFIM, only a 
sample area will be selected for 
measurement based on the 
geographic and sectoral 
disbursement of loans. IFAD 
projects are expected to use the 
default spatial resolution of 
300m, therefore not every 
location of an ARCAFIM loan 
will be measured, rather a 
sample measurement area will 
be det ermined by the relative 
geographical concentration of 
loans made by  the Host Bank. 
While the ABC -Map covers the 
most important pressures on 
biodiversity, it does not directly 
cover the pressures of climate 
change, pollution of soil, water 
and air and species 
introductions.  
Co-benefit 4  
Mitigation  Reduction in GHG 
emissions (tCO2)  Household surveys  at project 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12  0 TBD TBD The mitigation impact will be  
estimated post -investment at 
aggregate level for the types of


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 60 
  
  
 investments where mitigation 
benefits have occurred, and the 
estimates verified as part of the 
household surveys conducted at 
years 3, 6, 9 and 12 . 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1 Resource allocation 
through Host Bank  ARCAFIM and the Host Bank  allocate 
resources and a risk sharing mechanism for 
CCA investments and the PFIs introduce 
methods for direct CCA lending using agreed 
taxonomy  1.1.1 CCA lending products and services are 
rolled out by the Host Bank  
1.1.2 ARCAFIM provides international capital 
for CCA finance and a risk sharing mechanism 
to the Host Bank  
1.1.3 Regional Host Bank lends to smallholders 
and MSMEs  Host Bank developed the a ppropriate CCA 
finance products offered with ARCAFIM 
resources  
ARCAFIM delivered  US$ 90 million of  
international capital to the Host Bank for CCA 
finance  
The Host Bank  effectively operate s a US$ 180 
million portfolio of CCA finance investments to 
ARCAFIM eligible target groups  
 
Activity 1.2 Resource allocation 
through financial intermediaries  ARCAFIM and the Host Bank  allocate 
resources and a risk sharing mechanism for 
CCA investments and the PFIs introduce 
methods for indirect  CCA lending using a greed 
taxonomy  1.2.1 CCA lending products and services are 
rolled out by the ARCAFIM PFIs other than Host 
Bank   
1.2.2 Local FIs and other intermediaries receive 
wholesale credit lines from Host Bank and lend 
to smallholders and MSME  PFIs (other than Host Bank)  developed the 
appropriate CCA finance products offered with 
ARCAFIM resources  
ARCAFIM PFIs  (other than Host Bank) 
effectively operate a US$ 54 million portfolio of 
CCA finance investments to ARCAFIM eligible 
target groups  
Activity 2.1.1 CCA lending toolkits  
 
Activity 2.1.2 M&E system 
establishment and annual costs, M&E 
household surveys and evaluations  
 
Activity 2.1.3 PFI training  ARCAFIM offers demand driven capacity -
building and TA for PFIs  2.1.1.1 The Host Bank and other participating 
financial institutions will receive technical 
assistance to develop lending toolkits 
appropriate for ARCAFIM operations  
 
2.1.2.1 The Host Bank  will receive systematic 
support to establish the ARCAFIM programme 
management systems, to coo rdinate the 
programme implementation and report on the 
performance  
 
2.1.3.1 The Host Bank  and other Participating 
Financial Institutions will receive a 
comprehensive technical assistance package The Host Bank implemented the required 
improvements to the banks MIS system  to 
manage the programme and report on its 
performance in line with the agreement in the 
ARCAFIM design  
 
ARCAFIM Host Bank and other PFIs have 
appropri ate CCA finance strategies supporting 
the implementation of the ARCAFIM CCA 
finance portfolio  
 
Digital technologies  are introduced by the PFIs 
to reduce  transaction costs and improve the


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
 for the  development and implementation of a 
CCA finance strat egy and appropriate CCA 
finance service products targeting small 
producers and MSMEs active in food systems  
 
2.1.3 .2 Technical support to all PFIs on 
inclusion of digital technologies to reduce 
transaction costs, and improve the credit 
assessment and risk management of small CCA 
loans  credit assessment and risk management of 
small CCA loans  
Activity 2.2.1 Training of small 
producers  
Activity 2.2.2  Training of MSMEs  ARCAFIM offers demand driven capacity -
building and TA for smallholder farmers and 
MSMEs  2.2.1 .1 Awareness raising targeting rural small 
producers and MSMEs on the ARCAFIM CCA 
finan cial services  
2.2.1.2 Training and capacity building offered to 
small producers in rural areas in financial 
literacy and use of CCA finance products and 
services  
2.2.2.1 Awareness raising targeting rural 
MSMEs on the ARCAFIM CCA financial 
services  
2.2.2.2 Training and capacity building offered to 
MSMEs in effective development of business 
plans leading to access to CCA finance and 
sustainable implementation of the plans  Annual training reports by the Host Bank show:  
- The number of reached rural small p roducers 
and MSMEs through ARCAFIM awareness 
raising campaigns  
- The number of s mall producers  with 
strengthened  financial literacy and knowledge of 
CCA finance products and services  
- The number of MSMEs with strengthened 
capacity to develop bankable bus iness plans to 
apply and implement CCA finance investments  
Activity 2.3.1 CCA Rural finance policy 
dialogue, knowledge management  ARCAFIM engages in CCA finance policy 
dialogues including development and 
dissemination of CCA Taxonomy and CCA 
finance best practices  2.3.1 .1 Production and dissemination of the 
Foods Sector CCA Finance Taxonomy  
 
2.3.1.2   Engagement of regional and 
international key stakeholders in continuous and 
effective policy dialogue on CCA finance 
opportunities and best practices ; Organization 
of physical and virtual regional and international 
workshops to share best practices  
 Foods  Sector CCA Finance Taxonomy  
disseminated  
 
Number of stakeholders engaged in regional 
and international rural CCA finance workshops 
held to share best practices (reported based on 
the number of workshops/events organised and 
the number of attendees by coun try, gender and 
institution/sub -sector )


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
98. The purpose of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  for ARCAFIM is to continuously monitor and evaluate 
performance, assess whether the program is on track to deliver expected results and targets, generate data to 
improve performance, and increase learning in the field of Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) fi nance. 
ARCAFIM’s Theory of Change and Logical Framework will guide the M&E approach for the programme. The 
M&E approach outlined here will be further developed and refined during the inception phase s with the 
necessary inputs of stakeholders in the M&E pro cess.  
99. Prior  to ARCAFIM  launch , during  legal  documentation  phase,  dedicated  short  term design  resources  are 
used  for start-up preparations  including  recruit ment  of an ARCAFIM  M&E  Specialist  for the Host Bank  at the 
banking  group  level.  Such  specialist  would  provide  focused  support  to the design of a core financial reporting 
system for ARCAFIM with key indicators for the programme funds utilization and portfolio st atus, to be operated 
as a part of the main Host Bank performance reporting system. The M&E Specialist would also support the 
development of the additional, specific M&E reports on ARCAFIM operations, that (i) respond to the eligibility 
criteria and MIS and reporting requirements of the programme and (ii) can be operated as much as possible as 
a part of the standard IT -based accounting system of the Host Bank.  
100. In the Host Bank Management Information System , as a key principle, the books of accounts will have the  
loans issued from the project  funds specifically coded as ARCAFIM loans and reported a s eligible investment 
types for CCA financing. This will make possible a systematic on -line reporting and tracking of the ARCAFIM 
portfolio, as well as conducting separate annual audits on its accounting, with audit reports submitted to all 
investors in th is programme . 
101. M&E Stakeholders . While IFAD leads reporting back to the GCF, the Host Bank has a prominent role in data 
collection and analysis both for monitoring and evaluation aspects. For East Africa Region, Equity Group will 
provide  regular  performance  reports  to IFAD,  based  on a pre-defined  reporting  schedule,  indicators,  and 
formats,  to be agreed -upon  during  inception  between  IFAD  and the Host Bank.  The Equity Group already  has 
robust  data management  systems  in place  as well as dedicated  staff experienced  in reporting  requirements  of 
key international  development  financiers . In detail, the ARCAFIM M&E system will rely on coordination and 
data collection by the key stakeholders in project implementation . 
Stakeholder  Role  Responsibility  
IFAD  Accredited 
Entity  IFAD will implement and coordinate the overall M&E system; organize and lead the 
Annual Supervision Missions and Midterm and Final Evaluations; guide ARCAFIM 
stakeholders in appropriate M&E requirements and standards;  allocate resources to 
the stakeholders and service providers for the M&E tasks and deliverables; aggregate 
the M&E data and present it in overarching reports and knowledge documents; verify 
and ensure quality and validity of the M&E data and information f rom the various 
sources under ARCAFIM; and organize learning events to improve the programme 
performance and facilitate sector wide learning.  
Host Bank 
and PFIs  Executing 
Entities  The Host Bank, as key implementer of the programme, will play a key role in  data 
collection and analysis for the ARCAFIM portfolio under its management. The Host 
Bank and other PFIs will collect and report on baseline data, portfolio information, as 
well as output and select outcome indicators; participate in Annual Supervision 
Missions, Midterm and Final Evaluations; and participate in learning and adaptive 
management events. Resources are earmarked to support the preparations within the 
Host Bank and other PFIs to establish the required financial reporting systems for 
ARCAFIM wi th key indicators for the programme funds utilization and portfolio status, 
to be operated as a part of the main performance reporting system . 
Technical 
Assistance 
Providers 
(TBD)  TA Provider  Collect and report on data regarding the provision of technical  assistance . 
Third Party 
Research 
Firm (TBD)  M&E Data 
Collection  Contracted by IFAD to conduct the household survey following  IFAD’s procurement 
guidelines, and with support by IFAD’s Research and Impact Assessment (RIA) unit.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 Rural Loan 
Recipients  Beneficiaries  Participate in data collection surveys, self -assessments and interviews.  
GCF and 
other 
International 
Financiers  Financiers  Review ARCAFIM’s Theory of Change and Logical Framework, providing advice and 
guidance as needed; provide requirements and review ARCAFIM Annual Reports; and 
participate in the Evaluation Reference Group.  
 
Flow of Data within ARCAFIM  
 
 
102. M&E Approach. The overall M&E approach for ARCAFIM is built around its Theory of Change and Log -Frame 
and builds in adaptive management. Details on the specific tools are included in the Logframe in Section E, 
summari zed below:  
• Monitoring Activities: ARCAFIM will monitor program activities on an ongoing basis, providing progress 
updates in Annual Reports and all activities will be reviewed and adaptive measures identified during Annual 
Supervision Missions (more details below).   
• Monitoring Outputs: ARC AFIM will monitor program outputs by collecting data annually from  the Host Bank, 
who will lead data collection on outputs and report annually. Progress updates will be provided in Annual 
Reports, and all outputs will be reviewed an d adaptive measures identified during Annual Supervision 
Missions.  
• Evaluating Outcomes: ARCAFIM will evaluate program me outcomes , especially related to the expected 
climate results,  at 3 years, 6 years, 9 years and 12 years of implementation. These evalua tions will include a 
Household/Business Surveys of a sample of loan recipients . At 6 years and 12 years the detailed Interim and 
Final Evaluations are conducted (more details below). A before/after comparison with contribution analysis 
will be used to anal yse program outcomes and impact, and the program will use IFAD’s scorecard 
methodology for small -scale producer resilience measurement.  
 
103. IFAD Missions. IFAD will conduct Annual Supervision Missions  according to its own policies and procedures. 
The purpose of IFAD’s Annual Supervision Missions is to assess progress made in the implementation of 
activities , identify issues and challenges affecting implementation and agree on key strategic measures to 
enhance project performance. Annual Missions deliver a report with an updated M&E logframe with public 
summaries of the reports made available on IFAD’s website. These missions are followed up every six months 
by Bi-Annual Implementation Support Missions  which provide an opportunity to follow up on key 
recommendations made in the Annual Supervision Report.   
104. Evaluations.  At years 6 and 12, the I nterim and Final  Independent  Evaluations will be planned  and managed 
by IFAD according to the requirements of the GCF ’s evaluation criteria as per the GCF Evaluation Policy, and 
according to needs of evidence based ARCAFIM management. In advance to the Evaluation Missions, the 
Direct 
Beneficiar
Local PFIs 
(wholesale 
Host Banks  
IFAD  
 GCF  
Third Party 
Research 
Technical 
Assistance 
Household Survey 
Data  
Financial, Performance and 
Demographic Data  
Capacity 
Data  
All Data


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 64 
   
  
 
 RISK ASSE SSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1 : Weak CCA Finance Market Development   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description  
The financial sectors in the ARCAFIM target countries have not yet established CCA finance frameworks for the 
mainstream financial operations and private FIs  have  very limited CCA finance portfolios. This leads to the core 
operational risk for any CCA fina nce programme in the region: limited demand by small producers and MSMEs for 
appropriate CCA financing and limited capacity to meet the demand by offering appropriate CCA product and 
services by financial institutions. The risk often results in low disburs ement volumes of CCA schemes part icularly in 
Sub-Saharan Africa.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate this risk, substantial TA resources are included under ARCAFIM to stimulate both the demand and supply 
side. The Host Bank  will have delivery teams and systems set up at each country to professionally implement the 
scheme. High -class TA will be provided to achieve high staff capacities in the Host Bank to develop appropriate CCA 
finance products and to train their local partne r FIs in CCA financing and management. The beneficiary training will as 
well be adequately coordinated and resourced. Further, CCA investment progress and performance data collection 
and monitoring are of key importance, and this capacity will be developed  in-house at the Host Bank . Residual risk 
after the mitigating measures is expected to be moderate to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 2: Credit  Worthiness and Non -repayment Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  Host Bank will conduct more comprehensive Household/Business Surveys including both quantita tive and 
qualitative data collection and analysis. The analysis will not only evaluate direct Outcomes and medium -term 
results, but also assess the programme’s contributions to a long -term sustainable paradigm shift and enabling 
environment using GCF’s three -point scale rating. The ARCAFIM unit within IFAD  will lead the evaluation 
process following IFAD’s procurement guidelines and will be supported by IFAD’s Research and Impact 
Assessment (RIA) unit. The evaluations will be supported by an Evaluation Reference Group, made up of IFAD, 
GCF and the other co -financiers of ARCAFIM. This group will review and approve the terms of reference , the 
findings and the reports. The Host Bank will participate in the evaluations as needed.  
105. Annual Reporting. The Host Bank as key Executing Entity will provide quarterly repor ts to IFAD on financial 
progress and comprehensive annual reports to IFAD against  workplans, safeguards and  the Logical Framework  
indicators . IFAD as ARCAFIM Accredited Entity will provide annual reports to GCF  on the Funded activity 
according to GCF requi rements and will share those reports with other financiers. These reports will track and 
report progress on finances, results, management, workplans, activities, environmental and social safeguards, 
gender action plans, and all IRMF -related data and requir ements. The narrative will also cover:  
• Progress against intended objectives according to the ToC, with quantitative reporting on indicators and a 
qualitative analysis on what, why and how results are being achieved and contextual changes  
• A qualitative summary of any observed contribution to paradigm shift  
• A qualitative summary of any observed progress or contextual changes in the enabling environment  
• Lessons learned, challenges, and adaptive management measures undertaken.  
 
106. Aside from Annual Reports to GCF and Annual Supervision Reports, ARCAFIM will publish additional 
knowledge products for wider public under Component 2.3 on topics that will be identified throughout the  
programme implementation and  M&E process.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 Description  
The credit risk of small -scale producer and rural MSME finance is widely perceived as high by both international and 
regional FIs, and many FIs therefore shy away from this market. According to a recent study by Aceli Africa46 on agri -
lending in Sub -Saharan Africa, the average agri -lending portfolio default rate of commercial banks are estimated at 
6% and in the 4.9-7.7% range, 3-5% higher than commercial lending in other sectors.  Small producers face a similar 
or higher risk compared to the agri -MSMEs. Compared to standard agricultural loans to small producers, the risks 
with CCA finance instrume nts are unknown . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The ARCAFIM credit risks from the Host Bank perspective are mitigated by credit protection provided by IFAD . The 
real credit risk of CCA finance is unknown at the moment with insignificant or no systematic credit default data 
available for this specific sec tor. The proposed protection is, however, deemed adequate to convince  the Host Bank 
to enter or expand to the relatively unknown private sector field of CCA finance. Residual risk after the mitigating 
measures is expected to be moderate to low.  
Selected R isk Factor 3 : Foreign Currency Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Medium  Low 
Description  
ARCAFIM lending at the national level will be made in local currency while the international repayments by the Host 
Bank are made in US$ . This causes in the schemes of the ARCAFIM type a potential currency risk  which may 
adversely affect the programme disbursements, outreach and impact . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Under the ARCAFIM lending, the Host Bank manage s the currency risk of the US$ AR CAFIM financing through its 
internal treasury operations. The Host Bank, by design, is selected for its size, regional presence, financial strength, 
strong governance, and compliance with banking authority regulatory guidelines, including foreign currency exposure. 
In terms of loans to beneficiaries, loans from the Host Bank are expected to be in local curre ncy, and in hard currency 
only in circumstances where the borrower has the ability to hedge the foreign exchange risk, e.g., an exporter which 
earns revenues in US$. It is in the interest of the Host Bank and the borrower that the Host Bank only provides h ard 
currency loans to forex -earning enterprises  that can manage the FX risk. After these mitigation measures, the forex 
risk is con sidered  low for the successful programme implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 : Money laundering and Financial Crime  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Medium  Low 
Description  
In the ARCAFIM type of international lending operation, the possibility of prohibited  practices such as money 
laundering and other financial crimes needs to be considered and seen as a danger for successful programme 
implementation. Operating in the targeted countries, with sometimes fragile control environments, increase s the 
potential for such risks.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EDD assessment s support the implementation of IFAD’s Anti -Money Laundering and Countering the Financing 
of Terrorism Policy47 and related Procedures and reduce the risk that IFAD and the financiers of ARCAFIM conduct 
business with counterparties that are on international sanctions list s or have been involved in money laundering, 
terrorism financing or related risks . The Enhanced Financial Crime/KYC assessment fulfils IFAD’s fiduciary 
responsibility to protect i ts assets against potential misuse and ensure that its financing is not used for money 
laundering or terrorism financing .  
 
46 https://aceliafrica.org/bridging -the-financing -gap-unlocking -the-impact -potential -of-agricultural -smes -in-africa/   
47 EB2019/128/R.41/Rev.1  (https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/128/docs/EB -2019 -128-R-41-Rev-1.pdf)


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 Selected Risk Factor  5: Over -Indebtedness of Small Agribusinesses  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk of over-Indebtedness of  small producers and agribusinesses  can materialize, if in a relatively large scheme such 
as ARCAFIM, loans are provided to the low -income borrowers beyond their repayment capacity . Even if such practices 
can provide short -term relief against the adverse CC impact, the overall longer -term c onsequences to the target group 
can be negative and increase instability in the borrowing households.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate the risk of  small  agribusinesses taking loans beyond their repayment capacity, the aim of ARCAFIM 
Output 2.2 is to strengthen the smallholders’ and MSMEs’ knowledge of viable CCA options and benefits, appropriate 
financial services, business planning capacity, investment s tart-up and financial management skills of the borrowers , 
and thereby lower the investment risk for the PFIs. Furthermore, bankability assessments will be carried out for all 
potential borrowers , to help to inform the PFIs of the real investment risks and opportunities. The capacity building 
and BDS services will be demand -driven and target well -planned, productive, and screened investments in the rural 
agricultural sectors, thereby reducing the risks of over -indebtedness of the borrowers.  After  these  mitig ating 
measures, th e over -indebtedness risk is considered to be low.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 : Macroeconomic and Governance  Risk s 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  High Medium  
Description  
Maintaining stable economic growth levels during ARCAFIM implementation period is likely  to be a challenge in most 
of the target countries. Public debt levels can increase and surpass standard risk levels , global economic slowdown 
may continue to cause inflation and interest rate fluctuations, and supply chains of agriculture inputs and outputs may 
continue to be disrupted . Due to COVID -19 and environmental shocks, the economies contracted in various target 
countries and with the impacts of the war in Uk raine, the recovery is expected to take longer than was initially 
assumed, potentially affecting much of the ARCAFIM period. Furthermore, in various target countries, g overnance 
and transparency issues persist, resulting in high governance and corruption -related risk ratings.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
A key safeguard against governance and corruption -related risks is the private sector orientation of all the 
investments under ARCAFIM , as well as IFAD’s safeguards, practices and policies on zero tolerance to fraud and 
corruption48. This concerns both the private financial institutions that issue the services financed by ARCAFIM and the 
borrowers that utilise these services. At the same time , the impacts of adverse political and macro -economic 
deve lopments, such as the recent Russian attack to Ukraine, are  mitigated through the Host Bank financial stability 
and policies guiding their pricing and risk assessment. However, the external risks  are not possible  to be fully 
eliminate d in light of the inte nsity of the recent and ongoing external shocks . The residual impact of this risk is 
considered medium.  
 
 
48 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189366/fraud_e.pdf/ab42fc11 -b213 -49af-8df3-e70af2076650?t=1519055057000


---
*Page 71*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment   
107. The environmental and social risk category is moderate based on the screening of the potential ARCAFIM 
investments and the expected micro/ small scale and scope of these  investments . The end line investments will 
be made in non -sensitive locations  and potential adverse effects from them will be localized , mostly reversible 
and manageable with appropriate actions as proposed in the generic Environment and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) in the ARCAFIM Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) . The ESMF  
provides guidance for managing its environmental and social (E&S) risks. The ESMF places emphasis on the 
E&S risk management processes for the Programme’s implementing entities; the Host Bank, with additional 
guidance provided to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) and end beneficiaries.  
108. The ESMF aligns with the GCF E&S Screening Guidelines and E&S Policy, IFAD’s Social Environment and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) as well as the relevant E&S  legislation and guidelines in each of 
the ARCAFIM beneficiary countries. The ESMF builds on E&S risk management processes of the Host Bank, 
ensuring that gaps identified in the E&S due diligence (ESDD) of Host Bank are addressed including tools and 
templa tes.  
109. The ESMF is based on a programme level E&S risk assessment of ARCAFIM’s financing activities and 
outlines the broad E&S risks applicable to all ARCAFIM stakeholders, such as E&S -related incidents, 
stakeholder engagement and grievances, E&S management  skills and capacity, etc. Based on this assessment 
the ESMF provides the appropriate guidance notes to mitigate these risks. The ESMF will also briefly describe 
specific E&S risks that may be applicable to end beneficiaries, depending on the specific clim ate change 
adaptation investments that will be made. Risks (identified by the ARCAFIM country risk research) may include 
environmental pollution related to increased use of agro -chemicals (fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides), 
improper waste and wastewa ter management, land degradation (resulting from use of sub -optimal agricultural 
practices) and deforestation, climate change shocks, use of child labour, restrictions of freedom of association, 
substandard terms and conditions of employment, and exacerbat ing the vulnerability of women farmers  and 
indigenous peoples .  
110. The ESMF describes the E&S risk management process to be applied by the Host Bank when selecting PFIs, 
namely an assessment of the comprehensiveness of PFI’s own E&S management systems. The ES MF also 
describes the risk management process to be applied by the Host Bank (direct lending) or PFIs (indirect 
lending) when selecting end beneficiaries, which will categorise the individual climate change adaptation 
projects according to their E&S risk a nd screen the end beneficiaries’ capacity to manage these risks. The 
recommendations for capacity enhanced are based on short questionnaires provided to the PFIs. As part of 
the ESMF requirements, the end beneficiaries, PFIs, the Host Bank and the ARCAFIM programme as a whole 
will all monitor and report on the management of E&S issues in their respective spheres of influence. These 
E&S risk management processes will be supported by risk categorisation, screening, due diligence and 
monitoring tools/templates .  
111.  
112. In line with GCF IP Policy (Article 38), an IPPF will be prepared i n order to ensure culturally appropriate 
consultations for communities self -identifying as indigenous peoples . 
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan   
113. ARCAFIM’s Gender Equality & Social Inclusion Action Plan (GSIAP) is informed by the GESI assessments of 
the Host Bank and a sample of potential PFIs. ARCAFIM end beneficiaries (once known) shall be assessed 
based on a Generic GESI Self -Assessment tool.  Bo th GESI assessment tools are aligned to GCF’s Gender 
Policy and Project Planning Template Assessment Questions and IFAD’s gender mainstreaming criteria .   
114. The GSIAP outlines   an Action Plan with activities, indicators and targets, timelines, responsibilit ies, and 
costs. The GSIAP includes the results from the sample PFI Gender Assessments. As part of the ARCAFIM 
implementation, the Host Bank will provide further input and customize the action plan to their operational


---
*Page 72*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 needs and realities, particularly with  respect to the GSIAP timelines, responsibilities, and costs and the results 
from the additional PFI’s that will be engaged.  
115. Baseline data from  the Host Bank, potential PFIs and the Country -level socioeconomic analysis supported the 
development of an ARCA FIM Program Gender Equality & Social Inclusion Action Strategy. The Strategy aims 
at identifying and addressing the causes of vulnerability for women and girls and ensuring equal participation 
and benefits from the ARCAFIM funding activities, the ARCAFIM G ESI Action Strategy includes a GESI vision 
and policy statement, potential requirements and recommended action plan outputs for  the Host Bank and 
PFIs, a description of programmes, scope of application within the Host Bank, PFIs, milestones and generic 
completion targets for Host Banks, PFIs, and a monitoring strategy with KPIs, roles and responsibilities.  
116. Early GESI actions include conducting gender and social norms diagnostic studies at country and local levels 
to better understand the context in which AR CAFIM will be operating. Gender, youth and disability lenses will 
be applied understanding social norms, CCA technologies and practices, and financial products and services. 
These insights will provide the foundation for stimulating all stakeholders (from programme staff, host agency, 
PFIs and service providers through to community members and leaders) engage in critical reflection on norms 
that perpetuate inequalities and stimulate positive behaviour change in the inclusion -climate -finance nexus.  
 
117. As a result of capacity building for critical reflection and behaviour change on social inclusion issues, PFIs will 
view women, youth and people with disabilities as potential eligible borrowers of CCA finance. Under sub -
component 2.1, PFIs will address su pply-side barriers to CCA finance by seeking innovative ways to establish 
credit worthiness in the absence of traditional collateral, providing relevant CCA products and services, and 
identifying digital and non -digital routes to access services.  
 
118. At the c ommunity, household and individual levels, the shift in gender norms and attitudes will create an 
enabling environment in which women, youth and people with disabilities will be able to make independent 
decisions to borrow money and adopt CCA technologies and practices. Under sub -component 2.2, the demand 
for CCA finance will be strengthened by developing their climate adaptive knowledge and skills, financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship and business skills.  
 
119. Activities under output  2.3 will further strengthen the enabling environment for inclusive climate finance at 
policy level.   
 
120. The outcomes for women  and youth as a result of accessing CCA finance will be securing climate change -
resilient livelihoods with the benefits of food an d water security (with reduced workloads of household tasks); 
gains in voice and decision -making over income and the use of assets and outputs, including income 
generated; improved business and employment opportunities; and reductions in harmful practices and 
domestic violence. The principal institutional gains will be the ability of the host bank  and PFIs to expand the 
outreach of CCA finance to individuals that have traditionally been excluded, and a more conducive policy 
environment.  
 
121. These outcomes wil l feed into ARCAFIM outcome 1.3 (increased CC resilience), outcome 1.4 (improved food 
and water security) and the co -benefits 1 (increased incomes) and 2 (employment generation).  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement  
122. Disbursement Arrangement. During the availability period of the first 5 years, the Host Bank (i.e. Equity Bank 
(Kenya ) Limited ) will make a disbursement request to IFAD based on the disbursement projection every six [6] 
months under the Subsidiary  Loan Agreement. Equity Bank (Kenya ) Limited  will on -lend the amount received 
from IFAD to  other  participating  country subsidiaries  of EGH , namely Equity  Bank Uganda  Limited , Equity Bank 
Rwanda  PLC, and E quity Bank (Tanzania ) Limited , in accordance with the disbursement projection in each 
country subsidiary through sub -loan agreements. T he Host Bank and the other participating  country 
subsidiaries will be able to make a disbursement for the loans qualifying the ARCAFIM eligibility crit eria and 
CCA taxonomy (the “Qualifying Loans”) from the fund that they have received from IFAD, and Equity Group’s  
own contribution equal to the fund  from IFAD . Once the Qualifying Loan is disbursed, the Host Bank should 
submit the inclusion request to IFA D to notify IFAD of a list of the Qualifying Loan s, so that IFAD can monitor 
the status of the  portfolio  and disbursement to end -borrowers under the  Facility .


---
*Page 73*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 123. Procurement. Under the ARCAFIM Technical Assistance (TA) programme for technical support to the Host 
Bank (Equity Bank Kenya) and to the intermediary PFIs, the Host Bank will coordinate the service delivery, 
utilizing either their own internal service units (i.e. Equity Group Foundation) with ARCAFIM support or 
recruiting external technical service p roviders. Where external TA is required, the Host Bank’s Procurement 
Policy will apply. The Accredited Entity (AE) has reviewed the Host Bank’s Procurement Policy and found to 
be adeq uate and equivalent to the AE’s procurement rules, policies, and procedure  to the extent and scope of 
its accreditation , as it: (a) promotes best practices, transparency and professionalism in all acquisition 
processes within the Host Bank fraternity; (b) ensures that suppliers of goods and services are subjected to a 
competitive tendering process in order to achieve quality, price competitiveness and reliability; (c) ensures that 
all expenditure is in accordance with prior approved budget and procurement plan; and (d) ensures compliance 
with applicable regulations and l egislations. Procurement will be carried out by the Host Bank and procurement 
plan will be agreed between the AE and Host Bank. For the procurement oversight, the AE will provide prior 
review on all the major procurement as identified in the below threshol d, and conduct supervision every 6 
months to review the procurement processes conducted by the EE.  IFAD will put in place to ensure that the 
procurement carried out by the EE’s is compliant with EE’s procurement guidelines that are equivalent to the 
AE’s p rocurement guidelines .     
124. Prohibited practices.  The Subsidiary Agreement has the clauses that the EE has the obligation for the 
reporting of irregularities or prohibited practices, if any, during the implementation period. In addition, the 
prohibited practices are included in the IFAD Policy covenants in the Subsidiary Agreement.  
G.4.  Disclosure of fu nding proposal  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the  funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited enti ty’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 74*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 1.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 
49 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)   
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable   
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format   
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)    
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)    
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan ning Framework (IPPF) , Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan   
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)    
☐ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)     
☐ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions   
☒ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)    
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project   
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity   
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment   
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)   
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)49  
☒ Annex 23  Additional Annex: Country Climate Vulnerability Assessments


---
*Page 75*
---

Page 71


---
*Page 76*
---

Page 72


---
*Page 77*
---

Page 73


---
*Page 78*
---

Telephone : 256 41 4232095/341286 
Fax : 256 41 4233524 
Email : financcliilfinancc.go.11g 
: treasuryliilfinance.go.ug 
\Vebsite : www.finance.go.ug 
Plot No. 2-8 Apollo Kaggwa Road 
In any correspondence on 
This subject please quote No. ALD 79/251/03 
3rd November, 2022 
The Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA Ministry of Finance, Planning & 
Economic Development, 
P.O Box 8147
Kampala, Uganda 
LETTER OF NO OBJECTION FOR AFRICA RURAL CLIMATE 
ADAPTATION FINANCE MECHANISM 
I refer to the above project, which has been prepared and submitted to 
you by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for 
funding by the Green Climate Fund (GCF). 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry 
of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the National 
Designated Authority focal point of Uganda. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/ 10, the content of which we 
acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no­
objection to the project preparation facility activities as included in the 
PPF proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
a)The Government of the Republic of Uganda has no-objection to
the funding proposal;
b)The programme is in conformity with Uganda's national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social
safeguards, the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant
national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no­
objection to the proposal has been duly followed and that it applies to 
all projects or activities to be implemented within the scope of the 
programme. 
Mission 
"To formulate sound economic policies, maximi=e revenue mobili=ation, ensure efficient a/location and accountabilityfor public resources so as 10 
achieve t/,e most rapid and s11s1ainable economic growth and development" 
Page 74


---
*Page 79*
---

Page 75


---
*Page 80*
---

Page 76


---
*Page 81*
---

Page 77


---
*Page 82*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism 
(ARCAFIM) for East Africa region  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  International Fund for Agriculture Development  (IFAD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, September 21, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  English is one of the official languages commonly used in 
the four countries where the project will be implemented . 
The ESS documents will be  disclosed in local languages and 
made be available for the specific sub -projects that affect 
the populations in those specific areas  during the project 
implementation stage.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/a
rcafim -esmf -esa.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  A preliminary  ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a 
Category I-2 programme is contained in the “Environment 
and Social Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, September 21, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English 
Explanation on language  English is  one of the official languages commonly used in  
the four  countries  where the project will  be implemented . 
The ESS documents will be disclosed in local languages and 
made be available for the specific sub -projects that affect 
the populations in those specific areas during the project 
implementation stage.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/a
rcafim -esmf -esa.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme  is contained in the “Environment and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Page 78


---
*Page 83*
---

Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, September 21, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English 
Explanation on language  English is  one of the official languages commonly used in  
the four  countries  where the project will be implemented.  
The ESS documents will be disclosed in local languages and 
made be available for the specific sub -projects that affect 
the populations in those specific areas during the project 
implementation stage.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/a
rcafim -esmf -esa.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An E SMS  consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme  is contained in the “Environment and Social 
Management Framework”. 
Environment and Social Management Plans consistent with 
the requirements for a Category I -2 project will be 
prepared at the sub -project levels.  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), I ndigenous Peoples Planning  
Framework  (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) / Land 
Acquisition and Resettlement Guidance  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  English is  one of the official languages commonly used in  the 
four  countries  where the project will be implemented.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/a
rcafim -esmf -esa.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An IPPF titled ‘Indigenous Peoples Guidance ’ and the Land 
Acquisition and Resettlement Guidance are  included as 
Annex es to the ESMF  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  22 September, 2023  
Place  The ESMF for Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance 
Mechanism (ARCAFIM) for East Africa region  is available at 
the IFAD and Equity Bank’s offices located at:  
Ke
nya:  
IFAD Kenya office  
UNON Complex, Block “Q”  
United Nations Avenue, Gigiri, Nairobi, Kenya 
E
quity Bank Kenya  
9th Floor, Equity Centre,  
Hospital Road, Upper Hil l. 
P.O. Box 75104 -00200  
Nairobi, Kenya  
Page 79


---
*Page 84*
---

Tanzania:  
Equity Bank Tanzania  
3rd floor, Ohio St, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania  
Uganda:  
Equity Bank Uganda  
8H7H+9Q4, Kampala Road, 
Kampala, Uganda  
Rwanda: 
Equity Bank Rwanda  
Grand Pension Plaza, 1st Floor, KN 4 Ave, 
Kigali, Rwanda  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting   N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 23, 2023  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
__
______ 
Page 80


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 81 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment of 
FP220  
Proposal name:  Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM) 
for East Africa region  
Accredited entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development  
Programme countries : Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda  and the  United Republic of Tanzania  
I. Summary  
1. The Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism ( ARCAFIM ) for East Africa 
region aims to scale up private sector agriculture and climate adaptation finance in Eastern 
Africa ( specifically, Kenya, Rwanda , Uganda,  and the United Republic of Tanzania ) through an 
on-lending program me that supports smallholder farme rs and rural micro, small and medium 
enterprises ( MSME s) involved in food systems.  The climate goal of the programme is the wider 
use of commercial resources for Climate Change Adaptation (CCA ) in the region, enhancing the 
well -being of rural communities through climate -resilient livelihoods.  
Targeted programme 
size  USD 200 million (loan: USD 180 million; grants: USD 20 million)  
Loans (USD)  Grants (USD)  
GCF 45 m illion   GCF 10 m illion  
IFAD 45 m illion  (to be raised)  
IFAD (N ording Development Fund)  
15 million  
IFAD (G overnment of Finland)  10 
million  
Unfunded: 20 million  IFAD 10 m illion  (including 5 
million  from the Government of 
Denmark)  
Equity Group 90  million   
Total: 180 m illion   Total: 20 m illion


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 82 
 
 
Proposed GCF 
involvement  A total commitment of USD 55 million, comprising USD 45 million in 
subordinated loans and USD 10 million in grants.  
Recipient of GCF 
assistance  The International Fund for Agricultural Development  (IFAD ) will be the lender 
of record of the ARCAFIM funds and will on-lend the GCF funds to the executing 
entity, Equity Bank (Kenya ). Equity Bank will, in turn, on -lend facilities to its 
subsidiaries in Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania.  Equity 
Bank will th en on-lend the funds to the end borrowers in the four  target 
countries, directly  (70%) through its own subsidiaries and  indirectly  (30%)  
through financial institutions such as microfinance institutions (MFIs), savings 
and credit cooperatives (SACCOs), and FinTech companies . These will on -lend 
the funds for the eligible activities under the program me. The e nd borrowers 
are smallholders and rural MSME s. 
The IFAD ARCAFIM loans will also be matched 1:1 by Equity Bank , ensuring 
scale and alignment of interest for the programme.  
II. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
2.1 Impact potential       Scale:  Medium–High  
2. Increased weather unpredictability and frequency of extreme weather events will 
continue to have  an impact on the operations of the smallholders and MSMEs in the target 
countries , as they do not have the capacity to adapt and respond to climate change. New and 
innovative technology and practices are needed for the smallholders and MSMEs , as current 
practices will no longer be suitable.  
3. Agriculture investments in Africa, regardless of climate change, have always been 
viewed as problematic due to the structu re of the sector  consisting mainly of smallholder 
farmers . However, the perceived risk of the smallholder agriculture sector in Africa has been 
exacerbated by  the unpredictability of  climate change.  In the context of changing climate and its 
variability, i nvestments in climate -resilient and low -emission agriculture are perceived as high 
risk, especially by the local banking sector. There is currently a limited financial product 
available for the agriculture sector and existing products involve  high interest rates, collateral 
requirements,  and short repayment periods.  
4. The programme addresses the financial and non -financial barriers that prevent more 
CCA  financing in Eastern Africa. The programme will provide CCA  loans to smallholders and 
rural MSMEs t hrough a leading commercial bank in the region. CCA  loan products , which will 
aim to pass the concessionality to the end  borrowers , will be financed as follows :  
(a) 40 per cent of the loan programme will be distributed  by the host bank (Equity Bank) by 
providing direct micro -loan s to small holder farmers  
(b) 30 per cent of the loan programme will be distributed  by the host bank and subsidiaries 
by providing direct loans to small and medium -sized enterprises ; and  
(c) 30 per cent of the loan programme will be distributed  by providing wholesale loans to 
MFIs, SACCOs which will on -lend for climate adaptation as per eligibility criteria.  
5. As a result, the programme would strengthen the resilience of the target beneficiaries in 
the nasc ent CCA financial sector and thereby support sustainable agriculture, food and water 
security, resilient livelihoods and improved sustainable land use.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 83 
 
 
6. More directly, the program me aims to enhance CCA  finance access for smallholders and 
rural MSMEs involv ed in the food system , impact ing 1,160,000 direct beneficiaries and 330,000 
indirect beneficiaries , in the following ways:  
(a) It is expected to provide new loans to 260,000 smallholders and 500 MSMEs worth USD 
710 million through revolving loans.  
(b) It will stre ngthen awareness and improve the capacity of 20 participating financial 
institutions to provide rural CCA  finance services.  
(c) It will i mprove the capacity and awareness of the smallholders and rural MSMEs  by 
raising  financial literacy and their knowledge of CCA  financial products and services.  
(d) A taxonomy will be used as a key governance tool to identify eligible and bankable CCA  
investments.  The taxonomy prepared by IFAD is an impressive foundational tool which , 
if successful , can be widely replicated in the  areas of the  banking sector aiming to enter 
adaptation finance . However,  IFAD must ensure that it be adopted as part of Equity 
Bank’s due diligence process, and that it does not become merely another check -box tool 
used by the loan officers.  
7. The main risk to the programme achieving its desired impact is the executive entity 
aiming to recycle loans when they are paid back by the end  beneficiaries.  From a perspective of 
scale and its impact, this makes sense , as this design utili zes the same capital multiple times 
over the lifetime of the programme, so that it reaches many more people.  However, the trade -off 
of recyclable capital is that , ultimate ly, loans may need to be short -term and there may be  undue 
pressur e on the end beneficiaries  to pay back over  shorter periods of time that they are able to.  
These beneficiaries are particularly  vulnerable to unpredictable climate -related events , such as  
droughts, which could delay, minimize,  or ruin yields, making the short tenors of loan 
repayments risky.  This is a risk which is currently not sufficiently addressed in the design of the 
programme.  
8. CCA  loans may enable the end beneficiaries to be more productive and resilient,  but they 
could also negatively impact the financial resilienc e of the se beneficiaries and , in the process , 
reconfirm to  the financial sector that this segment is not bankable, which would undermine the 
paradigm shift potential.   
9. Other factors potentially undermining the impact  include : 
(a) Equity Bank being unable to place loans due to  a lack of an investible pipeline (driven , 
among other things , insufficiently incentivized loan officers but also due to the fact  that 
Equit y Bank has a strong network in the target sector but  still a nascent track record in 
the other subsidiaries );  
(b) Limited u tilization of the loan if Equity Bank does not pass on  the concessionality of the 
GCF/IFAD loan (subsidi zed pricing plus additional first loss) to loan clients , and   
(c) The dependence on  IFAD raising the balance of the funds .  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential      Scale:  Medium  
10. Scale:  The creation of financial products in the banking system tailored to small holders 
and MSM Es in the agriculture value chain, both to improve their efficiency and to increase their 
resilience to climate change.  The programme has correctly identified interventions such as : 
(a) Improving the  management information system and technical support to enable  a 
participating financial institution to pilot digital technologies such as geographic -based 
information about the agricultural models and expected  yields ; 
(b) Developing digital payments and mobile banking financial services ; and


---
*Page 88*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 84 
(c) Implementing data analytics trainings to make data -driven decision credit assessment
and risk management of the loans.
In addition, IFAD has developed a systemic and analytical approach to CCA financing by 
developing a first -of-its-kind adaptation investment taxonomy . If successful, this tool would  
provide  an appropriate  conceptual framework for scaling investments in this sector  via a 
systematic, analytical approach that can be  adopted by other financial institutions . 
11. Profitability: Given the small size of the loans, the ability to use digital technologies
successfully could showcase how banks and other financial institutions could reach this
segment profitably and at scale.
(a) Identifying and piloting adaptation finance for the agricul ture sector could bring the
nascent financing form grants to commercial viability, further strengthening the options
for supporting some of the most vulnerable segments of the population in East Africa.
12. Co-financing from a regional bank:  IFAD ARCAFIM loan s being  matched 1:1 by Equity
Bank (the executing entity ) and a regional commercial institution already showcases the
potential for CCA  financing.
13. One key point to flag  is that the programme is limited to one institution:  Equity Bank.
It is unclear how this will enable transformation of the entire industry. A stronger paradigm
shift would have been to  apply  at least the technical assistance component of the  programme to
other banks over time.
14. Finally, there also is no convincing theory of how this program me will, over time , enable
replication with less subsidy and risk mitigation.
2.3 Sustainable development potential Scale: High  
15. Small rural  producers are responsible for an estimate d average of 80  per cent  of food
production in Sub-Saharan Africa , while MSMEs involved in food systems provide services ,
valuable jobs,  and income opportunities to rural low -income populations.  These two segments
disproportionally experie nce the effects of climate change and external shocks on their
livelihoods.  To maintain and improve their levels of productivity, they urgently need dedicated
investment resources to build greater resilience to climate change but have been struggling to
attract sufficient financing.  Hence, the ARCAFIM programme – if it can deliver sufficient and
cost -effective financing  – would achieve high co -benefits:
16. Social and environmental potential co -benefits  include p romot ing food security ,
improv ing quality of land through sustainable land management practices  and h igher returns of
land and labour, which will positively affect the livelihoods of farmers .
17. Economic potential benefit s include i ncreased crop yields , resulting  in higher income for
farmers  and i ncreased resilience of the agriculture sector .
18. Gender  & Age/ related co -benefits : The programme will target 50 per cent programme
resources to women -led investments and generate employment for women . It will also target  30
per cent of programme resour ces to youth.  Increased financial and technical services will target
female small -scale farm operators and women -led agribusinesses.


---
*Page 89*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 85 
2.4 Needs of the recipient  Scale:  High  
19. The ARCAFIM target countries under Phase 1 in East Africa region are Kenya, Rwanda
Uganda,  and the United Republic of Tanzania , selected for the following reasons :
(a) They are either low-income countries or lower middle -income countries ;
(b) All are under severe climate change stress, which is higher than  average in developing
countries , as stated by the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC ) report ,
Climate Change  2022:  Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability1;
(c) There is a substantial  market of small -scale agriculture production with high potential
for rural CCA financing ; and
(d) The Equity Bank has significant operations and suitable delivery networks to reach the
intended ARCAFIM target groups with CCA finance products.
20. As mentioned a bove, the main concern is how the knowledge gained by  any success of
CCA financial products in agriculture  will be shared with the whole industry – rather than
limited to only one institution and its related network of MFIs and SACCOs.  The independent
Technical Advisory Pa nel ( TAP )  is reassured  by the fact that IFAD’s innovative CCA taxonomy
for agricultural value chains tool will be widely shared with the market  (as confirmed by IFAD
in the written questions and answers).
21. The scale and intensity of climate ris ks, and the  vulnerability to climate change within
the target group , are explained in the funding proposal and the country vulnerability
assessments . More than 70 per cent of the population still live in rural areas , where population
growth continues,  and people rely heavily on climate -sensitive rain -fed agriculture. Projections
indicate that the reduced crop productivity is expected to increase poverty and food insecurity2.
The resources needed for adaptation continue to increase and it is evident that th e involvement
of the private sector is crucial. The programme aims to provide long -term CCA  capital in this
nascent sector of low -income or lower middle -income countries.
22. Small -scale farms account up to 90 per  cent of crop production in the region and the
main source of employment3. By providing CCA  loans to this sector, the programme will address
the economic and social needs for the smallholders and rural MSMEs. The financial proposal
emphasi zes the lack of alternative sources of funding for this sector  and correctly identifies how
the current funding market does not serve target market, except for grants.
2.5 Country ownership  Scale:  High  
23. The programme would directly contribute to the implementation of the commitments in
nationally determined contributions  (NDCs) national adaptation plans, national climate change
strategies and policies of the four  target countries.
1 IPCC. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability . Available at 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth -assessment -report -working -group -ii/> 
2 USAID. 2020. Climate risk profile: East Africa.  Available at 
<https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2020_USAID_ATLAS_CRP -East -Africa -
Regional.pdf >. 
3 Ibid.


---
*Page 90*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 86 
24. The adaptation component  of the target countries ’ NDCs requests focus on the following
objectives4:
(a) Enhanced adaptive capacity and climate resilience of the agricultural sector ;
(b) Promotion and scal ing up of climate -smart agriculture interventions to increase
productivity in an en vironmentally sustainable way ;
(c) Development and wide sharing of a knowledge system ; and
(d) Mobilization of financial resources from foreign and domestic capital markets.
25. The programme will have a commitment of co -financing and implementation from a
leading co mmercial bank in the region, Equity Bank, subsidiary of Equity Bank Holdings
Limited.  Equity Bank Kenya will on -lend the loan to Equity Bank Uganda, Equity Bank Rwanda,
and Equity Bank Tanzania through sub -loan agreements. Equity Group Holdings is the larg est
banking group in the region and has a strategic focus to increase its rural and agricultural
portfolio, a track record of micro lending in the agriculture sector, a strong balance sheet to
match the international capital investments , and an ability to hedge fund in USD and disburse in
local currencies. The programme will ensure the bank will scale up its overall environmental
and climate change strategy, strengthen ing its capacity to develop, assess and implement
climate adaptation financial products.
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness Scale:  Medium  
26. The programme will provide CCA  loans to smallholders and rural MSMEs , and expects
1,160,000 direct beneficiaries, which represents 0.7 per cent of the population , and 330,000
indirect benefici aries , which represents 0.2 per cent of total population.
27. The co -financing ratio is 1:2.6, and the programme aims to leverage USD 55 million of
co-financing from international institutions and USD 90 million from a regional commercial
bank.
28. The financial s ustainability of the programme is highly dependent on GCF participation.
The programme includes a  strategy to phase out GCF support and operate on a commercial
basis in the long term.
29. The programme will also provide training and on -lend ing to four  equity group
subsidiaries and 20 participating financial institutions, which would ensure that CCA loans
become mainstreamed in the financial  ecosystem.
30. Ecosystem building : There is a satisfactory selection of a regional African executing
entity with strong loca l branches in all four countries.  In the East Africa region, the Equity Group
Holdings  operates in ARCAFIM target countries , having a wide rural branch network supported
by a large number of banking agents. In total, the Equity Group Holdings has over 330 branch
offices and over 53,000 agents in the ARCAFIM target countries. With this significant outreach ,
and its history as an active lender to small -scale farmers, Equity Group Holdings is well
equipped to provide CCA loans direct ly to smallholders and rural MSMEs. Therefore, direct
loans to end borrowers are expected to have a large share of the ARCAFIM portfolio in East
Africa.
31. Generally, there is a risk that concessionary credit lines to specific banks may distort
markets and create dominant  or monop olistic institutions . This happens when  the concession is
4 Kenya . 2020. Updated Nationally Determined Contribution ; Republic of Rwanda . 2020. Updated Nationally 
Determined Contribution ; The United Republic of Tanzania . 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution ; The Republic 
of Uganda . 2022. Nationally Determined Contribution.


---
*Page 91*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 87 
captured by one institution which comes to dominate a market and may have market 
distortionary effects.  This risk is apparent in the present program me.  
32. The risk of market distortion may be  mitigate d in this programme if there are
alternative channels  to Equity Bank  that  effectively reach the ARCAFIM target group with CCA
financing services . The program me targets 30  per cent  of the loans volume to be issued through
other lenders such as rural SACCOs and MFIs, which operate with large rural clienteles in this
region .
33. In order to support a market -based and sustainable interbank lending market in the
region, there is a strong rationale for Equity Bank to lend through MFIs and SACCOs. The
commercial bank s in the region have a significantly higher liquidity position compared to
SACCOs and MFIs, which are less able to mobili ze savings and international capital.  On the other
end of the spectrum, local commercial banks have less appetite to invest into the gr owing
agriculture market – compared to SACCOs and MFIs – but many have a better ability to access
capital and have high liquidity.  Despite this unbalance in capital accumulation in the financial
market, SACCOs and MFIs have limited opportunities to lend fr om the commercial banks to
increase their investments among rural clients. Therefore, strengthening the channel between
Equity Bank ( which can serve as  an example for other commercial banks in the future) and the
smaller local financial intermediaries woul d be key to achieve a sustainable market -structure
for climate adaptation investment  that  would not need to rely on donor -supported or
government -led funds but would function through private -sector market interests.
34. Given that strong rationale, the independent TAP found  it surprising that a minimum 30
per cent  overall  portfolio  target for on-lending  through other channels ( which  are not Equity
Bank) is not predetermined  in the subsidiary loan agreements and recommend it is included in
the relevant legal documents between IFAD and Equity Bank.
35. Strong executing entity with regional outreach in the target countries and target
sectors:  Based on IFAD’s extensive rural finance experience in Africa and reviews of financial
markets in the targeted countries , as well as interviews with several candidate banks, Equity
Group was selected as the host bank for the executing the ARCAFIM programme in East Africa.
The criteria for identifying the host bank identification included  a status of a leading commercial
bank in the targeted countries, solid institutional and financial conditions, a strong interest in
agriculture and rural finance operations as reflected in the size of portfolio or foreseen
strategies to scale up lending to the sector , a corporate objective to develop and scale  up the
bank’s climate finance and particularly climate adaptation finance operations, a regional branch
or agency network to operate in at least four or five  countries relevant to ARCAFIM, a strong
express ed interest to manage and co -finance the ARCAFIM programme, and established
governance, social and environmental management structures.
36. The regional approach, based on a strong regional executing entity , will allow the
programme to achieve economies of scale  and efficiency, and  demonstrate a  significant effect by
leveraging the strengths of a large -scale regional partner organi zation with a high level of
environmental, social and governance integration in its operations, a strong balance she et,
appropriate operational capacities, and an ability to hedge fund in US D and offer loans to low -
income borrowers in local currencies. The phased approach will also enable learning by testing
the implementation of the model with strong partner organi zations in East Africa and
integrating lessons learned into effective messages on how to promote CCA finance on a wider
scale over the African continent.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
37. The IFAD A RCAFIM  is a well -designed programm e which aims to lower barriers to CCA
finance for agricultural and rural beneficiaries in East Africa.  The independent TAP commends
the programme for tackling both the supply of adaptation credit (especially the CCA  finance
taxonomy for the food system) an d the demand by the end beneficiaries  for such credit .


---
*Page 92*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 88 
38. The independent TAP also  commend s the partnership with a regional bank , Equity
Group , as an executing entity, which already has wide -reaching networks in the region, along
with its  large contribution to the funding of the programme at USD 90 m illion . In addition, if the
programme is well executed, it may have long -term, market -making potential in enabling large
commercial banks to on -lend to smaller and less well capitali zed micro -SME finance and SACCO
institutions.
39. Therefore, the independent TAP endorses  this funding proposal , subject to the
condition s below :
40. Condition 1: Subsequent fundraising condition : IFAD states that for the balance of USD
45 million  that it needs to raise -- in addition to the USD 45 m illion  funding from GCF – it is in
negotiations with the Nordic Development Fund and the Government of Finland. It is not
guaranteed that these funds will materiali ze. In order to ensure the programme’s ability to
leverage GCF capital to crowd in additional capital in CCA financing, the independent TAP would
add a condition that GCF funding be disbursed pro rata to additional funding raised by IFAD.
41. Condition 2: Passing on the concessionality to end beneficiaries.
(a) Under the terms of the proposed loan agreement between Equity Bank and IFAD (acting
as trustee for the GCF), and as currently indicated in the Operations Manual (Annex 21),
Equity Bank will have to submi t inclusion notices to motivate successive disbursements.
Under the current terms of the Operations Manual, Equity Bank would not have to
provide evidence that it passes on at least a portion of the concessionality (consisting of
the below -market interest rate combined  with the first loss risk mitigation) of the
IFAD/GCF loan to its clients  and beneficiaries (e.g. in terms of tenor and/or interest
charged). (The Operational Manual only stipulates that “[…] each Qualifying Loan must
be provided at the lowest  end of market interest rate range as compared to similar risk
sharing products provided by similarly mandated financial institutions, however, not
below an interest rate viable for the market in order to avoid potential market
distortion .”) The Operations  Manual, and ultimately the loan agreement between IFAD
and Equity Bank, should contain a provision making it obligatory for Equity Bank to
provide, as part of the inclusion notice, evidence that the concessional terms of the
IFAD/GCF facility are passed o n to its loan clients. Such evidence could include
calculations of the amount Equity Bank would have charged its loan clients if it had
funded these loans from its own balance sheet, or other objectively verifiable market
benchmarks.
(b) IFAD should also fores ee implementation of an annual audit to determine whether
Equity Bank has passed on concessional terms to its loan clients.  These audits would
involve a comprehensive review of the Equity Bank loan portfolios, interest rates
charged and compliance with the  conditions set by IFAD.
42. The independent TAP would  also add the following three  recommendations, which
would enable the programme to achieve its stated climate , economic  and social co -benefits:
43. Recommendation 1 : Minimum lending through different local int ermediaries:  Given
the high risk of market distortion, where existing rural SACCOs and MFIs have limited access to
finance, it is important to maintain that at least 30  per cent  of the loans to end beneficiaries are
disbursed through these intermediaries.  In other words, the independent TAP suggests  that a
maximum of 70  per cent  of the loans be channelled through the host bank or its subsidiaries.
44. Recommendation 2: Incentivizing loan officers : (Concessional) lines of credit are a
tried and tested method to drive investment in climate action through local financial
intermediaries. However, experience shows that many lines of credit, and especially those that
are designed to achieve ambitious promotional objectives, are not drawn. The commitment fee
that is envisioned (0 .5 per cent  annually on undrawn amounts) provides Equity Bank with a
strong incentive to utili ze the line of credit provided by IFAD. However, the key will be to


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 11 
Page 89 
 
 
properly incentivize loan officers in the respective Equity Bank country operations to originate 
a portfolio of new projects that would qualify under the terms of the program me. There is 
significant theoretical demand , but that will have to be translated into a pipeline of investible 
opportunities for Equity Bank. Equity Bank s hould be required to submit, prior to first 
disbursement, a more comprehensive plan of how it will incentivize and support its loan officers 
to originate this new target portfolio.  
45. Recommendation 3: Monitoring gender equality and social inclusion indicator s: 
Among the 260,000 loans (worth US D 266,000,000) expected to be disbursed across the four 
East African countries, 50  per cent  of beneficiaries are expected to be women and 30  per cent  
youth. For the maximum 70  per cent  of the loans to be disbursed throug h Equity Bank directly 
or through subsidiaries, the independent TAP recommends  that IFAD track s whether 
beneficiaries are  50 per cent  women and 30  per cent  youth (to be defined) in each of the four 
countries, and report to GCF on whether the targets have b een met, and if not, why not.  If such 
targets are consistently not met over  a period agreed with the GCF Secretariat, IFAD is to 
investigate and report back on why the targets have not been met .


---
*Page 94*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.11 
Page 90 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP220 ) 
Proposal name:  Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCFIM) 
for East Africa region  
Accredited entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  
Country/(ies):  Kenya, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania and Rwanda  
Project/Programme size:  Medium  
 
Summary  
Targeted programme  size description needs to be revised as follows.  
• IFAD 45 million (to be raised)  
• IFAD (Nording Development Fund)  15 million . 
• IFAD (Government of Finland) 10 million     -> to be changed to 30 million.  
• Unfunded: 20 million -> to be deleted, as the programm e is fully funded  
Recipient of GCF assistance:  
• Indirect loans include lending through value chain companies , in addition to MFIs, and 
SACCOs.  
 
Impact potential  
7. “However, the trade -off of recyclable capital is that, ultimately, loans may need to be short -
term and there may be undue pressure on the end beneficiaries to pay back over shorter 
periods of time that they are able to.”  
• This risk is mitigated through the commercial viability assessment of each climate 
change adaptation investment option, and through the financial institutions’ risk 
analysis for each individual loan. The assessments also capture the payback period.  
 
Paradigm shift potential  
14. Finally, there also is no convincing theory of how this programme will, over time, enable 
replication with less subsidy and risk mitigation.  
• Once the project demonstrates the successful implementation with low default ratio for 
CCA financing, EB and PF Is will be able to quantify the risk for CCA financing, which will 
enable replication with less subsidy and risk mitigation.  
Sustainable development potential  
…


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.11 
Page 91 
 
 
  
Needs of the recipient  
… 
 
 
Country ownership  
… 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
Condition 1: Subsequent fundraising condition:  The independent  Technical Advisory 
Panel ( TAP ) would add a condition that GCF funding be disbursed pro rata to additional 
funding raised by IFAD.  
• Agree. The suggested condition is already included in the term sheet.  
Condition 2: Passing on the concessionality to end beneficiaries:  
a. The Operations Manual, and ultimately the loan agreement between IFAD and Equity Bank, 
should contain a provision making it obligatory for Equity Bank to provide, as part of the 
inclusion notice, evidence that the concessional terms of the IFAD/GCF facility ar e passed on 
to its loan clients. Such evidence could include calculations of the amount Equity Bank would 
have charged its loan clients if it had funded these loans from its own balance sheet, or other 
objectively verifiable market benchmarks.  
• IFAD welcome s the suggested approach, which makes it easier to ensure passing on the 
concessionality to end beneficiaries.   
b. IFAD should also foresee implementation of an annual audit to determine whether Equity 
Bank has passed on concessional terms to its loan cli ents. These audits would involve a 
comprehensive review of the Equity Bank loan portfolios, interest rates charged and 
compliance with the conditions set by IFAD.  
• IFAD will make sure that the scope of an annual audit involves a comprehensive review 
of the Qualifying Loan Portfolio, as suggested.  
Recommendation 1 : Minimum lending through different local intermediaries:  
Given the high risk of market distortion, where existing rural SACCOs and MFIs have limited 
access to finance, it is important to maintain that at least 30 per cent of the loans to end 
beneficiaries are disbursed through these intermediaries.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.11 
Page 92 
 
 
 • IFAD takes n ote of the recommendation. Since the wholesale lending through PFIs will 
require  significant due diligence and technical assistance, IFAD expects the portfolio 
for lending through PFIs will be gradually increasing during the investment period. In 
addition,  each country has different market dynamics in terms of the development 
stage of the PFIs, minimum lending threshold should be carefully considered at overall 
portfolio level.  
Recommendation 2: Incentivizing loan officers:  
Equity Bank should be required t o submit, prior to first disbursement, a more comprehensive 
plan of how it will incentivize and support its loan officers to originate this new target portfolio.  
• IFAD takes note of the recommendation. Equity Bank plans to provide sufficient 
capacity buildi ng to loan officers for CCA financing, in addition to the Green Financing 
training that is currently provided to loan officers. Equity Bank has implemented KPIs 
for branch managers and loan officers, which includes incentives for 1). Agricultural 
lending, and 2). Green Finance lending. Upon the implementation of ARCAFIM, Equity 
Bank will consider further strengthening of the incentive mechanism for branch 
managers and loan officers to ensure origination ARCAFIM Qualifying Loans.  
Recommendation 3: Monitoring  gender equality and social inclusion indicators:  
the independent TAP  recommends that IFAD tracks whether beneficiaries are 50 per cent 
women and 30 per cent youth (to be defined) in each of the four countries, and report to GCF 
on whether the targets have  been met, and if not, why not. If such targets are consistently not 
met over a period agreed with the GCF Secretariat, IFAD is to investigate and report back on 
why the targets have not been met.  
• IFAD takes note of the recommendation. IFAD intends to report the gender equality and 
social inclusion indicators through Annual Portfolio Review (APR). The sex and age 
disaggregated data will be monitored at country level. However, please note that the 
target for women (50%) and youth (30%) are set at overall portfolio level.


---
*Page 97*
---

Page 93 
 
   
 ARCAFIM GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION STRATEGY  
INTRODUCTION  
The overall development goal of ARCAFIM is “ Livelihoods in rural communities across the target countries rendered 
climate resilient through increased CCA investments, CCA capacity, employment creation and rural incomes”. The key 
ARCAFIM objectives are: (i) increased climate change  resilience of smal l-scale producers and rural micro -, small - and 
medium -sized enterprises (MSMEs)  active in the local food systems through CCA investments across agricultural  
value chains; and (ii) improved capacity of agriculture value chain participants to adapt to risks imposed by climatic 
changes. An underlying ambition of the programme is to achieve a paradigm shift towards systematic large -scale 
use of private financial resources for rural CCA investments.  
The programme has set a target to invest 50% of programme resou rces for women -led investments and to 
investments generating employment for women (and 30% for youth), and for advisory services to achieve a gender 
balance among the end beneficiaries in service delivery.  
This annex sets out the main parameters of the ge nder and social inclusion (GESI) action plan for ARCAFIM. Part 1 
provides a brief GESI analysis of smallholders, MSMEs and financial institutions in the context of climate change 
adaptation (CCA) and financial inclusion. Particular attention is paid to the  importance of identifying and addressing 
social norms which often act as key barriers to the financial inclusion of women, youth and people with disabilities.  
Part 2 provides an overview of the GESI action plan setting out the main actions and targets. Th ese will be further 
developed during early implementation.  
PART 1: GESI ANALYSIS  
Whilst modest gains are being made by East African rural women in improving their livelihoods, gender inequalities 
persist in many areas, such as political representation, access to education and training, access to quality and 
affordable healthcare, emplo yment, sexual and gender -based violence, and harmful cultural practices.1 Despite the 
presence of progressive legal and policy frameworks promoting gender equality, their implementation is weak. In 
2021, Kenya, Republic of Tanzania and Uganda lie in the l owest quartile of countries ranked on the UNDP’s Gender 
Inequality Index , which reflects gender -based inequalities in health, empowerment and economic dimensions.2 
Contributing factors include entrenched discriminatory social norms , which are reflected in  the OECD’s Social 
Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) and in the African Gender Index.3 Rwanda has the lowest levels of inequality and 
discriminatory social norms in the East Africa region.  
Climate change is not only one of the greatest environmental and development challenges facing the world today, 
but also  one that will have critical impa cts on human rights and inequalities, including gender inequality , where  
women and girls suffer disproportionately from the effects of climate change due to a variety of social, cultural,  and 
economic factors.  Rising temperatures, irregular rainfall patte rns and seasonal uncertainty will severely disrupt all 
aspects of rural livelihoods through widespread crop failure/loss, food insecurity and malnutrition, outbreaks of 
human and animal diseases, dislocation of human populations, and destruction of propert y and infrastructure. As 
livelihoods and incomes become more precarious, the viability of households and communities will be challenged. 
There is an ever -growing body of evidence that identifies the critical role women must  play in climate change 
mitigatio n and adaptation - women are innovators, leaders, entrepreneurs, workers  and customers in climate 
 
1 https://moderndiplomacy.eu/2021/02/20/east -africa -the-status -of-women -remains -unequal -at-all-levels -of-society/  
2 https://hdr.undp.org/data -center/thematic -composite -indices/gender -inequality -index#/indicies/GII  
3 OECD. 2022. SIGI Policy Highlights  for Ea st Africa  From Data to Policy Action: Tackling Gender -Based Discrimination in Social 
Institutions. OECD Development Centre https://read.oecd -ilibrary.org/view/?ref=1153_1153894 -wse22t2a31&title=SIGI -Policy -
Highlights -for-East-Africa


---
*Page 98*
---

Page 94 
 
   
 related fields. Whether at a global, national,  or local level, within a political, business  or social context, many are 
already leading the fight in the clima te crisis .4  
As global temperatures climb, widespread shifts in weather systems occur, making events like droughts, hurricanes,  
erratic rainfall,  and floods more intense and unpredictable . Agriculture is the most important employment sector 
for women in low and lower -middle income countries during these unpredictable weather events . Although  women , 
youth and indigenous people s are disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change and associated 
severe weather events , they remain underrepresented, both in key decision -making positions and as users/end 
beneficiaries of concessional finance for climate adaptation.5  
Women and girls are impacted disproportionately from the effects of climate change due to factors such as 
entrenched discriminatory social and cultural norms, a lack of entitlements to land and other credit assets, and 
unequal access to land, water, and prod uctive assets, compounded by limited mobility and decision -making power 
in many contexts. Their mortality from climate -related disasters is higher than that of men, and climate -induced 
floods and droughts exacerbate women’s poverty and unpaid domestic and care work burdens. W omen are 
impacted in their roles in smallholder cash and subsistence crop and livestock systems, including upstream and 
downstream MSMEs in the food value chains, to livelihoods dependent on natural resources (including fisheries, 
fores try and non -timber forest products). The burden of household tasks , which typically fall to women and girls - 
such as collecting water and fuel, or securing nutritious food – become even more onerous. As lives become more 
stressful, the incidence of gender -based violence and other conflicts is likely to increase.  
Yet in many African countries, women are recognized as agents of change who make valuable contributions to 
climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts. They are building climate resilience and enhancing the livelihoods 
and well -being of their families by inv esting in climate -smart agriculture and sustainable energy solutions for home 
and work. They are also finding innovative ways to adapt to climate change impacts on their communities and 
environments,6 for example by switching to drought -resistant seeds, e mploying low impact or organic soil 
management techniques, or leading community -based reforestation and restoration efforts.7 
Gender  
The ARCAFIM is a timely innovation to extend loans for rural adaptation to small producers in food systems and rural 
value  chains. Without specific initiatives to strengthen inclusion, the ability of rural women to develop resilient 
livelihoods through the opportunities presented by CCA finance will be constrained by a range of gender -based 
inequalities.8 For example:  
 
4 Huyer S, Gumucio T, Chanana N, Cramer L, Mungai C, Ouedraogo M, Simelton E, Tavenner K, Twyman J. 2019. Learning and 
action for gender -transfor mative climate -smart agriculture. CCAFS Working Paper No. 279. Wageningen, the Netherlands: 
CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS)  
5 IFAD. 2018. How to do note: Design of gender transfor mative smallholder agriculture adaptation programmes  
6 WIFCAG, Oliver Wyman Forum, 2X Global. 2023. Applying a Gender Lens to Climate Investing  
https://www. oliverwymanforum.com/content/dam/oliver -wyman/ow -
forum/climate/2023/WIFCAG_Gender_and_Climate_Framework_vF.pdf  
7 Schalatek, L. 2022. Gender and Climate Finance, Climate Funds Update, ODI and HBF https://climatefundsupdate.org/wp -
content/uploads/2022/03/CFF 10-Gender -and-CF_ENG -2021.pdf  
8 Koning A, Ledgerwood J, and Singh N. 2021. Addressing Gender Norms to Increase Financial Inclusion: Designing for Impact. 
Technical Guide. Washington DC: CGAP  
https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/2021_10_Te chnical_Guide_Gender_Norms.pdf  
Notta S and Zetterli P. 2023. Bolstering Women’s Climate Resilience and Adaptation through Financial Services. Washington DC:  
CGAP https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/WorkingPaper_WomensClimateResilience_v3.pdf  
Anderson J, Clause V, Mattern M and Zani K. 2023. “Strengthening Rural Women’s Climate Resilience: Opportunities for 
Finan cial and Agricultural Service Providers.” Working Paper. Washington DC: CGAP 
https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/strengthening -rural -womens -climate -resilience -opportunities -for-providers


---
*Page 99*
---

Page 95 
 
   
 • As smallholder producers9, women tend to utilize  smaller plots of less productive land than men and have 
fewer resources including labour, improved technologies and inputs. They focus on the subsistence 
production of crops and livestock with limited acces s to information, advisory services and engagement 
with markets. With insecure tenure over land and other natural resources, they may be reluctant to 
commit to CCA measures and unable to access finance.  
• As entrepreneurs running micro - and small -scale enter prises10, women typically engage in low value 
addition activities, utilizing  low-cost and labour -intensive technologies. The majority will be active at the 
lowest end of the scale of MSMEs (with under 10 employees and less than US$ 100,000 revenue).  
• Larger enterprises working along the food system value chains will recruit women as employees  where 
they may experience gender gaps in pay, terms and conditions of employment, opportunities for 
advancement, and practical facilities at the workplace.  
• Although many women are active members of VLSAs and SACCOs, they save and borrow small  sums of 
money.11 They often have a weak voice in intra -household household decision -making regarding the use 
of resources, including the income they earn. In many contexts, authorization from a male is required for 
women to open a bank account, obtain loa ns, enter into a contract or register a business.  
• Women’s ability to invest in CCA technologies and practices , either as smallholders or entrepreneurs, is 
compromised by many factors including a lack of awareness of opportunities, low mobile phone 
ownershi p, limited financial literacy and a lack of business skills to develop sound CCA investment 
proposals. With insecure land tenure, a lack of an identity document, an absence of credit history and no 
formal bank account, women are unable to meet standard col lateral requirements. They generally have 
an aversion to risk (especially regarding relatively new investments such as CCA) and prefer investments 
yielding benefits in the short -term. As a result, women often end up being offered very small short -term 
loan s, which invariably serve only as working capital, whereas larger medium -scale and longer -term loans 
are needed for women entrepreneurs to move from micro -enterprise status to nascent SME status. 
Without access to credit, women must settle for suboptimal l ivelihood choices, forgoing opportunities to 
boost their productivity, enhance their  income, and improve their climate resilience and ability to cope 
with a variety of shocks.  
• Financial institutions  are often hesitant to regard women smallholders and small  entrepreneurs as ‘safe’ 
borrowers. This is despite evidence showing that women -owned small businesses have the lowest 
proportion of non -performing loans, and that women and women -owned businesses tend to be more 
prudent borrowers than their male counterpa rts. The range of financial products and services often 
overlook the specific needs of these groups. Indeed, gender -blind products may inadvertently reinforce 
gender inequalities.  
• Women and women -led organizations have limited representation and engagemen t in decision -making 
processes  relating to climate change adaptation and mitigation, rendering their views and priorities 
invisible.  
 
9 For ARCAFIM the definition of “small producer” is based on th e criteria: (i) engaged in agriculture activity in crops, forestry, 
livestock, aquaculture or fisheries, (ii) main household income from the agriculture activity, (iii) majority of  agriculture work 
carried out by family members, (iv) the ARCAFIM supported small loans are appropriate for the household agriculture 
investments.  
10 In ARCAFIM, the eligible microenterprises and agribusiness -SMEs are profit -oriented enterprises that are involved in the 
agricultural value chain either directly or by providing enabl ing services to value chain actors. Following the IFC classification, a 
microenterprise has less than 10 employees and revenue less than $100,000; s small enterprise has less than 50 employees and 
revenue less than $3 million; and a medium enterprise has l ess than 300 employees and revenue less than $15 million.  
11 IFAD. 2022. In Kenya, for example, women typically receive less than 10 per cent of formal credit to smallholders and only 1 
per cent of formal credit to agriculture, and instead rely on informal  sources.


---
*Page 100*
---

Page 96 
 
   
 All these barriers reflect a range of social norms , which perpetuate negative gender inequalities and hinder  women 
from eq ually participating in and benefiting from development interventions, including their ability to borrow CCA 
money . Gender norms can determine to a great extent the level to which women’s financial inclusion is possible (see 
box 1). However, it  is important  to recognize that women are a heterogenous group (by age, wealth, socio -economic 
status, marital status) and this has significant implications for their resource endowments - including labour - and 
their freedom to make independent decisions. In turn, thi s influences their information -seeking behaviour, ability to 
attend training, develop new skills, take out loans, adopt new practices, and make decisions regarding income 
earned. Among those often most disadvantaged are women heading their own households a s a result of never 
marrying , divorce or widowhood; they typically account for around 25 -30% of all households in the four participating 
countries.    
Box 1: Examples of gender norms and their impact on financial inclusion  
Negative g ender norms : 
• Women should not have an independent bank account  
• Women should not own their own mobile phone  
• Women should not make independent decisions regarding the use of their income  
• Women should not take a loan without their husband’s permission  
• Women should be responsible for covering basic household expenses  
• Women should focus their time and energy on household duties  
• Women should not travel to town alone  
Norm holders  include traditional influencers, like husbands, parents, in -laws, community and traditional 
leaders and peers, and also non -traditional influencers like marriage counsellors  
Rewards  for following the norms include  women  being regarded as a role model, having the guarantee of a 
strong marriage, and being respected and praised by the community.   
Sanctions  for women  who do not comply with the norms can take the form of being called negative names, 
divorce, suffering violence, and being disowned by one's own parents.  
Norms are context specific and can change over time . For example, norms may be more r elaxed for 
wives in polygamous marriages  or when men are not able to provide for their family  or as a result of 
men and women participat ing in women’s rights education .  
 
The significance of addressing the root causes of women’s financial exclusion has been recognized increasingly in 
recent years.12 Unless negative norms and behaviours are addressed, women still face challenges in accessing formal 
financial products even when customized financial products and services are available. Similar ly, with the heightened 
focus on adaptation to climate change, the need to recognize and address the uneven distribution of vulnerability 
to and gender -differentiated impact of climate change is critical.13 Climate  services can risk reinforcing the gender -
 
12 See UNDP.2023. Gender Social Norms Index. Breaking down gender biases, Shifting norms towards gender equality.     
https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/hdp -document/gsni202303pdf.pdf  
13 FCCC/TP/2013/11, paragraph 15 cited in Awiti A O. 2022. Climate Change and Gender in Africa: A Review of Impact and 
Gender -Responsive Solutions, in Frontiers in Climate. J une 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 895950  
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fclim.2022.895950/full


---
*Page 101*
---

Page 97 
 
   
 based inequalities if they fail to understand and effectively target the differentiated needs of both women and 
men.14,15  
Hence it will be essential for ARCAFIM to identify and address both the underlying causes of gender inequality and 
their symptoms, if women are to engage fully with CCA finance opportunities. This will have implications for the 
success of the programme in developing a more resilient agricultural sector and rural economy  in the short term, as 
well as contributing to the sustainability of the longer -term goal to develop climate change resilient livelihoods and 
communities.  
Youth  
Populations in East Africa are  youthful, with approximately 20% aged 15 – 24 years old.16 Farming and self -
employment in the agri -food sector are the dominant categories of youth employment in rural areas.17 In regions 
where there are few employment opportunities, entrepreneurship presents a real opportunity to better their 
livelihoods. 18 However, although the rural youth may be perceived as ‘drivers of economic development’, they can 
face many challenges from inappropriate education systems and inadequate skills, limited training opportunities, a 
lack of access to assets (including land), a lack of access to goods and services, and financial exclusion (they are often 
not seen as bankable). In turn, this can lead to unemployment, landlessness, financial exclusion, o utmigration, and 
child labour in agriculture.19 
Youth is a heterogeneous group (in terms of gender, age, ethnicity, cultural specificities, educational level, 
employment status, skills and capacities) and of a transitory nature in time. Young women face a double challenge 
of being young and being female, due to gender -biased norms, a higher chance of being married and pregnant at an 
early age, limited physical mobility, and more household responsibilities. Since youth represent a significant 
proportion of t he population, it is essential that priorities and opportunities cater for their different livelihood 
options.  
People with disabilities  
People with disabilities typically account for around 2 -5% of the East African population.20 They are overrepresented 
among the poor, unemployed, face stigma and experience marginalization in multiple dimensions of life.21 Climate 
 
14 Gumucio T, Hansen J, Huyer S and van Huysen T. 2020. Gender -responsive rural climate services: a review of the literature,  
Climate and Development, 12:3, 241 -254, https://doi.org/10.108 0/17565529.2019.1613216  
15 This threatens women’s rights and directly contravenes the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW).  Schalatek, 2022. Op Cit  
16 This is the official UN definition of youth. African governme nts’ national youth policies normally adopt the definition provided 
by the African Union, which is 18 to 35. The definition of youth is a social and cultural construction that needs to be analy sed 
and understood as part of a dynamic process strongly influe nced by the specificity of rural contexts.  
17 Kubik, Z. 2022. The challenges of rural youth employment in Africa:  a literature review, Working paper 212,  Center for Development  
Research, University of Bonn 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/362052596_The_challenges_of_rural_youth_employment_in_Africa_a_literature_r
eview#pf1a  
18 Namatovu  R, Dawa  S, Mulira  F, Katongole  C and Nyongesa  S. 2012. Rural Youth Entrepreneurs in East Africa: A view from 
Uganda and  Kenya, Investment Climate and Business Environment Research Fund, Report #32/12 
https://search.issuelab.org/resources/34988/34988.pdf  
19 IFAD. 2018. IFAD Rural Youth Action Plan 2019 -2021  https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/125/docs/EB -2018 -125-R-11.pdf  
20 This figure needs to be taken with caution. The proportion of the population living with disabilities in the region is uncertain 
because of significant gaps in the data sets. In some instances , it is estimated it may be as high as 20%.  
21 IFAD. 2022. IFAD’s Disability Inclusion Strategy 2022 -2027 https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/137/docs/EB -2022 -137-R-
7.pdf?attach=1


---
*Page 102*
---

Page 98 
 
   
 change and external shocks tend to exacerbate these inequalities. Multiple and entrenched barriers, which are 
embedded in institutions, norms, at titudes and physical spaces, constrain their ability to fulfil their fundamental 
rights including access to health care and other vital services.  
Persons with disabilities, especially young persons with disabilities, often live on the margins of their community. 
Families and communities may assume that they are unable to engage in mainstream activities such as attending 
school which subsequently results in a lack of skills; low confidence, expectations and achievement; and limited  
workplace opportunitie s. Many disabled women and children face a heightened risk of domestic and sexual violence. 
However, opportunities do exist to strengthen the participation of persons with disabilities in local food systems and 
pro-poor value chains.  
PART II: GENDER AND S OCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  
The programme has set a target to invest 50% of programme resources for women -led investments and 
to investments generating employment for women, and for the advisory services to achieve a gender 
balance among the end beneficiar ies in service delivery. In addition, 30% of beneficiaries are to be the 
youth.  
The objective of the  ARCAFIM GESI action plan is to ensure that women, youth and people with disabilities 
have equal opportunity to access and benefit from CCA financing as men  and to secure climate -resilient 
livelihoods. The action plan has four principal audiences:  
- end-users  of CCA finances and ARCAFIM programme services : smallholders, MSMEs and their 
communities , including women, youth and people with disabilities ; 
- financial service providers : Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) which will be offering CCA 
financial services to the small producer and MSME markets, including host bank branches and 
agent networks, micro -finance institutions (MFIs), savings and credit coop eratives (SACCOs) and 
Fintechs ;  
- other service providers : such as advisory and extension staff, input suppliers, agribusiness es, 
vale chain actors; and  
- programme  management : ARCAFIM Facility Coordination Unit at IFAD, PMU at the host bank 
HQ and ARCAFIM fo cal points at country subsidiaries.  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of the ARCAFIM program me is to make rural climate change adaptation finance work for Africa’s future:  
• To catalyse and scale up private sector climate change adaptation financing targeting smallholders and rural 
and rural MSMEs in the agricultural sector in Africa.  
• To address  the environmental, technical, economic, social and political factors faced by smallholder 
producers and rural MSMEs to adapt and build stronger resilience to climate change and thereby bring 
about growth and opportunity.  
 
Theory of change, assumptions and ris ks


---
*Page 103*
---

Page 99 
 
   
 The GESI action plan is an integral part of the overall ARCAFIM. The programme will use the twin -track approach to 
mainstream GESI considerations into ARCAFIM operations, complemented by targeted interventions to overcome 
any specific barriers as necess ary. This approach will enable programme opportunities to be expanded to women, 
youth and persons with disabilities, while also addressing the main gaps and barriers they face to inclusion.  
The GESI theory of change is founded on the need to identify and address social norms that perpetuate GESI 
inequalities and exacerbate barriers on both the supply and demand sides of CCA financial inclusion.  GESI activities 
are present in programme component 2 (which addresses the non -financial barriers to CCA financing) and 
programme implementation arrangements.  
Early programme implementation arrangements will ensure there is sufficient capacity and skills  to deliver and track 
GESI performance through the recruitment of specialists, selection of implementin g partners, strengthening capacity 
of those responsible for programme delivery, and the monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) system.  
Early GESI actions  include conducting gender and social norms  diagnostic studies  at country and local levels to 
better  understand the context in which ARCAFIM will be operating. Gender, youth and disability lenses will be applied 
understanding social norms, CCA technologies and practices, and financial products and services. These insights will 
provide the foundation for stimulating all stakeholders (from programme staff, host agency, PFIs and service providers 
through to community members and leaders) engage in critical reflection on norms that perpetuate inequalities 
and stimulate positive behaviour change  in the inclusi on-climate -finance nexus.  
As a result of capacity building for critical reflection and behaviour change on social inclusion issues , PFIs will view 
women, youth and people with disabilities as potential eligible borrowers of CCA finance. Under sub -component 2.1, 
PFIs will address supply -side barriers  to CCA finance by seeking innovative ways to establish credit worthiness in the 
absence  of traditional collateral, providing relevant CCA products and services, and identifying digital and non -digital 
routes to access services.  
At the community, household and individual levels, the shift in gender norms and attitudes will create an enabling 
environment in which women, youth and people with disabilities will be able to make independent decisions to 
borrow money and adopt CCA technologies and practices . Under sub -component 2.2, the demand for CCA finance  
will be strengthened by developing their  climate adaptive knowledge and skills, financial literacy, entrepreneurship 
and business skills.  
Activities under sub -component 2.3 will further strengthen the enabling environment for inclusive climate finance at 
the policy level.   
The outcomes  for women  and youth as a result of accessing CCA finance will be securing climate change -resilient 
livelihoods with the benefits of food and water security ( including  reduced workloads associated with household 
tasks); improved business and employment opp ortunities  and incomes ; gains in voice and decision -making over the 
use of assets and outputs, including income generated; and reductions in harmful practices and domestic violence. 
The principal institutional gains will be the ability of the Host Bank and PFIs to expand the outr each of CCA finance 
to individuals that have traditionally been excluded, and a more conducive policy environment.  
These outcomes will feed into ARCAFIM outcome 3 (increased CC resilience), outcome 4 (improved food and water 
security) and the co -benefits 1 (increased incomes) and 2 (employment generation).  
The key assumptions  that underpin the GESI pathway moving from actions to outputs and outcomes include: 
stakeholders are willing to engage in the process of critical reflection to understand their unconscious biases and 
adapt their behaviours accordingly; the PMU and impleme nting partners embrace the GESI agenda and ensure it is 
reflected in resource allocation and tracking performance; there are sufficient skilled implementing partners and


---
*Page 104*
---

Page 100 
 
   
 service providers to deliver high quality GESI activities; and policy makers are willi ng to take measures to improve 
the policy frameworks to strengthen financial inclusion.  Upstream and downstream linkages in the food system are 
reasonably buoyant and small and medium enterprises provide opportunities for employment.  
The r isks of not add ressing social inclusion issues in CCA finance include:  
• Negative social norms would continue to disempower women, youth and people with disabilities, limiting 
their livelihood opportunities and perpetuating harmful practices including violence.  
• A significant proportion of the population would not have the ability, knowledge, skills or confidence to 
access and use CCA finance to ensure their livelihoods to become climate change secure. In turn, this 
would threaten the stability of rural communities and may trigger outmigration.  
• PFIs would miss the opportunity to expand their client base.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Awareness raising and capacity development of PFIs for CCA finance  
Under sub -component 2.1, the action plan will ensure that GESI considerations are mainstreamed into the supply 
side of CCA finance work of the PFIs and other service providers (such as advisory services, value chain actors).  
Capacity building for critical  reflection and behaviour change among PFIs and other service providers :  
This activity will follow on from the findings of gender and social norms diagnostic studies which will be conducted 
in each country during early implementation (see implementation arrangements for further details). Using 
participatory approaches to facili tate dialogue, trust, ownership, visioning and behaviour change at various levels , 
frontline staff and management from PFIs, BDS and other service providers will critically reflect on deep -rooted social 
and gender norms and attitudes which have an adverse effect on financial and other service provision to women, 
youth and people with disabilities. This will help stimulate positive behaviour change and lay the foundation for PFI 
staff to recognise the capacity of women and others to save and borrow money fro m the formal sector, and ensure 
financial products and services are relevant to their needs.  
 
Technical support for PFIs (host bank and local intermediaries) :  
• The CCA finance strategy (including CCA financial advisory capacities) and rural outreach and social 
inclusion strategies  will specifically address how the CCA products and services will developed and 
disseminated to women, youth and people with disabilities. Methods for community  engagement and 
outreach  will be inclusive and gender responsive . Women field staff may make it easier to engage with rural 
women.  
• CCA lending products and services  (including climate risk insurance) will be tailored to the needs, resources 
and capacities  of women and youth who are small producers or micro/small entrepreneurs in the food 
system.22 The range of products will cover production, post -harvest and value addition activities for both 
household consumption and the market undertaken by smallholders and micro/small businesses. They will 
also include energy -saving and climate smart technologies to make all aspects of rural livelihoods more 
climate resilient and reduce the workload of household tasks (such as biomass production, improved stoves, 
solar l anterns, water harvesting and storage systems, micro -irrigation for home gardens, potable water, 
basic food processing).  
 
22 Financial products could be co -developed between the FPIs a nd potential clients from different backgrounds to ensure their 
relevance. For further details, see Mayoux, L and IFAD. 2017. Financial Action Learning System (FALS) An integrated 
methodology for client financial empowerment and responsible financial servi ce provision, Concept Note 
https://gamechangenetwork.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/02/FALS_IFADConceptNote_Marchweb.pdf


---
*Page 105*
---

Page 101 
 
   
 • The taxonomy framework  for end -borrower investment eligibility will be reviewed regularly for relevance 
and effectiveness from a GESI perspective. The framework will adopt a holistic livelihood approach and will 
include technologies and practices that make both the productive and domestic aspects of rural livelihoods 
more climate change resilient. Adjustments  will be made as necessary to make the framework more 
inclusive.  
• Innovative ways will be used to establish creditworthiness and assess risks  among borrowers that would 
enable resource poor households (including those enterprises headed by women and youth)  to gain access 
to finance. Alternative forms of collateral could include group security or non -land assets.  
• Repayment terms  could be adjusted to meet the capacity of borrowers and enable them to adjust to 
unexpected shocks, with longer grace periods and r epayment periods, and options for pausing repayment 
schedules without severe penalties.  
• Insurance products  will be tailored to reduce the risk of borrowing and protect agricultural investments 
against climate risk. They will be made more accessible to rura l women, youth and people with disabilities 
by insurance providers adopting new approaches, such as flexible premium payments and bundling with 
other services.  
• Build the capacity of MFIs and SACCOs  to support women, youth and people with disabilities in su stainable 
livelihood development and agribusiness , as well as members and leaders of their organizations.  
Identifying and piloting technology -enabled innovative solutions : 
• Digital financial technologies  will be used for cost -effective transactions, credit assessment and risk 
management. Account will be taken of gender - and youth -differentiated access to digital services, through 
device financing, agent networks, group ownership of tablets for accessing c limate and extension 
information (for example, by SACCOs or farmer field schools), e -vouchers etc.).  
• Advisory packages, market information, weather and climate information  will be integrated into the 
mobile banking financial service interface. The content  will be adapted to be relevant to the different needs 
of the end -users, including women, youth and people with disabilities, and disseminated in local languages.  
• Alternatives to digital services  will be developed for those with limited access to such technologies, such 
as community radios, information boards, public announcements on market days, village agents, mobile 
services etc.  
• Conduct market studies  to identify market opportunities for commodities of interest to women, youth and 
people with disabilities and support the growth of their enterprises . 
Sub-component 2.2: CCA investment support services to small producers and rural MSMEs  
Under sub -componen t 2.2, the action plan will ensure that GESI considerations are mainstreamed into the provision 
of targeted and practical technical assistance to stimulate demand for CCA finance.  
Capacity building for critical reflection and behaviour change at the commu nity level : This activity will follow on 
from the findings of gender and social norms diagnostic studies , which will be conducted in each country during 
early implementation (see implementation arrangements for further details). Participatory approaches (see box 2) 
will be used in the community to facilitate dialogue, trust, ownership, visioning and behaviour  change with 
individuals, households, groups, leaders and upstream and downstream value chain actors. They will critically reflect 
on deep -rooted social and gender norms and attitudes in order to challenge power dynamics and bring about a 
paradigm shift to wards gender equality and social inclusion, specifically around financial inclusion and adapting


---
*Page 106*
---

Page 102 
 
   
 livelihoods to climate change. Some activities will explicitly engage with norm holders, men and boys to address the 
concepts of masculinity, gender and stigma . 
Box 2: Gender Action Learning System (GALS)  
GALS and household methodologies will be instrumental in enabling gender transformation amongst 
smallholders in groups and in farmer groups to empower women and men towards financial inclusion, more 
balanced wo rkloads, equitable decision making and benefits sharing. GALS tools will enable households to 
discuss the importance of climate -change adaptation and address the gender and social norms which could 
hinder access to financial products and the adoption of CC A technologies and practices in both productive 
work and household tasks.  
With the exception of the Republic of Tanzania, the participating countries have service providers with 
extensive experience of the GALS.  
For further details about GALS, see IFAD. 2 022. How to integrate the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) 
in IFAD operations https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/45173373/htdn_gals.pdf/38ec05a9 -d0a9 -
3559 -6306 -d73b5db550dc?t=1648470620545  
 
Small -scale agricultural producer CCA investment promoti on and financial literacy services:  
• Ensure the membership and leadership of the 16,000 rural producer groups to be trained include 50% 
women and 30% youth (of whom 50% are young women).  
• Promote inclusive leadership  in governance structures such as communi ty organizations, cooperatives, 
farmer groups, VLSAs, SACCOs and MFIs through leadership training, mentoring and developing their role 
as change agents.  
• Through participatory engagement with the community, ensure CCA products and services meet the 
priority needs and resources of different groups within the food system, including women, youth and 
people with disabilities. Understand the differentiated impac ts of climate change on rural livelihoods  and 
demand for CCA options. For example, women may prefer less risky but more labour -intensive climate 
smart technologies if they can allocate their own labour and accrue the benefits for themselves.23 They 
might p refer to invest in crops that contribute to household food and nutrition needs or new crop varieties 
or supplement traditional revenue with diversified production activities.24 In addition, they will be 
interested in technologies that will make the domesti c aspects of rural livelihoods more climate change 
resilient , such as water collection/harvesting, storage and use; fuel collection and use; food processing and 
preparation; and energy .  Consequently, they will have different needs for weather and climate 
information, training and technology options based on their access to productive assets, social and gender 
norms, and household division of labour.   
• Conduct awareness campaigns  about CCA technologies and practices to reach the widest rural audience s 
through a variety  of media, drama, demonstration plots, study visits and digital technologies. Include 
women’s groups and local information -sharing mechanisms as communication channels.  
 
23 Lambrecht, I., Bernard, V., and Miet, M .2016. Agricultural extension in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo: does gender 
matter? Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 43, 841 –874 https://hdl.handle.net/10568/75754  
24 World Bank, FAO, IFAD. 2015. Gender in Climate -Smart Agriculture. Washington, DC: World Bank; FAO; IFAD. Available o nline 
at: http:// documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/654451468190785156/pdf/99505 - REVISED -Box393228B -PUBLIC -Gender -
and-Climate -Smart -AG-WEB -3. pdf


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 103 
 
   
 • Develop CCA skills  through farmer field schools, demonstration plots, study visits. Provide opportunities for 
women, youth and people with disabilities to experiment with the use of climate smart technologies and 
practices, in particular to identify and address any potentia l increase in labour requirements or potential 
risks.  
• Train and sensitize input suppliers  on the needs of women through the GALS household methodology, 
enhancing the availability and relevance of the provided inputs.  
Financial products and services:  
• Develop and strengthen financial and digital literacy skills and savings culture  among women a nd youth 
including basic banking skills, the use of mobile and digital banking services, and decision making on savings, 
borrowing money and using income earned.  
• Encourage household members to identify and discuss gender norms and practices , which impact o n their 
attitudes towards borrowing, savings  and prepare financial vision journeys.25 
• Provide technical support to help develop CCA investment proposals  through strengthening business, 
entrepreneurship and negotiating skills, and introducing mentoring sche mes as a pathway to upgrade and 
expand participation  by women, youth and people with disabilities in the food system.  
Agribusiness CCA business development services26. Activities to strengthen the GESI focus of BDS to 625 
agribusinesses include:  
• Ensure business support organizations understand their GESI gaps and develop products and services that 
are inclusive; for example, BDS training in small groups and individual consulting services is relevant and 
accessible; market opportunities are accessi ble.   
• Provide vocational training  for young women and men to strengthen their potential both in the labour 
market and as self -employed entrepreneurs, identify role models, use different training formats available 
through the internet and mobile phones.  
• Embed a GESI module in agrientrepreneur training27 to ensure the social dimensions of entrepreneurship 
development are addressed.  
• Ensure agribusiness employment opportunities provide quality jobs and promote the decent work agenda  
with a fair income and is undertaken in conditions of freedom, equity, security and human dignity.  
• Promote inclusive agribusiness development  across the fo od system  and establish market opportunities 
for small producers; for example , by supporting farmer organizations and cooperatives, encourag ing 
collective mark eting platforms, support ing value addition through agro -processing, promoting equitable 
outgrower  arrangements.  
Sub-component 2.3: CCA rural finance policy dialogues  
IFAD will be leading discussions on creating an enabling environment for climate finance with the participation of 
ARACFIM financiers, the host bank, PFIs and value chain stakeholders. Links will be established for experience sharing 
with private and publi c sector rural finance platforms and other green finance initiatives in the region.  
 
25 See Financial Action Learning for Sustainability (FALS) https://gamechangenetwork.org/toolkit/fals -ifad-farmse -and-
opportunity -malawi/  
26 Business development service providers will participate in the critical reflection and capacity building activities un der 2.1.  
27 Equity Bank uses International Labour Organisation (ILO) Start and Improve Your Business (SIYB) curricula


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 104 
 
   
 This policy dialogue presents a unique opportunity to engage government and policy makers with GESI challenges 
and opportunities linked to inclusive CCA finance. Engagemen t will be b roaden ed to encourage collaboration and 
exchange between government, NGOs and civil society on the nexus between GESI, climate change and financial 
services. Key areas to address include28: 
• Any gaps in the implementation of women’s land rights . Often gender equality in access to and control over 
land is established at a constitutional level with relevant policy, legal and institutional reforms, but 
implementation remains weak at sub -national levels as a result of a lack of knowledge, inability to  access 
relevant information, and contradictions with customary laws. Actions may be required to increase 
understanding about the legal framework and strengthen implementation at the sub -national levels and 
below.  
• Women’s representation in advocacy, policy , and decision -making roles and processes . In 2019, the UNFCCC 
recognized that the ‘full, meaningful and equal participation and leadership of women in in national - and 
local -level climate policy and action is vital for achieving long -term climate goals”. However, women are 
often under -represented on such bodies; likewise for the youth and people with disabilities. Their 
participation can be increased by capacity strengthening programmes in confidence building and effective 
public speaking, the use of quota s, and ensuring meeting times and venues are suitable. It may also be 
necessary to engage with the traditional leadership on addressing any negative behavioural norms.   
 
Implementation arrangements  
The implementing structures for the GESI action plan through the host bank, Equity Bank Group, and the PFIs are 
presented in Appendices 1 and 2.  
The activities of Equity Bank Group and its Tier 2 Financial Intermediaries will be assessed based on their expected 
alignment with national and international gender frameworks such as the Bloomberg Gender -Equality Index, 2X 
Collaborative’s 2X Green toolkit, the Women Empowerment Principles (WEPs), the Gender Equality Mainstreaming 
(GEM) Framework, and ‘A Fund Manager’s Guide to Gender -Smart In vesting’ by IFC and CDC, and climate 
frameworks such as GFANZ, TCFD, the CDSB Framework, Climate Action 100+, and the Just Transition criteria from 
the Impact Investing Institute.  
Programme management.  Actions to strengthen the GESI dimensions of programme management:  
• Support for  GESI Action Plan implementation will be provided through the Technical Assistance, which 
includes capacity building at different levels including for the Host Bank, PFIs and the end beneficiaries.  
• Recruit a GESI specialist  for the PMU  at the Host B ank with responsibility to oversee: (i) the gender and 
social norms diagnostic studies followed by the development of a detailed GESI action plan; (ii) capacity 
strengthening and technical support to PMU staff and agents; (iii) the recruitment of experienc ed service 
providers support gender  mainstreaming and capacity building  at the field level; (iv) liaison with the MEL 
team; and (v) ongoing technical support during implementation.  
• Include a specific commitment to gender -responsive financial inclusion in t he terms of reference  of the 
programme manager, all staff in PMU and ARCAFIM focal points. This will be backed by capacity strengthening  
on identifying and addressing gender issues. Annual performance reviews will track staff performance on 
delivering GEWE  and GESI goals.  
 
28 Awiti, Op Cit


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 105 
 
   
 • Ensure gender considerations are mainstreamed into all programme components . 
• Select implementing partners  (PFIs and other service providers) with a proven commitment to poverty 
reduction and gender equality, and staff with the relevant GES I skills. The PFIs will be held accountable for 
delivering on GESI targets.  
• Seek opportunities to work with the range of regional and national  organizations supporting the growth of 
women as producers and entrepreneurs  (see Appendix 3).  
• Ensure that budgets  are prepared, delivered and tracked from a gender perspective, and that the funds 
allocated to implement gender -related activities are appropriate.  
• Ensure the PMU workplace  facilities, processes and  policies are gender -responsive, supporting: gender parity 
in recruitment, promotion, and retention of staff; equal pay between women and men for the same grade of 
employment; life -work balance; policies and communications on the prevention of sexual explo itation, 
discrimination, harassment and the abuse of authority.29 
• Ensure the systematic integration of GESI considerations – including attention to representation and expertise 
– in the programme’s governance , operational procedures, technical expert advis ory bodies and decision -
making structures.  
Gender and social norms diagnostic studies and detailed design of the GESI strategy. In order to increase the 
financial inclusion of women, youth and people with disabilities and facilitate their economic empowerm ent, 
diagnostic studies30 will be undertaken to understand how gender and social norms influence their financial 
inclusion31 (or exclusion) and their ability to adapt to climate change.  
Based on this understanding, activities to guide critical reflection will be delivered to seek positive behaviour change 
at multiple levels – from the individual, household and community levels to PFIs, service providers and policymakers. 
These will be coupled with intentional efforts to address key demand -and supply -side b arriers which block people’s 
ability to participate fully in CCA financial inclusion initiatives.  
The studies will be context specific and conducted in each participating country. They will complement the standard 
GESI analysis which examines the symptoms of gender inequality, youth, disability and poverty issues.32 The findings 
 
29 Details of the grievance procedures are presented in Annex 6.  
30 For a detailed guide on conducting gender norm diagnostic  studies, see: CGAP and MarketShare Associates. 2022. “Gender 
Norms in Financial Inclusion – Diagnostic Guidance.” CGAP Background Document. Washington, DC: FinDev Gateway. 
https://www.findevgateway.org/sites/default/files/publications/2022/CGAP%20Social%2 0Norms%20Diagnostic%20Guidance_fin
al%204.pdf  
Koning A, Ledgerwood J and Singh N. 2021. “Addressing Gender Norms to Increase Financial Inclusion: Designing for Impact.” 
Technical Guide. Washington, DC: CGAP 
https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/2021_10_Technical_Guide_Gender_Norms.pdf  
CGAP’s Social Norms Diagnostics Framework 
https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/2021 _10_Technical_Guide_Gender_Norms.pdf   
CARE’s Social Norms Analysis Plot  (SNAP) Framework https://www.care.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/11/TP_Social_Norms_measurementFINAL.pdf   
Georgetown University’s Social Norms Exploration Tool ( SNET) Framework https://gehweb.ucsd.edu/wp -
content/uploads/2020/01/resources_for_measuring_social_norms_guide_final.pdf   
31 CGAP and FinEquity, 2022 in https://www.rfilc.org/events/tackling -the-root -causes -of-women -s-financial -exclusion/  
32 A GESI  analysis typically examines inequalities in the areas of: access and control over resources and benefits; skills; 
workloads; decision -making and leadership; household dynamics; and well -being. It describes relevant national policies, 
strategies and actors; identifies the different roles, interests and priorities of women and men; and identifies the most 
important livelihood prob lems and opportunities faced by the community, as experienced by women , men , youth and people 
with disabilities . It also take s account of the differentiated and intersectional challenges facing different groups (for example, by 
sex, age, marital status, so cio-economic status, health, disability).


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 106 
 
   
 will help shape the detailed GESI strategy to ensure that the design of CCA technologies and practices, financial 
services and delivery channels will lead to more effective  interventions to increase CCA financial inclusion.  
Capacity building and behaviour change communication for PMU and key implementing partners. Following the 
gender and social norms diagnostic studies, capacity development sessions will be undertaken with programme 
staff, government, partners and service providers (in addition to those noted under component 2.1) to initiate critical 
reflection on deep -rooted social and gender norms and attitudes, and their linkages with behaviours, in order to 
bring about a  paradigm shift towards women and CCA financial inclusion.33 
 
Monitoring, evaluation and learning. To strengthen the GESI dimensions of MEL:  
• Ensure all data in the logframe are disaggregated  by sex, age and disability, where appropriate (including targets 
and data on youth34). 
• Train staff in the collection, analysis and interpretation  of disaggregated data at various levels: from the 
communities, PFIs and other service providers, to ARCAFIM focal points at country subsidiaries, PMU at host 
bank HQ and ARCAFIM Facility Coordination Unit at IFAD. Use findings from data analysis to inform  programme 
management and activities.  
• Track performance indicators , including by sex, age, location of the borrower, loan purpose, loan disbursements 
and outstanding balances, as well as repayment performance.  
• Establish and monitor mechanisms for tracking progress on outreach targets  between the different levels of 
programme management and service providers.  
• Monitor and analyse  beneficiary outreach , paying particular attention to ensuring the average value of loans to 
women and youth are commensurate with t hose given to men for similar operations in the food system35, with 
recommendations for remedial actions if required to strengthen outreach.  
• Assess progress on GEWE and GESI  through use of the project level index for the Women’s Empowerment in 
Agriculture Index (Pro -WEAI36) or IFAD empowerment index. Monitor changes in social norms, gender roles and 
power dynamics.  
• Undertake studies on good practices  leading to gender -responsive CCA financial inclusion outcomes and 
impacts and organize knowledge management and sharing events  to disseminate findings.  
• Ensure GESI issues and financial inclusion actions are addressed during supervision missions and mid -term 
review . Make provision for additional TA if it is recognised that the programme is failing to deliver on GESI 
targets during the mid -term review.  
 
33 For example, Care’s Social Analysis and Action methodology facilitates dialogue, enabling critical thinking and reflection 
about how social conditions perpetuate food and nutrition insecurity and development chal lenges.  https://www.care.org/our -
work/health/strengthening -healthcare/social -analysis -and-action -saa/  
34 The youth target of 30% of beneficiaries needs to be disaggregated by sex; that is, 50% of the youth target is young women.  
35 It is important to ensure that: (i) the targets for women and youth are met through their substantive engagement in 
programme activities, such as entrepreneurs, not solely as minor beneficiaries, such as employees in an agribusiness; (ii) 
women and youth have a proportionate share of the higher value loans and are not disproportionally clustered at the lower 
end; and (iii) the funds available for MSMEs are not totally consumed by the larger enterprises.  
36 Pro-WEAI is a composite index, which is based on 1 2 indicators of women’s empowerment in agriculture: autonomy in 
income, self -efficacy, attitudes about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, 
access to and decisions on credit, control over use of income, work  balance, visiting important locations, group membership, 
membership in influential groups, and respect among household members.


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 107 
 
   
 
ARCAFIM GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION STRATEGY    
Activities  Indicators & Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs  
 Impact Statement: The ARCAFIM Program will seek to deploy innovative financial products along with Technical 
Assistance to scale up CCA finance through the local private financial sector in selected East African (EA) countries 
to address the unmet needs of rural producers i nvolved in MSME food systems. ARCAFIM will mobilize US$ 270 
million in CCA investments and $ 30 million in TA to enable vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to 
identify, mitigate and adapt or increase their resilience to the negative impacts of climate change. Concurrently, 
ARCAFIM will seek to create opportunities to enhance livelihoods, particularly for women and youth. In ensuring 
equitable access to the benefits of the project, including employment and income generating activities, ARCAFIM  
will identify the potential impact and technical assistance where possible, to support disenfranchised groups, 
including women, to access climate resiliency tools and knowledge products to facilitate climate -smart 
innovation. This will be done through the  stakeholder engagement articulated in Annex 7 of the ARCAFIM funding 
proposal and the capacity building provided under the Technical Assistance. ARCAFIM will enable local businesses, 
including women -owned and/or led enterprises to adapt their existing met hods, expand local markets and 
demand, as well as attract further investment, especially for yet to be identified adaptation products and services.   
Outcome Statement: ARCAFIM will secure climate change -resilient livelihoods with the benefits of food and 
water security (including reduced workloads associated with household tasks); improved business and 
employment opportunities and incomes; gains in voice and decision -making over the use of assets and outputs, 
including income generated; and reductions in h armful practices and domestic violence.  ARCAFIM will report 
sex-disaggregated program level impacts to the extent possible and ensure that end beneficiary vulnerable 
groups are protected against harmful practices such as child labour and exploitation, in o rder to meet both 
national and International Labour Organization legal requirements. ARCAFIM will also achieve the following 
gender -responsive outcomes:  
1. Sustainable communities: ARCAFIM shall play a critical role in providing an avenue to collectively targ et 
and empower women/youth/IPs, build on their agency and operationalize this GESI Action strategy, 
through strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes as well as providing 
access to women, youth and IP associations and village g roups in East Africa. The organizations will in 
turn provide access to training, collaborative efforts on tackling different aspects of climate adaptation 
such as land planning, agro -forestry, soil conservation practices and energy saving stoves and techno logy. 
A more detailed list of organizations can be accessed in Annex 4.   
2. More balanced control over the four Factors of Production: ARCAFIM shall play a crucial role in promoting 
a balance of control between men and women program end beneficiaries over th e factors of production, 
thereby facilitating their participation in decision -making processes.  
3. Mitigate the disproportionate impact of climate change on vulnerable groups (women and young girls):


---
*Page 112*
---

Page 108 
 
   
 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most v ulnerable people and communities in East 
Africa via opportunities benefiting women and girls, leads to their enhanced access to resources and 
economic engagement. Examples of these opportunities include access to financial resources, including 
credit, to i ncrease their economic power, and promotion of equal pay for equal work.  
4. Increase the climate resilience and adaptation capacity for vulnerable communities, including women, 
girls and indigenous communities in EA: via tools to support them in the adoption  of distributed, data -
based, and efficient water technologies, and more resilient farming practices, in order to enhance access 
to reliable and safe water supply, despite climate shocks and stresses.    
5. Mainstreaming gender in concessional finance for climate change adaptation and related technical 
advice: Apply a gender and climate lens across the investment process and ARCAFIM implementing 
activities of Equity Bank Group and the Participating Financial Intermediaries (e.g. KWFT, Faulu, Rafiki, 
TADB), via Gender and Climate Policies, as well as a Gender -Smart Climate Financing Toolkit to be used by 
the bank to disburse direct and indirect concessional finance for climate adaptation and gender -smart 
techni cal advice to smallholders and rural micro -, small - and medium -sized enterprises (MSMEs) in the 
agricultural sector in East Africa.  
 
The overall budget required for the implementation of the GSIAP is estimated as USD 960,000. This amount is 
mostly included  in the TA capacity building budget with the remainder in the Monitoring and Evaluation budget of 
ARCAFIM.  
Activities:  Indicators & Targets:  Timeline:  Responsibilities:  Costs (USD)  
 ARCAFIM PROGRAM LEVEL OUTPUTS  
 Output 1: Establish an ARCAFIM Gender Mainstreaming Process & Outcome  
1A. Alignment to 
International Standards 
& Frameworks: The 
ARCAFIM program shall 
seek to align with 
national and 
international gender 
frameworks such as the 
Bloomberg Gender -
Equality Index, 2X 
Collaborative’s 2X Green 
toolkit, the Women 
Empowerment Principles Indicator 1A: Report on alignment with 
national and international gender 
frameworks such as the Bloomberg 
Gender -Equality Index, 2X 
Collaborative’s 2X Green toolkit, the 
Women Empowerment Principles 
(WEPs), the Gender Equality 
Mainstreaming (GEM) Framework, ‘A 
Fund Manager’s Guide to Gender -Smart 
Investing’ by IFC and CDC.  
Indicator 1B : Report on alignment with 
national and internation al climate 
frameworks such as GFANZ, TCFD, the Throughout the 
investment 
period.  
 IFAD, EBG  
 
GESI Expe rt 
 Will involve a mix of 
management time to 
conduct training on 
relevant Gender and 
Climate frameworks 
and a lump sum for 
preparation of 
training course 
material on relevant 
Gender and Climate 
frameworks and 
delivery of course 
over 2 -3 days for 30 -


---
*Page 113*
---

Page 109 
 
   
 
(WEPs), the Gender 
Equality Mainstreaming 
(GEM) Framework, ‘A 
Fund Manager’s Guide to 
Gender -Smart Investing’ 
by IFC and CDC; and 
respective climate 
eligibility frameworks 
such as GFANZ, TC FD, the 
CDSB Framework, 
Climate Action 100+, and 
the Just Transition 
criteria from the Impact 
Investing Institute.  CDSB Framework, Climate Action 100+, 
and the Just Transition criteria from the 
Impact Investing Institute.  
Target 1A: ARCAFIM shall aim to align 
its disbursement activities with national 
gender frameworks in t he EA countries 
it will be implemented in, and ensure 
minimum compliance with international 
frameworks, specifically the 2X 
Collaborative’s 2X Green toolkit & the 
Women Empowerment Principles 
(WEPs).  
Target 1B: ARCAFIM shall aim to align 
its disbursement a ctivities with national 
climate frameworks in the EA countries 
it will be implemented in, and ensure 
minimum compliance with international 
frameworks, specifically GFANZ, TCFD 
and Climate Action 100+.  50 part icipants  in 
each EA 
implementing 
country.  
 
Total - 40,000  
2A. Maximize/Promote 
and safeguard the 
gender and social 
inclusion (GESI) and 
economic empowerment 
of women, socially 
excluded and vulnerable 
groups, smallholder 
producers and rural 
micro, small and medium 
enterprises: the 
ARCAFIM program will 
provide targ eted 
technical advice (TA) to 
help deliver additional 
GESI impact, i.e., wider Indicator 2A: Number of ARCAFIM -
supported GESI TA provided to EBG and 
Tier 2 Financial Intermediaries annually.  
 
Targe t 2A:  At least 1 GESI TA program 
implemented annually for EBG’s 
ARCAFIM -implementing investment 
teams.  
 
Target 2A (i): At least 1 GESI TA 
program implemented annually for all 
of EBG Tier 2 Financial Intermediaries 
and their ARCAFIM -implementing 
investment teams.  Throughout the 
Investment 
period.  EBG’s ARCAFIM -
implementing 
investment teams & 
EBG Tier 2 Financial 
Intermediaries and 
their ARCAFIM -
implementing 
investment teams.  
 
GESI Expert  
 
 Fees for 10 days per 
quarter retaine r on 
GESI mainstreaming 
at a Technical 
Specialist rate of 
$900 - $1000 per day 
(exclusive of GST, 
VAT, and WHT).  
 
Total - 80,000


---
*Page 114*
---

Page 110 
 
   
 
gender and social 
inclusion (GESI) benefits, 
supporting EBG and Tier 
2 Financial Intermediaries 
to develop appropriate 
social safeguarding 
processes and to go 
beyond these by 
intentionally integrating a 
gender and social 
inclusion  analysis  across 
all areas of corporate 
strategy, decision making 
and operations.  
3A: Knowledge 
Generation and 
Communication : 
ARCAFIM will ensure 
equitable gender 
participation through the 
inclusion of women in 
public stakeholder 
meetings and events such 
as webinars and other 
convenings hosted by 
IFAD/GCF that discuss 
practical approaches to 
adaptation and resilience 
investment.  Indicator 3A:  ARCAFIM will collect 
gender -disaggregated information from 
key public stakeholder meetings to 
track gender participation and 
engagement.    
Target 3A : 40% of the participants of 
ARCAFIM’s key public stakeholder 
meetings are women.  December 2024 - 
will occur  on an 
ongoing basis.  ARCAFIM 
Coordinator ( or 
similar role ) working 
with the GESI Expert 
at EBG will have day -
to-day responsibility 
for the 
implementation of 
this ARCAFIM 
Gender & Social 
Inclusion Action 
Strategy.  Avg. $1000 -$5000 
per quarter for each 
publ ic stakeholder 
meeting/Knowledge 
generation webinar 
until the end of the 
implementation 
phase. (Multiply by 
number of EA 
implementing 
countries for total 
estimate or based on 
the geographical 
coverage required).  
 
 Total - 100,000  
4A: Actioning this 
ARCAFIM Gender and 
Social Inclusion Strategy 
shall require capacity 
building & knowledge Indicator 4A:  Number of ARCAFIM 
Participants receiving ARCAFIM GSIAS 
training annually including training on 
types of support available for climate Throughout the 
programme 
implementation 
period  GESI Expert  Avg. $5000 -$10000 
per year for each 
ARCAFIM GSIAS 
training/Accelerator/


---
*Page 115*
---

Page 111 
 
   
 
sharing for all ARCAFIM 
Participants: This will 
ensure the Strategy is 
operationalized 
throughout the ARCAFIM 
program thereby 
increasing knowledge on 
the document and 
strengthening staff 
capacity to implement 
the actions. This will be 
meted via training 
programs, accelerators as 
well as organizations that 
support women, youth 
and IP entrepreneurs in 
the Agri -Sector in EA.  adaptation measures  (260, 000 small -
scale producers as end line target) . 
Indicator 4B:  Number of ARCAFIM 
Participants engaging accelerators a nd 
organisations that support women, 
youth, and IPs in EA.  
 
Indicator 4C : Number of ARCAFIM -
organized Entrepreneurship 
Development & Financial Inclusion with 
gender and climate lens training aimed 
at ARCAFIM participants.  
 
Target 4A:  80% of employees of 
ARCAFIM implementing partners 
participating in GSIAS training within 
the first year of employment.   
 
Target 4B:  At least 2 ARCAFIM -
organized and supported accelerators 
annually.  
 
Target 4A : 1 training course per year. 
Topics will rang e from entrepreneurship 
development & financial inclusion, 
Awareness of climate threats and risk -
reduction processes, to climate -resilient 
farming practices such as new water 
technologies and farming inputs.   Gender TA until the 
end of the 
implementation 
phase. (Multiply by 
number of EA 
implementing 
countries for total 
estimate).  
 
Total - 100, 000  
 
4B: Gender technical 
advice & assistance: The 
ARCAFIM program shall 
provide technical advice 
and assistance to EBG 
and its implementing Tier Indicator 4B (i):  Number of ARCAFIM 
Gender TAs provided annually for EBG.  
Indicator 4B (ii) : Number of ARCAFIM 
Gender TAs provided annually for Tier 2 
Financial Intermediaries  (20 PFIs - end 
line target) . Annually 
beginning in 2024  GESI Expert


---
*Page 116*
---

Page 112 
 
   
 
2 Financial Intermediaries 
throughout the 
investment period to 
enhance their 
understanding of the 
intersectionality betw een 
gender & climate.  Indicator 4B (iii) : Number o f ARCAFIM 
Gender TAs provided annually for end 
beneficiaries of the program.  
Target 4B (i):  80% of employees of 
ARCAFIM implementing partners 
participate in GSIAS training within the 
first year of employment.   
Target 4B (ii):  1 training course per 
year. Topics will range from 
entrepreneurship development & 
financial inclusion, Awareness of 
climate threats and risk -reduction 
processes, to climate -resilient farming 
practices such as new water 
technologies and farming inputs. 
Gender and social inclusion will  be 
mainstreamed in these trainings.   
 EQUITY BANK GROUP LEVEL OUTPUTS  
 Output 2: Develop the Equity Bank Group (EBG)GESI Action Plan based on GESI Assessment and 
document review completed, putting the below into consideration:  
5A. EBG’s ARCAFIM KPIs 
as aligned to the 2X 
Criteria : With support 
from ARCAFIM and IFAD, 
EBG will  establish 
indicators that fulfil the 
banks’ obligations aligned 
to ARCAFIM’s approach 
to Gender Equality and 
Social Inclusion. This is 
done by establishing 
commitments and 
ambitions in terms of 
female ownership by 
promoting women Indicator 5A: EBG commits to one of 
the below criteria as a women -owned 
company:  
• Capacity building of the E BG 
shareholders on the 
importance of diversity and 
unconscious bias.  
• Initiatives (targeted 
recruitment and promotion) to 
increase the ownership of 
women and other members of 
socially excluded groups, 
aligned to EBG’s ownership 
shareholding ambitions in 
terms of female ownership.  Throughout the 
investment period  
 IFAD, EBG  
 
GESI Expert  EBG Management 
time, Avg. $5000 -
10000 fees for 
training/ capacity 
building of the EBG 
shareholders on the 
importance of 
diversity and 
unconscious bias per 
year and 5 days per 
month retainer at 
Technical Specialist 
rate of $900 - $1000 
per day (exclusive of 
GST, VAT, and WHT)


---
*Page 117*
---

Page 113 
 
   
 
entrepreneurs at a 
leader ship level and/ or 
supporting initiatives that 
support the appointment 
of women into leadership 
levels either directly or 
indirectly (outsourced).  • Appointment of pre -selected 
female investors/board 
members whose vision aligns 
with that of EBG’s vision.  
Target 5A: As ARCAFIM’s implementing 
Host Bank in the East Africa region, EBG 
board should develop a 
strategy/framework to est ablish 
commitments and ambitions in terms of 
female ownership.  to support EBG to 
develop a 
strategy/framework 
to establish 
commitments and 
ambitions in terms 
of female 
ownership . 
 
Total - 40, 000  
5B. Establish 
commitments and 
ambitions in terms of 
EBG’s considerations of 
women as consumers by 
tailoring products that 
address critical barriers to 
women's economic 
participation and 
financial inclusion.  Indicator 5B: EBG commits to 
establishing products a nd services that 
disproportionately benefit women:  
Develop and innovate products and 
services targeting women 
entrepreneurs specifically those aimed 
at women and groups in the Agri -sector 
in all EBG entities in Kenya, Uganda, 
Tanzania, South Sudan, DRC an d 
Rwanda.  
Target 5B: As ARCAFIM’s implementing 
Host Bank in the East Africa region, EBG 
shall establish commitments and 
ambitions in terms of women as 
customers and consumers and commit 
to the indicator above.  Throughout the 
investment 
period.  
 IFAD, EBG  
 Management Time.  
6A. Equity Bank Group 
Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy:  A GESI 
assessment of the bank 
revealed that there is 
value in EBG developing a 
Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy to 
recognize and adequately Indicator 6A: Report on Equity Bank 
Group Gender Responsive Climate 
Policy development.  
 
Target 6 A: EBG Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy developed  
 
Target 6B:  EBG Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy implemented.   
 
 
 
By June 2025  
 
 
2025 onwards  
 EBG, IFAD, Gender & 
Climate Experts.  Management time 
or activity included 
under 5 days per 
month gender 
expert retainer as 
per above to 
develop and support 
EBG in the 
implementation of


---
*Page 118*
---

Page 114 
 
   
 
address the needs, 
priorities, and realit ies of 
men and women, in the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation, so 
that men and women can 
equally benefit from the 
ARCAFIM program.   
 the Equity Bank 
Group Gender 
Responsive Climate 
Policy.  
 
7A. EA Country Level 
ARCAFIM Participant 
Engagemen t: informs 
country level gender 
assessments and identify 
opportunities to align 
ARCAFIM investments 
with gender -related 
priorities at the country 
level.  
 Indicator 7A : Number of Country, TIER 
2 FI and Agri -sector level consultations 
that identify barriers and opportunities 
to expand climate resilient solutions to 
women vulnerable to climate change.  
 
Target 7A : 1 annual country -level 
consultation for each EA ARCAFIM -
implementing country in which Equity 
Bank Group will make an investment 
through ARCAFIM.    Annually 
beginning 2024.  IFAD, Nordic 
Development Fund, 
each have a 
dedicated, 
permanent 
employee 
responsible for the 
implementation of 
Gender Policies, and 
full integration of 
this gender strategy 
within the ARCAFIM 
implementing team 
including Equity 
Bank’ s investment 
teams.  Avg. $2000 -$4000 
for each annual 
country -level 
consultation per EA 
ARCAFIM -
implementing 
country in which 
Equity Bank Group 
has made an 
investment.  
 
Total - 80,000  
8A. Application of a 
gender & climate lens 
across the EBG Direct 
Investment process: via 
the Gender -Smart 
Climate Financing Toolkit 
(See Annex 5 Section for 
Provisional ARCAFIM 
Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Toolkit Indica tor 8A:  Number of existing and 
new EBG investments under the newly 
developed Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Framework throughout the 7 -
year Disbursement period of the 
ARCAFIM Program.   
 
Target 8A:  30% of EBG’s direct 
investments as part of the ARCAFIM 
program that are aligned to the 2X Throughout the 
investment 
period.  
 
 ARCAFIM 
Coordinator ( or 
similar role ) working 
in collaboration with 
the GESI Expert will 
have day -to-day 
responsibility for the 
implementati on of 
this ARCAFIM 
Gender & Social Item included in 5 
days per month 
retainer for a gender 
expert developing 
and supporting EBG 
in the 
implementation of 
the Gender -Smart 
Climate Financing 
Toolkit.


---
*Page 119*
---

Page 115 
 
   
 
considerations ), with an 
objective to channe l 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards direct 
investments or Tier 2 
Financial Intermediaries 
who are women -owned, 
led/governed, who create 
income -generating 
opportunities for women 
the Agri -sector & Who 
increase usage by 
women, of climate 
resilient products and/or 
services. The toolkit will 
additionally identify and 
address vulnerabilities 
and challenges 
experienced by end 
beneficiaries in East 
Africa. These 
vulnerabilities have been 
detailed in the preceding 
sections of this strategy.  Gender and Climate Finance Toolkit 
Framework.   Inclusion Action 
Strategy.  
 
9A. Apply the Gender -
Smart Cli mate Financing 
Toolkit to guide the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards direct 
investments who are 
women -owned: EBG will 
use the tools in the Due Indicator 9A: Report on number of EBG 
Direct investments in the Agri -sector 
that meet the  follow criteria as women -
owned companies:  
• At least 51% women -owned  
• Founded by one or more 
women.  
• The primary decision -maker is 
a woman.  Through the 
investment 
period.  
 The ARCAFIM 
Coordinator working 
with the GESI Expert 
will provide 
oversight of the 
Gender -Smart 
Climate Financing 
Framework and 
utilize external 
gender experts to Management time.


---
*Page 120*
---

Page 116 
 
   
 
diligence tools in the 
Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Toolkit to 
evaluate and track 
women -owned direct 
investments in the Agri -
sector and require them 
to report on gender -
related actions or 
considerations agreed to 
in their gender action 
plans.  • One of the female founders is 
actively involved in 
management (in the C -Suite)  
Target 9A: EBG will invest in 2 women -
owned companies per country.  ensure compliance 
and implementation 
of the GCF & IFAD 
Gender Policies  
As well as the 
ARCAFI M Gender & 
Social Inclusion 
Action Strategy.  
 
10A. Apply the Gender -
Smart Climate Financing 
Toolkit to guide the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards direct 
investments or Tier 2 
Financial Intermediaries 
who are women -
led/governed: EBG will 
use the Due diligence 
tools in the Gender -Smart 
Climate Financing Toolkit 
to evaluate and track 
women -led/governed 
direct investments in the 
Agri-sector and require 
them to report on 
gender -related actions or 
consideratio ns agreed to 
in their gender action 
plans that will be Indicator 10A: Report on number of 
EBG Direct investments in the Agri -
sector that meet the follow criteria as 
women -led/governed companies:  
• The b usiness has 20% - 30% 
women in Senior Management  
• The business contains 30% 
share of women in the 
Investment Committee (IC)  
• The business contains 30% 
share of women in the Board.  
Target 10A: EBG will invest in 2 women -
led companies in each country .  
 GESI Expert


---
*Page 121*
---

Page 117 
 
   
 
provided with the first 
year of ARCAFIM 
participation.  
11A. Apply the Gender -
Smart Climate Financing 
Toolkit to guide the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards direct 
investments who create 
income -generating 
opportunities for 
women, youth and 
Indigenous Communities 
in the Agri -sector: 
Identify opportunities 
within EBG direct 
investments as part of 
the ARCAFIM program, to 
provide a new source of 
income for climate -
vulnerable communities, 
facilitate employment 
opportunities for women 
and youth and scale 
access to localized, asset -
specific information on 
climate -related risks and 
impacts, as well as 
physical products and 
services to manage those 
risks and impacts.  Indicator 11A: Number of direct jobs 
created for women in EA within EBG’s 
direct investment as part of the 
ARCAFIM program.  
Indicator 11B: Number of direct jobs 
created for vulnerable youth in EA 
within EBG’s direct investment as part 
of the ARCAFIM program.  
Indicator 11C: Number of direct jobs 
created for indigenous communities in 
EA within EBG’s direct investment as 
part of the ARCAFIM program.  
 
 
Indicator 11A: Number of Indirect jobs 
created for vulnerable women EA, 
within EBG’s direct investment as part 
of the ARCAFIM program.  
Indicator 11B: Number of Indirect jobs 
created for vulnerable youth EA, within 
EBG’s direct inv estment as part of the 
ARCAFIM program.  
Indicator 11C: Number of Indirect jobs 
created for Indigenous communities in 
EA, within EBG’s direct investment as 
part of the ARCAFIM program.  
 
 
 
Target 11A, 11B and 11C: [Targets for 
number or percent of direct and  
indirect employment created for GESI Expert


---
*Page 122*
---

Page 118 
 
   
 
women, youth and indigenous people ( 
11A -50% of the 7,500 overall ARCAFIM 
target and 11 B - 30% of overall 7,500 
ARCAFIM target  while 11 C is TBD) ] 
12A. Apply the Gender -
Smart Climate Financing 
Toolkit to guide the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards direct 
investments who 
increase usage by 
women, youth and 
indigenous communities, 
of climate resilient 
products and/or 
service s: Identify 
opportunities to extend 
physical products and 
services to climate -
vulnerable women, youth 
and indigenous 
communities to better 
manage climate risks and 
impacts.  Indicator 12A: Number of additional 
women, youth and indigenous people 
that have been de -risked provided 
access to and/or are benefiting from 
climate resilient solutions, including 
localized climate risk information or 
physical products or services (for 
example women mad e more aware of 
climate threats and risk - reduction 
processes; made more food secure; 
provided improved access to water / 
water management solutions, etc.)  
 
Target 12A: At least 30% of all 
beneficiaries from ARCAFIM 
investments are women, youth and 
indigen ous people.  GESI Expert  
13A:  Actioning the 
Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Toolkit shall 
require capacity building 
& knowledge sharing for 
all ARCAFIM 
implementing 
investment teams at 
EBG: This will ensure the Indicator 13A:  Number of ARCAFIM 
implementing investment teams at EBG 
participating in Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Toolk it training annually.  
 
Target 13A:  80% of ARCAFIM 
implementing investment teams at EBG 
participating in Gender -Smart Climate 
Financing Toolkit.   GESI expert


---
*Page 123*
---

Page 119 
 
   
 
toolkit is operationalized 
throughout the B ank’s 
implementing teams 
thereby increasing 
knowledge on the 
document and 
strengthening staff 
capacity to implement 
the actions.  
 
 
 
 TIER 2 FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY LEVEL OUTPUTS  
 Output 3: Establish TIER 2 FI -Level ARCAFIM -Implementation Structure  
14A.  TIER 2 FI Level 
Gender Assessment and 
Action : through the 
gender assessment, EBG 
and the TIER 2 FIs will 
identify GESI gaps and 
opportunities to 
mainstream within the 
TIER 2 FI’s governance 
structures as well as 
throu ghout their 
ARCAFIM -Implementing 
process and activities 
invest in women owned 
(15A), led and governed 
companies (15B); income 
generation for women 
through direct and 
indirect employment 
(15C); and the adaptation 
of climate resilient Indicator 14A: TIER 2 FI Gender and 
Social Inclusion Action Plan: Report on 
TIER 2 FI GSIAP development.  
Indicator 14B: Report on number of 
TIER 2 FI investments/CCA loans in the 
Agri-sector that meet one of the follow 
criteria as  women -owned smallholder 
producers, Agri -sector entrepreneurs, 
or rural MSMEs:  
• At least 51% Women -owned  
• Founded by one or more 
women.  
• Loan beneficiary is a woman 
smallholder producer or 
entrepreneur.  
• The primary decision -maker is 
a woman.  
• One of the fema le founders is 
actively involved in 
management (in the C -Suite)  Through the 
investment 
period.  GESI Expert  Management time.


---
*Page 124*
---

Page 120 
 
   
 
products or services by  
vulnerable women (15D).  Target 14A: 20 Tier 2 Financial 
Intermediary level GSIAP co -developed 
with IFAD and implemented by Tier 2 
Financial Intermediaries.  
Target 14B: As ARCAFIM’s 
implementing Host Bank in the East  
Africa region, EBG shall aim to invest 
ARCAFIM funds into at least 2 women -
owned direct investments.  
Indicator 14C: Report on number of 
TIER 2 FI investments/CCA loans in the 
Agri-sector that meet one of the follow 
criteria as women -Led/governed 
smallhold er producers, Agri -sector 
entrepreneurs, or rural MSMEs:  
• The business has 20% - 30% 
Women in Senior Management  
• Loan beneficiary is from a 
woman -led savings or self -help 
group.  
• The business contains 30% 
share of women in the 
Investment Committee (IC)  
• The b usiness contains 30% 
share of women in the Board.  
Target 14C: As EBG’s indirect 
investment within the East Africa 
region, the TIER 2 FI shall aim to invest 
concessional finance for climate 
adaptation into at least 5 women -
led/governed direct investments within 
the Agri -sector in each country.  Overall 
560 MSMEs are targeted in ARCAFIM


---
*Page 125*
---

Page 121 
 
   
 
15A. TIER 2 FI Level 
Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy:  The 
abovementioned GESI 
assessment of the  TIER 2 
FI should action the 
development of a Gender 
Responsive Climate Policy 
to recognize and 
adequately address the 
needs, priorities, and 
realities of men and 
women, in the 
disbursement of 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation, so 
that men and wo men can 
equally benefit from the 
ARCAFIM program.  Indicator 15A: Report on TIER 2 FI 
Gender Responsive Climate Policy 
development.  
  
Indicator 15B: Report on TIER 2 FI -
specific access to markets & Services  
 
Target 15A: TIER 2 FI Gender 
Responsive Climate Policy developed 
and implemented.  
 
Target 15B: TIER 2 FI Markets & 
Services access strategy developed and 
analyzed annually.  By December 
2024  GESI Expert  Fees for 10 days per 
month retainer for a 
gender expert to 
devel op and support 
TIER 2 FI in the 
implementation of 
the TIER 2 FI Level 
Gender Responsive 
Climate Policy.  
16A.  Channel 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards ARCAFIM End 
Beneficiaries who consist 
of smallholder 
producers, under -
employed rural men, 
women and youth with 
no access to land or 
assets beyond their skills 
and time, and rural Agri -
MSMEs that meet one of 
the 4 Direct 2X Challenge 
Criteria:  Identify 
opportunities within EBG Indicator 16A : Report on number of 
EBG Indirect investments/Tier 2 
Financial Intermediaries with 
investments into the Agri -sector that 
meet one of the following criteria:  
• Meets at least one of 4 Dire ct 
2X Challenge criteria internally 
within the TIER 2 FI’s 
governance.  
• TIER 2 FI receiving ARCAFIM’s 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation will use this 
financing to support 
smallholder producers, under -
employed rural men, women 
and youth with no acc ess to Throughout the 
investment 
period.  
 GESI Expert  Management time.


---
*Page 126*
---

Page 122 
 
   
 
indirect investments/Tier 
2 Financial Intermediaries 
as part of the ARCAFIM 
program, to receive 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation as 
long as 30% of their 
portfolio of 
clients/businesses meet 
Direct 2X Challenge 
criteria.  land or assets beyond their 
skills and time, and rural Agri -
MSMEs that meet at least one 
of 4 Direct 2X Challenge 
Criteria.   
Target 16A:  
• At least 30% of the TIER 2 FI’s  
financing proceeds support 
businesses/group lending 
models that meet direct 2X  
Challenge Criteria.  
• At least 30% of the TIER 2  FI’s 
ARCAFIM - Financed portfolio 
supports businesses that meet 
direct 2X Challenge Criteria.  
At least 30% of the TIER 2 FI’s end 
beneficiaries of the ARCAFIM 
program/Groups meet direct 2X 
Challenge Criteria.   
17A. Channel 
concessional finance for 
climate adaptation 
towards Participating 
Financial Intermediaries 
who create income -
generating opportunities 
for women, youth and 
indigenous communiti es 
in the Agri -sector: 
Identify opportunities 
within Tier 2 Financial 
Intermediaries to provide 
a new source of income 
for ARCAFIM End 
beneficiaries in climate -Indicator 17A: Number of direct jobs 
created for vulnerable groups (women, 
youth & indigenous people) in the EA 
Agri-sector by the TIER 2 FI as part of 
the ARCAFIM program.  
 
Indicator 17B: Number of Indirect jobs 
created for vulnerable groups (women, 
youth & indigenous people) in the EA 
Agri-sector by the TIER 2 FI as part of 
the ARCAFIM program.  
 
Target 17A and 17B: [Targets for 
number or percent of direct and 
indirect employment created f or 
women, youth and indigenous groups  GESI Expert  Management Time.


---
*Page 127*
---

Page 123 
 
   
 
vulnerable communities 
and/or facilitate 
employment 
opportunities for women, 
youth and indigenou s 
people.  will be established at the time of each 
EBG investment into a TIER 2 FI as part 
of the ARCAFIM program].  
18A:  Actioning this 
ARCAFIM GSIAS at the 
TIER 2 FI level shall 
require capacity building 
& knowledge sharing for 
ARCAFIM implementing 
teams: This will ensure 
the Program is 
operationalized 
throughout the TIER 2 FI 
and its activities thereby 
increasing knowledge  on 
the program and its tools 
and strengthening staff 
capacity.  Indicator 18A:  Number of existing and 
new investment professionals 
participating in ARCAFIM training within 
the first year of employment.   
 
Target 18A:  80%  of employees of TIER 2 
FI Employee s participating in GSIAS 
training within the first year of 
employment.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annually 
beginning in 2023.  GESI Expert  Lump sum for 
external specialist 
support in 
preparation of 
training course on 
gender inclusion and 
delivery of course 
annually over 2 days 
for 30 -50 
participants per year 
at a cost of $15 -20K 
per year  
 
Total -100,000  
 Output 4: Apply a gender & climate lens to monitoring & evaluation analysis  
19A. ARCAFIM shall 
develop a Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
framework  that provides 
granularity on the impact 
of vulnerable 
communities, including 
women and girls.  Indicator 19A: Number of ARCAFIM 
beneficiary businesses that 
incorporate gender metrics into their 
reporting and / or develop relevant 
policies, strategies, and plans that 
include discussion of gender.  
 
Target 19A: 100% of ARCAFIM 
implementing host banks (incl. EBG) 
and Tier 2 Financial Intermediaries Throughout the 
investment period 
with annual 
reporting 
requirements  The GCF, IFAD, 
Nordic Development 
Fund, each have a 
dedicated, 
permanent 
employee 
responsible for the 
implementation of 
GCF and IFAD’s 
Gender Policies, and Management time.


---
*Page 128*
---

Page 124 
 
   
 
(Incl. Faulu, Rafiki, TADB, KWFT) 
incorporate gender metrics in 
reporting and / or develop policies, 
strategies, and plans to address 
gender gaps, barriers and challeng e 
and opportunities.  
 full integ ration of 
this gender strategy 
within the ARCAFIM 
implementing team 
including Equity 
Bank’s investment 
teams.  
20A. Gender 
Safeguarding in Equity 
Bank Group and its 
Tier 2 Financial 
Intermediaries: 
Include protections to 
ensure that the 
employment 
relationship is based 
on the principle of 
equal opportunity and 
fair treatment and will 
not discriminate with 
respect to any aspect 
of the employment 
relationship 
(recruitment, hiring, 
compensation, 
working conditions, 
terms of employment, 
access to training, 
promotion, 
termination, etc.).  
 Indicator 20A : Monitor and report 
non-compliance through the ESMF 
and address violations, as necessary, 
through Environmental and Social 
Action Plans and GSIAPs. Verify 
ARCAFIM -related reporting 
requirements on a routine and 
randomly selected basis.  
 
Target 20A: Equity Bank Group and 
each active TIER 2 FI monitors and 
reports for compliance on an annual 
basis.  
 EBG and Tier 2 
Financial 
Intermediaries will 
provide this data 
annually through 
the Environmental 
and Social Action 
Plans and GSIAPs 
developed at the 
bank level as well 
as with each TIER 
2 FI.  EBG & Tier 2 
Financial 
Intermediaries  
 Management time.  
20B. Capacity building to 
expand understanding of 
gender responsive 
climate adaptation and Indicator 20B : Monitor and report 
on capacity building initiatives. Verify 
what M&E means for each fit -for-
purpose situation in different EA EBG and Tier 2  
Financial 
Intermediaries will 
provide this data EBG & Tier 2 
Financial 
Intermediaries  
 Avg. $100 -150 K per 
year per Tier 2 FI for 
or the development 
and implementation


---
*Page 129*
---

Page 125 
 
   
 
resilience: Including 
increasing understanding 
by local institutions and 
communities of gender 
responsive climate 
adaptation and resilience 
and what M&E means for 
each fit -for-purpose 
situation in different EA 
countries as well as 
different approaches 
such as stakeholder 
engagement on topics 
such as GBVH, climate 
resilience and adaptation, 
climate -smart farming 
techniques, leadership 
skills, peer counseling 
(mentorshi p programs), 
technical training on 
resilient farming practices 
and use of new water 
technologies, as well as 
community -based M&E 
systems such as 
identifying impact, 
reporting ARCAFIM 
progress at a community 
level and evaluation 
mechanisms to feedback 
lesso ns learnt and 
challenges experienced 
during the 
implementation of the 
ARCAFIM programme.  countries and relevant app roaches to 
be taken.  
 
Target 20B: Equity Bank Group and 
each active TIER 2 FI launches gender 
responsive climate adaptation and 
resilience M&E programs targeting 
stakeholder engagements, technical 
training and a community -based M&E 
System.  
 annually through 
the Environmental 
and Social Action 
Plans and GSIAPs 
developed at the 
bank level as well 
as with each TIER 
2 FI.  
 of each gender 
responsive climate 
adaptation and 
resilience M&E 
program per Tier 2 
FI.  
 
Annual ongoing 
monitoring cost 
would drop to 40 -
50K USD once 
framework is set up 
(to include approx. 2 
to 3 monitoring 
cycles)  
 
Total - 500, 000


---
*Page 130*
---

Page 126 
 
   
 
ANNE X 1: The Equity Bank Group ARCAFIM Implementing Structure  
 
ANNE X 2: The Tier 2 FI ARCAFIM Implementation Structure


---
*Page 131*
---

Page 127 
 
   
 
ANNE X 3: Organisations Support ing Women Entrepreneurs in East Africa  
REGIONAL  
Organisation                        Description  
Eastern Africa 
Farmers 
Federation 
(EAFF)  EAFF is a corporate members -based regional farmers’ organization founded in 2001. It is 
registered in Kenya under the Societies Act, with country chapters in each of its member 
countries which includes all the ARCAFIM’s focus countries in East Africa i.e., Kenya, 
Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda. EAFF’s establishment was triggered by the development 
imperatives of the late 1990s and early 2000, especially the need to strengthen mechanisms 
for regional collective acti on to provide an opportunity for farmer organizations to engage 
at the regional level. One of the organization’s core mandates includes active engagement 
of women and youth in agricultural development regionally.  
Africa Women 
Agribusiness 
Network 
(AWAN) Afrika  AWAN Afrika is a non -profit organization limited by guarantee. Its network comprises 
individual members’ businesses including producers, processor s, aggregators, export 
companies, and input suppliers among others across the continent and globally. The 
organization provides women -owned and youth -owned agribusinesses with an E -Hub, 
which is a repository of information on agriculture along value chains  and supply chains. 
AWAN Afrika Under 30 champions involves youth of either gender engaged in agribusiness.  
UN Women  
 UN Women supports regional institutions, governments, and other stakehold ers in setting 
up and applying a comprehensive and dynamic set of global norms, policies and standards 
on gender equality and empowerment of women.  
Through policy and technical advisory services and regional engagement, the Regional 
Office partners with re gional bodies to support women’s participation in intergovernmental 
policy processes such as the regional preparations for the Commission on the Status of 
Women - CSW, the Rio+20 follow up, the Beijing+20 review, and the Post 2015 
development agenda. These  processes are linked to national level gender equality and 
women empowerment advocacy.  
ANDE GLOBAL  Through the Accelerating Women’s Climate Entrepreneurs Progra m, ANDE global hopes to 
build the gender -lens investing ecosystem for women climate entrepreneurs to grow 
scalable climate -related businesses in Sub -Saharan Africa.  
 
KENYA  
Organisation                        Description  
Association of 
Women in 
Agriculture - AWAK  was conceived on the precept of scal ing up agribusinesses from conventional 
subsistence farming to advanced climate smart agriculture, urban food security, value 
addition and advocacy in the quest of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)


---
*Page 132*
---

Page 128 
 
   
 
Kenya AWAK  both at household and national levels.  
Women Farmers 
Association of 
Kenya (WoFaAK)  WoFaAK  is the national umbrella organization of women farmers in Kenya. WoFaAK is a non -
political, non -government and non -religious member -based organization. The association 
provides the women farmers of Kenya with a platform to articulate issues affecting them in 
agriculture. The goal of WoFaAK is to address issues that impede women farmers from 
undertaking both profitable and sustainable agricultural enterprises with a view to improve 
their livelihoods.  
Agriculture 
Sector Network 
(ASNET)  Agriculture Sector Network (ASNET) is the umbrella body representing the collective voice of 
the agriculture sector in Kenya. ASNET serves as the agriculture sector board for the  Kenya 
Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA).  
ASNET’s key role is to coordinate agriculture sector actors in Kenya through various 
mechanisms to engage in policy advocacy and value chain development that promote 
increased productivity, competitiveness and attracts investments into the agriculture sect or.  
ASNET functions through a network of agencies and organisations such as AAK Grow, 
Agricultural Employers Association, Agricultural Society of Kenya, Association of Kenya Feeds 
Manufacturers (AKEFEMA), Avocado Society of Kenya, Cereal Growers Associati on (CGA), 
Cereal Millers Association (CMA), Commercial Aquaculture Society of Kenya (CASK), East 
African Tea Trade Association, Elgon Kenya Ltd, Kenya Association of Manufacturers (KAM), 
Kenya Camel Association, Kenya Flower Council (KFC), Kenya National F armers' Federation, 
Kenya Tea Growers Association, Kenya Camel Association (KCA), Lake Naivasha Growers 
Group, Micro Enterprises Support Programme Trust (MESPT), National Coffee Platform, 
National Potatoes Council of Kenya, Seed Trade Association of Kenya and the Ustadi 
Foundation.  
The Kenya 
National 
Farmers’ 
Federation 
(KENAFF)  The Kenya National Farmers’ Federation (KENAFF) is the apex, umbrella farmers’ 
organization in Kenya; also known as the National Farmers’ Organization (NFO). It was 
founded in 1946 to represent, articulate, promote, and protect the interests of Kenyan 
through lobby, advocacy, policy action and farmer empowerment. The federation also 
deploys a wide range of member servic es:  
Capacity building on organizational development for farmer groups/associations/enterprises.  
Technical advisory and market facilitation.  
Facilitating linkages between farmers and credit and finance institutions.  
KENAFF’s membership comprises smallhol der farmers organized in Producer Business 
Groups (PBGs); County Farmers Associations (CFAs); apex Commodity Associations (CAs) 
Cooperative Societies; Farmers’ Unions; farmer -owned business entities; and, large -scale 
producers. The current membership is ap proximately 1.6 million farm families spread across 
all the 47 counties and the eleven (11) KENAFF regions.


---
*Page 133*
---

Page 129 
 
   
 
 
RWANDA  
Organisation                        Description  
Rwanda 
Women’s 
Network  Rwanda Women’s Network was founded in 1995 to end gender inequality in Rwanda by 
empowering women to be positive transformation agents in their homes, communities, and 
the nation at large. One of the organization’s key p illars is socio -economic transformation 
which focuses on enhancing access to knowledge and building financial skills as keys to the 
mobilization of gender roles and economic growth in Rwanda. The organization’s programs 
provide financial education and inve st in the development of women led local small 
businesses.  
Rwanda Youth 
in Agribusiness 
Forum (RYAF)  RYAF is a platform established to bring together different youth organizations, individual 
youth farmers and entrepreneurs in Agriculture Sector working in one or many of the 
following sub -sectors: crop production, lives tock, agro -processing, inputs and other Agro -
services (extension, marketing, food packaging, farm mechanization, seed multiplication etc.) 
as well as ICT for Agriculture in Rwanda. The platform aims to change the old mind -set 
among the youth vis -à-vis the agricultural sector in Rwanda, while orienting youth to reach 
out to other farming groups to raise awareness on the practice of business -oriented 
agriculture.  
Youth 
Engagement in 
Agriculture 
Network 
(YEAN)  YEAN is a Youth -Led Agriculture social enterprise created to empower farmers and 
agripreneurs through capacity building, foster innovation, optimization of information 
availability, quality agriculture input access, efficient crop, and animal production 
technologies deployment towards contributing to the SDG Goal 2: Ending hunger, achieving 
food security, improving nutrition, and promoting sustainable agriculture through engaging 
youth as agents of change.  
 
TANZANIA  
Organisation                        Description  
Tanzania Youth 
in Agribusiness 
Association 
(TYAA)  TYAA is an umbrella association formally registered in 2022 whose membership base 
constitute of valued youth led enterprises, registered firms and initiatives in agribusiness and 
farm related value chains including cooperatives, services providers, professionals, 
processors, exporters and related agropreneurs.  
IITA Tanzania 
Youth 
Agripreneurs 
(ITYA)  ITYA was formed in March 2014 to change the mindset and attitudes of young people 
towards agriculture and empowering them to be more productive by setting up and running 
successful agriculture businesses and becoming job creators. The group is engaged in 
different agribusinesses, including: packing of high quality cassava flour and selling under the 
brand ‘Mpishi Mkuu’, (the great cook; www.mpishimkuu.com ), production of tomatoes


---
*Page 134*
---

Page 130 
 
   
 
under a greenhouse and drip irrigation, supply of clean cassava planting mater ial, processing 
of soybean to products such as milk, yogurt, and tofu, providing weed control services to 
farmers using appropriate and safe herbicides, and the use of modern techniques (hermetic 
bags) for storage of maize and training farmers on making of  high nutrient -dense foods from 
locally grown crops.  
 
UGANDA  
Organisation                        Description  
Support for 
Women in 
Agriculture and 
Environment 
(SWAGEN)  SWAGEN is an indigenous organization founded and owned by grassroots women in 
Uganda. The organization came into existence in 1998 out of a felt need to go beyond 
engaging women at the National level due to the prolifera tion of women focused NGOs at 
the national level. Its mission is to create strong women groups capable of active 
participation in and meaningful contribution to mainstream national development.  
SWAGEN advocates for a transition to agroecology as the food p roduction model in Africa 
as opposed to industrial agriculture. Agroecology is a people -centred system of sustainable 
agriculture combining indigenous knowledge with cutting edge science, making the best 
use of nature to create healthy communities. SWAGEN supports small -scale food producers 
to build a sustainable, resilient, diverse, healthy, productive, and culturally appropriate 
food system for Africa.  
Association of 
Uganda 
Professional 
Women in 
Agriculture and 
Environment 
(AUPWAE)   AUPWAE is an association of professional women qualified and with vast experience in the 
fields of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Food Science and Technology, Environmental 
Science and Veterinary Medicine. Founded in 1992, it currently boasts of a membership of 
300 professional women working in both private and public sectors in all regions of the 
country. One of their key objectives is to enhance the ability of rural women to acquire and 
utilize a ppropriate knowledge, technology and skills for improved food security, income 
generation and environment conservation. The organization promotes training on 
entrepreneurship skills and business planning, value chain development and 
implementation, institu tional capacity development, resource mobilization and in improved 
agricultural and environment conservation technologies.  
Rural Women 
Empowerment 
Network 
(ROWONET)  
 Rural Women Empowerment Network (ROWONET) advances equity for women and girls 
throughout rural Uganda through research, advocacy, capacity building, and networking. A 
membership organization comprising 179 women -led organizations across Uganda that 
represent the communities RUWONET serves, all members share a common vision: 
equality  and socio -economic justice for women and girls. Some of the key focus areas by 
ROWONET include promoting climate smart agriculture, enhancing access to clean water 
drinking water and promoting the use of renewable energy technologies in the rural areas.  
Uganda 
Women's Trust  UWT links the lack of economic empowerment among women to the current development 
challenges such as gender -based violence; education (quality, access, dropout rates, 
retention), corruption, maternal mortality among others. UWT has thr ee approaches to


---
*Page 135*
---

Page 131 
 
   
 
women’s economic empowerment:  
Building capacity of the women in agriculture for both household food security and 
household income, providing inputs and linking them to relevant services like agriculture 
training centres, and marketing grou ps.   
Building entrepreneurship skills among the women and encouraging the women to work in 
groups to save and be loanable.  
Enhancing adult learning and skills development so that the women can negotiate, 
participate and make informed decisions in all aspe cts of their social, political and 
economic lives.  
Organization for 
Rural 
Development 
(ORUDE)  ORUDE is a grassroots NGO in south -eastern Uganda. Formed in 1997, the organization had 
been mobilizing and training rural women's economic groups and preparing  them to absorb 
credit. It then helped the groups to open savings accounts with microfinance institutions 
(MFIs) from which they hoped their members could access credit.  
Youth Go Green  Youth Go Green is a youth -led umbrella organization of youth engaged in climate change, 
resilience, green growth, environment protection, SDGs, and youth empowerment 
activities in Uganda & African countries. The organiza tion's mission is to empower and 
engage young people in pursuance of low carbon socio economic development pathway. 
Some of its key thematic areas relevant to the project include climate change adaptation 
and mitigation, biodiversity conservation, green gr owth and youth skilling and 
empowerment.  
The Young 
Farmers’ 
Federation of 
Uganda (UNYFA)  UNYFA is an umbrella body for young farmers in Uganda, established in 2016, and launched 
in June 201 7, as a duly incorporated member -based organization, with 54 members 
registered as District Young Farmers’ Associations (DYFAs), farmer youth groups and school 
agricultural clubs, with a total of over 35,000 individual young farmers across the country. 
The organization is driven by the desire to have a holistically transformed youth in 
agriculture for a sustainable economy: its target group is of youth between 12 to 39 years 
of age who are rural and/or urban agro -based and young farmers in and out of school / 
Institutions. UNYFA provides platforms for these youths where they can express and 
acquire tailor -made training to enhance their livelihoods.  
Young Farmers 
Champions 
Network 
(YOFCHAN)  YOFCHAN is a network of young Agri -entrepreneurs (14 - 40 years) working together to 
shape the future of agribusiness. It was formed to support young farmers with the 
necessary entrepreneurial skills to run agri -business enterprises, incubate their agribusiness 
ideas into viable businesses, provide affordable fin ances and link them to sustainable 
markets for them to embrace farming as a profitable business.


---
*Page 136*
---

Page 132 
 
   
 
ANNEX 4   SAMPLE TIER TWO FI ANALYSIS   
ARCAFIM has engaged a sample of four East Africa -based Tier 2 FIs to gain a general understanding of the maturity 
of the E&S risk management systems of potential ARCAFIM partners. The results of the ESMS assessment are 
provided in the table below:  
Tier Tw o FI ESMS Comparison  
 TTFI 1   TTIF 2  TTFI 3  TTFI 4  
Commitment to 
E&S/Sustainability  Yes. 
Annual Report 
commits to 
sustainability 
approach of 
managing social, 
environmental, and 
economic risks  Yes. 
Have joined UN Global 
Compact, Women’s 
Empowerment 
Principles, and are 
committed to the SDGs  Yes. Yes. 
ESG 
Resources/Capacity  No resource 
responsible for ESG.  No resource responsible 
for ESG.  Regional manager is driving 
ESG adoption.  
Would like to have their field 
staff trained on ESG. Current 
have been trained on OHS, fire 
safety, waste management.  In progress.  
Looking to hire 
dedicated ESG 
resource/ establish 
ESG unit.  
Policy  No. In progress.  
Recruited ESG 
consultant in 2023 to 
develop an ESG Policy 
and Framework.  In progress.  
Have a draft ESG Policy in 
place. Looking for a 
technical/financial partner to 
further develop.  Yes.  
ESMS  No.  In progress.  
See above.  No.  Yes, although 
ESMS not fully 
implemented.  
Consultant is 
currently 
contracted to revise 
ESMS (developed 
in 2016 as part of 
AfDB loan).  
Exclusion List  Yes 
Part of Old Mutual 
Group, use Old 
Mutual Exclusion List  No.  
Only prohibited projects 
are those in 
contravention of Kenyan 
law.  Yes.  
Included in credit policy.  Yes. 
Based on AfDB and 
other international 
standards.


---
*Page 137*
---

Page 133 
 
   
 
E&S Screening/ 
Due Diligence  No.  
Investigate 
necessary 
environmental 
permits required by 
national law only.  No.  No. 
Have ‘green finance’ code to 
denote projects with 
environmental benefits, but no 
specific screening.  Yes. 
Have screening 
checklist, will be 
revamped, and 
better implement ed 
as part of ESMS 
revision.  
E&S Monitoring  No.  
Monitor conditions 
against permit only.  In progress.  
Currently limited 
reporting against UNGC 
and WEP. Reporting to 
be fleshed out through 
use of above consultant  No. Yes. 
Currently only for 
bigger projects 
which require an 
ESIA. As part of 
ESMS revamp, all 
clients will have 
monitoring 
requirements.  
ESG -related to 
support to loan 
recipients  No.  
Some CSR may be 
linked to 
sustainability 
initiatives   Yes.  
Provide ‘life -touching’ 
products to support 
clients on an individual 
level. Some relate to 
ESG e.g., solar to 
replace kerosene, 
prevent deforestati on  Yes.  
Field representatives 
encourage borrowers to adopt 
environmentally friendly 
practices e.g., protect water 
bodies, forests, minimum 
tillage, alternative energy 
sources.  No.  
Work with partners 
below them who 
are engaging more 
directly with loan 
beneficiaries on the 
ground.


---
*Page 138*
---

Page 134 
 
   
 
ANNE X 5: Gender and climate considerations across the EBG investment process to support the development of 
a Gender and Climate Finance Toolkit for Direct investments and Wholesale lending


---
*Page 139*
---

Page 135 
ANNEX 6 The 2X Challenge Criteria  
__________