=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20220928182213+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.2.20212
/ModDate: D:20220928222546+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.2.20212
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  VI 
Funding proposal package for FP19 6 GCF/B. 34/02/Add.06 
29 September  2022  Meeting of the Board  
17 - 20 October  202 2 
Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional Agenda Item  13 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following fix parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy 
Efficiency Financing in Indonesia with Lesson s for Replication in other ASEAN Member 
States ” submitted by Korea Development Bank (KDB);
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s  
assessment; and
f)Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled  “Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Financing in Indonesia with Lesso n for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States” by Korea Development Bank (KDB)  is being circulated on a limited distribution basis 
only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, 
legally privileged or co mmercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.34/02/Add.06  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity        1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)    72 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure         73 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment         75 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                82 
assessment  
Gender document ation   84


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Supporting  Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy 
Efficiency Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication 
in other ASEAN Member States  
Country(ies):  Indonesia  
Accredited Entity:  The Korea Developme nt Bank  
Date of first submission:  [2021/08/26 ]  
Date of current submission  [2022 /09/23]  
Version number  [V.008]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
Section H ANN EXES   
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
•Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet,
etc.
•Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the
details provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or
annexes must be reflected in all relevant documents.
•The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should
not exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed
within the  usual service standard time.
•The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.
•Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding
proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission
to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed
pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill ou t information on
disclosure in section G.4 .
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

List  of Acronyms  
ACE ASEAN Centre for Energy  
AE Accredited Entity  
AMA  Accreditation Master Agreement  
AMS ASEAN Member States  
APAEC ASEAN Plan for Action for Energy Cooperation  
ASEAN  Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
BAPPENAS  Ministry of National Development Planning of the Republic of Indonesia  
BASE Basel Agency for Sustainable Energy  
BAU Business -as-usual  
BKF Fiscal Policy Agency (Badan Kebijakan Fiskal)  
CAPEX Capital Expenditures  
CDM  Clean Development Mechanism  
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease  
CSO  Civil and Social Organisation  
DFI Development  Financial Institution  
E&S Environmental and Social  
EE Energy Efficiency  
EE&C  Energy Efficiency and Conservation  
EEF Energy Efficiency Financing  
ESCO  Energy Service Company  
ESG  Environmental, Social, and Governance  
ESI Energy Savings Insurance  
ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMF  Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ESMP  Environmental and Social Management Plan  
ESMS  Environmental and Social Management System  
ESS Environmental and Social Safeguards  
FAA Funded Activity Agreement  
FI Financial Institution (or Financial Intermediary)  
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GHG  Greenhouse Gas  
GRC  Grievance Redressal Committee  
IE Implementing Entity  
IEA International Energy Agency  
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
JCM Joint Credit Mechanism  
KDB The Korea Development Bank  
KEA Korea Energy Agency  
KKP Ministry of Maritimes Affairs and Fishery of Indonesia  
LFIs Local Financial Intermediaries  
MDB  Multilateral Development Bank  
MEPS  Minimum Energy Performance Standard  
NDA  National Designated Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
O&M  Operation and Management


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
   
OECD  Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development  
OJK Financial Services Authority (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan)  
OPEX  Operating Expenses  
PIU Programme Implementation Unit  
PLN State Electricity Company (Perusahaan Listrik Negara)  
PoA Programme of Activities  
PT IIF  PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance  
PT SMI  PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur  
RCP  Representative Concentration Pathway  
RPJMN  National Medium Term Development Plan ( Narasi Rencana Pembangunan 
Jangka Menengah Nasional)  
RUEN  National Energy General Plan (Rencana Umum Energi Nasional)  
RUPTL  National Electricity Supply Business Plan (Rencana Usaha Penyediaan 
Tenaga Listrik)  
SDGs  Sustainable Development Goals  
SIAC  Singapore International Arbitration Centre  
SME  Small and Medium -sized Enterprise  
TA Technical Assistance  
tCO2eq  Tonne  of Carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent  
TCX Currency Exchange Fund  
TOE Tonnes of Oil Equivalent  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
VFD Variable Frequency Drive  
VSD Variable Speed Drive  
WHR  Waste Heat Recovery


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
A.1. Project or
programmeProgramme  A.2. Public or
private sectorPrivate  
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)Not applicable 
A.4. Result area (s)Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contributi on devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contribution respectively.  
GCF 
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Energy generation and access Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Low-emission transport Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 100 % 100 % 
☐Forestry and land use Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Most vulnerable people and communities Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Health and well -being, and food and water security Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Infrastructure and built environment Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐Ecosystems and ecosystem services Enter number  % Enter number  % 
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  3,139 KtCO2eq over 
Programme Total Life Span  A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  - 
- - 
- - 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance2)247.7 million  USD  
A.9. Project size Medium (Upto USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested105 million  USD  
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to 
the GCF contribution (i.e., GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or 
programme desc ribed in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2
A.10 . Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF fundingMark all that apply  and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8 .  
☒Grant 5 million US 5 million 
USD  
☐Loan Enter number  
☒Guarantee 100 million USD ☐Equity     Enter number  
☐Results -based payment    Enter number
A.11. Implementation
period10 years  A.12. Total lifespan 20 years  
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval 1/20/2023  A.14. ESS categoryI-2
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?Yes ☒    No ☐A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP ?Yes ☐    No ☒
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?Yes ☒    No ☐A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme?Yes ☒    No ☐
A.19. Complementarity
and coherenceYes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity
informationFor Component 1 
Local Financial Intermediaries (Local FIs  or LFIs ) will be engage d as Executing 
Entities, i.e., financial intermediaries, as per local stakeho lders’ interest and 
appetite.  
-PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (SMI)
-PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF)
-PT KEB Hana Indonesia (Hana  Indonesia )
-PT Bank IBK Indonesia (IBK Indonesia )
-KB Bukopin (KB Indonesia)
-PT  Bank Shinhan Indonesia (Shinhan Indonesia) .
-PT Bank Woori Saudara Indonesia (Woori Indonesia)
For Components 2 and 3  
-ASEAN  Centre for Energy (ACE )
A Jakarta -based intergovernmental organisation within the ASEAN structure
which represents the 10 ASEAN Member States (AMS) interests in the
energy sector
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3
Indonesia is in need of urgent actions to address gradually deteriorating climate change impacts and their 
consequences. The climate -vulnerable archipelagic state submitted its nationally determined contribution 
(NDC) to the United Nations Framework Conven tion on Climate Change (UNFCCC) with a strong willingness 
to transition towards a low -carbon and climate -resilient pathway. The NDC of Indonesia recognises energy 
efficiency as one of its key mitigation actions. While Indonesia attributes 65.43% of the tot al greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions to the energy sector, the market penetration of energy efficient technologies and the 
ensuing energy savings have been long hampered by a range of barriers, such as access to finance, 
regulatory challenges, and a lack of c apacity and awareness amongst relevant stakeholders. In addition, 
since the Coronavirus  Disease  (COVID -19) outbreak and spread, the state budget and relevant stimulus 
measures in the neediest areas have brought the agenda of energy efficiency and conservat ion back in 
terms of priority. Surrounded by further setbacks from the pandemic and related budget deficits, an 
international -level intervention in the urgent, but deprioriti sed area is more important than ever. The 
Programme entitled “Supporting Innovativ e Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency Financing in 
Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in the other ASEAN Member States,” hereafter “ Programme,” will 
support Indonesia and its neighbouring ASEAN members to re -focus on climate actions amid the po st-
pandemic recovery era, strengthening the foundation for the NDC achievement and the national alignment 
with the Paris Agreement eventually.  
The Programme, therefore, shall support Indonesia and other ASEAN countries to be ready to drive a low-
carbon development pathway with enhanced energy efficiency and conservation performance , addressing 
three chronic barriers – i.e., financial, regulatory, and technical barriers, which are all interlinked with a 
vicious circle of implementation failures  of similar precedents . This initiative pays special attention to the 
three challenges, regarding them as the three entry points of intervention and designing three components 
accordingly  as below . The Programme proposes a solution package of innovative energy efficiency financing 
schemes equipped with de -risking mechanisms, a supportive regulatory framework, and technical 
assistance.  
【Table 1】 Programme Composition Summary  
Triggered Barrier  Component  Executing Entity  GCF Funding 
Financial barrier  
(e.g., access to energy 
efficiency  finance)  [Component 1 ] 
Energy Efficiency Finance  Local financial 
intermediaries (FIs)  USD 100 mil 
(Guarantees)  
Regulatory barrier  
(e.g., lack of policy 
incentives)  [Component 2 ] 
De-risking mechanisms  ASEAN C entre for 
Energy ( ACE) USD 1.58 mil 
(TA grant)  
Demand -side barrier  
(e.g., weak capacity of 
local enterprises)  [Component 3 ] 
Technical Assistance (TA) for the 
Market Readiness  ASEAN C entre for 
Energy    USD3.42  mil 
(TA grant)  
The Programme anticipates bringing  about a transformative change in the  industrial energy efficiency 
market of Indonesia and its n eighbouring ASEAN countries, in terms of the GHG emissions reduction  
(3,139 ,000 tonnes of CO2eq), as well as proliferation of diverse energy efficient technologies, socio -
economic  and environmental  co-benefits, investment at scale,  awareness enhancement and behavioural 
change  amongst local players , and so on. Above all things, the Programme will function as a catalyst to 
drive a genuine paradigm shift through enabling environment formation , in addition to one -off financing 
provision.  This grand -scale intervention will be made with key local and global stakehold ers with different 
expertise under KDB supervision. With the successful implementation of financing under component 1 and 
TA activities under component 3 , i) confidence over energ y efficient technologies  will be accumulated 
amongst industries and financiers  on the ground,   ii) financiers  will have a better understanding on energy 
efficiency  financing and a credit analysis and mitigation  mechanisms within their internal system , and iii)  
energy efficiency ecosystem including locally fit de -riking scheme and regulatory framework development 
will be created in Indonesia industry sector, which will make financial institutions and local stakeholders  
keep joining energy efficiency  financing and market  even after  the Programme is over .


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 4 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
Mitigation Needs in the Energy Sector  of Indonesia , Surrounded by Harsh Market Circumstances . 
Indonesia is one of the largest GHG  emitters globally. The Carbon Brief Profile (2019) recognises the large 
emerging economy as the world ’s fourth largest  GHG emitter  in 2015, attributing heavy emissions to the 
burning of fossil fuels for energy generation, deforestation, and peat fires. In particular, the energy se ctor 
largely contributes to the total GHG emissions  of the large emerging economy. Relevant ly, Climate 
Transparency (2020) argues that Indonesia has seen its emissions increase by almost 140% between 1990 -
2017 with the highest increase in the energy sector. A business as usual (BAU ) scenario -based emissions 
project presents a dire snapshot of the energy secto r being the biggest culprit contributing significantly to 
the enormous  GHG emissions in 2030 (BAPPENAS, 2015). Given this backdrop, Indonesia needs urgent 
and effective actions to mitigate GHG emissions in the energy se ctor in pursuit of a true transformat ion 
towards a low -carbon society.  
 
【Figure  1】 GHG Emissions  Profile  of Indonesia , 2000 -2016  
(Source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry, Indonesia)  
 
 
【Figure  2】 GHG Emissions  Profile  of Indonesia , 2010 vs. 2030  
(Source: BAPPENAS, 2015, extracted from the World Resources Institute)  
 
 
Indonesia’s energy sector has faced c hallenging circumstances  against a low -carbon transformation, 
considering the apparent fossil fuel dependency ; as of 2020, more than 60% of its electricity generation 
relied on the capacity of coal -fired power plants , according to the latest Power Development Plan (RUPTL)


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 5 
 
 published by the state -owned  utility company, PLN . Such a heavy dependency has bee n continuously 
exacerbated with the state subsidies for t he fossil fuel-based  petroleum products and electricity. As of 2019, 
the amount of the fossil fuel subsidies totalled USD8.6 billion . Distorted policy incentives have resulted in 
significantly low energy prices, which is one of the critical barriers to ene rgy transition moves including the 
promotion of energy efficiency and conservation in Indonesia.   
 
Intervention is Urgent  and Necessary  with Indonesia, Lagging behind the Paris Agreemen t. According 
to the NDC of Indonesia, updated in July 2021, the country has set up an unconditional target of 29% 
reduction of the GHG emissions against the BAU scenario by 2030, while committing itself to a conditional 
contribution up to 41% reduction by 203 0 with international support. In actual ity, these targets are criticised 
by international experts because they are not ambitious enough to be in line with the Paris Agreement. While 
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry of Indonesia also reset the net z ero target year from 2070 to 2060 
through the updated NDC, it emphasises the necessity of international assistance.  Given  that the national 
net zero target of 41% conditional mitigation commitment by 2060 c an be achieved only with internationally 
supportiv e actions for fi nance provision, technology development and transfer, and capacity building, an 
international level intervention is critical.  At this juncture , the international partnership -based  Programm e is 
an essential intervention  for Indonesia . It shall tackle the energy sector with substantial mitigation potential 
(see below) for the country to be on track moving towards a 1.5 °C scenario.   
 
【Figure  3】 Indonesia’s Updated NDC Scenario  in 2030  
 
Internationally  projected climate scenarios present a dire picture of the climate future in case of a BAU 
pathway; Indonesia is not an exception to this at all. In particular, Indonesia’s scenarios of a Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP ), a GHG  concentration trajectory adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC ), alarm the country when it trails around with a BAU case of RCP8.5. The global 
community ought to support Indonesia to strive for and act in accordance with a choice of RCP2.6, a 
desirable pathway that limits global warming to below 1.5 °C, the aspirational goal of the Paris Agreement. 
See below RCP scenarios for Indonesia, by different emissions pathways from the strong mitigation scenario 
to the BAU scenario.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 6 
 
  
3 IEA. 2017  
4 IEA. 2019 . Southeast  Asia Energy  Outlook  2019  
5 ASEAN Centre for Energy . 2017 . The 5th ASEAN  Energy Outlook (AEO5)  
6 IEA. 2017 【Table 2】 Projected Temperature Changes ( °C) in Indonesia  by RCP Scenario  
 
 
【Figure  4】 Projected  Average Annual Temperature Changes (°C) in Indonesia  by RCP Scenario  
 
 
Energy Efficiency  is an Urgent Area  for Reducin g GHG Emissions from Indonesia ’s Energy Sector . 
The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that half of the worldwide climate mitigation actions must 
come from energy efficiency.3 According to the IEA report on Southeast Asia’s Energy Transition as of  2019, 
there is a significant untapped potential to improve energy efficiency measures in the industry sector across 
the Southeast Asian region and more than USD 600 billion is needed to improve end -use energy efficiency 
in the Sustainable Development Scen ario that outlines the needed changes of the global energy system to 
deliver on these three energy -related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs ) – (1) universal access to 
energy (SDG 7), (2) reduction of the severe health impacts of air pollution (SDG 3), and (3) climate action 
(SDG 13) – by 2040.4  
The 5th ASEAN Energy Outlook addresses that, between 2015 and 2040,5 the total primary energy supply 
of Indonesia will be more than double in the absence of enhanced energy efficiency. The IEA strongly 
supports the urgent need of improved industrial energy efficiency, noting that the role of energy efficiency is 
crucial in order to achieve energy intensity reduction targets of 17% lower than BAU projections proclaimed 
under the National Energy General  Plan of Indonesia (RUEN).6 Of the energy -related GHG emissions, 
particularly, the industrial sector is the largest driver within the energy areas, accounting for 37% of the total, 
followed by the transport sector (27%) and power sector (27%). Climate Tra nsparency Report (2020) states ,


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7 
 
  
7 International Energy Agency (IEA) . 2017 . Energy Efficiency 2017  
8 Ministry of Industry Republic of Indonesia and UNDP . 2018 . Greenhouse Gas Emission Profile from Indonesia’s Industry 
Sector  
9 IEA. 2019  “Indonesia has implemented industrial energy management policies ; however, more stringent industrial 
energy efficiency standards are needed to achieve significant emission reduction (p.13).” The sectoral 
breakdown of the GHG  emissions justifies the Programme’s intervention in the industrial energy efficiency 
area by urgency and priority.  
 
【Figure  5】 Energy -related GHG Emissions of Indonesia  
 
Industrial  Energy Efficiency in Indonesia – Potentials and Challenges . In emerging economies, in 
general, the energy use from industries is increasing exponentially, directly linked to the GDP. Between 2000 
and 2015, Indonesia’s GDP has doubled and its demand for el ectricity increased by 150%.7 According to 
the ACE, energy consumption in the industry  reached 11.94 million tonnes of oil equivalent (TOE) in 2017, 
which is around 30% of the  total energy consumption in Indonesia. These figures highlight the importance 
of taking industrial energy efficiency measures in this climate vulnerable country. In addition, the GHG 
emissions from industrial activities that include fossil fuel combustion s, industrial processes and product s 
used, and waste treatment activities rank second after land use in Indonesia. Amongst manufacturing 
industries, the eight highest energy intensive industries – i.e., cement, fertilizer, ceramic and glass, chemical, 
pulp and paper, textile, iron and steel, and food and beverage – contributed approximately  55.9 percent of 
the national GHG emissions from energy use in industry (approx. 147.43 Mt CO 2e) as direct and indirect 
emissions in 2016.8 Severe inefficiencies in the industrial process and system have been leading to high 
energy waste  on a national scale. The utili sation of energy -efficient technologies in the industry sector 
therefore could provide a substantial  benefit to the GHG emissions reduction as well as to an energy intensity 
reduction target of Indonesia. In particular, potential energy savings would be significant in energy -intensive 
manufacturing industries where energy intensity could be improved by 44% by 2040.9 
 
The Indonesian energy efficiency market, albeit a growth opportunity  as suggested earlier, remains yet at 
the early development phase. The Market Assessment conducted by the Programme has recognised that 
only one initiative, the Joint Credit Mechanism (JCM), is operational out of numerous initiatives of competitive 
players – both domestic (public sector players) and global parties (multilateral and bilateral agencies) – so 
far to establish energy efficiency finance mechanisms in Indonesia. In addition, publ ic incentives to spur the 
growth of the energy efficiency market are still limited. In 2017, Otoritas  Jasa Keuangan (OJK), the Financial


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8 
 
  
10 https://www.esdm.go.id/en/media -center/news -archives/electricity -tariffs -for-april-june-2021 -remain -unchanged  
11 Electricity prices for ASEAN member states: U$ 0.113/kWh (Philippines), U$ 0.11/kWh (Thailand), U$ 0.092  (Malaysia) 
(1Q of 2021, Bloomberg NEF)  Service s Authority , stipulated the OJK Regulation No.51/2017 regarding Sustainable Finance that oblig ated 
banks to apply sustainable finance principles and to submit yearly reports. Thus, financial institutions are 
legally required to provide financial products , such as loans for sustainable and green projects incorporating 
energy efficiency finance. However,  since the regulation did not set any specific targets, financing towards 
energy efficiency efforts has not been accelerated . The nationwide deployment of technologies with a high 
energy efficiency potential in the Indonesian industry area has been hindere d due to several challenges 
described in Table 3 below.  
 
【Table  3】 Challenges  in the Industrial  Energy  Efficiency  Market  in Indonesia  
Financial  
Barrier s • Local f inancial institutions are unfamiliar with the energy efficiency financing 
mechanism with persistent implementation failure of precedents.  
• Banks are highly risk-averse in energy efficiency  financing, thereby imposing  
high interest  rates  and asking a borrow er for providing stringent  credit and/or 
collateral and high equity injection which local SMEs are remotely capable of 
clinging to.  
• No credit mitigation technique including  the de-risking mechanism  (such as 
guarantee or insurance) for energy efficiency in the local market.  
• Financial institutions , in particular large -sized banking institution s, have little 
interest in financing energy efficiency projects since many are relatively 
small -scale projects led by SMEs with low credit.  
• High interest rates or collateral requirement s for energy efficiency  project s 
due to risk analysis difficulties . 
Regulatory 
Barrier s • The subsidised energy tariff is a disincentive for industries to invest in 
energy savings; the price of electricity is U$ 0.078/kWh for businesses 
(medium voltage),10 which is lower than that of other ASEAN Member 
states .11 As part of the COVID -19 recovery measure, an incentive of 100% 
(later reduced to 50%) discount on electricity was provided, especially for 
low-income households and small businesses.  
• No minimum energy performance standard (MEPS) for industrial equipment 
and appliance is available to serve as guidance.  
• No regulation to encourage less energy intensive sectors (motor, boiler, etc.) 
due to lack of awareness among st policy makers, despite the  large GHG 
emission from those sectors . 
• Existing  fiscal or non -fiscal incentives from the government  to promot e the 
energy  efficiency area have not been disseminated to industries or 
financiers, nor been sufficient enough to boost the market . For instance, 
Article 20 of Government Regulation No.70/2009 (Energy Conservation) 
states that incentives may vary in the form of provision from taxation facility 
for energy saver equipment to low interest -rate funds for the need of 
investment in energy conser vation. It, however, does not work in the market.  
Demand -
side 
Barrier s • Low demand for high -energy efficiency facilities due to low energy tariff s.  
• Market players  lack awareness of assessing  energy efficiency technologies 
and capacity and resources in carrying out its cost-benefit  analysis, which 
partially results in a low prioriti sation of investing in energy efficient projects.  
• Industries are yet to recogni se the regulatory requirements with respect to 
energy efficiency repo rting and implementation.  
• There are not many well -trained in -house energy managers nor extensive 
pools of experienced experts in energy efficiency, mainly due to little


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9 
 
 emphasis on the importance and distribution of resources and incentives for 
employing and training them.  
 
As a result of multi -layered deteriorating dynamics amongst the aforementioned challenges and barriers, 
energy efficiency in Indonesian industries has not been facilitated and the relevant business models are not 
persuasive in the market. Given this, market players and stakeholders such as industries, technology 
providers, energy service companies (ESCOs ), and financiers are not fully ready to engage in the 
deployment of energy efficiency technologies while commercialisation has never materialised.  A lack of 
project pipelines and an exemplary model case makes potential players even more reluctant to attempt  entry 
into the least developed energy efficiency market in the country and the region as a whole. The foregoing 
challenges have been commonly and repeatedly discovered as the precedent initiatives of other emerging 
markets across the Southeast Asian region – Indonesia is not an exception.  
 
COVID -19 Impacts on Energy Efficiency Promotion  in Indonesia . In harsh reality, being confronted by 
the state budget’s deficit widened due to the handling of the pandemic, the government has a strong 
willingness to address priority sectors such as healthcare around the procurement of vaccination and 
medical equipment, social protection and basic needs support that directly affect the vulnerable group of 
people and businesses. The governmental deployment of stimulus measures in the neediest areas seems 
likely to bring energy efficiency and conservation back in terms of priority. The area of energy efficiency and 
conservation is generally positioned as a second pr iority and the COVID -19 crisis has added an extra level 
of pressure on top of the backdrop, according to Energy Efficiency 2020 report (IEA, 2020). Given the further 
setbacks from the COVID -19 woes, international -level intervention in the urgent business a rea – lower 
priority though – is more important than ever: breaking a trajectory in respect of the importance of low 
priorities.  
 
Designed with Contextual Lessons  Learnt . The proposed Programme is designed based on the lessons 
learned from the precedents in the country and in other jurisdictions, in line with the strong willingness of the 
Indonesian government to strengthen and refine the regulatory framework and policies for promoting 
industrial energy efficiency in consideration of synergy impacts alongside diverse relevant programmes and 
initiatives.  
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
 
Three Pillar Barriers -based Entry Points for Energy Efficiency Achievement . The Programme will serve 
Indonesia and its neighbouring countries to shift the development pathway towards a low -emission direction 
as prescribed in the Theory of Change (ToC) diagram. The Indo nesian energy efficiency financing initiative 
shall address three chronic barriers – financial, regulatory, and demand -side barriers – that have  been  
block ing the success of  the energy efficiency business in Indonesia. Amid interlinked challenges and vicio us 
circles of implementation failures,  entry point initiatives as illustrated below will bring  changes to the 
abovementioned barriers .The programme has been designed with the three barriers -based intervention in a 
strategic way as shown in figure 6 (Theory of Change Diagram).  
 
- Financial Barrier -wise Entry Point : Energy efficiency businesses will benefit from  a guarantee  
instrument , coupled with a locally customised de -risking mechanism and capacity building and 
knowledge sharing activities with local FIs. 
- Regulatory Barrier -wise Entry Point :  Awareness and perception on detaild energy efficiency related 
policy or regulation will be raised by  workshops and seminars for the related ministries with the support 
of advanced institutions with global expertise, leading into  unified policy direction of the  government and 
relevant ministries. Relevant stakeholders will be incentivised alongside active policy intervention and 
improved regulatory framework , including a strong need of reasonable tariff adjustments , which will


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
 encourage the market creation and development with the deployment of ene rgy efficient technologies 
in Indonesia.   
- Demand Barrier -wise Entry Point : Local industry owners will be enhanced with mandatory capacity 
building and knowledge  sharing activities through technical assistance  (TA).  Along with the TA activit ies, 
their demand for energy efficiency  project s will be found through increased access to financial support 
such as concessional loan and guarantee  instruments . 
 
The three chronic barriers will be addressed by customised activities of individual components: financial 
barriers under Component 1; demand -side barriers under Components 2 and 3; and regulatory barriers 
under Component 3. The programme’s strategic interv ention will bring about an increased volume of energy 
efficiency finance across the country’s industrial areas with proactive participation of the local FIs under 
Component 1, the generation of locally customised de -risking mechanisms under Component 2, an d the 
market readiness and a spread of the best practice acorss ASEAN under Component 3. Such change will 
accelerate desiable outcomes and co -beneifts that put Indonesia in the right track towards a low -carbon 
development pathway through reduced GHG emissi ons, improved energy efficiency ecosystems including 
the relevant market creation in and beyond Indonesia, and women’s contribution to the labour market 
(inclusive development) and an economic leap. The programme will eventually prove that the sophisticate dly 
designed intervention is correct.    
 
 
【Figure 6】 Theory of Change (ToC) Diagram   
 
 
A Pursuit of a Genuine Change through the Correct Intervention . The programme is based on the 
assumption that  the correct intervention of addressing existing chronic barriers will empower Indonesia to


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
  
12 GIZ and MEMR. 2019. Usulan Skema insentif & Kegiatan untuk dana energi terbarukan dan konservasi energi Fokus: 
Efisiensi Energi  
13 Republic of Indonesia . 2009 . Government Regulation Number 70 Year 2009 on Energy Conservation  (PP No. 70/2009  
KONSERVASI ENERGI )   self-combat climate change through energy efficiency business development. Studies on similar precedents, 
extensive research, interviews, and focus group discussion s with multiple  key stakeholders relevant in the 
industrial energy efficiency ecosystem have informed on  the following issues and challenges that are to be 
tackled under the Programme : 
 
- Financing institutions have a limited capacity to understand energy effici ency projects and assess risks 
associated with the relevant technologies; thereby being highly risk -averse and reluctant to provide 
attractive financing terms and conditions for those who require the capital -intensive upfront cost for high 
efficiency techn ologies. Primarily motivated by the energy saving potential to improve profitability in 
management, SMEs are relatively more open to energy efficiency projects , and are willing to speak with 
banks for financing, whereas their creditworthiness and small pro ject scale tend to discourage financial 
institutions – in particular, large banks and formal financial institutions – from providing financ e with 
competitive terms and conditions.  Furthermo re, for SMEs, access to finance is becoming more difficult 
as there is currently no protection technique, such as insurance or guarantees that can mitigate  the 
credit risk of energy efficiency projects. This situation often leads to high interest rates and rigid collateral 
requirements f rom financial institutions.  Therefore, SMEs are particularly burdened with new equipment  
purchases or instalments  requiring significant upfront costs.  
 
- In that i ndustries basically pursue cost reduction, comparatively higher interest costs and low energy 
tariffs for energy efficiency  projects  consequently has lowered the industry demands and  has made the 
success of energy efficiency trials difficult over the past period in Indonesia . Also, l ocal industry o wners 
have not been able to mak e well -informed investment decisions due to a lack of knowledge about the 
needs and a lack of awareness of how to measure and assess the energy  saving potential along with 
the relevant cost -benefit analysis, thereby seeing no  point for replacing a still functioning technology.12 
Despite the existing regulation that commands industries whose annual energy consumption exceeds 
6,000 TOE to have energy managers with periodic reporting,13 the relevant in -house technicians are not 
well trained and the reports are rarely followed up on. The main reason for this reality is due to a lack 
of emphasis on the importance of energy efficiency and allocated budget for clean energy, low carbon 
technologies R&D, and innovation, especially for developing smart manufacturing technologies. Hence, 
adversely affecting workforce training and education.  It is identified through market assessments that 
Indonesia needs to overcome these barriers so as to generate demand s from the industry  sector.  
 
- Ministries and public agencies have  their own – varying and different – insights on the complexity of 
various challenges, while simultaneously acknowledging the necessity of improving and sophisticating 
existing energy efficiency policies and reg ulations with a specific focus on industry. As a result, 
regulatory barriers, including the lack of  a regulatory framework, such as fiscal and non -fiscal incentives 
and low energ y tariff s due to subsidies polic ies for fossil fuel s exist, despite the Indone sian government’s 
eagerness to respond to climate change and reduce GHG emissions. With that being said, there should 
be policy and regulatory synchronisation and harmonisation amongst themselves, along with an 
enhanced awareness of it. In order to ensure implementation on the ground, the more active 
interventions shall be performed through TA  activities of Component 3.   
 
- ASEAN is a political, economic and cultural community established in 1967 with an aim of pursuing 
peace, stability, and economic growth in Southeast Asia and promoting soci o-cultural development. 
ASEAN member states are heavily influenced by each other in terms of econ omy, industry, and 
environment.  Due to the nature of the region being greatly affected by each other, the lack of in terest in


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
 energy efficiency projects has weaken ed the po ssibility of success and scale  up of small -scale  energy 
efficiency project s in Indonesia. Accordingly, the Programme aims to enhance awareness and regional 
scale up in the ASEAN region through success ful pilot project implementati on and sharing of lessons 
learned  through the Programme under Component 3. This is expected to make the Programme more 
sustainable by the establishment of an energy efficiency ecosystem in the ASEAN region.  
The Programme considers the formulation and facilitation of a self -functioning market, eventually moving 
towards a genuine transition to a low -carbon development pathway in Indonesia. An enabling environment 
is essential for creating and facilitating a market t hat properly functions, with Indonesia’s confronting of a 
harsh reality that potential players and stakeholders have been barely active under the surface, getting stuck 
on the aforementioned stumbling blocks and obstacles. In that multiple challenges and b arriers are related 
to each other, the Programme is designed with a set of financing and TA activities in an interlinked and 
supplementary manner: (1) financing energy efficiency businesses as per eligibility criteria; (2) developing 
de-risking mechanisms with energy saving insurance (ESI) scheme s coupled with a standard performance 
contract and measurement and verification (M&V) tools; (3) and building capacity for market acceptance and 
finetuning the policy and regulatory framework, with the goal of regio nal scaleup and replication in mind.  
 
Expected outputs from the Programme implementation would serve to bring about a transformative change 
in the industrial energy efficiency market of Indonesia and its neighbouring countries, in terms of investment 
and financing volume, beneficiary scale such as the number of end bene ficiaries, proliferation of diverse 
technologies and relevant industries, quality of the policy intervention, change in perception, behavioural 
change, and so on. Above all, with an improved regulatory framework as a result of active policy intervention 
alongside training, knowledge sharing, and outreaching activities, the market stakeholders across industries 
will be incentivised to voluntarily choose to engage in energy efficiency and saving activities. Also, the 
behavioural change of the relevant stakeho lders will contribute to successful track records in the country, in 
addition to the trust building process amongst key business stakeholders in the market. With the 
improvement of market acceptance and regulatory capacity, trust over energy efficient tech nologies and 
related business models will likely be strengthened and industries and financiers will make well -informed 
investment and lending decisions with prioritisation of energy efficient technology deployment. These 
changes will drive the industries o f Indonesia and its Southeast Asian neighbours to be aligned with the fund -
level impact for low emission development pathways as a whole at last.    
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries , 
appliances  MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2 
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
1.Reduced 
GHG 
emissions 
with energy 
savings  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
2. Improved 
energy 
efficiency 
market with 
enabling 
ecosystems  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
 6. Improved 
energy 
efficiency 
market and 
sustainable 
energy 
efficiency 
ecosystem 
across 
ASEAN  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
7.Energy 
efficiency 
improvement 
of Indonesia 
Industry 
Sector  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
8. Increased 
participation 
of potential 
private 
investors in 
energy 
efficiency  
investment  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
9. Enhanced 
enabling 
environment 
conducive to 
energy 
efficiency  
Improvement  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
10. Increased 
demand of 
energy 
efficiency 
finance in 
ASEAN  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
If any co -benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co -benefit table below to map each co -benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.  
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
3.Increased 
Women’s 
Participation in 
Industry Sector  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
4. Increased 
Industrial 
Economic 
Benefit by 
Reducing 
Energy Cost  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
5.Creating 
Green Jobs  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
 
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages )


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
  
The Programme consists  of three components designed as an integrated package that aims to address 
financial, regulatory, and demand -side barriers , accelerating the fa cilitat ion of genuine paradigm shifting  
outcomes . Component 1 is the major private sector energy efficiency fina ncing element and Component s 2 
and 3 are the technical assistance (TA) element. The TA components are  designed to support a successful 
implementation of Component 1, which would lead to a genuine paradigm shift in the industrial energy 
efficiency sector of  Indonesia, as well as those of neighbouring states beyond a single country . 
 
Component   
(Final Beneficiaries)  Activities  Executing 
Entity  
[Component 1]  
Energy Efficiency 
Finance  
(Industry Owner, 
Technology Provider,  
ESCOs)  ▪ Backstopping credit risk of local FI ’s own loan with the 
GCF  credit guarantee  provision   Local FIs with 
respect that FI;s 
Own Loan only  
(PT SMI,  PT IIF,  
  Hana Indonesia  
IBK Indonesia.  
KB Indonesia,  
  Shinhan Indonesia,  
 Woori Indonesia ) 
[Component 2]  
De-risking 
mechanisms  
(Financial Institutions, 
Industry Players, 
Government Authorities ) ▪ Activity 2.1 : Introduction of customi sed Energy Saving 
Insurance (ESI)  
- Development of customized insuracen  covering energy 
saving, standards contracts, energy savings validation 
methodologies  
- Consulting and in -depth inverview with key stakeholder 
and Workshops  
▪ Activity 2.2 : Development of ESCO financing structure  
- Development of locally -fitting  outcome -fixed contract  
- Capacity building and knowledge sharing workshop s for 
advanced ESCO finance cases  ACE 
(BASE, KEA as 
Implementing 
Entities)  
[Component 3]  
Technical Assistance 
(TA) for the Market 
Readiness  
(Financial Institutions, 
Industry Players, 
Government Authorities ) ▪ Activity 3.1 : Local FIs capacity building activities  
- Support for the development of project pipeiline  
- Technical advisory on M&E on projects  
▪ Activity 3.2 : Technical advisory for industry player   
- Tehnicnal  advisory on technology installation & 
utilization  
- Technical advisory on M&E on projects  
▪ Activity 3.3 : Development of EE regulatory framework  
- Workshops and in -depth interview with policy makers  
- Regulatory framework for recommendations  
▪ Activity 3.4 : Sharing know ledge and  understanding 
gained by  the p rogramme with ASEAN member states  
- Draw the lesson learnt from programme implementation  
- Knowledge sharing session with key stakeholders in 
ASEAN  ACE 
(Korean Banks 
including KDB as 
Implementing 
Entities)  
 
Component 1 – Energy Efficiency Finance ; Backstopping credit risk of local FI’s own loan with GCF 
credit guarantee provision . Component 1 shall establish the guarantee facility that offers appropriate de -
risking mechanisms that are  currently lacking in the market for successful energy efficiency  trials o f local 
FIs. The Programme provides GCF credit guarantee to LFIs (guarantee beneficiary) through KDB, 
backstopping credit risk of relevant financl beneficiaries as borrowers of loan to be provided by LFIs.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
 • Target  Selection for Priority Industries and Energy Efficien t Technologies . The Programme identifies 
five priority areas for energy efficiency financing implementation from the industrial sector, as a result of the 
Market Assessment. The industrial subsectors – (1) food and beverage, (2) textiles and apparel, (3) pulp 
and paper and wood, (4) chemical and petrochemicals, and (5) non -metallic minerals – are selected with the 
quantitative criteria  of Table 4  below  . 
 
【Table 4】 Criteria to Identify Priority Subsectors  
 
Energy use and GHG emissions -related criteria  
• Subsector energy use share/ranking  
• Subsector GHG emissions share/ranking  
• Electricity vs fuel use in the subsector  
Systems and Technology -related criteria  
• Importance  of our targeted systems (e.g.,  motor systems and boiler systems ) in the 
subsector  
• Share of targeted systems ’ energy use from total subsector  energy use  
• The potential  application of targeted technologies (e.g., efficient pump, fan, variable 
frequ ency drive (VFD),  boiler, etc . in the subsector)  
Economic -related criteria  
• Share/rank of subsector  from total industrial value -added /GDP  
• Share/rank of subsector  from total industrial export/import  
• Strategic importance of subsector in Indonesia  
Other criteria  
• Overall financial readiness of the subsector  
• Subsector’s reputation in willingness  to change and invest in energy efficiency  
• Small and medium enterprises (SMEs)  vs large energy -intensive subsector  
• Existing regulations in Indonesia and how it impacts each subsector  
 
The five industrial subsectors , identified  through a first-round analytic selection , were further narrowed down 
by a second -round analytic selection  that included a review of  industrial , systems, and technology levels. 
The industrial level criteria include d factors such as energy use, GHG emissions and economic contribution, 
for example , and the systems  level criteria embrace d the cross -cutting nature of systems for market 
transformation  and the importance in the relevant industry. The technology  level criteria contain ed energy 
efficiency and mitigation potential, cost -effectiveness, and local capacity to install and operate the relevant 
technologies. Based on the three levels of criteria , the Programme selected nine industrial energy efficiency 
technologies: pump, fan, compressor, variable speed drive (VSD), motor, steam boiler, economizer for 
boilers, chiller, and waste heat recover y (WHR) for power generation in cement plants. For more details, 
please see the Market Assessment submitted as Annex 2.  
 
【Figure  7】 Selected Industrial Subsectors with Rankings by Criteria


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
  
 
• Eligibility Criteria and Terms and Conditions (T/C)  Customi sed for Indonesian Energy Efficiency 
Projects . Partner local FIs are to provide energy efficiency finance to ultimate end beneficiaries pursuant to 
pre-defined eligibility criteria summarised in Table 5 below . The criteria identify priority target in dustries 
through consideration of energy -intensive areas, priority target systems and technologies, qualification of 
borrowers, and other quantitative and qualitative sources including market assessment s and focus group 
discussion s. For instance, the NDA of Indonesia emphasises the needs of vulnerable locations and 
beneficiaries as prioritised in the National Medium Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2020 -2024 and in turn, 
the Programme assigns priority to bor rowers who belong to the identified group. The selection criteria are 
treated to function as a protective set of guidelines that supports the GCF and KDB standards: e.g., a gender 
investing lens is applied to the Programme by prescribing a high priority on  women -led SMEs in terms of 
access to finance. The criteria are expected to be specified further during the implementation stage 
according to more in -depth practical and legal discussions with local FIs.  In addition, the criteria for the 
selection of benef iciaries under Components 2 and 3 are set out in the Term Sheet  (Annex 14) . 
 
【Table 5】 Eligibility Criteria for Energy Efficiency Financing  
Final   
Beneficiaries  
(Borrowers)  • General – Mandatory Qualification  
Industry owners, enterprises, technology providers, ESCOs, or project developers in 
any form of a greenfield, replacement, upgrade, scale -up and/or expansion , which aim 
to enhance energy efficiency in industrial areas of Indonesia . 
* Entities with more than USD200million  in annual sales not eliglble  
*  Guarantee coverage to a single borrower shall be up to USD 20 mil lion (20% of total GCF 
guarantee cover ).. 
 
• Flexibility in Form  
A single final beneficiary may be selected on a stand -alone basis or on an aggregated 
basis (e. g., bundling a number of projects with a mixture of different energy efficiency 
technologies) or multiple final beneficiaries may be grouped into a single Sub-project 
Loan Agreement (e.g., bundling a number of industry owners with their respective 
projects within an industrial complex ). 
 
• Priority Condition 1 (Indonesia NDA priority)  
Vulnerable locations and beneficiaries as prioritised in the National Medium Term 
Development Plan (RPJMN) 2020 -2024, NDC roadmap, and NAPs.  
• Priority Conditio n 2 (Women’s Empowerment and Gender Investing Strategy)


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
  
14 IFC’s definition of women -owned enterprise i.e., at least 51% owned by a woman or women; or a business where at least 
20% is owned by women with one or more women in a top management role (CEO/COO), and at least 30% of the board of 
directors being female (where a board exists). But to better suit the objective to this programme, broader definition of women -
owned business by MCA -Indonesia (2016) will be adopted, which is business in which a woman or group of women holds 
most of the im portant roles and positions in the ownership of capital/business inputs, business management, human 
resources/labor, and/or business control. Consequently, a thorough assessment should be carried out in a case -by-case basis 
to determine whether a business can be categorized as a women -owned business.  
15 www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/how -can-indonesian -sems -scale -up/ A women -led SME will be selected with priority.14 Even if not gender -mainstreamed 
yet, a company with a commitment to gender mainstreaming could be prioritised under 
the guidance of gender experts employed for the Programme.  
Total Cost  • General – 100% of total amounts  
- The cost of purchasing the energy efficient  technologies and equipment ; 
- Required associated costs/expenses for the energy efficient technologies and      
equipment, including freight, installation, customs duty, and related insurance; and  
- Other costs/expenses considered necessary for the project implementation by 
relevant FIs.  
Equity 
Injection 
Requirement  • As per the classification of the final beneficiaries into Class  A / Class  B, a minimum 
level of e quity  injection is required as 5% / 10% of Total C ost, respectively.  
• Each of the final beneficiaries is classified as per the annual sales volume, based on 
SMEs classification of WEF (World Economic Forum), in 202115 (USD converted) as 
follows : 
 
Annual Sa les Volume  Classification  Equity Requirement  
Up to  USD35million  Class A/ 
ESCOs  5% (of Total Cost)  
USD35million  ~  
USD200millio n Class B  10% (of Total Cost)  
 
Total Eligible 
Investment 
Cost  • Total Cost excluding the equity  injection by final beneficiary  
Environmental 
and Social  
Safeguards  
(ESS)  • To be classified as “E&S Risk Category B” or “E&S Risk Category C”  
• The Programme will not finance any project with the category A potential  
• The Programme will not finance any project with potential adverse impacts in relation 
to indigenous peoples in Indonesia  
• The Programme will not finance any project  that may involve land acquisition that may 
cause any involuntary resettlement or physical/economic losses  
• The Programme will not finance any  project with potential adverse impacts on 
ecological diversity and ecosystem  
• The Programme will not finance any project with potential adverse impacts on cultural 
heritage


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
  
16 In 1982 already, PT Koneba  (now known as PT.EMI) was established to serve as a company focused on energy 
conservation and energy management (ACE, 2017). In 2018, the ESCO Association APKENINDO reported 25 members 
(Carbon Trust 2018). Research in 2017 found that ESCOs in Indonesia a re usually small engineering companies that 
provide industry and buildings services  Priority  
Industries & 
Technologies  • General – Mandatory Qualification  
- Technologies with energy effic iency improvement by more than 20 %, compared to 
the existing equipment of a beneficiary ; for cases where 20% is not achievable 
(e.g: motors), best in class equipment will be used  
- The rate of improvement would be proven by evidence, such as 
catalogue/brochure/declaration from suppliers, reports/certificates from certified 
energy auditors/independent advisors, or reports developed under TA activities of 
Component 3 ; 
- No re -sale of exi sting equipment is allowed ; and  
-  Second -hand equipment is not eligible  
• Priority Industries  
Food and beverage, textile and apparel, chemical and petrochemical, pulp / paper / 
wood, and non -metallic minerals (including cement).  
• Priority Systems and Technologies  
- Pump, fan, motor, compressor within the motor system (e.g., high efficiency 
pump, fan, compressor, motor, variable speed drive (VSD) and variable frequency 
drive (VFD) etc.  
- High efficiency boiler / economiser / chillers within boiler / steam /  process cooling 
systems  
- Sector -specific system (e.g., waste heat recovery (WHR) power facility in cement 
industry)  
 
A credit guarantee coverage ratio ranging between 50 to 95% will be offered based on the market conditions 
at the time of the establishment of the FI own l oan and guarantee agreement, the FI’s risk appetite, and the 
size of the final beneficiary. The guarantee coverage will provide  an adequate incentive for local FIs to 
provide their own loans for those who have greater needs for financing support for their projects, such as 
the less creditworthy SMEs, who typically have substantial difficulty obtaining loans with competitive rates. 
The credit guarantee instrument would function in a way that ensures the balance between comfort against 
credit concerns and risk-sharing  amongst parties.  In addition, there is a substantial need for support for 
energy service companies (ESCOs) according to the Market Assessment. Even though ESCOs have already 
operated in Indonesia for a long time,16 their impact on the energy conservation sector is considered minimal, 
as Indonesian ESCOs struggle to obtain third-party  finance due to their weak balance sheets  and lack of 
collateral. Therefore, for the Programme, ESCOs are categori sed in the same group as less creditworthy 
SMEs.  Component 1 will  command at least 50% of loans provision for the vulnerable SMEs / ESCOs.  
 
【Table 6】 Guarantee Coverage Ratio  
Annual Sales Volume  Classification  Coverage Ratio  
Up to USD  35 million  Class A/ESCOs  Up to 95%  
(of Total Eligible Investment Cost)  
USD  35 million  ~  USD  200 
million  Class B Up to 50%  
(of Total Eligible Investment Cost)  
 
• Selection of Local Financial Intermediaries with Experiences in the L ocal and Global Energy 
Efficiency Financial Market . The Programme has considered a strategic partnership with local FIs for the 
proper development, implementation, and management  of the Programme , leaving primary ownership with 
local stakeholders . The FI selection process has considered multiple  factors: (1) extensive commercial 
lending experiences in industries including energy -intensive industries; (2) familiarity and/or understanding 
of the guarantee structure through collaboration with the Multilateral Development Banks ( MDBs), 
Development  Financial Institutions (DFIs), and/or global financiers; (3) familiarity with and/or willingness to


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
 adopt global standards through the Programme impl ementation ; for example , in terms of environmental and 
social (E&S)  safeguards, gender mainstreaming policy and system, procurement, and ethics and 
compliance; and (4) strong willingness to be a pioneer for climate finance transactions.  
  
Through a series of extensive market research , discussions, and interviews with potential FIs in Indonesia 
during the Market Assessment phase, several local financial institutions  have been confirmed as partner FI s 
and E xecuting Entitie s under Component 1 to enjoy the merits  of the Programme . In particular, KDB has 
selected FIs in two  groups, which are  1) “LFIs with local experiences” with a wide local network , broad 
experiences, and an understanding of the local government policy and 2) “LFIs with global experiences” that 
can transfer experiences and knowledge from advanced energy efficiency proje cts and climate financing in 
Korea. Other FIs are to be further selected to expand this opportunity to include as many FIs as possible. 
The invi tation  and selection of new FIs and associated capacity assessment s will be completed  by KDB  prior 
to the FAA effective  date.  
 
1) LFIs with local experiences  
 
The Programme  provide s opportunities to further develop synergies with existing local players, such 
as PT SMI  (SMI) and PT IIF  (IIF). The  institutions  are committed to contributing to sustainable 
development, and as infrastructure financing companies , they are mandated to provi de innovative 
financing schemes to infrastructure sectors. As they have  expanded their business sectors, renewable 
energy and energy efficiency have become priority areas of focus, allowing them  to gain valuable 
insights with financing energy efficiency  projects as they take on more projects to garner experience 
in the sector. As relatively new player s to the market, they,  and other interested institutions with a lack 
of EE project experience, may encounter unfamiliarity with the risk profile  of energy effi ciency financing . 
The de -risking mechanism can serve to overcome the main barriers for financial actors to invest in 
energy efficiency, and they can play a key role in creating an innovative financing mechanism for 
energy efficiency in Indonesia.  
In additi on, both institutions have been closely working for GCF -related businesses – SMI is a GCF 
accredited entity and has been in the process of develop ing GCF projects, and IIF is in the process of 
becoming accredited by the GCF . The participation of these two local banks in this Programme will 
strengthen their capacity for global climate project development, contributing to further expansion of 
the GCF Programme and its vision in Indonesia and the neighbouring ASEAN region.   
 
2) LFIs with global  experiences  
 
As part of Component 1, KDB, as the Accredited Entity, with the  Korea Energy Agency  will lead a 
consortium of leading financial institutions from Korea  for the Programme  to pass on key lessons learn t 
from energy efficiency  financing experiences within Korea and internationally, including in Indonesia . 
KB Kookmin Bank, Hana Bank, and Industrial Bank of Korea have committed t o their participation in 
the Programme, both in Korea to support at the headquarter s level and locally  with their domestic 
branches in Indonesia. Other c ompanies with existing business understanding and physical presence 
and experience in Indonesia were reached out to participate in the Programme, and currently , Woori 
Bank and Shinhan Bank have also expressed their strong interest s and intent ions to participate.  
Interviews were conducted with Korean companies (from electronics and technology service 
industries) with prior experience s with  energy efficiency  projects within Indonesia and valuable 
feedba ck was shared , from recommendations on financial structures of financing  and capacity building 
for local industry stakeholders  to what to watch out for in terms of risks such as higher fees in lieu of 
lower interest rates and experiences in energy  saving facility installation projects through the ESCO


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
 mechanism . The Programme will continue to gather useful insights and provid e those experiences to 
the executing entities of the Programme to leverage and learn from.  
【Table 7】  LFIs with Global Experiences  
 
 
• Monitoring in line with Local Financial Market Needs. Local FIs, as well as government stakeholders, 
highlighted throughout the interviews with the AE (KDB) and the Executing Entity of Components 2 and 3 
(ACE) that the F/X rate risk can be a main barrier for successful Programme implementation given the nature 
of Indonesia’s business environment requiring FI own loans to final beneficiaries to be in Indo nesian local 
currency and  the GCF Credit Guarantee is only available in USD.  KDB has developed the GCF Credit 
Guarantee structure in line with these market needs, designing the guarantee so that the GCF will partially 
absorb the foregoing F/X  risk and th e rest of F/X risk is borne by FIs ,  thereby  reducing one of the major 
concerns of potential FIs for the Programme and simultaneously enhancing competitiveness of the ultimate  
interest rates for final beneficiaries on the ground . Focusing on the fact that F/X risk will increase as the loan 
period increases, F/X risk absorption by GCF is structured in Annex 14 . This risk will be monitored and 
immediately reported to GCF by KDB based on the Guarantee Advisory and KDB’s experiences in the 
international financ ial market  
 
In addition , KDB,  the Accredited Entity, plans to hire a global independent expert with a local presence in 
Indonesia  as a Guarantee Advisor, who will provide professional monitoring services for each sub -project, 
related performance, and any change in credit risk with a full review of related contracts including sub -project 
loan and Guarantee Agreement s.  The monitoring activity will be immediately reported to KDB  to support its 
close Programme monitoring, and also  to be shared, if considered necessary by the AE, with LFIs to assist 
in their successful Programme implementation . 
  
This structure including Guarantee Advisory is developed through interviews with various local stakeholders . 
For the sake of clarity , the selected Guarantee A dvisor will be hired not using GCF funding but through the 
AE fee, under KDB’s willingness to expand its contribution to the Programme.  
 
【Figure  8】 Guar antee Advisor


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Component 2 – De-risking mechanisms . Component 2 introduce s de-risking mechanisms of an ESI / 
ESCO  model  and scheme that helps  lower the perceived  high level of risk and  establish es credibility and 
comfort amongst key relevant stakeholders . To avoid any confusion , this is not a financing component to 
provide any de -risking scheme to each project but a Technical Assistance (TA) component to introduce and 
develop de -risking mechanisms for better energy efficiency project s for the future in Indonesia .  
 
Activity 2.1 . Introduction of customi sed Energy  Saving Insurance (ESI) . Key stakeholders including 
local FIs will be convened and consulted on the devised de -risking mechanisms to ensure buy -in. During the 
Programme development phase, KDB has discussed the ESI model with BASE, a Swi tzerland -based non -
profit foundation. According to BASE, “for investors, the risk -return trade -off is one of the essential 
components of each investment decision” and the critical issue is that “energy efficiency projects face a high 
level of perceived risk a nd the expected reward is not commensurate with the perceived risks. ” Activity 2.1  
shall therefore propose the ESI model that addresses such challenge s by reducing the investment risk of 
enterprises and building trust between relevant stakeholders , which will lead to a more attractive risk -return 
trade -off perception in the market. For this, BASE , with great expertise in the de -risking model , will be 
conside red as an Implementing Entity, which is a service provider engaged by ACE (Executing Entity) for 
the implementation of this activity.  
 
The Programme plans to introduce  the ESI scheme to the Indonesian energy efficiency market using multiple 
examples from advanced countries. Moreover, it is expected to develop a customi sed ESI contract and 
validation methodologies thr ough workshop s or consulting with  local stakeholders including LFIs . 
 
[Figur e 9】 Risk-return Trade -off for Enterprises


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
 Activity 2.2 . Development of ESCO s financing structure . As mentioned in Component 1, there is a 
substantial  need of support for energy service companies (ESCOs) according to the Market Assessment.  
 
ESCOs in Indonesia are primarily  small engineering companies that provide industry and building services , 
and they struggle to obtain third-party  financ ing due to  their weak balance sheets and lack of collateral . For 
better access to third-party  finance, PT. EMI , a state -owned ESCO in Indonesia, suggested the business 
model as Figure 10, outcome -guaranteed financing by ESCO, through interviews with ACE, Executing En tity 
of Component 2. The outcome -guarantee financing is when ESCO withdraw the investment via saved 
energy amount or cost, which is the benefit of the customers, is guaranteed by ESCOs.  
 [Figure 10】: Outcome -guaranteed Contract (ESCO -financed)  
 
In order to support ESCO financing, the Programme provides up to a 95% guarantee coverage ratio to 
ESCOs  who have tried to secure third party finance , including through the ESCO financing structure above,  
categori sing the ESCOs in the same group as less creditworthy SMEs in Component 1. In addition to 
guarantee funding, the Programme , through Activity 2.2., will  provide advisory services for the ESCOs to 
achieve better financing structure s and obtain knowledge shar ing from advanced institutions  with expertise 
in ESCOs financing.  The Programme plans to develop a customi sed ESCO financing scheme and a standard 
contract through the E xecuting Entity, ACE, and knowledge sharing  and workshop s through the 
Implementing Entity (In -kind contribution), t he Korea Energy Agency  (KEA)  , which is a service provider 
engaged by ACE (Executing Entity) for the implementation of this activity . KEA is Korea ’s energy leader  and 
an experienced organi sation for energy efficiency  promotion  and relevant economic development . KEA will 
step in to  provide opportunities  for ESCOs with high human capacity but low capital , which hinders their 
achievement of sustainable growth . The agency will b uild capacity and help creat e awareness of advanced  
energy efficiency financing  (EEF mechanisms)  to ESCOs , such as consumer  outcome -guaranteed 
contract s. The outcome generated contracts can be financed by energy consumers unlike the previous 
ESCO financing scheme, which can utilize th e consumers’ credit that is usually better than the one of ESCO. 
Its detail is outlined  in Figure 11 below.  
 
[Figure 11】: Outcome -guaranteed Contract (Consumer -financed)


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
 For the o utcome -guaranteed contract, 
consumers are responsible for the 
delivery of funding. The savings 
amount is guaranteed by ESCOs and 
depending on the level of guaranteed 
saving amount vis -à-vis the actual 
saving amount, a cash transfer may be 
necessary. When the guaranteed 
savings amount is more substantial 
than the actu al savings amount, 
ESCOs would pay back the difference 
in cash; in cases when the guaranteed 
savings amount is lower than the actual 
savings amount, the difference 
distributed would be agreed upon between ESCOs and energy consumers.  
 
Component  3 – Technical Assistance (TA)  for the Market Readiness . One of the major barriers for 
successful energy  efficiency finance is the lack of experience and understanding about energy efficiency  by 
major stakeholders, which can be classified by consumer – industry , supplier , and  financial institutions, and 
external environment – regulatory framework, in terms of energy efficiency f inance. In Component 3, 
successful energy finance with balanced role s of stakeholders is pursued through capacity building for each 
stakeholder, which will support the Indonesian market that is ready to accept advancements in energy 
efficien cy, in line with the GCF standards in terms of environmental and gender risk management . To avoid 
any confusion, this is not a fin ancing component to provide funding to any installation of new technology, 
etc., but a Technical Assistance (TA) component to build the capacity of local stakeholders including financial 
institutions, industry players, government authorities, and neighbori ng countries for better energy efficiency 
eco-system in Indonesia and ASEAN member states. .  
 
Activity 3.1. Local FIs capacity building activities . This activity focuses  on the establishment of reliable 
two-way communication channel s to provide continuous support to local FIs , who are EE under Component 
1.  ACE, as the Executing Entity  for Component 3, will organise regular committee meeting s and workshops 
to exchange knowledge  and lessons learnt regarding energy efficiency financing to support in their efforts in 
the market and provide open communication channels between the localised Korean banks’ subsidiaries 
and local financial institutions in Indonesia, with a support of KDB, as the Accredited Entity . In particular, the 
subsiciaries equipped with both local presence and global energy efficiency finance knowhow , through this 
committee, will share s advanced financial experiences and systems with the local bank s, especially related 
to climate finance and ESG principles under  ACE’s support, which means that the  localised subsidiaries  will 
act not only as the Executing Entitie s in Component 1, but also as the I mplementing Entities (in-kind 
contribution) for Activity 3.1.   
 
Activity 3.1 also plans to establish a programme implementation unit (PIU) in local FIs , primarily SMI and IIF,  
for the sake of practical support in terms of pipeline development, investment portfolio management, 
monitoring and evaluation for sustainability, and reporting to KDB on a regular ba sis to ensure success in 
the energy efficiency  finance ecosystem.  The PIU will be composed of GCF project managers, focal points, 
and consultants dispatched from external expert agencies or TA Providers under Activity 3.1.  The 
Programme  will require LFIs t o establish a PIU where local Technical experts (incl. E&S and gender) are to 
be assigned and to provide advisory to support the development of pipeline, technical, E&S monitoring, 
evaluation  & assessment  activities of FIs , and even the developoent of pipe line. The anticipated pipeline  will 
be in compliance with a set of eligibility criteria agreed  upon by the GCF and KDB  (Table 5), with a financing 
roadmap and time -bound  action plan, and an operational  capacity of implementing the Programme in line 
with sustainability principles , E&S, and gender safeguards .


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
  
Activity 3.2 . Technical advisory for industry player . The focus for Activity 3.2 is to support  industry 
stakeholder s, who will be the final beneficiary of the energy efficiency  finance.  Industry players who are 
expected to be selected as borrowers under Component 1 in line with Eligibility Criteria(Table 5) will be 
beneficiaries under Activity 3.2. The main purpose of this activity is to boost the demands of industry 
stakeholders regardin g energy efficiency projects by informing  them of  the need and economic benefits of 
such energy efficiency programme s and to help them feel that the projects are more accessible through 
training and technology  advisory services. The activity supports the i nstallation and utilisation of new energy 
efficient  technologies to final beneficiaries , through seminars and workshops for industry players. In addition, 
it plans to implement a successful pilot energy efficiency project by supporting the industry stakeholder s in 
their communication with  the FIs and reporting in line with GCF  and KDB guidelines during programme 
implementation.  
 
Activity 3.3 . Development of EE regulatory framework . This activity will support Indonesia to fine tune, 
strengthen, and document the regulatory framework o f the energy efficiency investment and technology as 
a result of review and a series of consultations with Indones ian policy makers: e.g. , adoption of fiscal  and/or 
non-fiscal  incentives on energy efficiency actors, and the labelling and MEPS for industrial technologies.  
 
According to the Market Assessment  (Annex 2) , the Indonesia n government is not unaware of the nee d of 
an energy efficiency programme . However, there seems to be a lack of deep understanding on energy 
efficiency  projects , finance , and policies and their  ability to implement energy efficiency  policy  and regulation 
in detail. Since economic development is an important goal for all developing countries , including Indonesia, 
energy efficiency  policy  and regulatory frameworks are likely to  be second to economic policy ; therefore,  
subsidies for fossil fuel are prolonged. In addition to the proble ms in Indonesian policy including subsidies 
for fossil fules , there are still big gaps of opinions and perception on energy efficiency  between each ministry 
– such as Ministry of Environment, Misitry of Economy and Finance, and  Minstry of Industry and Ener gy, 
which is one of main barriers. The Proramme will narrow this gap through workshops for government 
departments and seminars  to raise a clear awareness of the need for energy efficiency promotion to policy 
makers, and draw a new desirable policy directio n. In this situation, the main goal of this activity is to 
strengthen the capabilities  of government agencies and to show the potential  of simultaneous development 
between the economy and energy efficiency through successful implementation of Component 1  and sharing 
the lesson s learnt , which will induce the government to implement energy efficiency  policies and refine the 
related framework s voluntarily.  
 
Activity 3.4 . Sharing know ledge and understanding gained by the Programme with ASEAN member 
states . Regional replication  of the Programme throughout ASEAN member states  is intended for this activity , 
bearing in mind that not only Indonesia , but also the entire ASEAN region , has experienced tremendous 
increments in energy demand, and that the long -term ene rgy supply outlook is likely less positive in the 
absence of energy efficiency and conservation measures. Component 3 shall collect, organise, disseminate, 
and display valuable lessons learn t, stimulating knowledge sharing actions for brainstorm ing and dev ising 
contextual fitness -based solutions for countries in needs.  ACE, the Executing Entity of the component, has 
assessed existing energy efficiency and conservation financing schemes through the ASEAN region as 
below (see Table  9), which will be  referred to as baseline with other considerations , when it comes to 
shortlisting candidate countries . In that most energy efficiency projects in this region are currently carried 
out through grants , including for Indonesia , lessons in energy efficiency guarantee s experienced through 
this Programme can  present a fresh financing perspective for other ASEAN countries in situation s and 
circumstances similar to those of Indonesia.  
 
 
【Table  9】 Energy Efficiency & Conservation Financing Schemes in  ASEAN Member States


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
  
                                                                                                                                                (Source: ACE, 2018)  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages plus diagrams ) 
 
Legal  and Contractual Arrangements under the Standard Two-step Financing Intermediation 
Programme . The Programme features a standard financing  structure under the supervision of KDB, the 
Accredited Entity, and engagement of local FIs, ACE, and other expert groups, executing and implementing 
entities, to promote energy efficiency businesses. Its umbrella agreement is a Funded Activity Agreement 
(FAA) under which other legal and contractual arrangements are to be set and effective throughout  the 
course of the FI own loan programme.  
 
【Figure  12】 Legal  and Contractual Arrangement  with Financial Flows  
 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) : In accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA ), the 
GCF and KDB will enter into the FAA in a form of the agreement below for each component, whereby KDB  
will administer the GCF proceeds and manage the Programme during the Programme lifespan.  
- Component 1 : Guarnatee Cover Agreement  
- Component s 2 and 3: Grant Agreement  
 
Under the umbrella agreement of the FAA, KDB shall pursue the following legal and contractual 
arrangements.  Figure  13 illustrates t he overall implementation structure and contractual, financial, and 
institutional arrangements between participants under Component 1 . 
 
【Figure 13】 Implementation Structure of Component  1


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
  
 
Guarantee Agreement . (Subsidiary Agreement under Component 1)  A Guarantee Agreement , whose 
terms and conditions are set out in accordance with those in Term Sheet (Annex 14),  will be entered into 
between KDB  (guarantor of record ) and each FI  (guarantee beneficiary ), guaranteeing the credit risk (Credit 
Guarantee)  of the relevant final beneficiary (borrowe r) who will borrow  covered loan from local FIs under a 
Sub-project Loan Agreement .  
Guarantee Cover  Agreement . GCF will provide guarantee cover to KDB so that it discharges its payment 
obligations under the Credit Guarantee given by KDB to local FI as the provider of the guarantee cover under 
the Guarantee Cover Agreement which will be entered into between GCF and KDB in accordance with the 
terms of the FAA.   
Table 10 explains the details  of GCF Guarantee  Cover  in the overall perspective: from the moment when a 
local FI gets entitled to draw on the Credit Guarantee upon default  to how GCF’s Guarantee  Cover  is given 
and flows back to the local FI.  This can be read in conjunction with Table 10 – Term Sheet for GCF Guarantee  
Cover Agreement . 
Table 10 – GCF Guarantee  Cover  Structure  
GCF’s Obligation  A.  GCF pre -funds KDB on a “look forward” basis for any calls made on 
KDB guarantees. Claims issued by Local FIs under Credit  Guarantees 
would constitu te “eligible claims” under the G uarantee Cover 
agreement  
  
B. Specifically, subject to the satisfaction of relevant condit ions 
precedent (including the issuance of a disbursement request by KDB), 
GCF pre -funds and pa sy to KDB “eligible claims” under the Credit 
Guarnatee  which are reasonably expected to arise  within six (6) months 
from the date of the relevant request for dis bursement  
KDB’s Obligation  A.   To the e xtent that GCF has paid to KDB  and KDB has not used the 
funds received from GCF to discharge claims under the GCF Guarantee  
within six (6) months from the date of the relevant request for 
disbursement , KDB may (i) continue to hold such pre -funded and 
unused funds (“Unused Amounts”) and setoff such amounts against its 
next disbursement request to GCF; or (ii) reimburse GCF the Unused 
Amounts at zero interest, noting that such sums reimbursed shall not 
be available for further disbursement.  
  
B.      Alternatively, to the extent that GCF has paid to KDB and KDB 
has used the funds received from GCF to discharge claims under the 
KDB guarantees within six (6) months from the date of the relevant 
request for disbursement


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
 a)    KDB must pursue the underlying borrowers and provide recoveries 
back to GCF, and ensure that GCF is able to be provided with 
subrogation rights to independently pursue the borrowers; and  
  
b)  if KDB fails to recover from the underlying borrowers within an 
agreed period of time, KDB must transfer its subrogation rights to GCF.  
  
C.     KDB must pay to GCF the commercially agreed portion of the 
guaran tee premium that KDB receives from Local FIs, as a “guarantee 
cover fee”.  
 
Each of  the FIs, as an Executing Entity , will be responsible for ensuring that each Sub -project is in line with 
the Eligibility Criteria set out in B.3 and , all necessary or desirable due diligence has been conducted. The 
Accredited Entity will be responsible for the overall management, implementation and supervision of each 
FI regarding the relevant Guarantee Agreement and related Covered Loan in line with the Accredited Entity’s 
own internal rules, policies and procedures pursuant to the AMA.  
 
Sub-project Loan Agreement.  A Sub -project Loan Agreement is to be contracted between a local FI and 
each respective end borrower, which implies a num ber of Sub -project Loan Agreements to be contracted on 
the ground. As per the financial instrument needs of end borrowers, terms and conditions of the agreement 
would be customised with credit lines available under the  FI own loan backed by the Guarantee Agreement.  
 
TA Service Agreement.  (Subsidiary Agreement under Component 2 and 3)  KDB and ACE, an Executing 
Entity  of TA components (Component s 2 and 3), will enter into a TA Service Agreement, aligned with the 
FAA. Pursuant to the TA Service Agreement, ACE will be responsible for TA activities of the Programme, in 
partnership with implementing entities with relevant expertise: e.g. , BASE is well -versed in energy saving 
insurance modelling. ACE will be guided by KDB for selecting proper Implementing Entities and utilising the 
GCF grant proceeds in the most effective way.  
 
The overall implementation structure and contractual, financial, and institutional arrangements between 
participants under the Components 2 and 3 are illustrated in Figure  15 below:  
 
【Figure 15】 Implementation Structure of Component s 2 and 3 
 
 
A Proven Capacity of Engaging Entities to Deliver Aimed Results . Relevant expertise and experiences 
of individual entities – accredited entity, executing entity, implementing entity, and partners in various forms 
– are described in Table  10 below. T he overall implementation structure and contractual, financial, and


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 institutional arrangements between participants under the Programme are illustrated in Figure  15 as shown 
above.  
 
【Table 10】 Role and Capacity Assessment of Engaging Entities  
KDB  
(Accredited 
Entity)  • GCF Proceeds Channelling ; 
• Follow -up management of GCF  Guarantee  Cover under Component 1 ; 
and 
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of all the executing entities’  
implementation under all Component s 
• E&S and gender mainstreamed system well institutionalised  
• Equipped with a stable credit rating based on strong macroeconomic 
fundamentals of Korea with having successfully completed financial 
arrangements across countries; e.g. , top-tier PF arranger in Asia Pacific ; 
• A proven track record of deploying energy efficiency finance while 
creating energy efficiency markets on scale and tackling challenging 
circumstances of the then least developed market in Korea ; 
* KDB has over 20 years of experience in domestic energy efficiency 
programme and  has a loan balance of more than USD 300 million as of 
the end of 2020.  
• On-lending is one of many business areas of the bank. As a policy 
financing institution, KDB has possess ed a proven track record of two -
step lending experiences under a structured internal system with 
intermediaries.  
• Willing to transfer decades –long accumulated experience and know -how 
on taking on calculated risks and strategically creating financial values in 
new business areas with a purpose of the ASEAN regional replication 
and scale up ; and  
• Well-versed in a standard on -lending scheme with supporting multiple 
sub-projects and sub -borrowers in collaboration with local FIs in 
Southeast Asia . 
PT IIF 
(Executing  Entity  
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1; and  
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of the Final Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1.  
• A strong track record of being engaged in infrastructure financing 
including Renewable energy plant and advisory services that are 
professionally managed and focused on commercially viable 
infrastructure projects;  
• Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) system well institutionalised 
with proactive approach -based activit ies;  
• Global standards -based best practices applied in its whole operations – 
providing credit, risk management, good co rporate governance, and ESS.  
PT SMI 
(Executing  Entity  
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1; and  
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of the Final Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1.  
• Goal-oriented government entity working towards accelerating national 
infrastructure that is well-versed in mobilising resources from varying 
institution types to finance infrastructure projects;


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
 • Experienced in sustainable development and climate resilience  (e.g., 
water, renewable energy generation, transport, and agriculture -related) 
projects  for the Indonesian community . 
PT KEB Hana  
Indonesia  
(Executing  Entity  
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1;  
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of the Final Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1; and  
• Implementing Entity (in -kind contribution) under Component 3 . 
• Able to utilise and leverage lessons learnt from the most extensive global 
network among commercial banks in Korea across 24 countries ; 
• Showcasing good business ethics and sound corporate governance at 
both the global and local levels  through its strong internal controls and 
monitoring system . 
PT Bank IBK  
Indonesia  
(Executing  Entity  
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1;  
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of the Final Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1; and  
• Implementing Entity (in -kind contribution) under Component 3 . 
• Government entity with unmatched experience across Korean 
commercial and government financial institutions in financing SMEs, 
microbusinesses, and start-ups in Korea and abroad;  
• Leader in promoting government policy related to SMEs and ready to 
share knowledge and best practices through the Programme;  
• Established and in -house ethical management and human rights 
management systems meeting globally recogni sed ESG standards.  
KB Bukopin  
(Executing  Entity  
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1;  
• Monitoring, Supervision and Evaluation of the Final Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1; and  
• Implementing Entity (in-kind contribution) under Component 3 . 
• Largest Korean bank by assets, with substantial financing experience in  
SME loans through its breadth and depth of quality asset portfolios to 
share, and longstanding focus on the Southeast Asian market;  
• Ranked first in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index World for six 
consecutive years to indicate its commitment to creating s ustainable 
value, healthy corporate governance, and promoting responsible 
management for the environment and society . 
PT Bank Shinhan  
Indonesia  
(Executing Entity 
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1  
• Implementing Entity (in-kind contribution) under Component 3  
• Monitoring, Supervision, and Evaluation of the Financial Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1  
• Euipped  with diverse financial services and qualified employees ready to 
serve the public in need of access to finance  
• Recorded a meaningful growth even amid COVID -19, due to its strategic 
business management under the proper guidance of Shinhan Financial 
Group, Korea’s one of representative financiers


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 • Tracks, monitors, and evaluate its corporate governance for the 
implementation of good corporate governance, along with a strict level of 
risk and compliance management practices.   
PT Bank Woori 
Saudara 
Indonesia 
(Executing Entity 
for Component 1)  • Local Financial Intermediary under Component 1  
• Implementing Entity (in -kind contribution) under Component 3  
• Monitoring, Supervision, and Evaluation of the Financial Beneficiaries’ 
implementation under Component 1  
• Proven  financial system and experience in corporate finance, along with a 
growing market share and net growth in Indonesia, fundamentally based 
on supervision of Woori Financial Group, Korea’s one of leading 
commercial and investment bank.   
• Good Corporate Governance system settled down bankwide , along with 
the risk management and internal control system.  
• Has a focus on sustainable finance for contrib uting to the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), through financially supporting 
environmental, social, and educational areas in need.  
ASEAN Centre for 
Energy  
(Executing  Entity  
for Component s 2 
and 3 ) • TA (Technical Assistance ) Service Provider  under Components 2 and 3 
in partnership with Experts in various fields.  
• Proven capacity as an inter -governmental organisation in terms of 
expertise in energy, policy advisory services, and various knowledge 
sharing and capacity building  activities across ASEAN countries ; and  
• Equipped with relevant data and information accumulated through various 
policy analyses, energy assessments, and studies on best practices and 
lessons learnt from cross -country initiatives in pursuit of sustainable and 
low-carbon development in ASEAN . 
 
Governance and Implementation Arrangements of the Programme . For the effective implementation 
and sustainable management, the Programme structures different governance and implementation 
arrangements by component . Component 1 features the private investment element whereas the 
Components 2 and 3 are composed of TA activities supported by the GCF grant proceeds in collaboration 
with various partners , such as BASE and Korea Energy Agency (KEA) equipped with decades of extensive 
experience and expertise in energy efficiency business areas. In particular, KEA is actively conducting 
international co -operation projects such as establishing Infrastructure of Climate Business, laying the 
foundation s for energy efficiency projects and supporting policy framework in developing countries, based 
on over than 40 years of experience and knowledge on domestic energy projects. The following 
implementation structures are indicative, subject to change as per addition of additional collaborating 
partners whom with on -going discussions on partnership has continued.  
  
KDB would conduct periodic  meeting s between  KDB, each  of FIs, and the Guarantee A dvisor  under 
Component 1, so as to i) exchange  the market  information , ii) share  any feedback  or concerns  arisen  from 
the energy efficiency financing  activities, and  iii) discuss  the existing  or new sub -projects  from the portfolio  
management perspective . For clarity,  these meetings are n ot for a decision -making  for FIs’ lending  activities .  
FIs have  full authority  to select,  appraise, structure,  execute, and monitor  each  of their sub-projects,  provide d 
that those  activities  and process es are fully in line with the Eligibility  Criteria  and the KDB and GCF’s 
Guideline s.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
  
17 Bank of Indonesia. 2020. Interest rate of rupiah loans by group of banks and type of loans . Available at 
https://www.bi.go.id/seki/tabel/TABEL1_26.pdf . Accessed on 23 April 2020.  B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
Advanced Financing Scheme to Overcome Low Demand and Financial Barriers . Local FIs shared that 
a lack of liquidity, is not a primary concern for Indonesian financiers considering participation in energy 
efficiency finance or other sectors in general. Securing financing  through global banking or capital markets 
on competitive terms , aside from the lo an funding from the GCF,  is accessible without substantial barriers 
given the high credit worthiness of Indonesian financial institutions . Instead, a common concern of 
prospective FIs and consideration of the Indonesian Financial Services Authority (OJK) is that the perceived 
associated risk against borrowers and/or energy efficiency projects and technologies is too significant. 
Though a nu mber of prospective FIs have been interested in providing loans and other financial services 
related to the energy efficiency market, the lack of historically successful energy efficiency projects reveals 
a gap between the acceptable risk level for FIs for energy efficiency projects and the current risk level of 
financing such projects. To address this barrier , the Programme was curated to provide a credit guarantee  
cover  mechanism from the GCF for FIs to mitigate the risk gap that they would face as they i nvest into the 
evolving energy efficiency market , rather than directly providing loan capital. With G CF providing guarantees 
cover for FI o wn loans that meet the necessary criteria outlined further as mentioned in B.3 , FIs would now 
be able to accept any c redit risk level of final beneficiaries, in particular those of the least creditworthy SMEs 
so that those beneficiaries can access energy efficiency loans  and begin to expand the market . 
 
The GCF Credit Guarantees Cover Agreement will also diversify the existing energy efficiency financing 
efforts , as well as GCF’s portfolio of financing , as energy efficiency loans are the most widely discussed 
energy efficiency financ ing model, with financial institutions , primarily banks , issuing loans to final 
beneficiaries for projects (DeT’serclaes, 2010; Kats et al., 2011; MacLean & Purcell, 2014; Würtenberger, 
2012). Climate finance research suggests that financing for energy efficiency by private actors only accounts 
for 4% of the total investment int o climate finance of USD 13 billion between 2015 and 2018 , reflecting the 
deep need and significant opportunity to pursue an increase in energy efficiency investment in Indonesia. 
Because direct bank loans to existing customer s with stringent lending terms , rather than potentially new 
borrowers with higher credit risk levels, are customary of the loan market  (Würtenberger 2012) , GCF’s role 
in providing  support to bridge the risk gap for FIs and ultimate ly providing more competitive financing terms 
to final beneficiaries for energy efficiency projects is key.   
 
Based on the information above , KDB developed the concessional GCF Credit Guarantee  Cover  portion of 
the Program me as its primary financial component . As detailed in B.3 and B.4, the Programme  does not 
simply provide low -interest funding  to final beneficiaries  but provides credit risk guarantees for FIs for their 
own loans,  providing a higher guarantee coverage ratio  to those with lower credit , which l eads to increased 
energy efficiency financing and addressing of the market in Indonesia.  
 
Justification for the Concessionality Level . Commercial interest rates of a typical corporate loan in the 
local financial market range between low-teen to high -teen percentages, although the rates vary greatly 
depending on the creditworthiness of the borrower, nature of underlying investments and risk  allocation 
structure, detailed financing terms including a tenor, and/or the  current market situation. The Market 
Assessment of the Programme shows that the rates often increase by more than 15% for financing the 
deployment of energy efficiency technologi es compared to standard rates .17 The increased  rates are not 
attractive for industry enterprises and technology providers to utilise their existing and limited credit lines 
available for an investment that may not directly support their core business areas nor immed iately increase 
output production and revenues. Thus, commerci al loans in Indonesia are currently not a feasible option for


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 industry stakeholders to secur e the required private ‘buy in’ to take off in the local energy efficiency market. 
In addition, market players – particularly purely domestic firms and/or instituti ons – are relatively small with 
weak financial position s. As a higher risk premium on lending is imposed on vulnerable borrowers, it is 
challenging for the vulnerable business group, mainly local SMEs, to access and secure the finance required 
for manufact uring and installing energy efficiency technologies.  
 
Considering Indonesia’s low electricity t ariff and industry’s perception and knowledge of the energy efficiency 
business, analysis and stakeholder feedback indicates that a low  interest rate of approximately  less than 
10% is needed to induce financial institutions and industries to participate in energy efficiency  projects.  
 
As such, final interest rates to the local end beneficiary group are assumed to be a single -digit percentage  
with a maximum  up to a low -teen percentage, after taking the GCF Credit G uarantee  Cover , which 
represents a margin from FIs and other financing cos ts, into consideration. This scenario is perceived as 
competitive compared to the market terms available in Indonesia.  
 
Most importantly, the Programme ensures that the concessionality and guarantee coverage ratio , of up to 
95% depending on the size of final beneficiaries , offered by the GCF  is passed on  to the end beneficiaries , 
such as SMEs via local FIs, imprinting the lessons learnt; concessionality often disappears as international 
funding comes through multi -layered intermediaries to final benefici aries. The Programme  will be equipped 
with protection and monitoring mechanisms so that margin and/or financing costs from the FIs , which are 
included in the ultimate rates applicable to end beneficiaries , will be capped in contract under KDB 
supervision.  In addition, with the successful implementation of financing based on the concessionality 
provided by GCF, confidence over energy efficient technologies will be accumulated amongst industries and 
financiers, and financiers will have a better understanding on energy efficiency financing and a credit analysis 
and mitigation system internally, which will make financial institutions have a willingness towards energy 
efficiency financing even after the Programme  is ove r. Finally, if these successful cases continue, we can 
expect other private investers currently under the surface  will join energy efficiency financing.   
 
Rationale for the Proposed Solution Finan cing Package  - TA Grant Facility . The Programme never 
disregards how the current risk averse  trajectory of the energy efficiency market ha s been long formulated 
by a lack of awareness, knowledge, capacity as well as misperception of relevant stakeholders, and why it 
is still getting stuck despite some trials. Even if a solution financing scheme is prepared, it would be too hasty 
to expect the market to be boosted by pr ompt actions from both private and public stakeholders. Relevant 
interventions along with the pioneering energy efficiency funding is therefore inevitable. As such, technical 
assistance activities are planned with the support of the GCF grant instrument , as well as in -kind 
contributions from other participants including KDB.  
 
In this context, de -risking mechanisms can play a critical role in assisting market functioning for investments 
that are considered too and insubstantial to be attractive for banks to take on or too challenging to analyse 
the related credit risks, such as energy efficiency markets and the SME market (International Finance 
Corporation 2013). The Programme suggests two kinds of de -risking mechanisms in Component 1 and 
Component 2 as Table  11 shows below. These two schemes can work in tandem with each other and create 
synergies to increase energy efficiency in the Indonesian industrial sector.  
【Table 11】  De-risking Mechanisms in the Programme  
Component 1  
(financing 
component)  Credit Guarantee for Sub -project loans between LFIs and final 
beneficiaries  
Component 2  
(TA component)  Introduction and development of ESI (Energy Saving Insurance) 
scheme


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
  
18 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Secretariat. 2017 . Energy Efficiency Finance in Indonesia: Current State, 
Barriers and Potential Next Steps - APEC Energy Working Group  Development of customi sed ESCO finance structure with 
guarantee sch eme 
 
 
Limited Public Endeavours and the COVID -19 Impact . The government of Indonesia and the public 
sectors have carried out limited studies and have developed regulatory frameworks for promoting energy 
efficiency in the industry sector. Such endeavours, however, have not aggressively pushed the deployment 
of the industrial energy efficiency technologie s or the implementation of the relevant businesse s, and 
anticipated benefits of energy efficiency have n ot been translated into energy intensive industries.18  
 
Furthermore, as the economy has contracted and strugg led amid the prolonged pandemic crisis , the national 
indebtedness has increased due to the government’s borrowing of funds from international funders for the 
purpose of disseminating COVID -19 relief packages and economic stimulus towards the post -pandemic 
recovery, according to Bank of Indonesia . Confronting tighter budgets, particularly in the midst of the 
unprecedented COVID -19 crisis, the government and the public sector are more likely to have a priority of 
funds allocation towards the post -pandemic recovery schemes over energy efficiency ini tiatives .  
 
The Importance of the GCF as an Anchor Investor . Surrounded by myriads of barriers, constraints, and 
unfavourable local circumstances,  the GCF ought to play a crucial role as an anchor investor with a 
financing solution package. In this regard,  the GCF is a sole solution financier, particularly considering its 
strategic thematic priority to ‘industries and appliances’ for driving a low -emission development pathway in 
emerging economies, and with financial flexibility and mobilisation capacity.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max . 500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
 
Function as a Catalyst to Drive a Genuine Paradign Shift towards  a Sustain able Energy Efficiency 
Financin g and Markets.  The main financial barriers are assessed by Market Assessment as i) a lack of 
understanding/capabilities of local FIs, and ii) a lack of credit risk mitigation techniques /mechanisms. 
Through the successful implementation of energy efficiency financing under component 1 and TA activities 
including the development of de -risk m echanisms under Component 2, LFIs can have a better understanding 
on energy efficiency financing and a better de -risking mechanisms within their internal system, which will 
make LFIs keep joining energy efficiency financing even after the Programme is over . In othe words, the 
Programme will function as a catalyst to dri ve a genuine shift through enabling environment formation, 
beyond  one-off financing provision . 
In addition to financing and de -risking scheme development, TA services will be provided to various 
stakeholders including industry players, financial institutions , and government authorities . With the 
successful implementation of TA activities under component 3 , local stakeholders can accumulate their 
confidence over energy efficient technologie s and financing , which means that  a sustainable  energy 
efficiency market including locally fit de -riking scheme and tregulatory framework development will be 
created in Indonesia industry sector . 
 
Formulation of the Market and Enabling Conditions as the Key Post -Programme Sustainability 
Strategy. The Programme ensure s its post-Programme sustainability after the exit of the GCF and KDB, by 
making its best efforts to formulate the energy efficiency market surrounded by enabling circumstances. In 
short, its exit strategy implies the relevant market creation with enabling settings, not to make it passively 
left dependent on the external support – Indonesia is an attractive emerging market . Thus , international 
cooperation trials for energy efficiency are most likely to continue – but to bring lasting actions amongst local 
players. Once the market is formed, a working mechanism where ambitious pioneers emerge to the surface


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 and somebody is willing t o bear the roles and responsibilities  that will allow the market to settle down. The 
Programme sees the exit strategy as the on -going process of deploying this market -driven sustainability 
principle in following through all stages of the Programme cycle wi th often making a necessary modification 
to the plan if needed over a decade.  
 
【Table  12】 Four Channels of Interventions for Market Creation  
 
Market Enabling  
 
Create the frameworks within which 
markets can function, including policy, 
regulation, patforms , financial, and other 
interventions. E.g. The Programme will 
make sustainable energy efficiency 
framework from the policy, financial, and 
technical perspective s.   
Innovation and Competition  
 
Promote competition th rough innovation, 
improved management, cost reductions, 
and efficiencies that encourage other 
market players to continue improving their 
products and servicies .  
 
Demonstration and Replication  
 
Proivde  demonstration effects, encouraging 
replication and more generally the spillover 
of ideas. .   
Capacity Buildling  
 
Build capacity and skills and create 
standards that open new market 
opportunities and support market 
development.  
 
                                                                                                                            (Source: IFC website)  
 
Taking difficulties of market creation, particularly in the emerging economy c ontext, into account, the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) usually takes multiple interventions that contain upstream activities 
and market enabling work at the sector level. For the sake of the market development, the Programme also 
takes coordinat ed interventions that integrate the private investment financing scheme and TA activities such 
as capacity building of key local stakeholders and knowledge  sharing and replication across the ASEAN 
region.  
 
Harnessing the Programme as a Golden Opportunity t o Bring Institutional Changes of Indonesian 
Partners for Sustainability. Undoubtedly, ‘s ustainability ’ is an important value,  so it is a must agenda 
throughout global discourses on international cooperation projects in the developing world. It is therefore 
familiar with many, but never easy to materialise on the ground as a matter of fact. The Programme, as an 
ambitious trial supported by the largest m ultilateral climate fund, shall take the sustainability issue into 
account throughout the industrial energy efficiency lifecycle, and even after the exit of the GCF and KDB.  
 
Above all things, as an accredited entity with accountability on the Programme su ccess, KDB shall try to 
create an enabling environment in which not only the Programme but also other relevant businesses can 
self-sustain without external capital injection. For realising this, formulating and facilitating the market is the 
kernel of the energy efficiency initiative. Before the launch of the Programme, at present, the Indonesian 
market possesses a few potential players and they have been barely active under the surface while 
confronting the existing stumbling blocks and obstacles. After th e multi -dimensional intervention of the 
Programme, Indonesia will see the market that works along with enhanced institutional capacity. In short, 
technical assistance  for market readiness (particularly under Component 3) is an important factor that will 
function as an exit strategy for the sake of the post -Programme  sustainability, eliminating dependency on 
concessional financiers and donors . Besides, the Programme tries to implant other supplementary tools and 
measures from its beginning to  the end, delivering a complete functional solution  to ensure the industrial 
energy efficiency in a sustainable manner.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 35 
 
  
 Strategically Crafting Climate -responsive Recovery in the Post COVID -19 Period for Sustainability. 
As tried elsewhere in most other countries, Indonesia has been rolling out its stimulus packages in response 
to the pandemic outbreak and economic recession.  The Programme strategically crafts the way of integration 
into the national stimulus package so that the Programme could self -sustain as a national recovery measure 
after the exit of the GCF and KDB, not as a one -off event. Of the economic measures, the I ndonesian 
government has devised a stimulus for SMEs like interest subsidies for microcredit, MSME financing, 
guarantees, and placement of funds in banks and the Programme will make endeavours to come up with 
ideas for the GCF -funded activities to be integ rated into regular government exercises. The way of 
integration – in what form and what specific measures – is to be brainstormed and discussed with relevant 
government stakeholders for a genuine country ownership. Such integration of the international sup port 
Programme into national planning is an effective exit strategy for the Programme to self -sustain after the 
implementation period ends.


---
*Page 42*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
105 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  100 10 years    
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  5     
(vii) Results -
based payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co-
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
142.7 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniorit
y 
Local FIs19 Senior Loans  
 133.33 million USD 
($)  10 ye ars 
3 years  Enter % pari 
passu  
 
In-kind  0.29 million USD 
($) - - - 
Local SMEs  Equity  
 9 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
KDB (AE)  In kind  
 0.03 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Korea Energy 
Agency  (KEA)  In kind  
 0.04 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Korean Banks  In kind  
 0.01 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Click here to 
enter text.  Options  
 Enter 
amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
247.7 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)  N/A 
 
19 Participation amount by each FI is undecided


---
*Page 43*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 C.2. Financing by component  
Component  Output  Indicativ
e cost  
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1  
Energy 
Efficiency 
Finance  
 Increased 
volume of 
energy 
efficiency 
financing in 
Indonesia 
industry with 
an increased 
participation 
of the local 
FIs in energy 
efficiency 
financing  242.3 3 100 Guarantees  133.3 3 Senior loan  Local FIs  
9 Equity  Local 
borrowers  
-M&E  
0.29   0.29 In-kind Local FIs  
Component 2  
De-risking 
Mechanisms  Generation of 
Locally 
customised 
ESI 
Mechanisms  1.21 1.21 Grants     
Developed 
ESCO 
financing 
stricture  0.36 0.32 Grants  0.04 In-kind KEA 
M&E 0.06 0.06 Grants     
Component 3 
Technical 
Assistance 
(TA) for the 
Market 
Readiness  
 Enhanced 
capacity of 
financial 
institutions  0.97 0.93 Grants  0.03 In-kind KDB 
0.01 In-kind Localised 
Korean  
Banks’ 
subsidiaries  
Gene ration of 
market 
preparedness 
of industry 
stakeholders  0.89 0.89 Grants     
Polished and 
strengthened 
regulatory 
framework  
policy that 
incentivi ses 
energy 
efficiency 
stakeholders  0.75 0.75 Grants     
Spreading 
positive 
perceptions 0.69 0.69 Grants


---
*Page 44*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 of energy 
efficiency 
finance in 
ASEAN 
region  
M&E 0.15 0.15 Grants     
Indicative total cost  (USD)  247. 7 105 142. 7 
 
Main Terms and Conditions under Component 1 (See Annex 14 for details)   
1. Tenor: The maximum tenor will be the shorter of ten (10) years and the period remaining between the signing of the 
AE Guarantee and the Completion Date  
2. Currency: USD  
3. Purpose of Gua rantee : To guarantee FI Own Loans that meet the Eligibility Criteria  
4. Guaranteed Loan : Each FI Own Loan shall rank pari -passu with other senior loans of the Borrowers  
5. Guaranteed Risk :  Any default of the Scheduled Payment by the relevant Final Beneficiary under the Sub -Project 
Agreement which remains unpaid 25 business days after becoming due.  
6. Scheduled Payment  
Each (a) repayment of principal of the FI Own Loan, and (b) payment of C overed Interest that is due and payable by 
the Borrower (i) on the Scheduled Payment due dates and in the amounts specified in the Payment Schedule for 
the FI Own Loan, or (ii) by acceleration or mandatory prepayment caused by default on the scheduled prin cipal and 
interest payment.       
The Scheduled Payment excludes any break or unwinding costs upon any prepayment of the FI Own Loan, any 
default interest, penalty, fees, costs, or any gross -up payments which are not expressly covered herein.  
7. Guarantee Claim (Payment Demand)  
i) Not later than [30] days after the occurrence of the Guaranteed Risk, the Beneficiary may make demand on the 
Guarantor for the Guarantee Payment (“Demand Date”) by written notice in substantially a pre -agreed form 
("Demand Notice "). The FI shall confirm that it has not recovered the defaulted payment since the Demand Date.  
ii) The Guarantor shall pay the relevant amounts in USD as specified in the Demand Notice. For the avoidance of 
doubt, the payment from the Guarantor to the Ben eficiary is limited to the amount that GCF has paid to the 
Guarantor under the relevant Guarantee Cover Arrangement.  
iii) Upon any payment made by the Guarantor in respect of any claims under the Guarantee Agreement, the Guarantor 
shall be subrogated to all  the rights and remedies of the Beneficiary against the relevant Borrower in respect and to 
the extent of the sums which the Guarantor has paid pursuant to the Guarantee Agreement.  
8. Obligation of each FI  
i) Each FI must take all necessary measures in good faith with the same level of care exercised towards other assets 
not covered by the Guarantee Agreement, and noti fy the results of such measures to the Guarantor.  
ii) If eacha FI becomes aware of any circumstance of any default, or any event that may damage the ability of Sub -
project or any person providing a security mechanism from fulfilling its debt obligation, or  that an event of default has 
occurred under a Sub -Project Loan agreement, each FI must notify the Guarantor in writing within one (1) month 
after the date when each FI became aware of such event,.  
iii) Each FI must take all necessary measures to collect t he principal and interests under the Sub -project Loan 
Agreement, compensation for losses, penalties, and other similar amounts, even after each FI has received the 
Guarantee Payment, and notify the result of such measures to the Guarantor.  
iv) Any collecte d amount calculated as the amount collected through iii) above multiplied by the Guarantee Coverage 
Ratio under each Guarantee Agreement shall be paid to the Guarantor only up to the amount of the Guarantee 
Payment received, within fifteen days after the d ate when collected.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 45*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a 
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for t hese activities, to the extent 
possible.  
Improved Capacity to be Built for Implementation.  The Programme finance s capacity building 
activities to support a successful implementation of the Programme. Despite quite many capacity 
building activities for industries, ESCOs, and/or government, the past activities had confronted 
implementation challenges with still an unde r-served demand in institutional, financial, technological, 
and regulatory capacity enhancement. Indonesia needs to keep out of the past trajectory of short -
term trainings and capacity building programmes on a stand -alone basis. In the absence of an 
enabli ng circumstance, the Programme will repeat the past failures; it cannot materialise its activities 
nor achieve the impacts.  
 
Lessons lear nt from the precedents are carefully taken into account when it comes to designing TA 
activities; (lesson 1) capacity building towards industries should eye on the top management level 
since knowledge sharing to working level technicians and managers rarely translate into practice and 
a strategic determination from the higher ups who tend to prefer a short -term hit on pro fitability; 
(lesson 2) capacity building towards financial institutions should be carried out with selected local FIs 
on a learning by doing basis over the course of actual pipeline development, financing, portfolio 
management, and repayment under Componen t 1; and (lesson 3) the regulatory support for the 
government, ministries, and public agencies should never disregard the inter -sectoral policy 
synchronisation and collaboration amongst themselves, in that each of them has individual insights 
and existing institutional systems.  
 
In this regard, the Programme set s out capacity building activities under Component s 2 and 3, as 
seen in B.3, with the support of GCF grant proceeds and in -kind contribution s from an executing 
entity, alongside the market -driven fi nancing under Component 1. The two TA components seek to 
enhance  the market, institutional, and regulatory capacity of Indonesia where the industrial energy 
efficiency financing schemes are to be deployed. It further expands  the regional capacity beyond 
Indonesia through regional knowledge sharing and dissemination activities of the energy efficiency 
financing schemes, given the connected financial network across ASEAN.  
 
Financing Technology and Innovation. From a technological aspect, the Programme will 
accelerate the development and adoption of new energy efficient technologies in the local industrial 
sectors. This embraces a great potential of formulating a new market segment that promotes relevant 
technol ogy research and development, production, installation, operation and maintenance service, 
and monitoring and evaluation expertise. Additionally, expected engineering and/or technological 
modifications to the existing industrial processing procedures are a  new practice – i.e., innovation – 
to Indonesia. The Programme could also bring about a revival of ESCO business via the proposed 
de-risking mechanism under Component 2.


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG ) Mitigation Impact Potential Based on a Programme of Activities (PoA) 
Approach. The Programme has a direct GHG mitigation impact potential estimated at approximately 3.1 
million tCO 2eq for the lifespan  of the technology . This results from the adoption of the PoA approach that 
clings to principles of the C lean Development Mechanism (CDM ) methodology in terms of baseline 
comparison and project emissions by following eight steps below. See Annex 22 for details . 
 
【Table 13】 PoA-based Calculation on GHG Emission Reduction  
[Step 1] Deriving Emission Factors  
• Different fuel sources are used for individual technologies; boilers use gas: and motors, VSD, pumps, fans, 
and WHR use electricity. 56.1 (eq kgCO 2/GJ) is an emission factor for natural gas as per  GHG Emission 
Factors of Electric Power Interconnection System 2016 by the Ministry of Energ y and Mineral Resources in 
Indonesia  (IPCC). As f or electricity, a grid emission factor is 0.675  (UNFCCC, IFI Dataset, Version 3.2). 
[Step 2] Confirming Industrial Energy Use and Energy Consumption by Technology  
• Energy use in two major industrial energy systems – motor and steam systems – was estimated for 
Indonesia , in addition to the above analysis.  
[Step 3] Confirming Technologies  and the Number of Units within each Bundle  
• Bundle A – focus on motors with VSDs, pumps, fans, and boilers, such as in food and beverage, and 
manufacturing sectors  
• Bundle B – focus on similar technologies but also adding a chiller as a cooling  technology for petrochemical 
sector, for instance  
• Bundle C – Cases of loans taken by a technology provider who would serve SMEs  
[Step 4] Confirming Annual Emission Reduction of Each Technology wit hin a Bundle  
• The annual GHG reduction (eq tonCO2/yr) was c alculated through annual energy savings per technology 
multiplied by the number of units per technology within each bundle – A, B, C  and WHR  
* It is assumed that actual energy saving s is 55% of the one from market assessment  
[Step 5] Combining Emission Reduction Estimates of All Technologies  
• The annual GHG emission reduction of each bundle is calculated by a sum of all annual mitigation figures 
of each technology within a bundle. The value was mul tiplied by the grid emission factor of Indonesia  
afterwards.  
[Step 6] Calculating Emissions Reduction of Bundled Projects as per Disbursement Schedule  
•  Disbursement Schedule (Availability  period of 3 years)  
 
[Step 7] Concluding the Impact Potential of the Lifespan in Total  
• A sum of emission savings of all bundles is concluded as the GHG emission reduction with the machine 
lifespan , which is assumed as 10 years for all technologies from conservative perspective.


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
 D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
 
Scaling Up and Replicating the Effective Energy Efficiency Interventions. The Programme recognises 
the importance of scaling up and replicating energy efficiency business trials so as not to be a one -off 
initiative. The OECD  identifies three key aspects for scale  up and replication of climate finance interventions 
that were carefully considered during the designing phase : (1) a better design of the institutional structure 
and decision -making framework; (2) demonstration of su ccessful interventions; and (3) policy support to 
enhance enabling environments. 20 The Programme has  components that reflect on the three aspects so 
that it can bring energy efficiency activities in both sufficient quantity and  quality in Indonesia.  
 
【Figure 17】 Three Key Aspects for Scaling -up and Replication  of Climate Finance Interventions 
(OECD)  
 
As for the first aspect of designing a better institutional structure, the Programme  takes a two -step financing 
structur e that simultaneously utilises  KDB’s capacity, as a global financier with abundant energy efficiency 
finance experiences and local FIs with a strong local presence and expertise in allocating and disbursing the 
funds, under the government (including NDA) as a re gulatory standar d setter. With regards to a success 
demonstration, the Programme aims to be the first exemplary best practice by additionally devising energy 
efficiency guarantee financ ing beyond the conventional concessional loan that has been tou ched by 
preced ing trials. Such a diverse flexibility of finance will definitely boost the success potential of the 
Indonesian -led energy efficiency move. Concerning the policies to enhance enablin g environments, the 
Programme embraces the fine -tuning of th e local regulatory setting as one of critical TA activities.  
 
Designed as a Catalyst for Formulating Enabling Environments, Driving a Genuine Paradigm Shift . 
The Programme dedicates its components  to improve awareness and dissolve barriers identified through 
the Market Assessment and a series of consultations; it equips itself with systemic TA supports on top of a 
huge financial support. In short, the Programme reminds of the past precedents that financing solutions – 
designed by global players – were not easily adopted nor implemented on the ground. Therefore, diverse 
activities such as capacity building, knowledge sharing, and policy recommendations  for the government are 
included in the TA components so that the primary component’s (Component 1) financial incentives for local 
borrowers genuinely would  work in the market.  
 
The Programme plans to function as a catalyst that brings the eyes of the market into the brand -new energy 
efficiency financing schemes so as to be more sophisticated and advanced to next steps. The Indonesian 
 
20 OECD. 2014. Scaling up and replicating effective climate finance interventions.


---
*Page 48*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
 financial market is already active and commercially oriented . Once energy savings insurance pick s up on 
the notion of a new pro duct, the market will most likely jump in to provide similar products. Meanwhile, the 
market and banks will be more familiari sed with investment in energy efficiency. This will lead to lower 
interest rate  of loans enticing increased  demand for these financial mechanisms. The Programme further 
anticipates that the whole ASEAN regio n would have an eye on this, developing their own de -risking 
mechanisms customised into their respective market circumstances; this is a genuine regional pa radigm 
shift towards an energy efficient development pathway.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Green Jobs Created and Sustained with the Energy Efficiency -driven Economic Leap. It expects to 
bring about economic co -benefits. The local job creation – especially green jobs – with income generation is 
the major economic benefit to the country , in addition to energy savings -caused profits in industries . The 
energy efficiency business plans the employment of p rofessional and administrative h uman resources to 
install, manage, monitor, evaluate, and maintain the energy efficient appliance and equipment in factories 
and plants. It assumes considerable economic impacts given a pool of several hundreds of energy man agers 
and 30 ESCOs currently registered across Indonesia. The emergence of green jobs created and sustained 
will relieve unemployment as much as scale  up and replication of the Programme proceed s. 
 
Transition towards an energy efficient economic structure will result in great economic productivity and long -
term economic prosperity, making the country more competitive in the ASEAN economy. A recent study 
reveals that firms whose energy productivity – economic output per unit of energy use – is the worst in 
industry could further achieve growth  in annual profits at a rate of 2.2% to 13.8% by brin ging energy efficiency 
into the industrial processing line.21 Assuming such room for potential growth, the Programme is integral to 
endeavours to jumpstart Indonesia.  
 
Gender Co -benefits around Skilled Female Workforce and Women -led SMEs.  Very well aware of 
tremendous merits of women -empowered  advancement in line with the energy efficient economy booming, 
the Programme submits gender assessment and action pl an in both Programme and project levels. Since 
the inception stage, KDB gender and social development specialist therefore has engaged the concept 
development in pursuit of a holistic gender mainstreaming. Taking into account the two -step financing  
structure  of the Programme, as the Accredited Entity, KDB emphasi ses the incorporation of a women -led 
SME framework and women’s empowerment through the technical and vocational training provision that 
seeks for higher skilled occupation of women on the energy effici ency labour market. Detailed activities are 
specified in G.2 (Gender assessment and action plan section).  Gender co-benefits further relate to social 
co-benefits . Proactive women’s empowerment activities will turn out to produce positive externalities in 
divers e social areas , such as healthcare and education, referring to internationally proven cases that the 
skilled female workforce will gain confidence and voice in the household decision making process and their 
generated income could be invested in schooling of their children and nutritious food of their families. To put 
it succinctly, the positive externalities are to be extended beyond gender and relevant arenas.  
 
Achieving SDGs with the Far -reaching Energy Efficiency Intervention.  Energy efficiency is one o f the 
best buys in global energy  and has a crucial role in achieving the SDGs. As prescribed above, the 
Programme expects positive externalities in various aspects, implying its direct and indirect contributions to 
all of the 17 UN SDGs . Nevertheless, focusing only on a direct linkage, the Programme will support Indonesia 
mainly to contribute to the global targets: Goal 5 (gender equality), Goal 8 (decent work and economic 
growth), Goal 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), Goal 1 2 (responsible consumption and production), 
Goal 13 (climate action), and Goal 17 (partnerships for the goals). As a far -reaching energy intervention, it 
definitely reflects the critical ethos of the SDGs.  
 
 
21 Climate Works Australia, 2016


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 【Figure 18】 Direct Contribution to the 6 SDGs  
 
 
    
   
  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Need -based Targeting: Mapping the Needs of Energy Efficient Technologies across Indonesia. 
Confronted against a surging energy demand amid the economic growth and urbanisation, the deployment 
of energy efficient technologies is a desirable pathway ahead of  Indonesia to meet the surging needs and 
ensure energy security in coming decades. As a result of mapping the needs of industrial energy efficiency 
enhancement, the Indonesian MEMR has identified potential target locations with energy intensive 
companies w ith more than 6,000 TOE of energy consumption: 278 companies and 346 sites, mainly spread 
out throughout four major provinces – West Java, East Java, and East Kalimantan, and Banten. These four 
provinces account for 70% of the total industries obliged to d o energy management such as appointing an 
energy manager and implementing energy programmes with audit activities, as regulated by the Government 
Regulation on Energy Conservation no. 70/2009. Due to aforementioned obstacles, it has barely 
materialised in Indonesian industries, in actual. With reference to the MEMR mapping as of 2018 ( see Figure 
19 below), the Programme will help Indonesia take actions and prioritise relevant policy and regulatory 
setting, so as to track a genuine progress towards the country’s policy goals and international climate 
commitments.  
 
【Figure 19】 Mapping Prospective Target Beneficiaries  
 
(Source: Indonesia MEMR)  
 
Needs to build an Energy Efficiency  Financial Ecosystem enabling Energy Efficiency  Market even 
after the Programme.  The Indonesian Industry has a need to establish a sustainable financial ecosystem


---
*Page 50*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 between private financial institutions and local player s, even when there is no participation of international 
financiers such as MDBs  and i nternational organi sations (IOs) with grant s, concessional loan s, or risk-taking 
mechanisms. For the energy efficiency  market to be active even after the Programme  ends , the Programme 
was designed to include 1) project replication and scale up trials throu gh successful pilot programme 
demonstration and 2) development of customi sed de -risking mechanisms for Indonesia leading more 
attractive risk -return trade -off in energy efficiency  finance.  
 
Urgent Need for Strengthening Institutions and Implementation Capacity, in the Midst of Acute and 
Chronic Climate Impacts.  As mentioned throughout the previous sections, Indonesia is undoubtedly 
climate vulnerable and its needs for energy efficient measures are crystal clear. An extensive use of 
ineffi cient technology, equipment, and process es in multiple  industrial sectors put Indonesia in a more 
vulnerable position. The potential direct and indirect mitigation impacts of this Programme fit well with the 
country needs.  
 
Final GHG mitigation impacts aside, the Programme also has eyes on insufficient institutional and 
implementation capacity of Indonesia. The local energy sector lacks technical capacity in implementing 
innovative and system -based technologies. The Programme ’s deployment of highly efficient technologies 
with energy management systems and relevant regulatory frameworks , such as rating and audit systems 
will benefit the country, transferring technology and expertise and increasing the nation’s overall capacity in 
terms of innovation in energy. As described hereunder, the Programme  is designed based on the lessons 
learnt from the precedents, in line with a strong willingness of the Indonesian government to strengthen and 
refine the regulatory framework and polici es for promoting industrial energy efficiency in consideration with 
synergy impacts alongside diverse relevant industrial development initiatives.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Indonesia -led Initiative with a Strong Country Ownership backed by the NDA. The Programme 
conforms to the country ownership principle of the GCF in that the birth of the business concept was first 
proposed and initiated by the Indonesian NDA versed in the GCF Country Programme, and in that it is fully 
aligned with the national strategies, policies, and other existing frameworks of the partner country. 
Throughout the designing of the Programme, the Indonesian NDA, policy makers ( e.g., NDA, MEMR, 
Ministry of Industry) , private experts, and civil society organisations have proactively engaged in a series of 
stakeholder consultations; as developed with their recommendations from the scratch, the Programme 
ensures the effective implementation under guidance of th e government with a strong ownership.  
 
Alignment with the National Strategy and Regulatory Direction of Indonesia. Since 1982, Indonesia 
has formulated several policies and regulations to promote energy efficiency and conservation in the 
industrial sector. According to the MEMR Regulation No.14/2012 on Energy Management that targets the 
energy intensive industry, the g overnment has imposed energy users with consumption equal to 6,000 TOE 
per year to assign an energy manager, plan an energy conservation Programme, perform an energy audit, 
and report the Programme implementation. In addition, the Government Regulation No. 70/2009 states 
incentives , such as tax exemptions, fiscal incentives for import, a low interest rate for investment in energy 
efficiency . Also, OJK promotes sustainable finance in its roadmap, setting up the OJK Regulation 
No.51/POJK.03/2017 that requires all the major banks in Indone sia to provide a sustainability report by the 
end of 2019 . This newly pushes the local private sector to in vest in green business areas including energy 
efficiency. Indonesia accordingly has RUEN tha t stipulates energy efficiency finance to boost investments in 
energy efficiency with financial incentives.  As explained above, the Indonesian government is clearly  aiming 
to decrease the energy consumption while increasing infrastructure supply . However, as its scope and 
degree of such efforts  are not sufficient to revitalize energy efficiency in Indonesia, energy efficiency market 
stills remains at a very initial s tage, as the market assessment (annex 2) has shown,


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
  
Aligned with a willingness of  the Indonesian government , the Programme recognises the government ’s 
commitment to the promotion of energy efficiency and plans to move forward in line with the national 
regulatory direction. The Programme therefore shall contribute to the Indonesian government’s target to 
reduce energy intensity by 1% per year and elasticity of energy to less than 1% by  2025.  
 
Alignment with the Nationally Determined Contribution . Indonesia submitted its NDC to the UNFCCC 
with a strong commitment of unconditionally reducing 29% of GHG emissions and up to 41% with 
international support against the BAU scenario by 2030.22 The NDC outlines the government’s willingness 
to transform towards the low -carbon and climate resilient pathway through actions including improved energy 
efficiency and consumption patterns.  
 
The Programme recognises that energy efficiency in final energy consumption is included amongst key 
mitigation actions in the NDC. Assuming inefficiency of the BAU scenario as a baseline, 75% and 100% of 
mitigation are anticipated in the unconditional scenario and conditional scenario , respective ly.  
 
Proven Capacity of KDB to Deliver Energy Efficiency Impacts in partnership with Local E xecuting 
Entitie s. The Programme shall benefit from the roles and responsibilities of KDB, the A ccredited Entity of  
the Program me. When energy ine fficiency was an impediment to growth so fostering its efficiency was not 
a choice anymore for Korea due to urbanisation, rapidly growing energy demand, and fossil fuel -based 
energy mix structure, KDB was at the centre of deploying energy efficiency financ e nationwide. Creating and 
transforming energy efficiency markets on scale require tremendous efforts in addressing barriers; KDB has 
experience in supporting Korea leapfrog in the energy efficiency industry by tackling ch allenging 
circumstances of the then least developed market.  Leveraging capacity accumulated, KDB will perform as 
an ideal accredited entity to support Indonesia becoming more energy efficient in collaboration with executing 
entities havi ng capacity and loc al presence.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page )  
 
The Programme aims to maximis e environmental benefits , including GHG emission reduction , as well as to 
optimis e investment returns and economic gains for local stakeholders through innovative, reasonable, and 
efficient financial structure and eligibility criteria.  
 
Maximi sing Climate Change Mitigation Impacts. Overall, USD 100 million GCF funding will deliver 
mitigation benefits of USD 31.9 per tCO 2eq (assuming total  machine lifetime emission reduction). Taking into 
account the total project cost including co -financing, the Programme will deliver climate change mitigation 
benefits of an estimated USD 45.5 per tCO 2eq, based on the PoA approach described  in section E.2.  
 
Leverage and Co -financing. The Programme will use USD 1 00 million from GCF Guarantee  Cover  to 
leverage USD 143.3  million in total project costs, including USD 133.3  million from local FIs and  USD 9 
millions from  SMEs. The ratio of Co-financing  to GCF contribution is 1.0(GCF) : 1.43(Co -financing)  – this 
ratio is meaningful as the Programme would de -risk projects and catalyse private investment  from private 
financiers and local industries who are yet hesitant to invest in energy effic iency areas as confronting barriers 
and challenges. KDB would design the following finance structure to overcome these barriers and encourage 
private sector participation . 
 
Efficient Terms and Conditions.  Above all, private financiers are extremely hesitan t to use their own credit 
portfolios to fund energy efficiency businesses, with steady and acceptable rates of return on such 
 
22 Republic of Indonesia . 2021. Updated  Nationally Determined Contribution Republic of Indonesia. (submitted to UNFCCC 
on 21 July 2021)


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 investment not being assured. The kernel of the Programme is to provide incentives that attract relevant 
players to crowd in indus trial energy efficiency trials. At present, on -going energy efficiency deals often go 
high-teen percentages or more than 20%. Under the Programme, a target interest rate of c overed  loans is 
expected to around 10%. Given this, favourable terms and conditions of finance are designed in pursuit of 
better economic benefits and bankability so that it will be able to give positive signals to other entities and 
industries by presenting a successful pilot project in the energy efficiency  market that has not been realised 
so far due to lack of incentives in terlinked to uncertainty and lack of awareness in the least developed market. 
As a result of bilateral discussions on financial terms and conditions between the GCF and KDB, the amount 
of proceeds and its financing terms for guarantee and coverd loan  has been determined at a minimum level 
of concessionality.  
 
Guarantee Facility . On the ground of favourable finance provision from international financiers, the 
Programme sha ll also make an effort to catalyse and optimise co -financing opportunities via local financial 
institutions. The Programme therefore set s up a guarantee facility to cover FI  own loans in order to facilitate 
commercial financial institution’s participation in energy efficiency businesses. The coverage ratio of the 
guarantee instrument is dependent on the company size of borrowers, which will make commercial financial 
institutions be ar some amount of credit  and can be referenced in Table 6. In addition, the smaller the size of 
the borrower, the greater  the guarantee percentage , maxing out at 95%, proactively facilitating the 
participation of SMEs that would allegedly lack credit. In s hort, the Programme also takes a common practice 
– vulnerable SMEs need more credit guarantee s for borrowing – into consideration when it comes to 
designing the financial structure of the Programme. In addition, the success of pilot project guaranteed by 
the Programme would prove the feasibility of the energy efficiency projects to the private financiers and local 
industry. It will create a sustainable energy finance ecosystem that can be financed on its own without the 
support from GCF and other external f inanciers, coupled with the impacts of TA components , such as de -
risking mechanisms development.  
 
Target Technology Selection to Maximi se Economic Benefits. The Programme is also designed to take 
into account the economic benefits considering increased capital expenditures ( CAPEX ) due to technology 
and equipment installation and reduced operating expense s (OPEX ) due to energy savings. The shortlisted 
technologies p resented in the eligibility criteria were selected to maximi se energy savings per CAPEX or 
another expenses, based on the information of each technology obtained from energy experts ’ group , 
including ACE (See Annex 2 and 3). From this perspective, it is de emed  that the Programme is designed to 
produce the most substantial environmental benefit at optimal  investment cost, given that the energy saving 
rate is closely connected to the rate of GHG emission reduction (See Annex 22).


---
*Page 53*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the 
project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co -financing.   
E.1. Project/Progr amme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☐ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above 
by applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe th e current state (baseline) and the 
potential scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three -point -scale  rating ( low, medium, and high ) provided in the guidance note.  Also 
describe how the project/programme will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In  doing 
so, please refer to section B.2 (a) (theory of change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  There are few cases of successful 
energy efficiency  projects in  
Indonesia in the industrial  sector , 
due to the government subsidi sed 
electricity tariffs and high  upfront 
costs for energy efficiency  
technologies. The aforementioned 
reasons result in minimal 
participation of i ndustrial players 
and other new entrants into the 
energy efficiency  programme.  Low Change will begin with industrial 
players’ confidence that energy 
efficiency projects are no longer 
upfront cost -intensive, but rather 
attractive businesses offering higher 
operating profit, long -term productivity 
improvement, and more sustainable 
production processes. This will be 
achieved with the execution of enough 
successful energy efficiency projects 
at scale.  The intervention is projected to 
catalyse scalability of the industrial 
energy efficiency business area 
overall, by dissolving chronic financial, 
regulatory, and technical barriers 
through the de -risking guarantee  
facility and enabling market creation 
efforts  which are currently lacking in 
the market at present.


---
*Page 54*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
  
  
 Replicability  In that Indonesia is a market leader 
in ASEAN member states in 
various areas, the successful 
establishment of an energy 
efficiency ecosystem in this leading 
emerging market can be serve as a 
representative case to be 
replicated in other ASEAN member 
states. However, due to the current 
lack of successful cases, 
replication is not yet possible.  Low Once profitable energy efficiency 
projects with adequate GHG emission 
reduction impac t can be 
demonstrated, the associated financial 
and business structures will be 
naturally replicated to neighbouring  
countries that shares the similarities 
within the ASEAN community. In 
particular, the development of de -
risking techniques, such as energy 
saving insurance (ESI), will encourage 
private investors to promote the 
energy efficiency business.  Lessons learnt t hrough this 
Programme will directly impact and 
provide a pioneer example to any 
effort to replicate the work in other 
countries  under knowledge sharing 
activities amongst ASEAN countries 
(Component 3). Positive perceptions 
of energy efficiency finance and de-
risking mechanisms will spread across 
not only Indonesia but also across the 
ASEAN region over the long term.  
Sustainability  A sustainable energy efficiency 
ecosystem cannot be achieved 
solely through enhanced access to 
finance. Considering the current 
regulatory  barriers  such as the 
subsidised energy tariff and lack of 
fiscal/non -fiscal incentives  and the 
credit risk mi tigation  scheme s that 
local financial institutions have 
implemented, the Programme 
sustainability remains in question 
even if several successful energy 
efficiency projects are implemented 
through the support of the GCF.  Low 
 Sustainability can be reached with a 
stronger regulatory framework to 
support the Programme’s financing 
commitment.  
In addition to changes in the 
government’s policies, the lack of 
awareness of energy efficiency 
technologies, capacities, and 
resources of i ndustry players and 
external advisers need to be 
addressed in order for the 
prioritisation of investment in energy 
efficiency projects. Packaged efforts in 
building the regulatory and technical 
capacity of Indonesia will ensure the 
long-term sustainability  of the energy 
efficiency financing programme, in 
particular, amid the COVID -19 
pandemic.  The NDA -initiated Programme will 
work closely with government 
agencies and public sector financiers 
to build their financing capacity and 
refine the existing regulato ry 
framework. The Programme will also 
provide capacity building activities, 
such as technical advisory services, to 
industry players, including financial 
institutions to be equipped with energy 
efficiency business pipelines and 
sustainability guidelines. T he 
Programme efforts will result in the 
vibrant energy efficiency market 
creation and development that 
ensures sustainability, even far 
beyond the Programme 
implementation period and areas.


---
*Page 55*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
  
  
 E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and  or suppleme ntary) indicators may 
be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)) . If IRMF indicators are unable to 
measure any given project/programme outcomes, project/programme -specific i ndicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).   
*Please be noted that figures below are indicative as impacts vary depending on finally chosen industries and technologies  in each bundle . 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final23 
 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  
 Core 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/sequestered  1. Programme GHG 
(Green House Gas) 
emission reduction 
reports conducted and 
verified by an 
independent verifier   
 
2. Annual performan ce 
report  including the 
respective GHG 
emission reduction 
from end borrowers 
and FIs  0 tCO 2eq 1.10 
MtCO 2eq 2.825  
MtCO 2eq Key assumptions used in 
Annex 22 and based on 
the implementation period 
of 10 years.  
Note that the Programme 
total expected mitigation 
outcome  of 3.139  
MtCO 2eq is based on the 
technologies lifetime and 
disbursement schedule, 
which is 12 years.  
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  
 Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings  1. . Programme 
energy saving reports 
conducted and verified 
by an independent 
verifier  
2. Annual performance 
report including energy 
usages and savings, 0 GWh  3,919 GWh    10,065 GWh  Key assumptions used in 
Annex 3 and Annex 22    
 
23 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period  (10 years) .


---
*Page 56*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
  
  
 from end borrowers 
and FIs  
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  
 Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions  Project financial report 
on total cost and asset 
value from end 
borrowers and FIs    0 USD   USD 142.3 mill
ion USD 142.3 mill
ion Key assumptions used in 
Annex 3 and Annex 22    
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outco me to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to comple te this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (basel ine) Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  A weakly regu lated  
institution of Indonesia 
discourages the 
promotion of the 
industrial energy 
efficiency; institutional 
barriers include the low 
price of electricity  by the 
distorted government 
subsidies, no re gulatio n 
on energy efficiency 
specific areas, and no 
market standards such 
as MEPS.   low Ministries and public 
agencies with their own 
varying insights will 
closely coordinate to 
formulate the proper 
desirable  regulatory 
framework with policy 
incentives. Once 
accepted, Indonesia will 
have an enabling 
institution attractive 
enough for relevant 
stakeholders to join the 
industrial energy 
efficiency market.  Relevant local 
stakeholders will be 
trained,  and their 
capacity will be built with 
the Programme ’s policy 
and regulatory 
intervention, which will 
result in reasonable tariff 
adjustments and 
enabling institutions for 
energy efficiency 
promotion in Indonesia.  National level (one 
country)


---
*Page 57*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
  
  
 Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  Market players have a 
low prioritisation of 
investing in the energy 
efficiency business, due 
to many barriers such as 
no recognition  on 
regulatory  requirements 
and little confidence  
from the economic 
perspective on business.  low Indonesia will witness 
the formulation and 
facilitation of a self -
funding market where 
market players could 
function with the 
protective de -risking 
mechanis ms newly 
deployed in the market.  An enabling  energy 
efficiency market will be 
created and developed 
with the key market 
players participating in 
the Programme’s energy 
efficiency finance under 
Component 1.  National level (one 
country)  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Potential players lack 
awareness of the 
industrial energy 
efficiency area  and 
relevant regulations , 
while there exist a few 
well-trained /experienced 
energy experts  amid no 
market incentives for 
employing them.  low Indonesia  with several 
best practices and 
enhanced capacity  in 
energy efficiency finance 
will spread and share 
newly accumulated 
lessons nationwide and 
region wide . Effective  knowledge 
generation , awareness 
enhancement,  and 
learning processes  will 
be achieved with use of 
best practices and de -
risking metho dologies 
and standards  under 
Components 2 and 3.  Multi -countries  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme -specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1 -E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide aga inst which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme  specific indicators. If any co -benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co -benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co -benefit indicators ” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please numbe r each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for ou tputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final


---
*Page 58*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
  
  
 Increased volume  of 
energy  efficiency 
financing  in Indonesia  
industry  with an 
increased  participation  
of the LFIs in energy  
efficiency  financing  Number  of LFIs 
partipcated  in the 
Programme  Financial  contract  with 
KDB 0 6 6 LFIs who are not 
Executing  Entity  in the 
programme  are not 
counted   
Number of projects 
approved by local FIs   Annual reporting to KDB 
from local FIs (if needed, 
the frequency of reporting 
may increase)  0 20  
(30% for 
women -
led/owned 
SMEs)  20 
(30% for 
women -
led/owned 
SMEs)  # of projects is subject to 
change as per local 
needs  
 
GAP  
USD Volume of 
disbursement  – both 
lending of final 
beneficiaries(sub -
project loan) and 
credit guarantee of 
the GCF  Semi -annual reporting to 
KDB from local FIs (if 
needed, the frequency of 
reporting may increase)  0 (Sub -project 
loans) 133 mil 
USD  
(gurantee) 100 
mil USD  (Sub-project 
loans) 133 mil 
USD  
(gurantee) 100 
mil USD  As per disbursement 
under each sub -project 
agreement  
Generation of l ocally 
customised ESI/ESCO  
financing  mechanisms  Documented ESI  / 
ESCO schemes for 
sharing with local 
players  ESI / ESCO document 
approved by local FIs  and 
and local enterprises , 
with annual reporting to 
KDB 0 1 1 The documenbt should 
be evaluated and 
approved by KDB (or 
independent advisor)  
Generation of l ocally 
customised ESI/ESCO  
financing  mechanisms  Strengthened 
financing capacity of 
local FIs  Documented financing 
capacity building manual  0 4 4 As for ‘documented 
financing capacity 
building manual’, the 
number depends on the 
number of EEs (local 
FIs). 
 
All the activities should be  
annually  reported to KDB  Strengthened 
technical capacity of 
industry players  Documented technical 
capacity building manual 
per energy efficiency 
technology/equipment  0 5 5 
Strengthened 
regulatory framework 
with policy incentive 
recommendations  Documented policy 
recommendations 
submitted to NDA and 
relevant ministries  0 1 1 
Spraeding  positive  
perceptionsof  EE 
Finance  in Indonesia  
and ASAEN   Accumulation of 
know -how and 
lessons learnt  Documented knowledge 
sharing material, 
submitted to KDB, local 
FIs, and NDA  0 0 5 Number depends on the 
number of participating 
countries. All the activities


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
  
  
  
24 https://www.esdm.go.id/en/media -center/news -archives/electricity -tariffs -for-april-june-2021 -remain -unchanged  
25 As of 7 April 2021  
26 Mechnical  Engineer,  2021,  in Jakarta  (www.teleport .org) should be  annually  
reported to KDB  
The number  of pilot 
projects  in ASEAN  
member  states   Documented  pre-
feasibility  studies  of pilot 
project  s 0 1 2 Number depends on the 
number of participating 
countries .Pre-feasilbility  
should  reflect lesson  
learnt  from the  
Active knowledge 
sharing for ASEAN 
replication  Workshops with 
participants across 
ASEAN  0 0 5 (number of 
workshops), 
100 (number of 
participants)  Workshop will be 
annually held since mid -
tem period, with best 
practices accumulated  
 
All the activities should be  
annually  reported to KDB  
Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Economic Co -benefit:  
Economic benefits of 
industries overall with 
saved energy and jobs 
created accordingly  Industrial profits 
caused by saved 
energy costs  Converted value of 
energy savings  0 USD 27million  
(annual 
average)  USD 36million  
(annual 
average)  [Assumption]  
- Energy  tariff of  
U$ 0.078/kWh for 
businesses (medium 
voltage)24 /F/X Rate  of ‘1 
USD  = 14,504  IDR25 
 -  Other key assumptions 
used in Annex 3 and 
Annex 22  
 
Taregt  value is subject  to 
change as per local 
context, depending on 
energy tariff and FX rate 
in Indonesia  
New energy 
efficiency jobs 
created  New employment in  
financed industrial  
companies,  ESCO, 0 200 600 [Assumption]  
- Average  annual  salary  of 
U$28,92726,and 5% of


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
  
  
  
27, Baseline is zero because Indonesia rarely have energy efficiency finance disbursements successfully done so far; a few were i dentified non -gender mainstreamed as a 
result of the local FIs consultation.  
28, Baseline is zero because Indonesia rarely have energy efficiency finance disbursements successfully done so far; a few were i dentified non -gender mainstreamed as a 
result of the local FIs consultation.  relevant energy efficient 
technology areas   additional  industrial  profits  
is used  to hire New energy  
efficiency  jobs 
- Other key assumptions 
used in Annex 3 and Annex 
22 
 
More specific details will 
be reported to AE 
annually.  
Gender Co-benefit:  
Women’s active 
participation in the 
energy efficiency labour 
market, with an 
increase of skilled 
female engineers  Increased women’s 
access to energy 
efficiency finance  Ratio of women -
led/owned SMEs out of 
all borrowers  027 30% of 
financed 
bene ficiaries  30% of 
financed 
beneficiaries  As per Gender Action 
Plan 
Gendered stakeholder 
consultations  as per 
sub-project approved 
by local FIs  Participation of women 
amongst stakeholders  028 20% out of 
consulted 
participants as 
per project  20% out of 
consulted 
participants as 
per project  Gendered stakeholder 
should embrace male 
stakeholders , and 
encourage them with a 
gendered mindset  
Gender capacity 
building trainings  The number of 
workshops and/or 
seminars  0 5 10 At least one gender event 
as per year  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5  implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of  activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub -activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity.  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1. Backstopping credit risk of 
local FIs ’ own loan with the GCF credit 
guarantee provision  
 When a FI would provide an end 
borrower with its own loan under pre -
agreed eligibility criteria, it would be 
entitled to benefit from GCF 1. FI's energy efficiency project 
selection as per eligibility criteria  
2. Guarantee proceeds disbursed  1. GCF Guarantee Cover  of USD 100 
million disbursed


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
  
  
 Guarantee Cover  to be provided by 
GCF (via KDB) against credit risk of 
the end borrower up to a pre -agreed 
guarantee coverage ratio.  2. FI own loan of USD133 million 
disbursed  
Guarantee Advisor employed by KDB 
will monitor and manage the 
guarantee facility with a focus on F/X 
risk management.  1. Monitoring and follow up 
management by Guarantee 
Advisor  employed  
2. F/X risk management  
Activity 2.1:   Introduction of 
customi sed Energy Saving Insurance 
(ESI)  Developing de -risking mechanism of 
an energy saving insurance model 
and scheme that would help lower a 
high level of perceived risk perception, 
and would establish credibility and 
comfort amongst key relevant actors   
assessing priority energy efficiency 
technologies to be de -risked through 
the market study . 1. Develop locally customised i) 
insurance covering energy 
savings, ii) standard ESI contracts, 
iii) ene rgy savings validation 
methodologies  
2. A Consulting and in -depth 
interview with key stakeholder and 
technology providers.  
3. Capacity building and workshops  1. Report on locally customis ed de -
risking mechanisms including 
standard ESI contra ct its and 
validation methodologies (approved 
by AE)  
 
2. Report on locally fitting ESCO 
financing structure  
Activity 2.2:  Development of ESCO 
financing structure  ESCOs will be introduced with  a 
standard format, such as outcome -
fixed/guaranteed contracts and  
capacity building  and awareness 
enhancement . 1. Develop a locally fitting  outcome -
fixed contract  
2. Capacity building and workshops 
for awareness enhancement and 
the ESCO implementation   
Activity 3.1:   Local FIs capacity 
building activities  Supporting the local FIs to be 
equipped with the energy efficiency 
business pipeline in compliance with a 
set of eligibility criteria, with operation 
capacity of implementation the 
Programme in line with sustainability 
principles su ch as E&S and gender 
safeguards  1. Support for the development of 
project pipeline including seminar 
or workshops to industry  
2. Technical (E&S, gender) advisory 
on monitoring and evaluation on 
projects (for Local FIs)  Project pipeline report/Technical 
advisory submitted to KDB  
Activi ty 3.2:    Technical advisory for 
industry player  Supporting the local industry 
stakeholder s to be equipped with the 
energy efficiency business execution 
capacity   1. Technical advisory on the 
technology installation or utilisation 
for industry players  
2. Technical (E&S, gender) advisory  Technical advisory book for local 
industry stakeholders with capacity 
building workshops


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
 Activity 3.3:   Development of  energy 
efficiency  regulatory framework  Supporting Indonesia to fine tune, 
strengthen, and document the 
regulatory framework on the energy 
efficiency investment and technology 
as a result of review and a series of 
consultation with Indonesian policy 
makers.   1. Capacity building and workshops 
with local policy makers with 
consulting  and in -depth interview 
with key stakeholders  
2. Documentation of policy guidelines 
and regulatory framework for 
recommendations  Regulatory framework and Policy 
guideline s approved by AE and 
submitted to NDA and relevant 
ministries  
Activity 3.4:   Sharing kn owledge and 
understanding gained by Programme 
with ASEAN member states  Support the regional scale  up of the 
Programme throughout ASEAN 
member states by extracting  the 
lessons learnt and understanding 
gained by experiences in Component s 
1 and 2  and share it  with countries in 
the ASEAN region . 1. Draw the lessons learnt from the 
Programme implementation  
2. Knowledge sharing session with 
key stakeholders in ASEAN 
through workshops or webinars  Capacity Building / Knowledge 
Sharing Book submitted to AE  
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The Programme plans monitoring, evaluation, and reporting activities of all components in a strategic way. As there will be a  need for closer 
monitoring and communic ation to ensure a sound start of the Programme, more frequent arrangements will be scheduled during the initial stages of 
the Programme. Monitoring and reporting activities will be arranged to begin on a quarterly basis and move to semi -annually as the dev elopment  
pipeline and Programme matures.  In order to avoid any confusion, the interim and final independent evaluations will be conducted in accordance 
with the GCF''s evaluation criteria as per the GCF Evaluation Policy  
 
Component 1  
 
Since the programme includes various levels of stakeholders such as final beneficiaries and financial intermediaries, it woul d be important to 
determine the appropriate channels for monitoring and reporting in accordance to the accountability of each stake holder.  
First of all, it is anticipated that the final beneficiaries (the borrowers) will report the financials of installing, settin g-up and operating the equipment 
as well as the amount of energy consumed. This data will be used to determine the energy s avings of each equipment installed. The borrower will 
have to ensure that they report the correct type of fuel such as electricit y, and the correct input data using identical units for the reporting period. 
This data will be reported to the executing entit ies (local financial intermediaries).  
The LFIs will then gather all information from their final beneficiaries and check the figures for both energy consumption level and t he 
corresponding total emission savings. After an initial check, all data will be s treamlined and reported to both KDB(AE). The summary of all data will 
be organized and confirmed. After this stage, KDB  will report to GCF regarding the programme’s overall energy and emission savings level in 
tandem with the financial aspects. This whole  process outlined above will be discussed and confirmed once the programme has been initiated. In


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
 addition, KDB and local intermediaries will endeavour to collaborate so that data is monitored at an appropriate level alongs ide verification of 
certain sampl e data to ensure data reliability and validity.  
 
• Final Beneficiary : Final Beneficiary is the entity that performs an actual energy efficiency project and is obliged to report basic data, such a s 
energy usage/savings and expenses/cost for project monitoring  and evaluation. However, due to the nature of the Programme that focuses on 
SMEs, the vulnerable group of final beneficiaries has realistic barriers and difficulties in establishing  a separate business unit for each energy 
efficiency project or having expertise for project monitoring activities. Therefore, the main obligation of monitoring and re porting to the AE and 
GCF including information interpretation, impact and assessment bes ides the basic information reporting is transferred to local FIs under Sub -
project Loan Agreement.   
 
• Local FIs : FI is a local financial institution selected by  the AE, as it has provisional track records of high efficiency, effective monitoring, and 
supervising  of country -wide programme s that has the capacity for monitoring and evaluation to support this type of project . However, their 
experiences with GCF’s E&S/gender guidelines, or energy efficie ncy project may be not sufficient to fulfil the necessary guidelines . Against this 
backdrop, a Programme Implementation Unit (PIU) will be formed within the local FI s that will be  in charge of monitoring, reporting, and 
evaluation duties. The PIU will be c omposed of GCF project managers, focal points, and consultant s dispatched from external expert agencies 
or TA Providers under Component 3 of the Programme. Potential external expert agencies are shortlisted in the programme development stage 
through local stakeholder consultation s. Other TA activities under Component 3 support the development of pipeline, technical, E&S monitoring, 
and evaluation activities of FIs.  
 
• KDB (AE) :  KDB monitors all information reported by local FIs  on a quarterly basis (potentially shift to semi -annually as the Programme matures) , 
evaluate s and assess es whether each project is in line with the GCF and KDB guidelines , and provide s the supervis ory function for the 
Programme lifespan. KDB also communic ates with the GCF throughout the procedures of interim and final evaluation reporting to the GCF. All 
reporting results will be faithfully delivered to the GCF with assurance of the proper business operation throughout the Programme lifecycle.  
KDB will hav e meetings ,  at least quarterly  with each of FIs for more efficient and active project monitoring and evaluation activities.  
 
【Figure 19】 Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangement under Component 1


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
  
 
Component s 2 and 3 
 
Monitoring and evaluation on TA activities under Component s 2 and 3 are to  be conducted by ACE on the ground. ACE assesses and reports whether 
the selection of Implementation Entity (IE) and contracts with the respective IE  is in line with GCF and KDB guid elines. ACE will receive reporting on 
detailed information about TA activitie s and cost information from each IE  on a quarterly basis (frequency will be re -evaluated after Programme 
initiation) . In addition, ACE will analyse if TA activities have been prop erly implemented as planned, evaluate their effectiveness, and report its results 
to KDB on a quarterly basis . KDB will finally review all the reported information, confirm the proper execution of TA activities, and reports its results 
to the GCF quarterly , initially and potentially semi -annually as the Programme matures .


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
 【Figure 20】 Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangement under Component s 2 and 3 
 
 
 
Leveraging Local Capacity amid the COVID -19 Crisis.  A strong partnership with local expert entities under the financial intermediation system is 
important, particularly, in the midst of the global pandemic  outbreak. COVID -19 has begun to rapidly spread within a country and even from country 
to country aroun d the globe with rising infection rates and loss of life. Faced with this uncontrolled stage of the COVID -19 with a lagging roll -out of 
vaccines, KDB cannot directly visit there and keep an eye on project performance and compliance with requirements due to  an overseas travel ban, 
but ought to necessarily depend on reporting outcomes of local partners. Therefore, the Programme undertakes a form of periodic monitoring, 
reporting, and evaluation on the basis of systemic collaborations with executing entities a nd partners of the Programme, including Indonesia NDA. 
As an accredited entity, however, KDB shall come up with an idea of effective supervision and shall increase the frequency of  periodic site visits as 
the number of infection cases gradually go down.


---
*Page 66*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), san ctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describ e the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as wel l as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
 
A potential technical and operation risk might be caused by a lack of knowledge and competence of end 
beneficiaries – mainly industrial enterprise owners – surrounded by the least -developed energy efficiency 
market circumstances. Especially, industrial ent erprises ought to adopt themselves to change into energy 
efficient equipment and technologies. The change necessarily requires enterprises to redefine the operation 
and management (O&M) process as per modification and/or replacement of technical methodolog y and 
operational mechanism.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The eligibility criteria require local FIs and their borrowers (end beneficiaries) to carry out a technical 
assessment on underlying projects so that any potential technical and operational risk attributable to 
unfamiliarity and a lack of skill and knowled ge could be minimised as much as possible. The set criteria 
further require demonstration of a concrete O&M plan over the borrowing lifespan in order to ensure the 
energy efficiency system optimisation and energy saving results accordingly. As per request from partner 
FIs, the Programme provides support for a technical assessment of the vulnerable group of local 
beneficiaries under Component 3.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
 
A potential governance risk might be caused by the Programme implementation governance of a standard 
guarantee intermediation structure  under which KDB relies on local FIs with a full authority to select, 
appraise, structure, execute,  lend, and manage sub -projects and their proponents. Given that KDB control s 
on local borrowers operate only via the FIs, the selected FIs are the key to implement the Programme 
faithfully in line with the eligibility criteria, for instance, including ESS and the gender lens in vesting principle . 
This would relate the classic principal -agent problem often arising due to inherently competing priorities 
between the principal (GCF and KDB) and the agent (local FIs).  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 67*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
  
Partner FIs selection has been cautiously done with many rounds of discussions, including a firm institutional 
commitment to the GCF and KDB policies and guidelines. In addition, a partial guarantee coverage 
arrangement (100% coverage not acceptable as per  eligibility criteria) under Component 1 is a protective 
device to align FIs’ interest with that of the GCF and KDB, thereby minimising the chronic principal -agent 
issue. On top of the above, the Programme put s multi -level contractual and institutional arrangements to be 
effective throughout all the business cycle in place: (1) the eligibility criteria for sub -project selection; (2) the 
Sub-Project Loan Agreement aligned with the FAA; and (3) the operation of th e PIU. Also, KDB will monitor  
FIs, through reporting  and physical  visits where  possible, if FIs implement the Programme in line with the 
eligibility criteria, and the guideline s of KDB  and GCF, which therefore expects periodic meetings between 
KDB and each  of FIs, including the Guarantee A dvisor .  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Low Medium  
Description  
 
The GCF Guarantee Facility of Component 1  would be directly exposed to the risk by its nature, up to a pre -
agreed  guarantee  coverage ratio . As typically seen in a credit guarantee or insurance product, the guarantor 
could be also exposed to any credit risk attributable to information -asymmetry.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Shortlisting and selection of local FIs takes the credit rating and relevant reputation into account. In particular, 
SMI and  IIF, under the current discussion , are reputable private financial institution s in Indonesia and their 
respective credit rating s are  equivalent or close to sovereign rating of the country. As such, it does not 
foresee the credit risk to be potentially material.  
 
As for the FI Own Loan to be backed by the GCF guarantee Cover , the FI w ould share any credit risk of the 
relevant borrowers up to the residual portion under the guaranteed FI Own Loan. With the said mechanism, 
any credit risk of the final beneficiary exposed to relevant FI is not insignificant, thus the moral hazard risk 
to be less likely  to occur. What  is more, equity injection from a final beneficiary could be told as another 
mitigation measure against any credit risk of borrowers.  
  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Low High  
Description  
 
There is a F/X risk of the Indonesian Rupiah (IDR) against USD   because the vast majority of FI  Own Loan 
to final beneficiaries are likely to be provided in IDR as  it is the case for a typical corporate loan to domestic 
borrowers ; however,  GCF funding (Guarantee) is provided only in USD.  As the GCF Credit Guarantee is 
denominated and made available in USD, FI s (as guarantee recipient s) may be expose d to a currency 
mismatc h risk related to the currency of defaulted debt service amounts under the FI Own Loan (in IDR , but 
this currency mismatch risk is limited to the case where IDR appreciates against USD.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 68*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
  
The GCF  Credit  Guarantee will be designed in a way which the foregoing F /X risk would be partially absorbed 
by the GCF  and F/X risk not absorbed by GCF is borne by local FIs.  F/X risk will be regularly monitored and 
managed by a professional Guarantee Advisor who would be employed by KDB.  
   
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Legal  Low Medium  
Description  
 
The programme entails multi -dimensional and multi -level legal and contractual arrangements with multiple 
parties, which might carry a potential legal risk in association with legality or validity and enforceability of any 
agreement or contract. Furthermore , dis-alignment amongst agreements and contracts governed by different 
jurisdictions might be another potential legal risk.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
In order to avoid a potential legal risk arisen by jurisdiction discrepancy, definitive agreements where KDB 
is a contracting party – i.e., FAA, Guarantee Agreement, and TA Service Agreement – are to be universally 
governed under English Law and potent disputes are to be resolved by arbitration administered by the 
Singapore International Arbi tration Centre (SIAC) in accordance with the SIAC Arbitration Rules. This is to 
be incorporated in the agreements.  
 
On the other hand, all the Sub -Project Loan Agreements to be entered between a FI and each borrower are 
likely to be governed by the Indones ian law – the host country law. That implies that all the sub -transactions 
are standard corporate loan financing, which are the core business areas of local FIs with an extensive track 
record over decades. In that regard, the occurrence of any legal risk, potentially caused by jurisdictional 
discrepancy seems marginal; and even if a potential risk occurs, local FIs are deemed capable enough to 
tackle the legal disputes by themselves as a contacting party versed in the local legal process.  
 
In addition, all  legal agreements in the programme will be carried out with support and advice from qualified 
independent legal advisors, which will minimize the legal issues and controversies.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low High  
Description  
 
The GCF proceeds under the programme can also be utili sed to support anti -terrorist activities, money 
laundering or prohibited activities policies by FIs or the final beneficiaries. Additionally, this risk of a failure 
to meet international standards with respect to preventing money laundering and/or financing  of terrorism 
can present problems , such as obstacles to financial flows and/or implementation and/or payment 
processing.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 69*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 The programme under Component 1 is supporting credit guarantees with local FIs, who will provide FI Own 
Loans to the final beneficiaries. As FIs were or will be selected through the proper capacity assessment by 
KDB including AML/CFT (KYC) assessment, final beneficiaries must also undergo due diligence according 
to the  Sub-Project Loan Agreement between the FI and the final beneficiary . Then,  it is considered that such 
related risk has been substantially mitigated . Also, Indonesia has the national regulatory system to monitor 
relevant issues of the financial institution s under the purview of central bank. Moreover, the potential 
Executing Entity under Component 1 has an internal regulation and policy about their investment activities, 
so the final beneficiaries’ activities under the programme will be properly screened an d monitored.  
 
Under Component s 2 and 3, AML/CFT assessment on the Executing Entity (ACE) is already completed by 
KDB, and the activities of implementing  entities  will be monitored if they are in line with the ACE’s internal 
regulations agreed by KDB. Reporting of complaints and allegations of impropriety, wrongdoing etc., are 
conducted by PIU (Programme Implementation Unit) for Business Coordination and Sustainabi lity under 
KDB Supervision, which will be established in each local FI under Component 3.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Sanctions  Low Medium  
Description  
 
There should not be any United Nations Security Council resolutions imposing financial sanctions that would 
prohibit the engagement of GCF or the AE in the country or with individuals or entities under each Component 
of the programme.  If there is any, any  approvals, exemptions, licences,  or other permissions are required.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
KDB has  ilar measures announced by the United Nations (UN) or other international organi sations ( e.g., 
World Bank, OECD, IMF, etc.), and will not deal with the countries or companies included in the list. In 
addition, it was confirmed by the internal system that Indonesia  and ACE are not included in the list as of 
now.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Low Medium  
Description  
 
There should not be any  practice included in GCF  and KDB prohibited practice s lists, e.g., non -compliance 
with the E&S safeguards and gender discrimination risk as for employment,  during the implementation and 
financing of the activities, under the GCF  and KDB guideline s on prohibited practice s.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
KDB has an internal system that controls AML/CFT and other prohibited practices , including prohinitons  
against E&S and Gender mainstreaming standards , and all the activities under the Programme will be 
monitored and supervised by KDB if any of them is in the list, based on GCF and KDB  guideline s. 
Selected Risk Factor 9


---
*Page 70*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Regulatory Risk  Medium  Low 
Description  
 
Regulatory barriers including lack of fiscal and non -fiscal incentives, fossil fuelled energy subsidies,  etc. 
should be addressed for energy efficiency improvement in Indonesian industrial sector from  a long term point 
of view. However, there is a risk that it will not improve to a satisfactory level, given that it needs to coordinate 
various opinions or int erests between many kinds of government ministires and there may face some conflict 
with the economic development rationale which is one of the government’s main policy goals.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The Programme is aiming to minimize this risk thorugh  Activity 3.3 under Component 3, In addition, it has 
a structure that enables a successful programme implementation wi thout a prompt improvement of policy 
and regulation through GCF guarantee Cover and de -risking scheme development. Also, if energy 
efficie ncy project is successfully implemented and its potential economic benefit is known to policy makers, 
the government’s willingness to improve the energy efficiency regulatory framework is expected to 
increase.


---
*Page 71*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
  
Environmental and Social Management System  (ESM S). The Programme submits an ESM S as Annex 6 
of the funding proposal package for the integration of E nvironmental and Social (E &S) aspects into the 
energy efficiency initiative, estimating the E&S risk category B. Given that project -specific information such 
as location and project size i s unknown at a programme level, the ESM S has been developed to provide 
guidance for screening and assessing likely E&S issues, carrying out individual project -specific 
environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA ), and preparing the environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP ) to mitigate potentially negative E&S risks. The framework will support local FIs 
and their borrowers to ensure compliance with the GCF and KDB safeguards policies and the government 
policies, rules, regulations, and procedures . 
 
【Figure 21】 ESM S with E&S Famework,  Assessment,  and Plans  
 
 
Potential E&S Impacts and Proposed Mitigation Measures on the Basis of a Phased -Approach. The 
framework singles out the followings as potential E&S impacts; thermal energy used by factory, electricity 
used by factory, surface and ground water pollution, ai r and dust pollution, noise pollution, solid and 
hazardous waste management, and suppliers’ compliance with labour and environmental standards. They 
are arranged in three phases – pre-installation, installation, and post -installation phases – with mitigati on 
and control measures and responsible entities. Please see Appendix E of the ESM S for more details.


---
*Page 72*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 Institutional Arrangement for ESS Compliance. A robust institutional arrangement should be present in 
order to effectively comply with stipulations given under the framework. Under a two -step lending structure, 
each of the local FIs will have its own PIU which will be partly composed of the E&S expert  group. As an 
intermediary, local FI is responsible for periodic monitoring and reporting  to KDB on sub -projects they 
finance,  and these duties are to be carried out by the PIU.  The programme will be in compliance with the 
GCF Policy on the Prevention and Protection from Sextual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual 
Harassment (SEAH Policy) as prescribed in its ESM S (Annex 6). According to the SEAH Policy, the 
programme sets clear obligations for all individuals in the GCF funded activities to prevent and respond to 
the SEAH, and to refrain from condoning, encouraging, participating in, and/or engaging in SEAH. This will 
be also addressed by the PIUs across local FIs.  
 
【Figure 22】 Implementation Arrangement for E&S Compliance


---
*Page 73*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
  
Consultations with Key Stakeholders – NDA, Relevant Policy Makers, CSOs, etc. – and Potential 
Impacts on Indigenous Peoples.  For gathering practical comments on the group, the Programme has also 
undertaken a governmental level focus group discussion with GCF , NDA, OJK, Fiscal Policy Agency (Badan 
Kebijakan Fiskal , BKF), PLN, M ENR , and ACE, and in -depth consultations with civil and society 
organisations (CSOs, GCF observers). Part of those consultations revealed the likelihood of potential 
impacts on indigenous communities; for instance, a CSO - WALHI, Friends of the Earth Indonesi a - shared 
an expert view that pulp and paper industries have been using forestry resources of indigenous people, and 
that cement companies have affected water conservation areas which may  give impact s to biodiversity and 
indigenous community livelihoods. The Programme will not finance any project with potential adverse 
impacts on indigenous people. Please see below a summary of the CSOs representing Indonesia and  refer 
to the ESM S for more details including identification and selection of interviewers and minutes of interviews.   
  
【Table 14】 Summary of Consultation s with CSOs   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM ) with Grievance Redress Committee and Focal Point. The 
programme sets out the GRM that answers queries, receives suggestions, and addresses complaints and 
grievances  about any irregularity in  the application of the guidelines adopted in the ESM S. As an executing 
entity and a  financial intermediary, local F Is are to form a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC ) and 
designate a GRM focal point in their PIUs. As for the GRM process, all complaints and suggestions of 
aggrieved people will be formally received in a written form (Grievance Redressal Form in Appendix H  of the 
ESM S) by a GRM focal point for a prompt response and the GRC is responsible for a periodic reporting to 
KDB while examining documentary evidence  submitted during informal hearings and recording salient points 
to be presented by the aggrieved.  
 No Stakeholders Engaged  Date  Summary  
1 IESR (Institute for Essential 
Service Reform)  Friday, 26 
March 2021  There are many energy efficiency projects implemented so lessons 
learned should be adopted. Opportunities to do energy efficiency 
are seen a lot in cement industries and commercial office building.  
Each project under the Programme has to submit an environ ment 
and social impact assessment suggested by the GCF ESS.  
2 KEHATI (Yayasan 
Keanekaragaman Hayati 
Indonesia - Indonesia 
Biodiversity Foundation)  Friday, 19 
March 2021  The Programme implementation should highlight the ability of the 
Programme to reduce carbon footprint. Human right or gender 
aspect have not seen as one of the noticeable components of 
project implementation in energy efficiency.  
3 WALHI (Wahana 
Lingkungan Hid up – 
Friends of the Earth 
Indonesia)  Wednesday, 
24 March 
2021  WALHI suggested that each program me related to energy efficiency 
should think about the impact that affects the environment and 
community surrounding the company facilities or down the 
company's  supply chain. Some examples are that pulp and paper 
companies have been using Indigenous People ’s forestry 
resource s. Mining companies (cement) has destroyed water 
conservation area which may impact biodiversity and community 
livelihood. The textile and f ood industry has been known to have a 
problematic approach to their workers' policy. Stakeholder 
consultation with the observer should not only happen at the 
beginning of the program designed only. The final draft of the 
Program me /screening instrument sho uld allow a discussion with 
observers as well.  
4 Perserikatan Solidaritas 
Perempuan ((SP) Women’s 
Solidarity for Human 
Rights)  Friday, 26 
March 2021  SP suggested adopting SP Guideline s for Women Safeguard on 
Policy, Program, and Climate Change Project.  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
Gender Mainstreamed since the Programme Inception. Since making a scratch outline of the concept, a 
gender specialist has engaged the Programme development for the sake of a genu ine gender mainstreamed 
work on the basis of KDB internal regulation. In that , the energy efficiency financing initiative differentiates


---
*Page 74*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 itself from the general grant projects . The gender studies have a strategic focus on financial inclusion of the 
vulnerable female group in terms of access to financial products and services; they are generally 
marginalised due to double or triple vulnerability like locality, low literacy, and lac k of tertiary educational 
attainment as well as gender -caused lack of access to finance. Considering a serious lack of first level micro 
/ raw gender -disaggregated data, literature review, focus group discussion , and key informant interview were 
used as th e primary methodologies for data collection and assessment. A full -fledged gender document 
(assessment and action plan) is submitted as part of the funding proposal package.  
 
Enjoying Market Opportunities through Gender Mainstreaming. The Programme sees t he group of 
women -led SMEs  as a market opportunity, rather than risk, with untapped potential in that the group makes 
up almost half of the country’s SME sector. Despite unavailability of gender -disaggregated microdata and 
precise statistics on women’s eco nomic contribution, IFC (2016) estimates that 43% of formal SMEs are 
women -owned in Indonesia; informality is one of issues from a gender point of view though. 29 It accordingly 
mainstreams gender considerations during the lifespan, believing that serving women -led SMEs eventually 
contributes to the whole economy.  
 
Supporting Underbanked Women -led SMEs through a Gender Lens Investing Approach.  Above all 
things, the Programme shall guide and support local FIs to adjust their energy efficiency finance to bet ter 
serve women -led SMEs. Most female entrepreneurs face inherent challenges and difficulties – e.g., collateral 
requirement and complex loan application procedures – in obtaining lending services from formal financial 
institutions for their business; the same might be true of beneficial energy efficiency financing. In order to 
tackle the harsh reality, the Programme produced the gender document (assessment and action plan) that 
applies the women -led SME framework under the financing  structure:  i.e., priority given to relevant women -
led SMEs in terms of access to energy efficiency financial products and services.  
 
In order to minimise anticipated discrepancy between studies and implementation, the Programme 
emphasises the practical and realistic solu tions of the gender lens investing approach. For a practical use 
of the women -led SME framework, the Programme clearly defines a women -led SME as a formally registered 
enterprise under 250 employees (with reference to the United Nations definition on the m edium enterprise), 
where at least one owner is a woman  or at least half of employees are women. G ender action plan ( GAP ) 
sets out representative KPIs as follows; 20% of women -led SMEs: and 30% female participants in trainings, 
and women -only consultations.  
 
Embracing Borrowers Not Ready Yet, Bringing Them towards a Gender Mainstreaming Commitment. 
Most importantly, the Programme does not discourage the borrowing business group not eligible for the 
gendered priority and financial benefit. It shall function as a meaningful incentive that encourages the not -
ready group to take this opportunity to internally mainstreami ng gender considerations: e.g. , In the case of 
approaching local FIs with a commitment to employing more women, the committed business group will 
enjoy the benefits under guidance of the GAP . Consequently, the Programme aims to achieve S ustainable 
Development Goal 5 – gender equality and women’s empowerment – and to produce best practices for the 
Indonesian SME banking sector  as a whole . 
 
Inputs Integrated from Consultation with Key Stakeholders Consultation. The Programme’s gender 
document integrate s valuable inputs as a result of a series of consultation s with the Women’s machinery 
and other line ministries and Indonesia -based key stakeholders with relevant expertise and a status as a 
GCF observer: Solidaritas Perempuan, IESR, Kehati, and WALHI. One  piece of valuable feedback was a 
division between upstream and downstream energy efficiency business areas in analysing gender -biased 
vulnerabilities, which differentiates from other studies in taking a look at varying dynamics even within the 
energy effi ciency sector. Detailed analyses and minutes of meetings are available in the submitted gender 
document. In addition, the Programme plans women -only consultation s as prescribed in GAP to extract 
women’s voice and call over the course of implementation.  
 
29 IFC (2016) . Women -owned SMEs in Indonesia: A Golden Opportunity for Local Financial Institutions. March 2016.


---
*Page 75*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
  
Implementation Arrangement in Partnership with Local Gender Experts.  As a Seoul -based accredited 
entity without a strong local presence, KDB has considered the most optimal implementation structure of 
partnering with local entities with contextual knowledge,  relevant expertise, and the proper network and 
resources. That said, the consultation process was part of tapping into local agency partners to ensure the 
proper and sustainable implementation of planned activities including monitoring and evaluation, of course 
under KDB guidance and supervision. More on the local gender agency selection is to be discussed with 
Indonesia NDA and local FIs; the local FIs are at the centre of the women -led SME banking activities in 
actual and they will be supported by the lo cal gender expert group. KDB will require selected local FIs to 
establish a PIU where local gender experts are to be assigned and to provide advisory on the ways to 
implement the GAP: e.g. , what sort of priority to be given to women -led SME s on the basis o f banking 
operation, how to sort out them out of the pool of borrowers  and screen them for final access to energy 
efficiency  finance, and what specific activities and commitments to encourage the borrowers to adopt for 
mainstreaming gender considerations.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words , approximately  1 page ) 
 
Systemic Governance and Monitoring Structure Ensures Proper Financial Management.  The 
Programme’s funding flows will be regularly monitored and strictly governed by a set of contractual and 
institutional arrangements under the guarantee facility  implementation structure, as addressed in the section 
B.4. In principle, the GCF proceeds will be  independently managed in a KDB account pursuant to the general 
provisions  of the AMA and FAA. As the Accredited Entity, KDB , will regularly confirm  whether financial 
operation s, such as disbursement of the proceeds , are being properly executed in complian ce with 
contractual and institutional arrangements.  
 
As for the GCF Credit G uarantee proceeds, each of the Guarantee Agreements will make a reference to 
relevant covenants set out in the Guarantee Agreement while imposing additional undertakings and 
covenants customised for the guarantee product. By doing so, the guarantor and its agent will be fully 
informed o f all of the material information over the guarantee execution period, so as to avoid any moral 
hazard issues related to potential information -asymmetry. Under KDB supervision, a selected Guarantee 
Advisor  will closely monitor the existing guarantee portfo lio so that aggregation of guarantor’s then -current 
liabilities under all executed guarantee agreements does not exceed the total guarantee pool of USD 100  
million.  
 
As the Accredited Entity, KDB will visit the Programme operation sites to oversee the status of 
implementation and technology deployment operation of SMEs in industries on the ground and to supervise 
the overall process related to financial management. The site visit plan is, however, to materialise once the 
COVID -19 crisis and ensuing trav el restrictions become loose. If the pandemic crisis severely continues in 
Indonesia, KDB will make its full efforts to secure effective alternatives: hiring local expert s to execute the 
onsite reviews . In addition, KDB plans to monitor and manage FI’s imp lementation activities in line with the 
guidelines of GCF and KDB through regular meetings with FIs (face -to-face or virtual ). 
 
Audit and Internal Control on Proceeds.  KDB manages GCF proceeds from GCF to executing entities in 
line with AMA and FAA, and al l the proceeds are subject to internal and external audit in line with KDB rule s 
and guideline s. GCF proceeds from KDB to final beneficiaries are managed by executing entities (EEs) 
(especially by PIU, which is Programme Implementation Unit established for  the Programme  for each 
executing entity ) in line with their regulations assessed by KDB already, under KDB’s supervision and 
monitoring.  
 
In addition, all disbursements under Component 1 are controlled by KDB and local FI as following clause of 
The Guaran tee Agreement between KDB and local FI s so that they can be used transparently for the


---
*Page 76*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 Programme; each disbursement to the FIs will be based on delivery by the FIs of evidence satisfactory to 
KDB of the physical progress of Sub -projects. All expenditures or disbursements under Component s 2 and 
3 are also controlled by KDB and executing entities as follows; each disbursement to the executing entities  
will be based on delivery by the executing entities  of evidence satisfactory to KDB of actual s ervice progress 
of Sub -projects. Especially, all the disbursement requests should have the details of usage of previous 
disbursement and their actual documentary evidence such as receipt s, invoices, delivery notices , etc.  
Documentation for usage of disburs ement proceeds should be reported on a quarterly basis.  Additionally, 
financial statements of the respective participating entities should be delivered to the entity that it reports to 
(e.g., IEs to EEs, EEs to AE, and AE to GCF) on an at least semi -annual  basis, and audited financial 
statements and annual reports should be delivered annually  for purposes of governance and review . 
 
Procurement Activities in Compliance with Proven KDB Procurement Policies Aligned with the GCF 
Standard.  KDB has a procurement policy that abides by the GCF procurement guidance. All the 
procurement of goods and services will be undertaken in accordance with KDB’s internal and external 
provision (under supervision of the Korean government) on procurement cleared by the GCF during 
accreditation. Under KDB supervision, executing entities are all to cling to the guidance.  
 
Under Component s 2 and 3 , ACE will function as the Programme proponent and pre -selected Executing 
Entity  partner for arranging TA activities. In that , if ACE ought to depend on the expertise of third-party  
consultants for various activities beyond its own capacity, professional entities will be appointed and/or 
procured as implementing entities by ACE under KDB’s supervision and control.  
 
The procurement process in its entirety will be carried out in strict compliance with KDB ’s procurement 
standard as defined in Annex 10 (Procurement Plan) and its respective internal procurement policy.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity decl ares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the fundi ng proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together 
with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality 
under the ac credited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website .  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 77*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provide d) 
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan , Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☐ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☐ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)30 
☒ Annex 23 Capacity Assessment of Executing Entities  
☒ Annex 24 Exclusion List


---
*Page 78*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
 R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE  FISKAL.KEMENKEU.GO.ID
Nomor :S-98/KF/2021 24 August 2021
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund  (GCF)
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu , Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
Subject :Funding Proposal for the GCF by the Korean Development Bank (KDB) 
regarding Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN Member 
States
Dear Mr. Glemarec ,
Werefer totheSupporting Innovative Mechanisms forIndustrial Energy Efficiency Financing in
Indonesia withLessons forReplication inother ASEAN Member States asincluded intheFunding
Proposal submitted by the Korean Development Bank (KDB) to us on 22 July 2021 .
The undersigned istheChairman ofFiscal Policy Agency, Ministry ofFinance astheNational
Designated Authority  of Indonesia .
Pursuant toGCF decision B.08/10, thecontent ofwhich weacknowledge tohave reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme  as included in the Funding Proposal .
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a)Thegovernment ofIndonesia hasno-objection totheprogramme asincluded intheFunding
Proposal;
(b)Theprogramme asincluded intheFunding Proposal isinconformity withIndonesia ’snational
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c)Inaccordance with theGCF’senvironmental and social safeguards, theprogramme as
included in the Funding Proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
Wealso confirm that ournational process forascertaining no-objection totheprogramme as
included in the Funding Proposal has been duly followed.
Wealso confirm thatourno-objection applies toallprojects oractivities tobeimplemented within
the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Yours  faithfully,
Ditandatangani  secara  elektronik
Febrio  Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman


---
*Page 80*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy 
Efficiency Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for 
Replication in other ASEAN Member States  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private 
Accredited entity  Korea Development Bank  (KDB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme  Indonesia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 16, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Bahasa Indonesia  
Explanation on language  Bahasa Indonesia  is the official  language  of Indonesia, 
which  is the language understandable to affected 
peoples /stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English :  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/ESMS_English.
pdf 
B
ahasa Indonesia:  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/ESMS_Local_La
nguage.pdf  
73


---
*Page 81*
---

Other link(s)   https://www.kdb.co.kr/index.jsp  → Investor Relation → 
Sustainability → Green Climate Fund → Access to the GCF 
Funds via KDB → Disclosure of Environmental and Social Information ( here ) → ESMS (English)  and ESMS (Local 
language)  
Remarks  An ESMS consiste nt with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the “ Environment al and Social 
Management System ”. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date Friday, September 16, 2022  
Place  Hard  Copies  of the disclosure will be made  available  at the 
ASEAN Center  for Energy Of fice located  at: 
S
oemantri Brodjonegoro II Building, 6th fl.,  
Directorate General of Electricity,  
Jl. HR. Rasuna Said Blok X -2, Kav. 07 -08, 
Jakarta 12950, Indonesia  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  TBD  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 17, 2022  
Not
e: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
___
_____ 
74


---
*Page 82*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 75 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP196 
Proposal name:  Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy 
Efficiency Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication 
in other ASEAN Member States  
Accredited entity:  Korea Development Bank (KDB)  
Project/ Program me size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel   
1.1 Impact potential      Scale: High 
1. Overview : The “Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN Member States ” 
programme (the “Program me”) seeks to promote a structural shift in Indonesia towards the 
adoption of more energy -efficient approaches to industrial activities. The Program me 
proposes to achieve this goal through a guarantee facility that will support local financial 
institutions (LFIs) in debt financing energy efficiency interventions. The guarantee facility 
will be accompanied by a technical advisory facility designed to support policy reform and 
capacity -building.  
2. The total Program me size is USD 247.38 million, which consists of USD 100 million in 
guarantees, USD 133.3 million in loans, USD 9 million in equity and USD 5.08 million in 
grants.  GCF is being asked to provide  the USD 100 million  guarantee portion and USD 5 
million in technical assistance grants.1 LFIs will provide USD 133.3 million co -financing in 
senior loans from their own funds. Project developers are projected to contribute USD 9 
million in aggregate equity, that will account for 5  to 10  per cent of the total investment on an 
individual projec t basis.  
3. Indonesia has submitted its nationally determined contribution (NDC) to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat ( UNFCCC  secretariat)  and has 
indicated a willingness to transition towards a low -carbon and climate -resilient pathway. 
Indonesia’s NDC recogni zes energy efficiency as a key mitigation pathwa y. According to the 
Program me’s funding proposal , Indonesia attributes 65.43  per cent of its total greenhouse 
gas ( GHG ) emissions to the energy sector  making it a useful target for climate intervention. 
Notwithstanding the above, the market penetration of energy efficien cy technologies in 
Indonesia have long been hampered by a range of barriers, such as access to finance, 
regulatory challenges, and a la ck of capacity and awareness among relevant stakeholders. 
The Program me aims to address these barriers by establishing an energy efficiency market 
ecosystem that will make investments commercially attractive and will scale and  function 
without further need  of concessional funding.  
4. The Program me will provide guarantees to LFIs in Indonesia that will partially cover 
(50–95 per cent) the credit risk of participating LFI loans to project developers. The end 
beneficiaries of the loans will be energy service companies ( ESCOs ), industrial small and 
medium -sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and small -scale corporates that will use the funds to 
 
1 KDB will provide USD 0.08 million in in -kind contributions to support technical assistance.


---
*Page 83*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 76 
 
 
acquir e energy -efficient industrial equipment. The coverage ratio applied  will be based on the 
details of each individual loan such as the type and size of a loan beneficiary.  KDB has 
selected seven LFIs, of which five are subsidiaries  of Korean financial instit utions , to act as 
executing entities. The LFIs will provide loans from their own funds for energy efficiency 
projects. KDB acting as GCF’s accredited entity will provide a guarantee product to support 
the issuance of the LFI loans.   
5. The LFIs will be the e xecuting entities for the guarantee component, while ASEAN 
[Association of Southeast Asian Nations] Centre for Energy (ACE) will be an executing entity 
for the technical assistance component. The technical assistance will include capacity -
building for rele vant public entities to enhance regulator y frameworks and to support  efforts 
to establish energy efficiency de-risking efforts such as energy savings insurance and ESCOs. 
LFIs will also be eligible for capacity -building support in  assessing and financially modelling 
energy efficiency  projects. This assistance in a new market c ould  be important in educating 
market participants on technology options and expected payback benefits from energy 
savings. The industry stakeholders will also receive t echnical a ssistance related to the 
installation and utilization of the equipment.  
6. Impacts : In the view of the independent Technical Advisory Panel (independent TAP ), 
the Program me has a well -articulated  climate objective. The Program me is expected to 
finance  energy efficiency equipment that will help to avoid GHG emission s of 3,138,649 
MtCO 2eq over 10 years (notwithstanding that energy efficiency  equipment often has a much 
longer useful life). The Program me will contribute to reducing th e overall energy intensity of 
Indonesian industr ial sector s by target ing energy -intensive industrial sectors and 
substituting equipment with high er energy savings potential . The acquired technologies will 
replace the energy -intensive equipment utilizing natural gas or energy from the fossil -fuel 
dominated sources.  
7. The impact of the Program me is not limited to direct GHG reductions. Its true value is 
in demonstrating the effec tiveness and commercial viability of energy efficiency 
interventions in Indonesia. If successful, the Program me can help jumpstart a new sector 
through demonstration impacts but , importantly , also through improved technical capacity 
among developers, finan ciers and government. The improved capacity on the public side 
should lead to regulatory reforms  that would facilitate the growth of energy efficiency in 
Indonesia. The potential market size is large as demonstrated in the funding proposal  but 
knowledge ba rriers and the need for additional regulatory reform ha ve limited energy 
efficiency adoption  in the past. Climate -finance research suggests that financing for energy 
efficiency by private actors only accounts for 4  per cent of the total investment in climate 
finance of USD 13 billion between 2015 and 2018, reflecting the deep need and significant 
opportunity to pursue an increase in energy efficiency investment in Indonesia. The 
Program me’s guarantee product should go a long way to bridge the risk gap for LFIs and 
ultimately enable more competitive financing terms to final beneficiaries for energy efficiency 
projects .   
8. The independent TA P view s the overall impact  potential of this funding proposal as 
high. The Program me could make a significant contribution to building an energy efficiency 
ecosystem in line with Indonesia’s NDC targets.  One noteworthy aspect of the Program me 
that supports a high assessment is that it does not simply provide low -interest funding to 
final b eneficiaries but , instead , utilizes a more efficient credit risk guarantee approach. Under 
this approach , LFIs will provide their own loans  to qualifyin g projects , while KDB will 
backstop the loans with a guarantee. The guarantee coverage ratio will vary d epending on the 
end beneficiary of the loan whereby a higher guarantee coverage ratio will be made available 
SMEs in Indonesia. Moreover, the Program me aims  to ensure that it uses the least 
concessionality necessary  and that concessionality benefits are primarily felt by end


---
*Page 84*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 77 
 
 
beneficiaries. The overall goal of the Program me is to migrate the energy efficiency market to 
a sta te where it does not require concessionality.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential      Scale : High  
9. The Program me seeks a paradigm shift in Indonesia by scaling up energy efficiency 
finance coupled with targeted technical assistance so that a self -sustaining market ecosystem 
can be created. The Program me intends to achieve this through : (i) addressing financial 
barriers via successful loans guaranteed by the Program me; (ii) policy support to enhance 
enabling environments ; and (iii) technical assistance to project developers and LFIs .  
10. It is our view that guarantee credit enhancement facilities like the Program me are 
well suited to mitigate many of the barri ers to finance that industrial energy efficiency 
projects  face in Indonesia . Although guarantees are not appropriate for all markets, the size 
of the Indonesian market and relative sophistication of its legal and financial sectors  make it a 
well -adapted  approach. KDB in its funding proposal ha s been able to demonstrate that the 
Indonesian market is sufficiently financially mature and th at  plentiful opportunities exist for 
financial intervention.  
11. Financial barriers : The guarantees will enable the Program me to finance energy 
efficiency developers at concessional rate s when compared to the financing generally 
available for infrastructure and industrial sector investments. The guarantee will lower the 
credit -risk premium resulting in an eventual reduc tion of the end interest rate to the 
beneficiaries making energy efficiency investments attractive for industry players. 
Concessionality can also be important in encourag ing industrial sector participants to adopt 
energy efficiency measures that they would  not have otherwise considered due to 
unfamiliarity, cost concerns and lack of targeted finance. Moreover, the demonstration impact 
of these initial projects (considering the potential size of the Indonesian market) can go a 
long way to catalysing  follow -on projects without the need for concessionality as the cost -
benefits of energy efficiency become clear er to market  participants . In the independent TAP’s 
review, it also appreciate s that the facility will focus on enabling access  to finance by SMEs 
that struggle for access  due to their small size and perceived low creditworthiness.  
12. The funding proposal demonstrated that KDB  has sufficient energy efficiency 
expertise to select LFI partners and screen underlying guarantee projects. The LFIs identified 
as executing  entities in the funding  proposal also provided evidence of strong local presence 
and expertise in allocating and disbursing funds. The LFI selection process considered 
multiple factors: ( i) extensive commercial lending experiences in industries , including 
energy -intensive industries; ( ii) familiarity and/or understanding of the guarantee structure 
through collaboration with multilateral development banks, development financial 
institutions, and/or global financiers; ( iii) familiarity with and/or wi llingness to adopt global 
standards through the Program me implementation; for example, in terms of environmental 
and social safeguards, gender mainstreaming polic ies and system s, procurement, and ethics 
and compliance; and ( iv) strong willingness to be a p ioneer for climate -finance transactions.  
13. Although the Program me is focused on Indonesia n paradigm shift, it anticipates that 
the demonstration impact can affect  the whole ASEAN region . The outcomes generated by, 
and lessons learned from the Program me will be documented and disseminated to other 
ASEAN countries that also have the potential to create a self-sufficient energy efficiency 
market  and that may benefit from replication of similar loan guarantee and technical 
assistance approaches.  
14. Policy support : The Program me’s technical assistance facility will partially focus on 
regulatory support for the creati on of an enabling environment more suitable for energy 
efficiency. KDB intends to provide support to the Indonesian government to enhance their


---
*Page 85*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 78 
 
 
relevant regulatory framework. The funding proposal articulates an interest in creating fiscal 
and non -fiscal incentives for energy -efficiency  investments and establishing minimum energy 
performance standards for industrial technologies. The funding proposal also recognizes the 
lack of regulatory incentives for energy efficient  technologies  and will work with local 
authorities to establish energy savings insurance  program mes (ESIs) and to promote scali ng 
of ESCOs .  
15. Technical assistance for relevant stakeholders : An important paradigm shifting 
element of the Program me is its focus on filling market capacity gaps by working directly 
with LFIs and industrial sector participants. The identified LFIs will receive capacity -building 
support in selecting, screening  and financing energy efficiency p rojects. This support is 
intended to build internal capacity at the LFIs and ensure a s uccessful financing track record  
that will aid their efforts in scaling up their  financing program me, as well as encourage other 
local financial institutions to engage in energy efficiency financing.    
16. The Program me will also provide technical advisory support to project developers 
and other industry stakeholders by training  them on the installation and utilization of the 
energy efficiency equipment. Understanding energy efficient  technologies and their potential 
bene fits coupled with access to financing, will increase the demand for the energy efficient  
technologies in the industry sector.  
17. Overall , paradigm shift potential is assessed as high. 
1.3           Sustainable development potential          Scale: Medium–High  
18. The Program me’s primary goal is to  reduce GHG emissions and increase the ad option 
of energy efficiency technolog ies and measures in Indonesia’s industr y sectors. In so doing, it 
seeks to contribute to all Sustainable Development Goals (SDG s) and directly to SDG 5 
(Gender equality), SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth), SDG 9 (Industry, innovation  
and infrastructure), SDG 12 ( Responsible consumption and production), SDG 13 ( Climate 
action), and SDG 17 ( Partnerships for the goals).  
19. Economic  co-benefits : The Program me is position ed to achieve economic co -benefits 
in the form of local job creation with income generation as a major economic benefit to 
Indonesia. The energy efficiency developments can create a range of employment 
opportunities a t both the professional and labour level  considering the human resources 
needed to install, manage, monitor, evaluate and maintain the energy efficient equipment in 
factories and plants. The funding proposal anticipates the creation of 600 green jobs during 
the 10-year  term of the Program me’s implementation.  
20. Income is also expected to  be generated from energy savings -caused returns at the 
industry and project developer level. The Program me anticipates increasing the industry  
sector’s  annual profits by an average of 5  per cent, or up to 13.8  per cent for companies with 
lowe r energy prod uctivit y. Moreover, i mproved energy efficien cy across an economy is 
linked to increased e conomic productivity and long -term prosperity, potentially making 
Indonesia a more competitive economy.  
21. Gender co-benefits : The Program me provide s for gender assessme nts and action 
plan s at both the Program me and project level. The funding proposal emphasi zes technical 
and vocational training for women that seeks to open opportunities for skilled occupation s in 
the energy efficiency sector . For instance, the capacity -building component aims to increase 
the share of female engineers in the energy efficiency sector. Under the Program me, women -
led/owned lending beneficiaries (or th ose with clear commitments towards gender 
mainstreaming ) are prioritized . A m inimum  of 20 per cent of the entities receiving capacity -


---
*Page 86*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 79 
 
 
building support must be women -led and a minimum of 30 per cent of the individual 
participants must be female.  
22. The i ndependent  TAP assesses this Program me as having medium –high sustainable 
development potential with significant social  and economic co -benefits.  
  
1.4               Needs of the recipients     Scale: High  
23. Indonesia is confronted with surging energy demand derived from economic growth 
and urbani zation  (150  per cent increase between 2000 and 2015). The GHG emissions from 
industrial activities rank second after land use in Indonesia and account for 37  per cent of 
energy -related emissions of Indonesia. Industrial activities are thus well suited to low-carbon 
interventions in the form of the adoption of energy efficiency technologies that could lower 
energy intensity and , in turn , reduce GHG emissions.  
24. The scale of this opportunity in Indonesia is captured in the recent mapping of 
industrial energy effi ciency needs t hat the funding proposal highlights. According to the 
study, Indonesia has identified potential target locations with energy -intensive companies 
with more than 6,000 tons of oil equivalent of energy consumption: 278 companies and 346 
sites, m ainly spread throughout four major provinces (West Java, East Java, East Kalimantan 
and Banten ). These four provinces account for 70  per cent of the total industr y base that are 
required to incorporate energy management efforts such as appointing an energy  manager 
and implementing energy audit s.2 Notwithstanding these regulatory obligations, Indonesian 
industries have been slow to adopt (if at all) energy efficiency technologies. T he Program me 
will help address some of the financial, capacity  and regulatory obstacles to energy efficiency 
adoption.  
25. The Program me also seeks to address the insufficient implementation capacity of 
Indonesia. The local industrial sector lacks technical capacity in implementing  energy 
efficiency t echnologies. Lack of understanding of the relevant technologies has resulted in 
low demand and a lack of credence in the benefits of energy efficiency investments. The 
Program me intends to address these gaps by train ing industry actors on installation and 
utilization of energy efficient  technologies and demonstrat ing the long -term economic 
benefits of  energy efficiency investments. Capacity -building at the LFI and developer level 
coupled with improvements to the regulatory framework will benefit the country and  align 
with Indonesia’s self -identified needs.  
26. A significant share of the technical assistance will also be deployed in supporting 
policymakers to develop policies favourable for energy efficiency implementation. This is 
critical in Indonesia as it face s multiple regulatory barriers to the scaling of a n energy 
efficiency market. The policy assistance, combined with financial de-risking to the LFI sector 
and devel opers , is intended to kick -start the market and create a self -sustaining market in the 
long term.  
27. Indonesia also has a need to address barriers  to energy -efficiency investments in the 
finance community, especially for SMEs , which often suffer from the perception of low 
creditworthiness. One issue that the Program me looks to address is the lack of LFI capacity to 
accurately assess energy efficiency projects. The lack of understanding of projects and ability 
to credit assess  leads to high perceived risks and , in turn, high er pricing of energy efficiency 
loans . While t he higher cost of money dampens interest in energy efficiency inter ventions. 
This situation is particularly acute for SMEs as LFIs are already reluctant to provide smaller 
 
2 Government Regulation on Energy Conservation no. 70/2009 .


---
*Page 87*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 80 
 
 
loans to  perceived low -credit entities. The risk mitigation impact of the Program me’s 
guarantee facility coupled with sector technical assistance has t he potential to address these 
barriers.  
28. Lastly, Indonesia’s economy has contracted and has struggled during the COVID -19 
pandemic, leading to increased national indebtedness as the country’s government  borrowed 
funds from international sources for pandemic relief and to stimulate the econom y towards a 
post -pandemic recovery. Confronting tighter public budgets, the government and the public 
sector are more likely to prioritize post -pandemic recovery over energy ef ficiency initiatives.  
The above reality has a clear impact on Indonesia’s need for GCF funding and concessionality.  
29. The i ndependent TAP assesses this Program me as high in terms of  the needs of its 
recipients.  
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  Medium–High  
30. A no-objection letter  has been obtained from the relevant Indonesian authorities.  
31. Indonesia has committed to a 29 per cent unconditional reduc tion  of its GHG 
emissions by 2030. From the independent TAP’s review, the Program me aligns with the 
country ’s ambition to reduce GHG emissions as reflected in the Indonesian NDCs and other 
relevant communications. Indonesia has regularly stressed the role of enhancing industrial 
energy efficiency to achieve its climate targets. The NDC id entifies energy efficiency among 
key mitigation actions to be incentivized. The Indonesian government has also outlined 
energy efficiency measures in the industry sector (among other energy -consuming sectors) 
as one of the strategies to reach its target , including a target to reduce energy intensity by 1  
per cent per year by 2025.  
32. The independent TAP also note s that the Program me was first proposed and initiated 
by the Indonesian national designated authority ( NDA ). The funding proposal reports th at 
throughout the designing phase of the Program me, the Indonesian  NDA, policymakers (e.g. 
NDA, M inistry of Energy  and Mineral Resources , Ministry of Industry) and civil society 
organi zations have been engaged in a series of stakeholder consultations  that have led to 
direct inputs and design features of the Program me.  
33. The independent TAP assess es the country ownership of th e funding proposal as 
medium –high. The Program me fails to achieve a high rating primarily due to the high levels 
of energy tariff subsidi sation i n Indonesia (including fossil fuel sourced energy) , which acts as 
a disincentive to industries to invest in energy savings. The funding proposal did not provide 
clarity around Indonesia’s willingness to address this barrier as part of the pr oposed 
technical assistance support.  
1.6               Efficiency and effectiveness     Scale : High  
34. The Program me aims to  develop the local Indonesian market for financing energy -
efficiency project s through the provision of c redit guarantee s from GCF to LFIs, combined 
with capacity -building support to the public sector and financial and development 
stakeholders.  
35. The Program me is structured so that KDB will provide a guarantee to LFIs , and GCF 
will in turn guarantee KDB’s obligation so that G CF is the ultimate guarantor. The design of 
using a guarantee rather than a concessional loan was based on an extensive market 
assessment from KDB.  Interestingly, the KDB market research concluded that lack of access 
to finance is not a primary concern of Indonesian L FIs. Securing hard -currency financing 
through global markets on competitive terms is feasible without substantial barriers given


---
*Page 88*
---

GCF/B. 34/02/ Add.0 6 
Page 81 
 
 
the credit worthiness of Indonesian financial institutions. For that reason, KDB found very  
little interest on the part of LFIs in concessional loans or on -lending facilities. Instead, the 
main financial barrier raised by LFIs was the perceived risk of SME borrowers and  energy 
efficiency projects and technologies themselves.  The guarantee  approach is a tool well suited 
to address ing the actual needs of the local finance community.  
36. Financial institutions in Indonesia have historically been highly risk -averse in energy 
efficiency financing, resulting in high interest rates and onerous colla teral and equity 
demands which SMEs struggle to meet.  Though some LFIs have been interested in providing 
loans for energy efficiency efforts , the lack of a successful track record of energy -efficiency 
projects has kept them out of the acceptable risk level  for LFIs. To address this barrier, the 
Program me was designed to provide a credit guarantee mechanism from GCF to LFIs to 
mitigate the risk gap that they would face as they invest in the evolving energy efficiency 
market, rather than directly providing lo an capital. We view this as a highly effective and 
efficient use of GCF concessionality based on the realistic needs of the target market. With 
GCF providing guarantees for LFI own loans  that meet the necessary climate and credit 
criteria  established under the Program me, LFIs would now be able to tolerate higher 
perceived credit risk level s of final beneficiaries, in particular SMEs . In turn, this will lead to 
those beneficiaries being able to progress energy efficiency projects demonstrat ing true cost –
benefit data that will allow for future expan sion of the market.  
37. Moreover, the independent TAP view s positively some of the efficiencies of design in 
the guarantee facility that are aimed at ensuring that concessionality benefits reach final 
beneficiaries and that use of GCF funding is optimiz ed. For instance, the coverage ratio of the 
guarantee facility is dependent on the size of the borrower  (higher for smaller borrowers and 
vice versa), while in all cases requiring that commercial financia l institutions bear some 
amount of credit risk. Additionally, the Program me will include protection and monitoring 
mechanisms so that margin and/or financing costs from the LFIs, which are included in the 
ultimate rates applicable to end beneficiaries, will be capped in contract under KDB 
supervision. By using a guarantee, the Program me is crowding in the local market actors to 
use their own funds. It also avoids currency mismatch, which is a key issue prevalent with 
hard -currency -denominated loans.  
38. The Program me will use USD 100 million from GCF Guarantee to leverage USD 143.3 
million in total project costs, including USD 133.3 million from LFIs and USD 9 million  from 
SMEs. The ratio of co-financing to GCF contribution is 1.0  (GCF):1.43  (co-financing). The 
Program me would de -risk projects and cataly se private investment from the p rivate sector 
who have been reluctant yet to invest in energy efficiency areas.  
39. The Program me has shortlisted a set of technologies included in its  eligibility criteria 
that are selected to maximize  energy savings per capital expenditure .  
40. The estimated cost per tonne of CO 2 equivalent on the total requested GCF amount of 
USD 105.0 million (including guarantee and grant) is USD 33.45.  
41. The Program me outlines a strategy to phase out GCF support and operate on a 
commercial basis in the long ter m. 
42. The funding proposal is assessed with a rating of  high in terms of efficiency and 
effectiveness.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel   
43. Based on the assessment above, the  independent TAP  endorses this funding proposal .


---
*Page 89*
---

 GCF/B.34/ 02/Add.0 6 
Page 82 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  assessment 
findings  
Proposal  name:  Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States  
Accredited entity:  The Korea Development Bank (KDB)  
Impact potential  
The AE would like to acknowledge the iTAPs recognition of the potential that lies in this project of 
nurturing an energy efficient market ecosystem that is not only limited to Indonesia, but of the 
nearby re gion (ASEAN). As mentioned, the project aims not only of direct GHG emission 
reductions but also of demonstrating the effectiveness and commercial viability of energy 
efficiency interventions in Indonesia . Through the successful implementation of this prog ramme, 
the local financial institution s would manage a significant amount of the funding backed with GCF  
credit guarantees in the short term and operate independently on the market in the long term.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The AE would like to express  gratitude for the recognition it earned regarding the screening 
process of Executing Entities . Hopefully, the rigid assessment considering the experience, ability, 
global standard adaptability and will of the institutions, will facilitate the management o f the 
programme  and promise a fruitful outcome, a paradigm shifts in Indonesia by scaling up energy 
efficiency finance coupled with targeted technical assistance.  
Sustainable development potential  
This is well noted.  
Needs of the recipient  
This is we ll noted. The AE is convinced that the combined structure of credit enforcement and 
technical assistance will incur a positive transaction mitigating the risks of investments in the 
energy sector.  
Country ownership  
The AE is aware of the lack of incenti ves for Indonesian industries to actively engage in the 
proposal as a result of high energy subsidies currently provided by the government. Thereafter, the 
AE is open to further communication with Indonesian authorities regarding the issue and is willing 
to find resolutions to encourage participation from local industries.


---
*Page 90*
---

 GCF/B.34/ 02/Add.0 6 
Page 83 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The AE agrees with the iTAP's remark regarding the local market assessment of the KDB focusing 
on credibility enforcement. The current guarantee structure utilizes GCF funds in stimulating 
Impact financing and Carbon -neutral initiatives promised by the SDGs, yet divides the risk among 
financial institutions.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
In general, the AE agrees with the r emarks made by the iTAP. The AE would like to note that this 
programme would promote transition in the energy efficiency ecosystem in Indonesia.  
-Through the programme,  an estimated  3,138,649  MtCO2  of GHG emissions is to be
avoided


---
*Page 91*
---

The business of sustainability  
Gender Assessment and 
Gender Action Plan  
Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for 
Industrial E nergy Efficiency Financing in 
Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in 
other ASEAN Member States  
4 July 2022  
Project No.: 0578633  -
84


---
*Page 92*
---

www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022  Document details  
Document title  Gender Assessment  and Gender Action Plan  
Document subtitle  Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency Financing in 
Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN Member States  
Project No.  0578633  
Date  4 July 2022  
Version  3.0 
Author  Joseph Park (JP), Michele Seghetta (MS) , Putri Handayani (PH)  
Client Name  Korea Development Bank  
85


---
*Page 93*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022  
 Signature Page 
 
4 July 2022  
 
 
Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan  
 
Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia w ith Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States  
 
 
 
ERM Korea Ltd.  
12F, Samhwa Tower,  
16, Eulji -ro 5-gil, 
Jung -gu, Seoul (04539)  
 
© Copyright 2022  by ERM Worldwide Group Ltd and / or its affiliates (“ERM”).  
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form,  
or by any means, without the prior written permission of ERM . 
 
86


---
*Page 94*
---

  
 
i 
 GENDER ASSESSMENT AND GENDER ACTION PLAN  
Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States  CONTENTS  
CONTENTS  
1. BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  1 
1.1 Objective  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  2 
1.2 General Programme  Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  2 
1.3 Report Structure  ................................ ................................ .............  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
2. PROCESS & APPROACH  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  4 
2.1 Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 4 
2.2 Data Colle ction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  5 
3. GENDER SAFEGUARD FRAMEWORK  ................................ ................................ .....................  6 
3.1 GCF Gender Policy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  6 
3.2 Indonesia ratification on CEDAW  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 6 
3.3 KDB Gender Guidance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  7 
4. NATIONAL GENDER CONTEXT  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 8 
4.1 Laws and Policies on Gender Equality  ................................ ................................ ..........................  8 
4.2 National Gender Strategy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  11 
4.2.1 Gender Mainstreaming Institutions  ................................ ................................ .............  11 
4.2.2 Gender Mainstreaming at the National and Subnational Levels  ................................ . 13 
4.3 Gendered Figure based on Socio Economic Data - Indonesia  ................................ ....................  14 
4.3.1 Women Access to Education  ................................ ................................ ......................  14 
4.3.2 Women Access to Economic Development  ................................ ................................  15 
4.3.3 Women Access to Decision -Making & Information  ................................ .....................  16 
4.3.4 Women Access to Health and Safe Working Condition  ................................ ..............  17 
4.3.5 Women Access to Land and Asset  ................................ ................................ .............  18 
4.3.6 Women Access to Financial Services  ................................ ................................ .........  19 
5. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT DURING GENDER ASSESSMENT  ................................ .... 21 
5.1 Stakeholder Identification ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  21 
5.2 Stakeholder Input  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  21 
5.3 Minutes of Meeting during Key Informant Interview  ................................ ................................ ..... 22 
6. GENDER ASSESSMENT IN THE PROGRAMME  AND PROJECT LEVEL  .............................  25 
6.1 Gender Impact Assessment Findings  ................................ ................................ ..........................  25 
6.1.1 Institutional Vulnerability in Programme  Level  ................................ ............................  25 
6.1.2 Gender Vulnerability in Project Leve l ................................ ................................ ..........  25 
6.1.3 Scooping Gender Impact in Programme  Level & Project Level  ................................ .. 26 
7. PROPOSED GENDER ACTION PLAN IN PROGRAMME  AND PROJECT LEVEL  ................  28 
ANNEX 1 : MINUTES OF MEETING FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION  ................................ ................  36 
 
List of Tables  
Table 4.1  Legislation on Key Issues Affecting Gender Relations  ................................ ....................  9 
Table 5.1  Stakeholder Identified and Engagement Activities to Date  ................................ ............  21 
Table 6.1  Gender Impact in Clean Energy and Energy Efficiency ................................ .................  26 
Table 7.1  Gender Action Pl an for Energy Efficiency in Industry - Indonesia  ................................ . 28 
 
List of Figures  
Figure 2.1  Gender Analysis Framework  ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
Figure 4.1  Education Rate in Indonesia  ................................ ................................ ..........................  15 
Figure 4.2  Women SME’s in Indonesia  ................................ ................................ ...........................  16 
Figure 4.3  Financial Decision Making in Family  ................................ ................................ ..............  17 
87


---
*Page 95*
---

  
 
ii 
 GENDER ASSESSMENT AND GENDER ACTION PLAN  
Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States  CONTENTS  
Figure 4.4  Women and Men Access to Health Care  ................................ ................................ ...... 17 
Figure 4.5  Women and Men Access to Land Ownership - Indonesi a ................................ .............  18 
Figure 4.6  Women and Men Financial Access – Indonesia  ................................ ............................  20 
 
88


---
*Page 96*
---

  
 
i 
 GENDER ASSESSMENT AND GENDER ACTION PLAN  
Supporting Innovative Mechanisms for Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Financing in Indonesia with Lessons for Replication in other ASEAN 
Member States  CONTENTS  
Acronyms and Abbreviations  
CEDAW  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women  
EE Energy Efficiency  
FI Financial Institution  
GA Gender Assessment  
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GCF  Green Climate Fund  
IE Industrial Enterprise  
IESR  Institute for Essential Services Reform  
IIF Indonesia  Infrastructure Finance  
KDB The Korea Development Bank  
WALHI  Wahana Lingkungan Hidup Indonesia  
  
89


---
*Page 97*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 1 
 REPORT STRUCTURE  
This document is structured as follow:  
Section 1 – Background  
Section 2 – Process & Approach  
Section 3 – Gender Safeguard Framework  
Section 4 – National Gender Context  
Section 5 – Stakeholder Engagement during Gender Assessment  
Section 6  – Gender Assessment in the Progr amme and Project Level  
Section 7 – Gender Action Plan in the Programme and Project Level   
  
90


---
*Page 98*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 2 
 BACKGROUND  
Objective  
The Gender Assessment  (GA)  will help understand the relationship between men and women, their 
access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they face relative to each other. A 
comprehensive  gender  assessment  entails examining  the different  roles,  rights, needs, and 
opportunities of women and men, boys and girls in this programme  and at a project  level. GA is a tool 
that will help promote gender -relevant entry points, policies and identify opportunities for enhancing 
gender equality in th e programme  and at project  levels. GCF emphasises ensuring gender equity in all 
programme  and project level activities. I n this regard, the GA was conducted for mainstreaming  gender  
into the programme  and project  level activities.   
The preparation of the GA and Gender Action Plan ( GAP ) has considered the six principles of the GCF 
Gender Policy as follows:   
◼ Equitable resource  allocation between women and men ;  
◼ Competencies throughout the Fund’s institutional framework ;  
◼ Country ownership, alignment with national policies and priorities , and inclusive stakeholder 
participation ;  
◼ Accountability for gender and climate change resu lts and impacts ;  
◼ Inclusiveness in terms of applicability to all the Fund’s activities ; and 
◼ Commitment to gender equality and equity .  
The objective s of the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan are:  
◼ to identify the gender aspects of the project activities, including selection of Final Beneficiar ies 
and their trainings; and  
◼ to address and reduce gender inequality, to deepen stakeholder engagement , and to deliver 
accountability to both men and women to generate sustainable livelihood opportunities  for health 
and well -being and resilience against climate -induced shocks and risks.  
  
General Programme  Design  
The Korea Development Bank (hereafter mentioned as “KDB”) has assigned Environment Resource 
Manageme nt (hereafter mentioned as “ERM”) to create a gender assessment (GA) and gender action 
plan (GAP) for an energy efficiency  (EE) programme  of KDB and Green Climate Fund  (GCF) . The 
programme  will cover industry with high-energy  intensity  and energy consumpti on such as food and 
beverage industry, textiles and clothing, p ulp and paper, chemicals, n on-metallic minerals (especially 
cement industry) . The programme  does  not plan to target  any particular location s across  regions within 
the country , as long as a Final  Beneficiar y or its sub-project  is aligned  with the programme ’s objective . 
That said, several provinces where energy -intensive industries or the relevant industrial complexes are 
concentrated (such as DKI Jakarta, East / West / Central Java, Banten, East Kalimantan, South / North 
Sumatra ) are likely to be where  the selected Final Beneficiaries or their  sub-projects will be  located . 
The programme  and project level activities are designed t o target the following output s: 
• Strengthening policies and regulatory framework for EE;  
• Establishing a model EE promotion mechanism for regional replication;  
• Enhancing capacity of stakeholders in EE;  
• Building trust in EE technologies and business model amongst stakeholders;  
• Building tr ack records for EE finance;  
91


---
*Page 99*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Developmen t Bank  4 July 2022    Page 3 
 • Demonstrating viability of EE finance applicable in the commercial market at scale; and  
• Launching a model mechanism for de -risking with credit guarantees and  EE insurance along 
with standard performance contracts and validation methodologies in Indonesia.   
 
92


---
*Page 100*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 4 
 PROCESS & A PPROACH  
Methodology  
The gender analysis method is used in u nderstanding the gender issue s and data . A gender lens  
analysis is used to  systematically gather and examine the information on gender gaps and social 
relations in order to identify, understand and redress ineq ualities based on gender, at each stage of the 
research process. Fundamental to this process is the availability of sex -disaggregated data.1  
 
Figure 0.1 Gender Analysis Framework  
The information gathered from the g ender analysis  and assessment should be considered in all stages 
of the project cycle: design, formulation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each of 
these stages, the programme  and project  managers should keep a ‘gender lens’ in mind, look ing at 
ways the project/ programme  can address gender inequalities that emerge from the project/ programme :  
• ensure the differential needs of women and men are addressed;  
• ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and capacity 
development;  
• ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as 
beneficiaries, partners and key stakeholders; and  
• ensure women’s equal participation in  decision – making processes.  
The methodology used for developing the gender assessment and gender action plan is used to 
understand common practice and value s surrounding energy efficiency in Indonesia, especially relevant 
to the industry with high energy  consumption  (e.g., food and beverage industry, textiles and clothing, 
pulp and paper, chemicals, and non-metallic minerals ( i.e., cement industry) ). Around the world, each 
industry has posed disproportionate impact to various gender group s. As there is specific context behind 
Indonesia ’s patriarchal culture and society , to address these issues within the project level , an action 
plan is designed to benefit both women and men in the energy efficiency programme .  
The following questions are used to elaborate topics relevant to the programme  & project’s GA and 
GAP:  
 
1 Reeves, Hazel and Sally Baden. 2000. Gender and Development: Concepts and Definitions. Report No55. BRIDGE, Institute 
for Development Studies, University of Sussex. Available online: http://www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/reports/re55.pdf  1)
What patterns affect 
development in the area?2)
Understanding the context 3)
Identifiy issues by using 
gender transformative 
approach 4)
Based on the information 
collected in steps 1, 2 and 
3, what can we do to better 
involve equally women and 
men in the environment and 
social impact assessment 
process of energy efficiency 
project? 
93


---
*Page 101*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 5 
 • What are the main elements that affect women’s (or men’s) li ves in Indonesia ’s context?  
• What are the key challenges that formulate gender inequalities and social exclusion of 
vulnerable women (or men) in Indonesia?  
• What are  the gender mainstreaming aspect s in the energy efficiency programme  and 
projects  for Indonesia ? 
• What significant gender impact might be caused by the industr y sector s above?  
• Considering the above questions, what are the main issues to be addressed for a 
successful gender mainstreaming in the programme  and project level gender action plan ? 
• What are the gender indicators for the energy efficiency programme  and projects?  
 
Data Collection  
Literature review  
Literature  review is designed to cover the secondary information from the national and international 
data available publicly. Secondary data are also obtained from GCF, KDB and key informant interview s, 
as well as other  digital media channels.  
Focus group discussion  (FGD)    
Group discussion s on energy efficiency were conducted at the national level  with governmental 
ministries  and agencies  to understand the stakeholders’ perception on the programme  and 
implementation. ERM has gathered gender -related findings  during the discussion process:  
• The decision maker s at the ministerial level are primarily men; and 
• There is no specific action plan in place for gender sensitive topic s in energy efficiency .  
Key in formant interview  (KII) 
The key informant interview s are  designed to cover the primary information from the relevant 
stakeholders identified as person s who will be able to provide expert suggestion s and perception s 
towards project design and implementation process es. The key informant interview s were  conducted 
between February and March 2021 involving GCF observer s for Indonesia. Structured , open ended 
questioned were  asked during the interview process.  
 
94


---
*Page 102*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 6 
 GENDER SAFEGUARD FRAMEWORK  
GCF Gender Policy2  
The GCF gender policy consists of six main elements organi sed around the following principles:  
• Commitment to contributing to gender equality “as enshrined in international agreements and 
national constitutions, and other human rights agreements” by focusing on the following: 
understanding socio -economic factors underlying climate -change exacerbating gender 
inequality, women’s and men’s abilit ies to contribute to societal change and address climate 
change, and the adoption of methods and tools to promote gender equality and reduce gender 
disparities in climate funding and measure the outcomes and impacts of Fund activities on 
women’s and men’s resilience to climate change;  
• Comprehensiveness in scope and coverage by confirming the application of GCF gender efforts 
to all its mitigation and adaptation activities;  
• Accountability for monitoring gender impacts, including through quantitative and qualitative 
indicators on the level of individual p rojects as well as on the GCF portfolio -wide outcome and 
impact level in addition to accountability of GCF management and staff for gender results as 
well as a process for gender -related complaints and grievances through the GCF independent 
redress mechani sm;  
• Country -ownership as national designated authorities (NDAs) and focal points, the Fund’s 
counterparts in recipient countries, are informed of the requirement to align proposed projects 
and programme s submitted to the GCF with its gender policy and of Fund requirements for 
equal opportunities for men and women in stakeholder consultations and decision -making;  
• Gender competencies of GCF staff, key advisory and decision -making bodies and the promise 
that GCF readiness and preparatory support can also focus on enhancing the capacity of 
entities involved in the GCF project cycle to implement the GCF gender policy; and  
• Resource allocation that contributes to gender equality and women’s empowerment, including, 
if necessary by targeting funding to support women’s adaptation and mitigation initiatives 
specifically in addition to efforts to mainstreaming gender consider ations.  
Indonesia ratification on CEDAW   
UU No. 7/1984 on (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against  Women) 
CEDAW ratification, Article 7 letter b states parties must take all steps necessary to eliminate 
discrimination towards women in political life, the public life of the country, and in particular guarantee 
for women, on an equal basis with men, the right to participate in formulation of government policies 
and their implementation, as well as holding p ublic office and executing all public functions at all levels 
of government . 
Article 14 Paragraph (2) letter a states parties  are obliged to make efforts appropriate to eliminate 
discrimination against women in rural areas in order to provide certainty . This is based on equations 
between men and women, that they participate and benefit from village development and especially 
must provide certainty for women the right to participate in expanding and carry out the development 
plan at all levels . 
 
2  
GCF/B.24/15: Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020 –2023, Retrieved on : March 2021, Retrieved at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf -b24-15   
95


---
*Page 103*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 7 
 KDB Gender Gu idance  
KDB has issued a set of guidance for projects under the GFC funding scheme. Specifically on Gender, 
KDB refer s to Chapter 4 of Gender Equality as follow s: 
 
Article 15 (Purpose) The objective of this chapter is to provide a guideline for effective mainstreaming 
of gender in the Projects.  
 
Article 16 (Definition) Gender mainstreaming is the process of assessing the implications for women 
and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or program s, in all areas and at all leve ls. 
 
Article 17 (Procedure)  Gender mainstreaming procedure will proceed as follows:  
1. Identification: KDB shall require the borrower to conduct gender analysis and identify evaluation 
indicators.  
2. Implementation: KDB shall require the borrowers to submi t annual monitoring reports and conduct 
monitoring based on previously identified indicators.  
3. Completion: KDB shall prepare evaluation reports on lessons learnt, and ensure that positive 
elements will be reflected in future projects.  
Article 18 (Terms o f Reference)  The following terms should be considered when implementing gender 
equality:  
1. Transparent disclosure of relevant information  
2. Allocation of sufficient human and financial resources  
3. Implementation of training program s for capacity enhancement  
4. Improvement of the Gender Equality Policy based on experiences and complaints received  
5. Monitoring of the borrower’s gender -related obligations      
 
96


---
*Page 104*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 8 
 NATIONAL GENDER CON TEXT  
Laws and Policies on Gender Equality  
The Constitution  of the Republic  of Indonesia,  Undang -Undang  Dasar  1945,  upholds  a commitment to 
the principle of equal rights between men and women. Paragraph 1 of Article 27 stipulates that: “every 
citizen enjoys  equal status before the law and government, and is obliged to uphold this status without 
exception.” Paragraph 2 of the same article states that: “every citizen shall have the right to employment 
and to conditions of life commensurate with human dignity.”   
The democratic  reforms  of 1999  caused  the Government  to pay increased  attention  to issues  of human 
rights and to refine the Constitution’s basic definition of the subject. An amendment to the Constitution 
was, consequently , issued in 2000 which recogni ses that “every person shall have the  right to be free 
from discriminatory  treatment  based  upon any ground  whatsoever  and shall have the right to protection 
from such discriminatory treatment." While the Constitution provides a sound foundation for the 
establishment of equal rights between men and women, much remains to be done in the passing of 
laws and regulations to put the principle into practice.  During 2020, World Bank provides an update on 
Indonesia’s equal policy instruments in urban economy setting, scores Indonesia as 64.2 out of 100 in 
average lower than other countries’ scores in the Eas t Asia and South East Asia region (71.3). 3    
The Indonesian  legal  system  is a complex  confluence  of three  distinct  systems  of civil, customary,  and 
religious laws.  Prior to the arrival of Dutch traders and colonists in the late 16th and  early  17th centuries,  
the archipelago  was ruled  by indigenous  kingdoms,  each  of which practiced  its own system  of adat 
(customary)  law, as well as laws drawn  from the teachings  of various religions and beliefs.  Dutch 
presence and colonization spanned a period of 350 years and lasted until the end of World War II , 
leaving a legacy of a Roman -Dutch based system of colonial law. The Indonesian legal system is, as a 
consequence, based on these laws , scores of which have been modified by interpretations of customary 
laws a nd laws based on religions, primarily that of the  Islamic  faith.  Statutory  legislation,  government  
directives, instructions,  and official compilations of Islamic law together add up to a pool of laws that 
inform the different aspects of personal and family relations.  
Conflicts  often  ensue  between  adat laws and the Constitution. The  adat laws are remarkably diverse 
and their provisions vary greatly in keeping with the different types of kinship systems that have been 
established in different localities . Consequently , the influence of “adat” laws on women also varies by 
locality .  
The nation’s  ambition  towards  a more  decentrali sed system  of governance  has unintentionally  made  
way for a number  of local governments  to advance  their aspiration  of institutin g public  policies  based  
on Shari’a  or Islamic  law. Although  debates  continue  over the merits and shortcomings of this law, there 
is general apprehension that its practice will impinge upon  the rights  of women.  In Aceh,  for example,  
there  is concern  over whether  the practice  of Shari’a will impose upon women a dress code of what is 
perceived to be Islamic attire and impart upon men the right to act as morality enforcers . 
Indonesia has ratified the major international conventions that uphold principles  of gender equality  and 
the empowerment  of women.  These  instruments  include  the United  Nations Convention  on the Political  
Rights  of Women  ratified  by Law 68/1958,  the United  Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) ratified by  Law number  7/1984,  and the Optional  Protocol  
to the CEDAW, which  was signed  by the Government  in 2000.  In the area of workers’  rights,  Indonesia  
ratified  the International  Labour Organization’s  (ILO)  Convent ion number  100 on Equal  Remuneration  
for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value by Law number 80/1957 , as well as a host of 
other ILO Core Conventions.  The country  has also committed  itself to acting  upon  the recommendations  
of the 1994 Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development, the 1995 Cairo International Conference 
 
3 Indonesia - Women, Business and the Law, 2020, retrieved from: 
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2020/sep/Indonesia.pdf  
 
97


---
*Page 105*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Developm ent Bank  4 July 2022    Page 9 
 on Population and Development, the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action, and the 2000 United Nations 
Millennium Declaration.  
Table 0.1 Legislation on Key Issues Affecting Gender Relations  
Legislation  Legal/Regulatory Provision  
Marriage and Divorce  
Marriage Law 1974 (Act No. 1), 
Article 31  
Marriage Law Implementing 
Regulation 1975 (9/75)  
Law on Religious Courts 1989  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1974 Property Law  Marriage Age: minimum marriage age of 19 years for males and 16 years 
for females; provision for marriage below minimum age is subject to 
judicial discretion and parental consent.  
Marriage Guardianship: free consent of marrying parties required for 
validi ty, unless religious law governing the parties directs otherwise.   
Marriage Law 1974 defines as legal a marriage "solemnized according to 
the laws of the respective religions and beliefs of each of the parties"; 
parties under 21 years need parental permiss ion.  
Marriage Registration: obligatory; Marriage Registrar Office of Department 
of Religious Affairs is responsible for registration of Muslim marriages and 
Civil Marriage Registrar Office of Department of Internal Affairs for all other 
marriages.  
Polyga my: basis of marriage is considered monogamy, but Marriage Law 
does not prohibit polygamy for those religions that allow it (Islam, 
Hinduism, Buddhism); permitted with consent of existing wife or wives and 
judicial permission, by fulfilling conditions spec ified by law.  
Obedience/Maintenance: law specifies that both spouses are equal and 
both are responsible for maintaining home and caring for children; 
obligation of permanent resident and domicile to be decided by both 
parties; husband as head of family re quired to protect wife and provide 
according to his means and wife’s duty is to manage household.  
Talaq, 87  Marriage Law provides that divorce shall be carried out only 
before Court of Law, after Court has endeavoured  to reconcile the parties; 
husband mar ried under Islamic law may submit letter notifying religious 
court of his intention to divorce and giving his reasons; if husband’s 
reasons accord with any of six grounds for judicial divorce outlined in 
Marriage Law and determines that reconciliation is n ot possible, court will 
grant session in order to witness divorce. Women are able to seek divorce 
on the basis of grounds prescribed by the law, particularly on evidence of 
neglect.  
Judicial Divorce: either spouse may seek judicial divorce (preceded by 
reconciliation efforts by judge).  
Post-divorce Maintenance/Financial Arrangements: property acquired 
during marriage considered joint property, and Marriage Law only directs 
that division is according to the laws applicable to the parties; court may 
order a limony for children or maintenance for former wife ( times  and levels 
not specified).  
Child Custody and Guardianship: Marriage Law simply provides that in 
case of dispute over custody, Court shall render its judgment; father shall 
have responsibility for m aintenance expenses, unless he is unable to bear 
such responsibility in which case Court may order mother to share 
expenses.  
98


---
*Page 106*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 10 
 Legislation  Legal/Regulatory Provision  
“Conjugal property is owned jointly and in common,” but on divorce is 
shared based on respective laws; customary or religious laws  may dictate 
a smaller share to the wife.  
In-heritance  / succession  
Civil Code: non -Muslims  
Islamic Law: Muslims  
Judicial decisions by the 
Supreme Court  Islamic law dictates that women inherit less than men do , and widowers 
receive a bigger share than widows do .  
The Civil Code provides for equal inheritance.  
Customary law depends on matrilineal or patrilineal societies.  
Access to Land and Credit  
1960 B asic Agrarian Law No  
5  
The Marriage  Law (1974)  
Article 35  
The Civil Code  Women are deemed to have land rights and may obtain title to land by 
registering land in their names.  However, in practice implementation and 
enforcement of laws often discriminat e against women.  
 
Article 35 provides for the adoption of the concept of joint ownership of 
property.  
Article 108 stands in the way of married women from entering into 
contracts on their own behalf.  
Health and Reproductive 
Health  
Law on Population Deve lopment 
and the Development of the  
Prosperous Family (10/1992)  
 
Law on Health  (23/1992)  and  
the Criminal Code  Stipulates that family planning services be restricted to married women   
  
  
  
  
Prohibits abortion and stipulates that ‘only in emergency where the life of a 
pregnant woman or her foetus  is in danger can abortion be undertaken by 
competent health providers with proper authority further reiterated i n art. 
220 of the Criminal Code’  
Regu lations practiced by selected schools prohibi ts married and pregnant 
girls to continue their schooling  
Labor and Social Protection   
1945 Constitution  “Every citizen has the right to employment commensurate with human 
dignity.”  
1981 Government Regulation  “Employers shall not discriminate between women and men workers in 
determining the rates of remuneration for work of equal value.  
1984 CEDAW Ratification  
Act No. 7  Emphasizes equality between men and women, the inalienable right to 
work, the need to elim inate discrimination against women in employment.  
Labor Act 13/2003  Provides women with 2 days of leave per month for menstruation, 1.5 
months of leave each before and after childbirth and 1.5 months’ leave 
after miscarriage. It also provides time for women to breast feed during 
99


---
*Page 107*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 11 
 Legislation  Legal/Regulatory Provision  
work hours and leave for men on the occasion of their wife’s delivery or in 
the event of their wife’s miscarriage.  
1964 Ministry of Manpower 
Regulations on Conditions of 
Health, Cleanliness and Lighting 
in Workplaces  Specify th at employers must provide separate la vatories for men and 
women, as well as spacious restrooms.  
Violence Against Women  
1915 Criminal Code, Royal  
Decree No. 33  
  
No 23/2004 Elimination on  
Domestic Violence  Article 285: A person who “uses force or threa t to compel a woman to have 
sexual intercourse with him outside marriage” will be guilty of rape and 
punishable for a maximum of 12 years.  
Article 288: specifies that a man “in marriage” having carnal knowledge of 
a woman “not yet marriageable” will be pu nished with a maximum of 4 
years.  
The Law defines domestic violence to include physical, sexual and 
psychological violence and neglect, and, for the first time in Indonesian 
legislation, criminalizes marital rape. The family is defined to include 
resident ial domestic staff.  
The statutory regulations in 
question are the Law of the 
Republic of Indonesia No. 13 of 
2006 concerning the Protection 
of Witnesses and Victims, 
Government Regulation no. 27 
of 1983.  Protection and rights of victims are given from the beginning of the  
investigation stage to the end in accordance with the provisions as 
stipulated in the law.  
Migration and Human 
Trafficking  
No 39/2004 Placement and 
Protection of Indonesia’s 
Migrant Workers  
Draft Bill  While the law refers to human rights principles, overall it focuses only in a 
minor way on the protection of the rights of migrant workers; rather the 
emphasis is on placement and the trade and economic  implications of 
migration.  
 
Based on discussions as part of the National Plan of Action for the 
Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children; focused on countering 
and criminalizing trafficking in persons.  
National Gender Strategy  
Policy  direction  and strategy  of gender  mainstreaming  in the five-year development  plan RPJMN 20 20–
2024 is: (i) improving the quality of life and role of women in development; (ii) improving  the protection  
of women  from violence  and sexual trafficking;  (iii) improving  institutional capacity for gender 
mainstreaming and women ’s empowermen t; and (iv) improving women’s participation in 
entrepreneurship . 
Gender Mainstreaming Institutions  
The National Development Planning Agency.  Indonesia’s National Development Pl anning Agency,  
Badan  Perencanaan  Pembangunan  Nasional  (BAPPENAS)  plays  an important  role in advocating 
gender equality and promoting gender mainstreaming within public sector development planning  and 
budgeting  processes.  The Agency  is involved  in the formu lation  and review  of development  plans  
100


---
*Page 108*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 12 
 proposed  by sectoral  agencies  and by referring  to proposed  regional development plans ; it is well 
positioned to ensure that the sectoral programme s are gender responsive.  
The Agency’s organi sational structure includes a Directorate for Population, Social Welfare, and 
Women’s  Empowerment, which  is responsible  for the promotion  of gender  mainstreaming  in national 
development planning.   
The Coordinating Ministry for Social Welfare.  The work of this Minis try is supported by five deputies ; 
one of whom is the Deputy for Women’s Empowerment. The Deputy’s principal task is to ensure  that 
coordination takes place among the work of line ministries involved in social welfare issues. This  puts 
the Ministry in a po sition where it can strategically advocate gender equality and promote gender 
mainstreaming.  
The Ministry for Women Empowerment  and Child Protection  (MoWECP ). The principal function of the 
MoWECP  is to formulate government policies in the area of women’s empowerment , as well as 
women’s welfare and the protection of children. The MoWECP  is also assigned the task s of coordination 
as well as harmoni sation of programme  planning, monitoring and evaluat ion, and enhancement of 
community participation in these areas. Also included among the MoWECP ’s functions are the 
coordination of government  agencies,  private  sector  entities,  and community -based  organi sations  in 
the area of women’s empowerment , as well a s welfare and protection. In accordance with Presidential 
Decree 9/2000 on Gender Mainstreaming and its Accompanying Implementation Guidelines, the 
MoWECP  is the Government’s principal advocate for gender equality and provider of technical 
leadership in ge nder mainstreaming to all government ministries and agencies at the national and local 
levels. It is  also assigned  the task of promoting  gender  mainstreaming  as a strategy  to be applied  in all 
development sectors and at all levels of operational activities  from the national to grassroots levels.  
The Ministry  promotes  gender  mainstreaming  at the national  level by advocating  the appointment  of 
gender  focal  points  in government  agencies  and the establishment  within  these agencies  of gender  
working  groups  with memberships  drawn  from the MoWECP  and national  level government  agencies.  
It encourages  the working  groups  to identify and seek solutions to gender -related problems, provides 
technical assistance, and prepares tools to implement gender mainstreaming , as well as to evaluate its 
implementation. At the regional level,  the MoWECP  promotes  gender  mainstreaming  by advocating  the 
establishment  of gender mainstreaming working groups and providing technical assistance toward s 
their institution s. These groups a re set up at each level of  the local government and their membership s 
are drawn from all local government agencies, community -based organi sations, and women’s study 
centres .  
The Ministry deploys around 20% of its budget on ” dana stimulan ” or stimulation f unds , which it offers 
to subnational level governments to motivate gender mainstreaming initiatives at provincial and district 
levels. The funds are expended on activities to increase the awareness of government  officials  on 
certain issues , such  as gender  equality  and justice,  gender  mainstreaming , and problems of gender 
disparity. They are also used to finance activities to increase the capacity of the regional  women’s  
empowerment  divisions  (WEDs)  and gender  focal  points  in gender  analysis, technical methods of 
mainstreaming gender into regional policies and programme s, coordination of activities in the area of 
women’s empowerment, and collection of sex -disaggregated data.   
The Line Ministries . While  some  studies  suggest  that levels  of gender  awareness  vary among different 
line ministries,4 gender  mainstreaming  activities conducted by various ministries in  collaboration  with 
different  international  development  agencies  have  had a positive  overall impact  on the ministries’  
capacity  to undertake  gender  analysis  and develop  gender  strategies.  
Some notable achievements include the compilation of sex -disaggregated statistical data and the 
production of gender -based women’s situational analyses in a number of provinces, district s, and sub 
districts .  
 
4 Government of Indonesia. 2004. United Nations Development Programme Support for Mainstreaming Gender into  
Develop ment Policies and Programmes (2004 –2005).  
101


---
*Page 109*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 13 
 Although  the Government  has designed  and put into place  legal  frameworks  and policy instruments  that 
are decidedly  tactical,  its agencies  nonetheless  continue  to have  a limited fundamental  understanding  
and appreciation  of the benefi ts and importance  of mainstreaming gender  perspectives  within  their 
policies  and programme s. The agencies  more  often  than not regard  gender  issues  as matters  to be 
considered  within  the confinement  of the social  sectors without recogni sing any linkage of the issues to 
the realms of politics and the economy.  
Women’s  Study  Centres . These  centres  are established  to set up sources  of technical expertise in the 
area of gender sensitive policy research. They are located within many universiti es and focus on 
researching issues related to women and gender. Together with the WEDs of local governments,  they 
carry out advocacy activities, specifically toward enhancing the capacity of local government offices in 
conducting gender analyses for policy formulation and implementation. The centres  are administered 
by the office of university sectors and are en dowed with relatively small budgets for their activities. The 
centres  are nonetheless generally reliable sources of information on gender  issues  in the regions,  
though  their capacity  differs  widely  from region  to region.  The introduction  of gender  mainstre aming  as 
a development  strategy  has increased  the local governments’ demand for the expertise of the centres  
in gender -based policy research and analysis.   
Nongovernment Organi sations . There are several hundred women’s NGOs in Jakarta and other cities 
in Indonesia that work on various aspects of gender and women’s issues. They have been  involved  in 
the implementation  of women’s  conventions,  including  CEDAW,  the International Conference on 
Population and Development, and the Beijing Platform for Action. Of particular  interest  is the changing  
role of women’s  NGOs  in response  to political  reform  and democrati sation, as well as to the changing 
dynamics among national, provincial, and local level development agents induced by decentrali sation.  
Gender Mainstreaming at the National and Subnational Levels  
Article 25b of Law 32/2004 on Regional Government stipulates that vice heads of regions are 
responsible for coordinating regional level activities of vertical agencies, acting upon reports and/or  
finding s of inspections  of the state  apparatus,  empowering  women  and youth , as well as developing  
and conserving  socio -cultural  and natural  environments.  Based  on the terms  of this article, the 
MoWECP  conducts at the national level annual coordination meetings to  review the status of women 
and evaluate the implementation of gender mainstreaming in  the regions.  These  meetings  are held in 
conjunction  with the participants  of the conventions of vice governors and heads of commissions of 
provincial level councils of people’s representatives concerned with social welfare issues.  
As a means  of integrating  the stipulations  of Presidential  Decree  9/2000  on Gender Mainstreaming 
within the framework of Law 22/1999 on Regional Government, the Minister of Home  Affairs  released  
Ministerial  Circular  Letter  050/1232/SJ  of 26 June  2001  on the implementation  of gender  
mainstreaming.  This letter  was subsequently  replaced  by Ministerial Decree  132 of the year 2003  on 
gender  mainstreaming  in regional  development.  The Decree emphasi ses that gender is to be 
mainstreamed in district planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation  and that capacity  
development  in gender -responsive  planning  is to be regarded  as a priority activity by local government 
institutions. It also mandates the establishment of WEDs at provincial  and district  levels,  with functional  
structures  parallel  to those  of the MoWECP  at the national l evel.  
WEDs  were  established  in 2001  and were  assigned  the responsibility  of ensuring  that gender  issues  
are mainstreamed  into policy  making  and development  planning  across  the administration.  They  were  
to undertake  this task by supplying  technical  input,  supporting coordination, providing motivation, and 
by monitoring and evaluating the gender responsiveness of the  administration.  The WEDs’  capacity  to 
promote  gender  mainstreaming  is often limited by the position of the unit heads within g overnment 
apparatus structures. In most districts, they  are located  in sections  of the administration  responsible  for 
social  concerns  and/or  are established  as a subsection  of the Community  Empowerment  section.  
Among  the WEDs across Indonesia, more than half (54%) are headed by low -ranking officers of echelon 
4 (the lowest rank in the civil service hierarchy).  This constraint limits the WEDs’ ability to influence 
higher -level public service officials to mainstream gender within their development stra tegies. Another 
102


---
*Page 110*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 14 
 factor that impedes the WEDs’ effectiveness is the limited amount of financing that is available to 
conduct their work, with some WEDs having no specific budget at all.  
The Minister of Home Affairs consequently issued Ministerial Decision 132 of the year 2003  on General  
Guidelines  for the Implementation  of Gender  Mainstreaming  in Regional Development to ad dress the 
above obstacles. The d ecision stipulates that the general responsibility for the implementation of gender 
mainstreaming at the provincial levels is under  the governor ’s instruction. A t the district  level, it is under 
the district  heads  or mayors , at the sub-district  and village levels , it is the responsibility of the respective 
camat or head of sub -district, lurah  or head of village in urban areas, and kepala desa  or head of village 
in rural areas. The d ecision also stipulates that working groups are to be formed and focal points are to 
be appointed at each of the above -specified  levels  of governance  and that their tasks  are to optimi se 
the implementation  and accelerate  the institution  of gender  mainstreaming  as a development  strategy  
within  regional governance.  
The Decision  also provides  that all costs  required  for the implementation  of gender mainstreaming in 
regional development is to be borne by the national budget and regional budget of each province, 
district, and municipality. It also stipulates that the budget allocation should be at least 5% of the 
respective provincial, district,  and municipal budget and that financing for gender mainstreaming based 
on conditions that are not binding may be borne by other parties as long as they are in accordance with 
prevailing rules and regulations.  
Despite the existence of these institutional frameworks, ther e still is lack of fundamental understanding  
and appreciation  of the benefits  and importance  of mainstreaming  gender  within policies  and 
programme s. Gender  equality  issues  are still not fully mainstreamed  within  most government  policies,  
including  within  Indonesia’s  2004−2009  MTDP.  Gender  advocates  are particularly  concerned  that at 
the district  level decentrali sed respons ibilities  may have  negative impacts on the gender sensitivity of 
district level policies and programme s. Of particular concern is that decentrali sation has been 
accompanied by a revival of interpret ations of gender roles based on conservative religious thinking as 
well as traditional  customs that c ould lead to the repression of women’s rights.  
Gendered Figure  based on Socio Economic Data - Indonesia  
Indonesia ’s population has grown by 32.5 million people in the past  10 years  from 2010 to 2020 . The 
result from the 2010 population numbe r shows 237.63 million people , then the census result for 2020 
shows 270.2 million people. The growth shows 3.26 million every year.  
Gender segregated data show the total number of men is 0.58 % higher than that of women. The male  
population is accounted  for as 136.66 million, while the female population  is accounted for as 133.54 
million people  (BPS, 2021) .   
Women ’s Access to Education  
The net enrolment rate in secondary education is slightly higher for females at 77% compared to 75% 
for males. Both female and male students suffer from a low quality of education, trailing behind their 
Asian counterparts in mathematics, science, and readi ng. In tertiary education, the net enrolment rate 
for females is slightly higher at 32% compared to 31% for males; however, this does not translate to 
increased  employment rates for females. Males have more opportunities to pursue advanced degrees, 
with 59 % of PhD graduates being male , while only 41% are female.5 Women participation in vocational 
school based on 2018 data has been recorded as lower than men. This number can be seen in figure 
below . A specific scholarship has been created for women students to join higher education and 
training ; however, the applicants for this education fund mostly originate from urban area s. Access to  
the scholarship information  in rural areas is limited.  
 
5 Women Research Institute. 2014. Policy Brief – Women’s Political Representation Series, citing WRI national survey 
conducted, retrieved from : http://wri.or.id/files/PolicyBrief_Gender_Equality_Equity_Law_Jan_201 4_English.pdf  
103


---
*Page 111*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Develo pment Bank  4 July 2022    Page 15 
  
Figure 0.1 Education Rate in Indonesia6 
In terms of access to education, Indonesia achieved parity in terms of male and female gross enrolment 
rates at the primary and secondary levels more than a decade ago. In general, females achieve higher 
levels of educational attainment than males at all l evels (BPS’ Population Census 2010). The net 
enrolment rate for females in tertiary education is slightly higher (32%) than for males (31%). However, 
gender gaps remain in some science, technology, engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) subjects. 
Males are tw ice as likely to study engineering (12.5% versus 6.4%) and I nformation Communication 
and Technology  (6.7% versus 13.10%) (WEF 2017) while female graduates outnumber males at 1.71% 
and 1.41% in natural science, mathematics , and statistics (WEF 2017).  
Women Access to Economic Development  
In 2014, Indonesia’s female labour force participation remains low at 50.3% compared with 84.4% for 
males.7 In 2017, o nly 28% of firms have female top managers, which is the same percentage of firms 
that have female co -owners (WEF, 2017). In 2018, Indonesia rank s 85th out of 149 countries measured 
in Global Gender Gap,8 with female participation only increas ing 2% from 2014  to 2018 , reaching 52.9% 
with males at 83.7%. During 2016, World Bank’s  study to see the SME owned by women in Indonesia 
shows that 51% of small enterprises are owned by women , as well as 34% of medium  enterprises. This 
number is reported to reach an average of 60% of SMEs owned by women in 2020.9   
 
 
 
 
6 Participation in education, 2020, retrieved from: http://uis.unesco.org/country/ID  
7 Indonesia’s HDI is 0.684, which is a medium human development category. UNDP. Human Development Report 2014 – 
Sustaining Human Progress: Reducing Vulnerabi lities and Resilience (Explanatory Note – Indonesia).  
8 Global Gender Gap Report, 2018, retrieved from: https://reports.weforum.org/global -gender -gap-report -2018/data -
explorer/#economy=IDN  
9 Ministry of women empowerment and child protection, 2021, retriev ed from: 
https://www.kemenpppa.go.id/index.php/page/read/29/3051/menteri -bintang -perempuan -pelaku -usaha -penopang -ekonomi -
bangsa -di-masa -pandemi   
104


---
*Page 112*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 16 
 Figure 0.2 Women SMEs in Indonesia10  
Gender parity in education has not translated into equal opportunities for women’s employment or wage 
levels. Indonesia is ranked 108th in terms of economic participation and opportunity  and 118th in labour 
force participation (out of 144 countries) (WEF 2 017). This level of economic participation and 
opportunity compare unfavourably with the Philippines and Vietnam, which are ranked at 25 th and 33 rd, 
respectively.  
Women experience higher levels of unemployment and underemployment and are more likely to be  
unemployed than less -educated men. This represents a significant loss to the Indonesian economy as 
women’s strong performance in educational attainment and qualifications are not being matched with 
employment. Female labour force participation has hovered  at around 50% for the last 30 years. The 
2017  data indicate that labour force participation rates stood at 52.9% and 85.8% for working age 
females and males, respectively (WEF 2017). A gap is also reflected among those with advanced 
degrees (81% for women  and 93% for men), even though there is a 1.12 ratio of female to male 
enrolment in tertiary education (WEF 2017).  
Early marriage is also an important factor in limiting women’s productive and economic resources. 
Marriage of girls aged 16 and 17 accounted  for 19.3% of Indonesian marriages in 2015 (UNICEF 2016). 
Research indicates that delaying marriage tends to increase women’s socioeconomic status, position 
within the household, and education. Married girls have poorer educational, economic, and health 
prospects. This limits their ability to lift themselves out of poverty and increases the likelihood of passing 
on similar circumstances to future generations.  
Women Access to Decision -Making  & Information  
Female representati on in parliament in 2019 and 2020 is 20% to 21% nationally. There are still many 
locations in I ndonesia that have  no women representative s in the parliaments seat. Even though since 
early 2000, the government of Indonesia has implemented many gender mainstreaming programme s, 
the position of women in the decision -making  process is still considered unequal in term s of number s 
compared to male representative s in the political decision -making  process .  
In the political sphere, female  political representation has increased from 1 1% in 2004 to  18% in 2009  
and to 19.8%  in 2014.  Law No. 10/2008  on General  Elections  set a minimum quota of 30% female 
candidates for each political party , and Law No. 27/2009 stipulates  women’s representation.  A total  of 
111 (out of 560) representatives  in the national parliament are now female and women hold one -quarter 
of ministerial positions (Inter -Parliamentary Union 2017, WEF 2017). Although the country is following 
the global trends  of the expansion  of female  representation,  Indonesia  ranks  only 63rd (out of 144 
countries) in political empowerment, significantly below the Philippines which ranks 13th (WEF  2017).  
In 2019, the house of representatives has 20.8% of women politician s (BPS,  2021). Female  
representation  in public  decision -making  remains  low relative  to other  countries,  despite  the Indonesian  
government’s  efforts  to expand participation. Reasons  cited  for the low percentage  of women  elected  
include  a lack political experience, networking, and financial support , as well as preference for m ale 
candidates because  of prevailing  cultural  perceptions  and gender  bias in terms  of roles  and capacities.  
In financial decision -making, the Survey on Financial Inclusion and Access (SOFIA, 2017)11 results 
show that most adults are engaged in making decisions on spending the money they personally receive, 
with only 5% of the population (in the four provinces surveyed) indicating that they were not involved at 
all when making such decisions. Most peo ple make decisions on their own (45%) or in consultation with 
their partners/spouses (42%), and a few (8%) said that they make these decisions in consultation with 
other household members. What is interesting though are the differences in terms of gender: the results 
underscore the role of women in households as key financial decision -makers. In comparison to males, 
 
10 Women owned small medium enterprise, 2016, retrieved from: https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/260f2097 -e440 -4599 -
91ec -e42d45cf3913/SME+Indonesia+Final_Eng.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lj8qhPY  
11 Bappenas Survey 2017, retrieved from 
https://www.bappenas.go.id/files/5615/1668/2564/SOFIA_Focus_Note_Gender_Nov_2017.pdf  
105


---
*Page 113*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 17 
 a greater proportion of females (59%) reported that they made decisions on how they spent their 
personal income independently (compared to only  30% of men). In contrast, a larger proportion of men 
(53%) said that they make decisions in consultation with their partners/spouses, as compared to only 
32% of women. Moreover, the results show that 9% of males said that they do not make such decisions 
(at all), compared to only 1% of females.  
 
Figure 0.3 Financial Decision Making in Family  
Women Access to Health  and Safe Working Condition s 
Maternal  and child health  concerns  require  immediate  attention  and prioritization, according to a 2013 
national survey.12 Despite significant improvements in access to maternal health care and t he 
implementation of a Health Insurance Program , Indonesian women continue to have  limited access to 
health care as of 2013.13 However, in 2018, the number of women with access to health care measured 
to be within 59% (rural area) to 68% (urban area) , which shows slightly higher access to health 
compare d to men in both areas.  
 
Characteristic By 
Location  Gender Group  Access to health care  
Available (%)  Not Available (%)  
Urban area  Female  68,61  31,39  
 Male  67,74  32,26  
Rural Area  Female  59,46  40,54  
 Male  58,89  41,11  
Combination (a+b)  Female  64,47  35,53  
 Male  63,73  36,37  
Figure 0.4 Women and Men Access to Health Care 14 
 
Sustainable development goal (SDG) suggests  a need  to improve  the quality of health services. Some 
eastern provinces h ave child and maternal mortality rates that are 2 or 3 times higher than the national 
average. With the introduction of a universal health insurance program  in early 2014, the ut ilization of 
 
12 The Delivery Insurance Program guarantees the financin g of antenatal services, delivery assistance by health personnel, 
and postpartum services, for all pregnant women who are not covered by health insurance.  
13 The Delivery Insurance Program (Jaminan Persalinan/ Jampersal) has been implemented since 2011.  
14 Women profile, 2019, retrieved from: https://www.kemenpppa.go.id/lib/uploads/list/b4bdc -profil -perempuan -indonesial -
_2019.pdf  
106


---
*Page 114*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 18 
 health services is expected to increase  and now 1/3 of Indonesia population are covered under 
universal health insurance.  
Women safety in men dominated industr ies can be a complicated safety risk for women when there is 
no specific grievance mechanism to protect women at work. The number of cas es of Violence against 
Women (KtP) throughout 2020 was 299,911 cases, consisting of cases handled by: [1] District 
Courts/Religious Courts totalling 291,677 cases , [2] Komnas Perempuan's partner service agencies 
totalled 8,234 cases , and [3] Komnas Perempu an's Referral and Service Unit (UPR) totalled 2,389 
cases, with a record that 2,134 cases were gender -based and 255 of which were cases that were not 
gender -based or provided information.  KBGS (Cyber Gender Based Violence) increased from 126 
cases in 2019 to 510 cases in 2020. The forms of violence that dominate KBGS are psychological 
violence 49% (491 cases) followed by sexual violence 48% (479 cases) and economic violence 2% (22 
case s). Cases of violence against women migrant workers are recorded at 157 cases in 2020 .15 Cases 
reported to the police or handled by victim protection organisation s are  required to protect the identity 
or victim and witness , as well as to provide rehabilitation after violence. For m ost of the cases, a private 
entity , like companies , in Indonesia do not have a proper grievance mechanism policy to handle such 
cases.   
Women Access to Land and Asset  
According to the National Lan d Agency (Badan Pertanahan Nasional/BPN), only 24.216 percent of 
Indonesian land is registered under female ownership. The trend seems to be the same globally.  
Indonesia recognizes three different legal frameworks on inheritance: customary law where inheri tance 
is given based on familial relationship, Islamic law that follows Islamic rules and civil law where land 
inheritance is equally distributed among the legal heirs. Today, a portion of the people still relies on 
customary law or Islamic law when it com es to inheritance as customary law continues to be a strong 
force and a majority of the country’s population is Muslim. Both laws tend to side with men when it 
comes to land inheritance, giving them a bigger portion than the women . A majority of Indonesian 
communities is also patriarchal, favouring the men as heirs  to their assets . 
 
 
Figure 0.5 Women and Men Access to Land Ownership - Indonesia  
 
15 CATAHU 2020 Komnas Perempuan: Lembar Fakta dan Poin Kunci (5 Maret 2021) , retrieved from: 
https://komnasperempuan.go.id/siaran -pers-detail/catahu -2020 -komnas -perempuan -lembar -fakta -dan-poin-kunci -5-maret -2021  
16 WRI, 2020, Land Ownership and Women Empowerment, retrieved at March 2021, Retrieved from https://wri -
indonesia.org/en/blog/land -ownership -and-women -
empowerment#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20National%20Land,to%20be%20the%20same%20globally.&text=The%20fa
ct%20is%20women%20are,ownership%20and%20decision%2Dmaking%20process.  Women
24%
Men
76%REGISTERED LAND 
OWNERSHIP INDONESIA  
107


---
*Page 115*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 19 
 There is a common assumption that women  depend on their  spouses after they are married, making 
men the only person responsible to inherit property, like house s or land. In this  capacity, men make 
land and cultivating choices . In reality, women are equipped to have significant  influence to govern and 
manage fam ily assets. They  assume a vital part in overseeing family money, including foo d, schooling, 
wellbeing, finances  and cultivating cost s. This has given women  a more exceptional, balanced 
comprehension of family funds contrasted with their male partners. This  implies that the inclusion of 
women in the dynamic on asset management, for example, farming area, seed to be planted, the 
necessary capital for the improvement of the homestead or harvest costs will help to establish  more 
prosperous families.  
Women Acces s to Financial Services  
It is estimated  that approximately  20% of Indonesia’s  population  depend s on micro - and small -scale 
businesses to earn a living but that only 25% of microenterprises have access to credit from formal 
financial institutions.17 Although women are considered an important market for microfinance,  targeting  
women  as clients has never  been  a hallmark  of the Indonesian  microfinance industry. The average 
proportion of female clients served by major microfinance institut ions has remained constant  over the 
last 20 years, indicating that there has been no improvement in women’s access to credit. Estimates 
from Bank Rakyat Indonesia units indicate that 25% of both their microcredit borrowers and micro 
savings customers are w omen. One of the main obstacles for women’s access to credit is lack of 
collateral,  as many collateral assets require the man in the family to sign  off. This process is considered 
common practice in many Indonesian financial institutions. It is noted that financial institutions have 
been following this practice  for years  and do not seem to be aware that this practice has create d 
limitation s for and/or discrimination to wards  a specific gender group in accessing financial services.  
An additional form of discrimination is the inherent bias towards married women with regard to credit  
access . Article 108 of the Civil Code impedes married women from entering into contracts on their  own 
behalf.  It requires  that husbands,  by their presence  or permission,  assist  women  in formalizing 
contracts.18 There is also an inherent bias against married women earning income from individual 
business activities. Tax regulations do not allow married w omen to be given a separate tax number and 
require them to use their husband’s. Married women thus find it difficult to engage in formal financial 
activities , such as opening a checking account, which  could facilitate application for credit. For Muslim 
women, when they are married, they will need to ask permission from their husband for an y important 
financial decision. It is common in Indonesia for women to not have any access to a financial account 
if they do not formally work .  
Quantitative measurements of credit access are insufficient in assess ing the gender impact of  access  
to credit.  Income  is only one indicator , and it does  not reveal  whether  microcredit  for women  actually  
implies  that women  have  control  over the financing . Additionally,  microcredit  often adds to women’s 
workload s, increasing their dual burden of productive and reproductive work. It is necessary to include 
metrics regarding the extent of women’s control over credit and income -generating activities, specifically 
whether the y have control of income earned, how they use it, and whether or not women and men, and 
boys and girls, benefit equitably from increased household spending.19 As the headline results of the 
Survey on Financial Inclusion and Access (SOFIA) survey reveal, more males  are using banking 
services /formal financial services  (45%, compared to 42% of women). W hereas a significantly higher 
proportion of females (49%) use informal financial services , such as borrowing to family members, 
friends, and money lenders  (excl usively, as well as non -exclusively), compared to males (29%). If 
women continue to disproportionately face barriers to financial access, this potentially inhibits them from 
 
17 Available: www.bwtp.org/acrm/indonesia/I_Country _Profile/Indonesia -country profile htm.  
18 ADB. 2002. Sociolegal Status of Women in Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. Manila.  
19 Land Tenure Center. 2003. Joint Titling in Nicaragua, Indonesia and Honduras; Rapid Appraisal Synthesis. University of 
Wisconsin -Madison.  
108


---
*Page 116*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 20 
 participating in the economy and from improving their lives and the wellbeing of t heir families and 
communities.20 
Figure 0.6 Women and Men Financial Access – Indonesia  
 
 
20Bappenas Survey 2017, retrieved from 
https://www.bappenas.go.id/files/5615/1668/2564/SOFIA_Focus_Note_Gender_Nov_2 017.pdf  0%10%20%30%40%50%60%
Formal Financial Service Informal Financial ServiceFinancial Acess Type by Gender
Men Women
109


---
*Page 117*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Deve lopment Bank  4 July 2022    Page 21 
 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  DURING GENDER ASSESSMENT  
Stakeholder Identification  
The programme  implementation will cover range of multi -stakeholders  to understand gender 
perspective and dynamic s. In the early stage s of programme  development , January  and March  2021 , 
the followin g stakeholders are identified  and engaged to gather input :  
Table 0.1 Stakeholder Identified and Engagement Activities to Date  
Group  Detail  Engagement Activities to Date   
Accredited entities;  Korean Development Bank  
**Focus Group Discussion 
Observation (small group 
discussion conducted by 
ASEAN Centre for Energy) – 
January 2021   Ministerial policy maker for 
energy efficiency;  Ministry of Energy and Mineral 
Resource, Financial Services 
Authority, Ministry of Finance, 
Directorate General in 
Renewable Energy , Directorate 
General Electricity , Fiscal 
Policy Agency  
National financial institution;  Bank Central Asia, Indonesia 
Infrastructure Finance  
Target Beneficiaries;  Industry owner; E nergy service 
companies  
Non-government organisation  
(National Observer under 
GCF)  *Solidaritas Perempuan , IESR , 
Kehati  Foundation, W ALHI  Key Informant Interview  - 
March 2021  
*Note: Solidaritas Perempuan has only available to provide input through document, which been 
considered during the gender assessmen t proces s and gender action plan21.  
**Note: Minutes of meeting can be found in Annex 1.  
Stakeholder Input  
As part of data collection in creating these documents, ERM has engaged GCF observers in 
Indonesia as follow s to receive high-level feedback in gender components for energy efficiency:  
• Solidaritas Perempuan;  
• IESR;  
• Kehati  Foundation ; and   
• WALHI  
Some noticeable points arise listed below related to  gender : 
• Project s relate d to energy efficiency in downstream industr ies might reduce employment 
for women and women -headed household s with reason s to streamline the production 
process;  
 
21 Standar Aturan Perlindungan Perempuan, 2012, retrieved from :  http://www.solidaritasperempuan.org/publikasi/koleksi -
buku/  
110


---
*Page 118*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 22 
 • New innovation project s in energy sector/energy efficiency ha ve limited access to 
women’s feedback/agreement/involvement , especially for wome n’s employee s or 
beneficiaries (women -owned industry);  
• Upstream industr ies where raw material is gathered to support downstream industr ies 
have a significant impact to women’s access and indigenous women’s access to natural 
resources; and  
• Gender dispropor tionate impact is not easy to identify for business owner s; therefore, 
specific communication material is needed for business owner s in the food and 
beverage, textiles and clothing, p ulp and paper, chemicals, n on-metallic minerals 
(especially cement)  indus tries.  
Minutes of Meeting during Key Informant Interview  
The Key Informant Interview was conducted inclusively for the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) GAP not only to discuss potential impacts on gender but also to consider the 
interrelation between gender and environmental and social issues . The following list of input is written 
in verbatim format to capture main points of discussion:  
 
1. IESR – Fabby Tumiwa  (Friday, 26 March 2021)  
Enviro nmental  aspect   
• Project impact in the industry, as mentioned earlier, should be traced along the supply chain 
at least tier 1. So that we can understand how Industry complies  with social and environment 
safeguards recommended by GCF/KDB;   
• Energy efficiency should work on how to replace coal or reduce coal impact; the probable 
option should consider co -generation of energy (i.e. Waste to Energy);   
• The cement industry can show a good promise in managing its impact, such as fly ash and 
bottom ash management. Ash has been cons idered as hazardous wastes and it needs to be 
control led correctly ; and  
• Each project should submit a risk and affect identification to comply with GCF environment 
and social safeguard.   
A good project will include   
• Green building;  
• Those who have implemente d ISO 50001 in energy management;   
• Some types that have been piloted under the UNIDO project also covered energy efficiency; 
and 
• Cement Cilacap is one of the samples of good energy management in the cement industry.  
Social aspect   
• Social impact due to ener gy efficiency will cause another social aspect, for example: Retrofit 
Energy reduction of energy consumption will reduce the amount of work as the process 
become more efficient and streamline. Losing livelihood should be considered as the social 
cost of EE ; 
• Pulp and paper industry has been utili sing forest source (Sumatera) fix stock which most of 
the time consumes Indigenous People forest;    
• Monitoring of social and environmental aspect should cover some indicators:  
• Result in monitoring framework;  
• Monitori ng based on ISO 50001 indicators;  
• Number of people trained;  
• External evaluations process at the end of project completion ; and  
• GCF social and environmental safeguard should be common guidance for the GCF -KDB 
project   
 
2. KEHATI – Rony Megawanto (Friday, 19 Ma rch 2021)  
Enviro aspect   
• GCF standard on CO2 equivalent (climate risk assessment & detail design) ; 
• Feasibility assessment (trends modelling) for project design to confirm project result) ; 
111


---
*Page 119*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 23 
 • monitoring on deforestation value ; 
• Forest conversation effort ; 
• water conservation effort monitoring ; and  
• climate change adaptation should cover effort monitoring (if any) . 
 Social aspect   
• Human Right consideration is always minimum ;  
• Gender indicator (% of gender representation in a meeting, village decision making 
organisation (man/woman’s role)) ; 
• Number of affected people ;  
• Vulnerable to CC and reduced number vulnerability ;  
• Energy access benefit for the community without emission or minimum emission ;  
• Public disclosure (no project disclosed yet involving Kehati/anot her GCF observer) ; 
• Project micro -hydropower social jealousy – community discontent, grievance mechanism from 
the community; wind power (island Sulawesi) – community expectation  
• Monitoring:  
• Specific risk should be monitored, such as (community risk dispropo rtionate benefit plan, 
health & safety on -site survey) ; 
• Monitoring Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan for indicator outcome /output (every three 
month/6 months (result) ;  
• Two years outcome ; and   
• Project committee conducted learning case - governance commit tees meeting of the project 
annually, it also included public disclosure (UNIPA disclosed through seminar/book)) . 
 
3. WALHI – Oslan Purba (Wednesday, 24 March 2021)  
Environment aspect  - Industry Impact   
• The textile and food industry has mainly shown poor mana gement in waste management ; 
• Kendeng Central Java has demonstrated a significant negative precedent of cement industry 
that cannot be separated from poor governance from province level. Advocacy includes 
JATAM (Anti – Mining Networks) ; and  
• Land used politics has caused the cement industry to be able to reach the Kars area, which 
full of biodiversity and has a significant role in the water conservation Social aspect .  
Energy Efficiency Impact   
• Land conversion in hydropower project . Even though, it is r enewable and can reduce carbon 
footprint . It may cause significant social and environment impact ; 
• Nickel industry booming, as it is considered as raw material for battery, electricity equipment 
and transmission line ; 
• Indonesia still opts for coal and tried to create a cleaner version of it, but the number burned 
will be higher every year ; 
• Energy diversification/mix is highly suggested instead of using only one source of energy ;  
• EE should also cover community as the direct operator if possible as the R E technology 
works best when the community on a small scale manages it ; and  
• Labour impact should be considered while doing efficiency . 
Monitoring  
• Monitoring of the project should involve the community in a participatory manner to 
understand why EE is imple mented ; 
• Women should be informed more as their access to information and decision making have 
been omitted most of the time ; 
• Vulnerable people should be covered within project implementation and find a way to involve 
people with special needs to join the c ommunity consultation or participatory exercise during 
monitoring or information disclosure ; and   
• After the project draft is done, it is suggested to involve CSO or NGO to give feedback, not 
only trying to get their voice at the beginning of the project as  if it is a legitimate 
action/affirmation to receive all project planning process.   
 
4. Solidaritas Perempuan (SP) – Puspa Dewi (Friday, 26 March 2021) – 
   Through writing instruction, SP mentioned that it suggest s including  the following  Gender aspect:  
• Aligned all action plan s with SP guideline s to mitigate risk in removing women access to:  
- Information;  
112


---
*Page 120*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 24 
 - Decision making;  
- Security and Safety;  
- Land;  
- Grievance Process ; and  
- Regulation background . 
• Project Impact assessment should cover risk management, especially social risk such as land 
acquisition, relocation, ecosystem service change, loss of livelihood, information disclosure, 
impact to IP women community, grievance mechanism ; and  
• SP also has mentioned regarding their strong disagreement in GCF & KDB  project in South 
Pacific http://apwld.org/letter -with-civil-society -concerns -about -the-green -climate -fund-
funding -proposal -fp088 -kdb-biomass -energy -Programme -in-the-south -pacific/    
113


---
*Page 121*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 25 
 GENDER ASSESSMENT IN  THE PROGRAMME  AND PROJECT L EVEL 
Gender Impact Assessment Findings  
Institut ional  Vulnerability  in Programme  Level   
• National government at the ministerial level might not aware that there is gender related 
vulnerability in accessing financing . As mentioned in section 4.3.3 Women access to decision 
making, it is quite common that the women representation in decision -making committee s 
involves fewer women representative s compared to male representative s. As such, the 
understanding of diverse  genders’ need s might not be considered ; instead, the decision -
making may be b enefitting the major ity gender group. As ob served in FGD process conducted 
by ACE, the majority of decision maker s invited were represented by male politician/decision 
maker s. 
• Financial institution s as loan  and other financing  intermediaries do not have the capacity , 
awareness  or commitment to impl ement gender mainstreaming action plan s or tak e into 
consideration a  gender priority  for women  applicant s. An assessment by a group of NGOs 
conducted in 2018 indicates poor performance of financial institutions in Indonesia on the 
aspect of gender equality.22 Of the 11 financial insitutions that were assessed , only six financial 
institution s have a gender poli cy in place , and foreign banks dominate as the highest ranking 
on the list. The gender polic ies in place mainly focus on internal management ( e.g., gender 
pay gap, non -discrimination policy, etc.). Gender mainstreaming has yet to be incorporate d 
into inves tment and credit scheme polic ies. 
• During the national stakeholder engagement  on energy e fficiency discussion, the majority  
stakeholders who joined were decisio n-makers in energy efficienc y policy for industries  and 
were male . The observation indicates that  women have limited access to information on 
energy efficiency. Secondary data review also show s that discrimination and inherent bias 
against women exists for women attempting to access financial service s. Even though , data 
shows that the women-owned SME in Indonesia may account for  60% out of total . Women 
access to finance service s is still very limited.  From this information,  it can be expected that 
the participants  for energy efficiency financing will likely be male business owner s. 
Gende r Vulnerability  in Project Level  
• Women have different levels of exposure to vulnerability  depending on their  specific position.  
Young er women are particularly susceptible to  the lack of access to the labour marke t 
compared to young men  despite their education al background . The disparity between the 
number of women and men worker s is highest within the 25 -34 years old  age range ,23 which 
applicable legislation  considers  to be youth . Socio -cultur al aspect s play a critical role, as 
elaborated in section 4.3.2 Women Access to Economic D evelopment .  
• Women worker s may dominate in the food and beverage , textiles  and clothing industr ies, but 
they lack access to the decision -making aspect since they do not hold st rategic position s. The 
ownership of these industries is primarily male-dominated – the same as pulp  and paper, 
chemicals , and non -metallic minerals industries , which are widely acknowledged as being 
male-dominated industries. According to Indonesia’s Manpower Ministry data, the ratio of 
female s to male s in managerial position s is 1:2. As the described Programme  is to be 
implemented in the  STEM sector,  male worker s will be highly likely to have more opportunit ies 
to be trained in technical proficiency for energy efficiency compared to  female  worker s. This 
 
22 2018 Bank Ranking Report, 2018, retrieved from https://responsibank.id/media/496524/laporan -pemeringkatan -bank -
2018.pdf  
23 Ketenagakerjaan dalam Data, 2021, retrieved from 
https://satudata.kemnaker.go.id/files/Buku%20Kementerian%20Dalam%20Data%202021%20Buat%20Web_1617259878.pdf  
114


---
*Page 122*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 26 
 assertion is supported by the Indonesian government’s data revealing the ratio of female and 
male worker s as machine assembler s and operator s, which is 1: 7 . 
• Women workers are also particularly vulnerable to violence in workplaces setting s, such as 
factories. The violence can be triggered by many reasons , such as social jealousy . Increasing 
access to women capacity building in energy efficiency  may be a  trigger  for social jealousy. 
Hence, the worker ’s ability to access a safe and inclusive grievance mechanism is needed in 
every setting considering multiple factors and scenarios . The cases recorded in regarding 
gender -based  violence can be found in section 4.3.4 Women Access to Health and Safe 
Working Condition s;  
• Currently  there is  not aspecific women s union in the industrial enterprise. Female workers are 
encouraged to join the leadership of the existing worker s union s – another male -dominated 
space. In principle, workers union is expected to advocate for workers rights, handle workers ’ 
issues (if any) and engage in a dialogue with the industry as a worker’s representative. 
However , the union often makes decision s without considering the interests and position s of 
female workers. Union meeting s are often conducted  after working hours  and female workers 
are often unable to at tend due to their domestic household roles.24 Representation of female 
workers in union s is one issue , but lack of understanding about gender equality is another 
significant  issue within  workers union s. The position of female workers in the union  
environment is quite  challenging . 
• Women -led business es may face limitation s in the ability to make their own financial decision s 
during loan application process, as by national law, their spouse s are required to sign the 
financial document s. As mentioned in section 4.3.2 Women Access to Economic Development 
and 4.3.5 Women Access to Land and Asset,  women -led business es (typically SME s) have 
experienced difficulties in accessing financial service s; the discrimination and inherent bias 
against women trying to access financial service s face can be expected due to how the 
financial lending system is built mainly for male -owned business es with sufficient collateral, 
that do not require their spouse to sign the financial document s. It is also challenging for 
women -led businesses to access the necessary information on financial lending process es to 
be able to make informed decisions.  
• Another layer of vulnerability is observed through women in a different category , women in 
project -affected communities. As mentioned by NGO representative s during consultation s, 
women are the one s who are significantly imp acted by energy -intensive industries  as their 
access to natural resource s are disrupted. The phenomenon is particularly salient in the 
upstream industry , where raw material is gathered to support the downstream industry. In spite 
of that, local women have limited access to decision making and information regarding 
project s. Decision s at the community level are often made by male community members.  
  
Scooping Gender Impact in Programme  Level  & Project Level  
The following gender impact was identified as relevant from a gender equality report on energy 
infrastructure :25 Programme  
Table 0.1 Gender Impact in Clean Energy and Energy  Efficiency   
Avoidable Impacts  Achie vable Outputs  Impact Level  
 
24 https://www.wri.or.id/1 74-current -project -id/perempuan -kerja/pekerja -perempuan/483 -buruh -perempuan -dan-relasi -
industrial.html#.YZYSd21Bw2x  
25 Getting to Gender Equality in Energy Infrastructure, 2018, ESMAP, World Bank  
115


---
*Page 123*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea De velopment Bank  4 July 2022    Page 27 
 Lack of financial assistance  
application s from women -led 
business   Provide quota and capacity building 
for women –led business  
 Programme  Level  
Lack of female  participation in 
policy consultations and decision 
making  Gender -inclusive po licy consultations 
and decision making (e.g., hiring a 
gender specialist that  may lead 
discussion with  women -only groups)  Programme  Level  
Lack of policy instrument in gender 
mainstreaming or prioritisation due 
to financial intermediaries’  limited 
capacity in developing a gender 
action plan and gender 
mainstreaming commitment  Provide a gender -screening indicator 
in the Programme  to select pr oject s 
and assist financial intermediaries to 
develop gender -mainstreaming 
commitment  Programme  Level  
Excluding women workers  from 
learning about clean energy a nd 
energy efficiency technology  Provide capacity building training 
opportunity for women workers in 
energy efficiency  Project Level  
Women’s lack of access to 
financing and collateral to 
purchase clean energy 
technologies and services  Prioritisation of women -led SMEs  for 
the Programme  to bypass the 
collateral requirements seen with 
typical financing options in the market  Project Level  
Lack of inclusive grievance 
mechanism that can create safe 
working condition s for all genders  Established safe and secure 
grievance channel at the pro ject 
location  and throughout the project  Project Level  
116


---
*Page 124*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 28 
 PROPOSED GENDER ACTION PLAN IN PROGRAMME  AND  PROJECT L EVEL  
Gender Positive Impacts  
The intended gender positive impacts of the Programme  are determined based on identification of t he project’s key stakeholders and their contribution to 
closing gender gaps in the country relating to the sectors of participating IEs.  
The main intended gender positive impacts of the programme  include  the following : 
• Promot ion of  gender -responsive policy -making and budgeting at the corporate and national levels;  
• Increase local financial institutions’ and government entities’ understanding of the gender aspect in the Programme ’s implementation;  and 
• Mainstream gender indicators duri ng project application screening and project implementation.  
The main intended gender positive impacts at the project level include  the following : 
• Improved quality of employment for women;  
• Improved equality in job allocation for women;  
• More EE business ow ned or led by women;  and 
• Reduced health risk and health caring responsibility for women . 
Gender Outcomes  
Below are specific intended changes in knowledge and skills of female workers and women’s owned business es when participating in the designated gender 
action plan. It is expected that IE’s and their management will become the main actor to mitigate gender risks and gender adverse impacts in Programme ’s 
implementation:  
• Women -owned / led final beneficiaries, or those otherwise meeting the gender criteria will be prioritised for Programme  EE financing . Women’s 
access to financial services have been a challenge due to the ‘patriarchal’ system and procedure, hence preferential measures for women are 
needed ; 
• Achieve KDB and GCF target in lowering production costs through energy efficiency strategy  that is in part developed by women . It should be noted 
that the number of women workers with technical proficiency is much lower than that of men. An affirmative policy should be in place to prioritize the 
participation of women workers in EE training ; 
• Women and men from vulnerable/minority/indigenous groups are provided with employment . The energ y efficiency sector requires the possession of 
a specialised skills et. IEs could develop a dedicated programme  that comprises of a series of training and internship s for these vulnerable groups ; 
• Improved quality of employment for women and men in Industria l Enterprises (IEs);  
117


---
*Page 125*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 29 
 • Raised awareness on gender issues among IEs and participating government agencies . Lack of understanding on gender issues has hindered the 
implementation of gender mainstreaming in the workplace ; 
• Improved women access in EE especially on information, decision  making, safety, grievance submission, and capacity building for women . It is 
particularly critical given women are among the most impacted group of the IE’s project, as suggested during consultation s; 
• Reduced health risks for male and female workers, and people living around IEs; and  
• Safeguard requirement compliance.  
 
Project Outputs:   
Strengthening policies and regulatory framework for EE;  
Establishing a model EE promotion mechanism for regional replication;  
Enhancing capacity of stakeholders in EE;  
Building trust in EE technologies and business model s amongst stakeholders;  
Building track  records  for EE finance;  
Demonstrating viability of EE finance applicable in the commercial market at scale; and  
Launching a model mechanism for de -risking with  credit guarantees and  EE insurance along with standard performance contracts and validation 
methodologies in Indonesia.   
Relevant Gen der Outputs:  
• Integrate the gender inclusive approach and participation in policies and regulatory framework for EE , as well as enhance the gender mainstreaming 
capacity of local financial institutions;  
• Increase d participation of stakeholders/audience fro m women -owned business es during the establishment of EE promotion mechanism for regional 
replication;  
• Enhanc ement of  capacity of stakeholders in EE , especially for women  employee s and business owner s; and  
• Maximized gender benefit of EE finance.  
 
Table 0.1 Gender Action Plan for Energy Efficiency in Industry - Indonesia  
118


---
*Page 126*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 30 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
Output 1 Programme  Level : Integrate the gender inclusive approach and participation in policies and regulatory framework for EE , as well as enhance  the gender 
mainstreaming capacity of local financial institutions;  
Conducting a gender audit on  policy, legal and 
regulatory framework on EE . The outcomes will 
inform the establishment of specific gender 
policies or guidelines of FI s and improvement of 
broader EE policies and regulatory framework.  
 ▪ One (1) gender audit report  
▪ One (1) gender policy/ 
guideline for FI a nd IE 
consistent with applicable 
framework  Q1 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision26 50,000 USD  
Strengthening the capacity of FI and PIU team 
members on gender mainstreaming in  the 
energy efficiency sector . This includes gender 
policy applied throughout the Programme  
implementation, e.g., reporting in a gender -
segregated data  
 ▪ One (1) capacity building/ 
training per year (followed by 
refreshment training)  
▪ 30% (minimum) of women 
participation in the capacity 
building/ training  Q2 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  20,000 USD  
Conducting consultation rounds to establish a 
gender inclusive EE financing framework , 
including a gendered screening process to be 
adopted by FI in assessing the Project. Gender 
criteria includes  number of women in leadership 
position s, percentage of female  employee s, and 
potential impacts of the project to gender minority 
group s (women).  
 
Stakeholders to be consulted include 
representation from IEs, FIs, national government, 
such as Ministry of Energy and Mineral 
Resources, Ministry of Women Empowerment and 
Child Protection, Ministry of Finance, experts, 
academics and non -government organization  
(especially those registered as GCF observer s). 
 ▪ 30% (in minimum) of women 
participation in the stakeholder 
consultation  
▪ One (1) gender inclusive EE 
financing framewo rk Q2 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  10,000 USD  
 
26 Programme Implementatioun Unit (PIU) will be established in the local FI under KDB supervision. It will consist of GCF project managers, focal points, and consultant s dispatched from external 
expert agencies, including a gender expert. The role of the gender expert is to support gender mainstreaming throughout project implementation.  
119


---
*Page 127*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 31 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
Conducting stakeholder  consultation s to 
ensure alignment of gender principles in all 
selected projects . This will be conducted  prior to 
the project commencement. The consultation  is 
not designed to undo the decision of project 
investment (unless highly necessary) , but it aims 
to assess gender elements of the project, namely 
gendered impacts and  mitigation measures  
especially to mitigate adverse impact to women  
(e.g., the presence of women in project 
management) .  
 
Stakeholders to be consulted include 
representation from IEs, FIs, national government, 
such as Ministry of Energy and Mineral 
Resources,  Ministry of Women Empowerment and 
Child Protection , WED  and non -government 
organization  (especially those registered as GCF 
observer s). 
 ▪ One (1)  consultation round per 
project  
▪ 30% (minimum) of women 
participation in the stakeholder 
consultation s One month after 
project selection  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  7,500 USD per 
project  
Monitoring Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
implementation  at Programme  level to identify 
challenges and update  the action plan.   
 
Stakeholder s engaged during GAP monitoring 
shall include women representation, both as 
Programme  implementor s and beneficiaries.  
 ▪ 30% (minimum) of women out 
of total respondents in the GAP 
monitoring  
▪ One (1) GAP monitoring report  
with s ex-disaggregated data  Annually  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  20,000 USD  
Output 2 Programme  Level:  Increase d participation of stakeholders/audience from women -owned business es during the establishment of EE promotion and market 
mechanism for regional replication;  
Conducting baseline study to map out women 
participation in EE sector in Indonesia. This ▪ One (1) baseline study in the 
GAP monitoring report per year  Q1 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  5,000 USD  
120


---
*Page 128*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 32 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
includes number of women -owned/led SMEs27, 
operational area s, revenue, financial service 
access, challenges, etc..  
 
Conducting needs assessment to identify and 
address specific financial service needs  of 
women -owned/led SMEs to access EE financing . 
The assessor shall engage SMEs owned/ led by 
women with attention to geography balance.  
 ▪ One (1) needs assessment 
report with 50% of women -
owned/led SMEs  out of total 
respondents  Q2 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  5,000 USD  
Developing  EE financing  targeted specifically 
towards  SMEs, including those owned/led by 
women. The scheme will follow the result of the 
demand  assessment.  
 ▪ One (1) guideline for EE 
financing schemes to be added 
onto LFI gender policy and /or 
guidelines  Q3 - 4 of first year 
of the Programme  Financial Institution under 
KDB gender specialist 
guidance  
 50,000 USD  
Develop ing outreach/information programme s 
for women -owned/led SMEs to become familiar  
with EE financing ; ▪ One (1) set of outreach 
material for women -owned/led 
SMEs  Q4 of first year of 
the Programme  Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  10,000 USD  
▪ Three (3) outreach activit ies 
with 50% women participation, 
including  women -owned led 
SMEs;  
▪ 75% of feedback rate from 
participants of the outreach 
activity  2nd year of the 
Programme  
Increasing participation rate of women -led and 
owned SMEs in the EE financing programme  ▪ 15% (minimum) of total SMEs 
owned/ led by women 
(captured in the baseline data) 1st year of the EE 
financing 
programme  Financial Institution  
 Inclu ded in aActivity 3 
under Output 2  
 
27 IFC’s definition of women -owned enterprise i.e., at least 51% owned by a woman or women; or a business where at least 20% is owned by women with one or  more women in a top management 
role ( CEO/COO), and at least 30% of  the board of directors being female (where a board exists). But to better suit the objective to this programme, broader definition of women -owned business by 
MCA -Indonesia (2016) will be adopted, which is business in which a woman or group of women holds most of the important roles and positions in the ownership of capital/business inputs, business 
management, human resources/labor, and/or business control. Consequently, a thorough assessment should be carried out in a ca se-by-case basis to determine wheth er a business can be 
categorized as a women -owned business.  
121


---
*Page 129*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 33 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
accesses the financing 
scheme.  Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  ▪ 30% (minimum) of total SMEs 
owned/ led by women 
(captured in the baseline data) 
accesses the financing 
scheme.  5th year of the EE 
financing 
programme  
Developing case study for lesson s learrn t for 
regional replication  ▪ One (1) report documenting 
challenges and lesson s learn t 
during the programme  
implementation  8th year of the 
Programme   Financial Institution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  5,000 USD  
Disseminating case study  for regional 
replication  ▪ One (1)  dissemination activity 
for knowledge sharing   
▪ Two (2) wom en represented  in 
the panel discussion  
▪ Three  (3) media coverage on 
gender element of the 
Programme  10th year of the 
Programme  Financial Ins titution  
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  10,000 USD  
Output 3 Project Level : Enhancement of capacity of stakeholders in EE, especially for women employees and business owners  
Conducting training on EE social and 
environment benefits, EE technology, EE 
innovation, and EE financing  for IE 
representatives. Participants are expected to 
develop action plan s as the output of the training  
 
 ▪ One (1) training  per IE  
▪ One (1) set of training materials 
(reusable)   
▪ 30% (minimum) of women 
participation  
▪ At least 70% of the action plan 
being followed -up on Q1 of first year of 
the Project  ACE 
 
Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  5,000 USD per IEs  
Conducting gender training  for IE 
representatives (at managerial/ mid -level 
position s). This aims to raise awareness of 
relevant gender elements, such as recruitment, 
gender sensitive working conditions, GBV , equal 
remuneration and promotion , etc. ). Participants ▪ One (1) training every year 
(followed by refresh  training) ; 
▪ One set of training materials 
(reusable)  
▪ 30% (minimum) of women 
participation  Annually  Gender Expert  from 
Programme  Implementation 
Unit (PIU) under KDB 
supervision  10,000 USD per IEs  
122


---
*Page 130*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 34 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
are expected to develop action plan s as the output 
of the training.  ▪ At least 70% of the action plan 
are being followed -up  
Output 4 Project Level : Maximize d gender benefit of EE finance.  
Reviewing IE’s gender policies and practices . 
This is not limited to EE implementation, but 
includes broader hiring policy, remuneration, 
training opportunity, and working condiitons. 
Findings of the review must be complemented by 
recommended actions  ▪ One (1) assessment report o n 
IE’s gender policies and 
practices  Q1 of the first year 
of project  
 IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  20,000 USD  
 
*Assumptions: 1,000 
USD per IE  with a 
scenario of 
investment in 20 local 
companies  
 Enhancing IE’s gender policies and practices , 
as informed by the result of gender policies 
assessment for each IE to support EE project 
implementation. This may include:  
▪ Establish and institutionalize gender focal 
point s; 
▪ Improve terms of employment for women 
employee s (e.g., close gender pay gap, 
equal opportunity for education and training, 
etc.);  
▪ Develop sex -disaggregated data and gender 
database . ▪ One (1) GAP monitoring paper 
in any form that proves 1 00% 
of hig h priority recommended 
actions followed  up on First year of the 
project  IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
▪ 50% of recommended actions 
are followed -up on Mid-period of the 
project  
▪ 100% of recommended actions 
are followed -up on The final year of the 
project  
Consulting  vulnerable groups  relevant to the IE 
business operation throughout the Project 
implementation. It might include affected 
communit ies, ethinic minority group s, women, 
youth or elderly, as relevant . 
 
 ▪ One (1) guidance on the  
project level s takeholder 
engagement plan ning 
requirement  
▪ 20% (minimum) of women 
participation  
▪ One (1) round of consultation 
for women -only including other 
applicable vulnerable groups 
under the condition that the EE 
project is identified to affect 
them disproportionately.  Throughout the 
project  
 IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementa tion Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
123


---
*Page 131*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 35 
 Activities  Monitoring Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
Establish standard operational procedure to 
handle GBV in workplace. This shall align with 
national legislation (recently issued Law 12 of 
2022 regarding Sexual Violence Eradication)  ▪ One (1) gender guideline or 
policy that includes s tandard 
operation procedure (SOP) of 
GBV handling  
▪ Evidence of socialization to 
internal  stakeholders  Q1 of the first year 
of project  IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
 Include d in Activity 
number 2 under 
Output 4  
Enhance  grievance mechanism that is safe and 
inclusive for all gender groups to address any 
gendered violation / harassment in IEs facilities 
(beneficiaries and  project -affected people)  
 
Grievance mechanism must enable anon ymous 
grievance to protect complainant. Protection must 
be given to victims and witnesses as well. In 
principle, grievance mechanism must be in 
accordance with international standards, e. g., IFC 
Performance Standard  ▪ Standard operation procedure 
(SOP) of grievance handling 
mechanism (includ ing focal 
point, time target, record & 
tracking)  to be set up in each IE  Q1 of the first year 
of project  IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
 Include d in Activity 
number 2 under 
Output 4  
▪ Evidence of socialization to 
internal and external 
stakeholders  
▪ Grievance record/ log for 
monitoring/ tracking  Throughout the 
project  
 
Improve targeted community support 
programme s to support local women  ▪ Female beneficiaries in 
community support  
programme s have doubled  Throughout the 
project  
 IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
 Include d in Activity 
number 3 under 
Output 4  
Monitoring Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
implementation  at Project  level to identify 
challenges and update  the action plan   
 
Stakeholder s engaged during GAP monitoring 
shall include women representation, both as 
Programme  implementor s and beneficiaries  
 ▪ 30% (minimum) of women out 
of total respondents in the GAP 
monitoring  
▪ One (1) GAP monitoring report  
with s ex-disaggregated data  Annually  IEs under guidance of Gender 
Expert  from Programme  
Implementation Unit (PIU) 
under KDB supervision  
 20,000 USD  
124


---
*Page 132*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 36 
 ANNEX 1 : MINUTES OF MEETING FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION  
 
To KDB 
From  ERM  
Date  7 January 2021  
Reference  FGD Market Assessment  
Subject  Minutes of meeting from ERM’s point of view  
 
Dudi Rulliadi (BKF Indonesia (NDA GCF))  – focal point from GCF  
Explained the expected meeting agenda:  
- Policy, Finance, and technical assistance ;  
- Energy efficiency assurance ;  
- Requested ministerial approval through NDA ; 
- Requests for concept notes first c onducted in 2019 (195 concept notes screened, 47 concepts 
notes received) ; 
- These concept notes received assistance to improve their concept notes to  be able to meet 
GCF’s standard ; 
- The matchmaking clinic was conducted to prop ose the winning proposal to GCF ; and  
- KDB and ACE with BKF are the organizations that responsible to submit concept notes to GCF 
as funding proposals). In 2019, FGD has been conducted with technology  providers (boiler 
technology).  
Septia (ACE)  – We represent 10 energy ministries in ASEAN . We are targeting 30 % energy 
consumption reduction across ASEAN. We expected to receive input in policy alignment for the 
energy efficiency programme . 
Jesuk Lee (KDB) – presented the EE project and partnership scheme.   
 
Zulfikar (ACE - Renewable Energy) – Accepted Programme   
Programme  
- Energy Efficiency (EE) insurance to reduce the risk of new technology in EE ; 
- 20M USD KDB, 30M USD GCF assistance ; 
- Capacity building for business actor/industry/technology provider ; and  
- Developing the market and documented lesson learned . 
 
Programme  challenge  
- Capacity building challenge ; and  
- Limited de -risking mechanism in Indonesia – no insurance for new technology . 
 
Market assessment  
- Potential ind ustries & technology sector ; and  
- Target improvement for market creation . 
 
Rio Jon (ACE) – Policy   
- EE Law Indonesia: year 2009 presidential decree no 70/2009, year 2014 presidential decree no 
79/2014, year 2015 ministerial decree no 07/2015 law energy for e fficiency .  
- EE target and policy : improvement energy is required for high emission industry .  
- EE National statistical bureau: energy source is heavily rely ing on high emission . 
- Discussion points: improvement the regulation on threshold and incentive, suppo rt from the 
government for technology penetration, capacity building, benchmarking with ASEAN industry in 
EE. 
125


---
*Page 133*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 37 
   
Zulfikar (ACE - Renewable Energy ) - Technical   
- Focus sector: 5 sectors industry  
- Discussion points: proposed regulations, approach, the project in pipeline, assistance, and 
verification bodies  
 
Verena (ACE consultant) - finance breakout session  
- Implementation pp 70/2019, energy audit up to 6000 Tonne of Oil Equivalents ( TOE) 
- Implementation of OJK  (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan  or Financial Servic es Authority in English)  
regulation  
- Initiative energy efficiency EXIM, JCM, PT SMI, AFD  
- Multiple actors in assisting market penetration (funding) for EE  
- Discussion points: incentives programme , information on it, de -risking mechanism    
 
**Technical breako ut session (Putri)  
Isti (OJK):  
- Financing on energy, roadmap sustainable financing 11 January phase 2 and master plan for 
financial service industry ; 
- Banking needs more capacity building on innovative technology. All banking institutions have 
different un derstanding and policy in de -risking the loan/financing. Calculation instruments from 
finance institutions should be up to the banking institution ; 
- Banking will need a suitable mechanism for the collateral de -risking process. They will need to 
calculate the risk of EE projects ; 
- OJK expects there should be one pilot project de -risking energy for the finance industry 
(including an insurance company). Capacity building should be given not only for banking but 
also for the insurance companies. The s tock market should be involved as other stakeholders 
that might give financing or incentive; and  
- OJK also needs government policy to cover the financing process.  
 
Rustam (PKPN -BKF):  
- Government (Ministry of Finance) has provided many incentives for renewabl e energy. The 
government is planning to give a roadmap in government assistance. This has been postponed 
since there is an oversupply for geothermal/renewable energy ; 
- In the transportation sector, there has been an incentive for those products that utilize d batteries. 
Incentives are in the form of a reduction of tax ; and  
- No incentives related to climate change mitigation action for companies.   
 
**Policy breakout session   
Zulfikar – DEK DJEBT (directorate general in renewable energy)  
- We need a replication business model not only pilot or capacity building ; 
- There are too many capacity building in finance service ; 
- We need capacity building on financing instrument creation an d insurance capacity building ; and  
- All engineers in the company do not need capacity building in new technology, they need 
capacity building in standards.   
 
Isti (OJK -Financial Services Authority):  
- Stock market for IPO in clean energy is still low intere st; 
- In the sustainable finance roadmap phase 2 will explain more about the green industry sector ; 
- Fix asset 100% collateral de -risking innovative finance instrument is required for financing 
industry. We need a sample of the de -risking instrument first for  EE financing so that the 
business/industry can start using it in their business ; and  
- Finance institution is ready, but we need a solution to the above financial instrument.  
 
Ilham (Directorate general electricity)  
- There is a new regulation for PLN (nation al electricity company) for energy efficiency projects 
and specific fuel consumption efficiency ; 
- EE does not have enough financial policy instruments and incentive policy ; 
- There will be a carbon -pricing policy; this policy will help to boost energy efficie ncy; and  
126


---
*Page 134*
---

 
  
 
 
www.erm.com  Version: 3.0 Project No. : 0578633  Client: Korea Development Bank  4 July 2022    Page 38 
 - For old power plants, which are not very efficient, will deal with the carbon tax policy. Therefore, 
they need to opt for energy efficiency. Power plant needs/has to think about the solution on how 
to reduce energy consumption in the plant itself.  
 
Dewa (BKF) – Fiscal policy agency  
- Carbon tax/levies will not be ready shortly, given that many fiscal policies need improvements 
and adjustments ; and  
- Existing policy for energy efficiency spare part : the policy is to reduce the tax and import levies 
for these products.   
 
Juniko (Ministry of Energy and Mining -Electricity)  
- All regulation in EE should be grouped it into 3 regions, to reflect current local conditions of 
industr ies, which are completely differen t. The grid emission factor is different, the so urce of 
energy and business processes are also different.   
 
**Finance breakout session   
Wahyudi – EMI (company)   
- My obstacle is usually not the technology of EE itself but it is mainly on collateral instrument s of 
EE;  
- EMI business is mainly doing the auditing for potential energy efficiency. Our clients, when they 
want to replace their technology, they said that the bank would ask for collateral de -risking 
amount which is quite high ; and  
- Industry always tries to reduce CAPEX in the beginn ing of business start, but they forget to 
consider the  OPEX.     
 
Irwan – DEK DJEBT (directorate general in renewable energy)  
- Every industry will ask incentive from government after they are doing EE. They do not like when 
the government says  that the benefit is in m ore revenue and more cost -effective technology ; 
- Consultant – ESCO (energy service companies) still does not have sp ecific policy as part of 
financing process ;  
- Measurement energy standard/efficiency is already available in Indonesia. However, there is a 
need for certified verification body (like ESCO) ; and   
- We have PPP example before for traffic : for example  the projec t utilizes the efficiency amount 
gap to pay back the loan.    
 
Closing Dewa Ekayana  
- We are going to give full support all proposals/concept notes for projects in Indonesia. As GCF 
has the biggest funding available now for climate change related projects/pr oposals.  
 
 
127