=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20220928155423+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
/ModDate: D:20220929094351+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
17 – 20 October 2022  
Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  13 GCF/B.34/02 /Add.02 
29 September 2022  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package f or FP 192  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate
Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R- CReWS)” ;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.34/02 /Add.02 
Page b 
3 
139  
140  
144  
163  
176  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  
Gender documentation  180


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme title:  The R's ( Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater S ystems in Barbados (3R -CReWS)  
Country(ies):  Barbados  
Accredited Entity:  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre  (CCCCC)  
Date of first submission:  2022/02/24   
Date of current submission 2022/07/ 28  
Version number  V.005


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total n umber of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any  information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 0  
 
  
LIST OF ACRONYMS   
AE  Accredited Entity  
AMA  Accreditation Master Agreement  
AMCECC  Adaptation Measures to Counteract the Effects of Climate Change project  
BNEP  Barbados National Energy Policy  
BSTP  Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant  
BWA  Barbados Water Authority  
CARICOM  Caribbean Community  
CAS  Conventional Activated Sludge  
CCCCC  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre  
CFATF  Caribbean Financial Action Task Force  
CMMS  Computerized Real -time Management System  
CReW  Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management project  
CSME  Single Market and Economy  
DEFM  Dynamic Economic and Financial Model  
EE  Executing Entity  
EFE Extended Facility Fund  
ELPA  Electric Light and Power Act  
ESIA  Environment and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMF  Environment and Social Management Framework  
ESMP  Environmental and Social Management Plan  
ESMS  Environmental and Social Management System  
ESS  Environmental Social Safeguard  
FATF  Financial Action T ask Force  
FP  Funding Proposal  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GEF Global Environment Facility  
GHG  Greenhouse Gas Emission  
GOB  Government of Barbados  
IDB Inter-American Development Bank  
IDP  Information Disclosure Policy  
IPR Indirect Potable Reuse  
IRMF  Integrated Results Management Framework  
IWRM  integrated management of water resources  
IWWM  Integrated Water and Wastewater Management  
MENB  Ministry of Environment and National Beautification  
NDA  National Designated Authority  
NWRP  National Water Reuse Policy  
PDMU  Programme Development and Management Unit  
PDP Physical Development Plan  
PEA Public Education and Awareness


---
*Page 6*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 0  
 
 PM Preventative Maintenance  
R2RP  Roof -to-Reef Programme  
RAFF  Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility  
RE Renewable Energy  
RFP  Request for Proposals  
RO Reverse Osmosis  
SCSTP  South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant  
SCWRP  South Coast Water Reclamation Project  
SIDS  Small Island Developing States  
SLR Sea Level Rise  
SOPs  Standard Operating Procedures  
UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
UNITAR  United Nations Institute for Training and Research  
VFD Variable Frequency Drives  
WSRN S -
Barbados  Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados  
WWD  Wastewater Department


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s)   
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total 7.5 % ---- % 
☒  Energy generation and access  5% ---- % 
☐  Low-emission transport  ---- % ---- % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  2.5 % ---- % 
☐  Forestry and land use  ---- % ---- % 
Adaptation total 92.5 % 100 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  17.5% 25% 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  37.5% 75% 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  37.5 % ---- % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  ---- % ---- % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  40,875 tCO 2e over 25 years A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  Population of Barbados or 277,821 
persons  (136,132 males  and 
141,689 females ) (excluding annual 
tourist  arrival  of approximately 
1,237,200  million visitor s per year ) 
(World Bank  WDI, 2021)  
136,220  (66,748 
males and 
69,472 females)  
direct 
beneficiaries  141,601  (69,384 
males and 
72,217 females)  
indirect 
beneficiaries  
49% 51% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  50 Million  USD   
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  39.4 Million  USD  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the  GCF contribution (i.e. 
GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme descr ibed in the funding proposal.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant  39.4 Million USD   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years  A.12. Total lifespan  25 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
10/17/2022  
 A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
 
PPF022  
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC), established by an 
Intergovernmental Agreement entered into force on February 2, 2002, a non -profit 
regional organization among Member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). 
The CCCCC organized and ex isting under the laws of Belize pursuant to the ACT, Act 
No. 6 of 2015, dated 29th July 2015 and legally registered as an International Inter -
Governmental Organisation under Article 102 of the United Nations Treaty and having 
its registered office at 3rd F loor, David L. McKoy Business Centre, Bliss Parade, P.O. 
Box 563, Belmopan, Belize, Central America. The CCCCC is a regional accredited entity 
(Direct Access Entity) to the GCF.   
 
The B arbados Water Authority  is a Statutory Body established by an act of L egislature 
on October 8, 1980 to replace the Waterworks Department of Government. It 
commenced operations on April 1, 1981. BWA full registered address is The Pine 
Commercial Estate, The Pine St. Michael BB11000, Bridgetown,  Barbados.  
A.21. Executive sum mary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3 
 Climate Change Problem  
Barbados is experiencing “absolute water scarcity” based on the Falkenmark water stress indicator since 
approximately 305 -310 m3 of water is available per person per year, placing Barbados amongst the most 
water scarce countries in the world.  
 
The issue of water scarcity becomes of greater concern in the face of climate change. The projections, 
representative for Barbados, using a  multi -model CMIP6 ensemble with the SSP2 -4.5 scenario and for the 
epoch 2041 – 2060, indicate that:  
• The mean annual daily maximum temperature will increase by about 1.0°C. The mean annual daily 
minimum temperature will increase by about 1.3°C. The daily m aximum temperature increase is 
largest during the wet season from September to November.  
• The number of heatwaves (three consecutive days where the maximum temperature exceeds the 
average daily maximum temperature at the 90% threshold) has increased over th e period 1991 – 
2020 and may be expected to increase further with increasing temperatures.  
• Annual mean precipitation will decrease by about 9%. The decrease is particularly severe in the May 
- July season, effectively extending the dry season by two months . 
 
There is a cause -and-effect relationship with each of these scenarios. For instance, temperatures will affect 
the seasonality of crops, increase evapotranspiration rates, induce heat stress on the population, including 
tourists and livestock, increase c ooling costs, induce changes in plant -wildlife -insect populations and 
distribution range and increase infectious and vector -borne diseases. More intense rainfall, severe storm 
conditions and SLR will promote flash flooding; saline intrusion into available ground water abstraction and 
irrigation wells and salinization of agriculture lands; coastal erosion and damage to coastal infrastructures 
and disruption to businesses.  
 
The effects of climate change are already evident in Barbados as increased flash -flood ing magnitude and 
frequency has caused havoc in Barbados: on 29 November 2016 Barbados experienced over 170 mm of 
rainfall in a few hours, which previously was only observed in 1995, and this contributed to the failing of the 
sewerage system.  
 
The decreasi ng amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing evapotranspiration 
due to higher temperatures will set the stage for increased drought which will further decrease underground 
recharge rates and increase salinization of aquifers, w hich provide 95% of the island’s potable water supply. 
The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease 
by around 50% by 2050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of groundwater abstracti on is already 
between 85 -100% of the safe yield.  
 
Project Summary and Climate Results  
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical component to help mitigate the 
impacts of climate change on water scarcity. Reclaimed water is wastewater that has been treated to tertiary 
levels so that it can be beneficially reus ed for non -potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf 
maintenance, and recharging the aquifer.  
 
The goal of 3R -CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and productivity of 
Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral a nd climate resilient water and energy management 
technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved. 
This will be achieved through four outcome level results and ten output level results.  
 
Outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are the largest, in terms of budget, as they are focused on infrastructure 
works and transfer of technology. Specifically, Outcome 1 aims to achieve a climate resilient pathway 
through the upgrade of the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) to a tertiary treatment system and 
the installation of wastewater treatment systems in two Zone A locations in Barbados to harness reclaimed 
water, which will be utilized for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation . This will be achieved throug h the 
installation of a 9km pipeline that will supply reclaimed water to support irrigation developments in the 
Codrington -Neils-Lears -Salters -Constant -Valley, which will benefit 155 farmers  on 235 Hectares  and recharge


---
*Page 10*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4 
 wells (injections wells) for repleni shing the aquifer . This water reclamation and reuse process  will be 
complemented with the installation of decision support tools and infrastructure  that are critical for resilient 
building .  
 
Outcome 2, which spans the installation of renewable energy PV systems, automated controls such as 
variable frequency drives (VFDs) and a sludge dewatering system, will contribute to the achievement of a 
low-emission pathway.  
 
Outcomes 3 and 4 are “soft” developmental results that primarily aim to create an enabling environment for 
achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches to the management of water resources, specifically wastewater, 
and thereby promoting water security in the face of a changing climat e. Specifically, Outcome 3 is targeting 
the enhancement of capacities and capabilities, primarily at the BWA, for managing, monitoring and 
operating the upgraded BSTP through the development of customized trainings, updating the Standard 
Operating Procedur es (SOPs) and Operational Manual and implementing a risk management framework. 
Outcome 4 further strengthens the enabling environment through a legislative review, strengthening buy -in, 
ownership and leadership in the private sector for the adoption of was tewater technologies and reuse options 
and having nation -wide public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water 
availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options and promoting transparency 
and lessons  emerging from this project.  
 
Outcomes 1 and 4 are expected to yield co -benefits related to social, economic, adaptation, mitigation and 
environmental sectors.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 5 
 
  
2 World Population Review (Barbados 2020): http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/barbados -population/  
3 This method defines water scarcity in  terms of the total water resources that are available to the population of a region; measuring scarcity as the 
amount of renewable freshwater that is available for each person each year. If the amount of renewable water in a country is below 1,700 m3 per person 
per year, that country is said to be experiencing water stress; below 1,000 m3 it is said to be experiencing water scarcity; and below 500 m3, absolute 
water scarcity (Falkenmark, M., J. Lundquist and C. Widstrand (1989), “Macro -scale Water Sca rcity Requires Micro -scale Approaches: Aspects of 
Vulnerability in Semi -arid Development”, Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 258 -267)  
4 Barbados Second National Communication (2018).  
5 Barbadian farmers, especially small farmers, are becoming in creasingly vulnerable to drought as their livelihoods are threatened by low rainfall where 
crops are rainfed and by low water levels and increased production costs due to increased irrigation. Their livestock grazing  areas change in nutritional 
value, as m ore low quality, drought tolerant species dominate during extensive droughts, causing the vulnerability of livestock to incre ase. The potential 
for livestock diseases also increases. http://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/  
6 See Feasibility S tudy for more details.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
National Context  
Barbados has a population of approximately 287,000, with a density in the region of 660 persons per km2, 
ranking the island within the top fifteen most densely populated countries in the world  2. Barbados is 
experiencing “ absolute water scarcity ” based on the Falkenmark water stress indicator  3 since approximately 
305-310 m3 per person per year  of water is available, making Barbados amongst the most water scarce 
countries in the world.4 Water availability in Barbados is acutely affected by the periods and intensities of the 
wet and dry seasons and by extreme weather systems so much so that a dry spell of only 7 -10 days has the 
potential to reduce yields, thus influencing the livelihoods of farmers  and wider population  and increasing 
their climate vulnerability.5  
 
Climate change projections for Barbados and impacts  
As is indicated the Feasibility Study, climate change projections  using a multi -model CMIP6 ensemble with 
the SSP2 -4.5 scenario and for the epoch 2041 –2060 indicate that the current issues and challenges faced 
by Barbados will increase over the coming decades, relative to the  current climato logical normal, the period 
1991 –20206: 
• The mean annual daily maximum temperature will increase by about 1.0 °C. The mean annual daily 
minimum temperature will increase by about 1.3°C. The daily maximum temperature increase is 
largest during  the wet season from September to November.  
• The number of heatwaves (three consecutive days where the maximum temperature exceeds the 
average daily maximum temperature at the 90% threshold) has  increased over the period 1991 –
2020 and may be expected to inc rease further with increasing temperatures.  
• Annual mean precipitation will decrease by about 9%. The decrease is particularly severe in the May 
- July season, effectively extending the dry season by two months.  
 
The results of the analyses on the climate c hange projections on temperature are aligned with the findings 
of Working Group I of the IPCC in their report for the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). For precipitation and 
droughts there is no agreement in the CMIP6 models for the Caribbean region (although  the local 
precipitation data for Barbados does show trends such as an increase in extremely heavy precipitation). 
From Chapter 11, for the Caribbean region:  
• Table 11.13:  Significant increases in the intensity and frequency of hot extremes and significant 
decreases in the intensity and frequency of cold extremes: CMIP6 models project a robust increase 
in the intensity and frequency of TXx events and a robust decrease in the intensity and frequency of 
TNn events  
• Table 11.14: Insufficient data and a lack of a greement on the evidence of trends in heavy 
precipitation: CMIP6 models, CMIP5 models, and RCMs project inconsistent changes in the region  
• Table 11.15: Mixed trends between subregions, but some evidence of increases in drought duration.  
 
For the Caribbean,  and Barbados, the number of hot days is projected to increase substantially, in turn 
increasing the frequency of hot days and nights that are considered “hot”, there will be more intense and 
shorter duration rainfall events interspersed with long periods of dry weather and increased frequency and


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 6 
 
  
7 Simpson et. Al (2011)  
8 Water scarcity carries a range of health risks in Barbados. These are related to the following: (a) Reduced amounts of water available for basic hygiene 
(e.g. water - washed diseases); (b) Chemical and microb ial contamination as a result of increased drought; (c) Gastrointestinal diseases. In addition, water 
scarcity may result in water -storage and vector -borne diseases. Barbados has the highest incidence of dengue in the world. Rainwater storage as a 
response  measure to lack of freshwater provides breeding sites for the disease vector of dengue, the Aedes aegypti mosquito. 
http://www.who.int/globalchange/projects/adaptation/PHE -adaptation -final -Barbados.pdf  
9 Barbados Second National Communication (2018).  
10 Farrrell, D., Nurse, L., & Moseley, L. (2007). Managing water resources in the face of climate change: A Caribbean perspective . UWI.  
11 http://www.cbc.bb/index.php/news/item/2059 -poverty -on-the-rise-in-barbados  
12 Simpson et al (2011)  
13 The poor are vulnerab le as food price increases are often associated with drought. Expensive, desalinated water resources are becoming more 
important in the Caribbean, and this can impact the poor significantly. Rural communities are vulnerable since potable water networks are  less dense and 
therefore more heavily impacted during drought, while children are at highest risk from inadequate water supplies during drou ght. 
http://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/  
14 The modelling work did not take into account the potential impact of sea level rise or fluxes between the freshwater and seawater interface and 
therefore should be treated with some caution (Cashman, 2021)  
15 Cashman (2021)  
16 Cashman, et al., 2012 in Cashman (2021)  intensity of extreme storms and sea -level rise (SLR). Higher temperatures will affect the seasonality of crops, 
increase evapotranspiration rates, induce heat stress on the population, including tourists and lives tock, 
increase cooling costs, induce changes in plant -wildlife -insect populations and distribution range and 
increase infectious and vector -borne diseases7. Already, i n recent years Barbados has experienced high 
incidences of vector borne and waterborne diseases that were attributed to episodic changes in temperature 
(+0.7°C - +4.0°C) and rainfall patterns and linked to events such as dry season droughts and wet season 
flash flooding. It is projected there could be even more of an increase in w ater-borne diseases, due to limited 
water availability and wastewater sanitation.8  
 
More intense rainfall, severe storm conditions and SLR will promote flash flooding; saline intrusion into 
available groundwater abstraction and irrigation wells and salinization of agriculture lands; coastal erosion 
and damage to coastal infrastructures and disruption to businesses.  Increased flash -flooding magnitude and 
frequency has caused havoc in Barbados: on 29 November 2016 Barbados experienced over 170 mm of 
rainfall in a few hours, which previously was only observed in 1995, and this contributed to the failing of the 
sewerage system.  Stormwater run -off from intense rainfall activity that contain debris, microorganisms and 
chemicals also contribute to nutrient l oading in near -shore environments which negatively impact coral reefs. 
Barbados has over 50 hard coral species and 600 species of fish. Coral reefs, which serve as natural 
breakwaters along the coasts, also support more than 25% of all marine species, maki ng them the most 
biologically diverse of marine ecosystems and an equivalent, in terms of biomass productivity, to rainforests 
on land.9 Furthermore,  the coral reefs generate significant revenues for local fishermen and the tourism 
sector through snorkell ing and scuba diving10. The tourism sector in Barbados employs about 26,000 persons 
(9% of the total population) and indirectly contributes to about 40% of Barbados earnings11, making climate 
change a great threat to the island’s main economic earner .  
 
The decreasing amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing evapotranspiration 
due to higher temperatures will increase water shortages and competition over water between tourism and 
other productive sectors, increase in wildfires a nd agriculture productivity12. These conditions also set the 
stage for increase drought which will further  decrease underground recharge rates and salinization of 
aquifers, which provide 95% of the island’s potable water supply.13 At the onset of the 2020 wet season, 
Barbados had completed a 24 -month period with below normal rainfall that had a severe impact on aquifer 
recharge and resulted in seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers and reduced yields (see Figure 1). The 
future is even more worrying since hydrogeological modelling using MODFLOW 200014, indicated that by 
2050 under an RCP 2.6 scenario, groundwater yields could be reduced to 26.9 Mm3/year,  and 25.5 Mm3/year 
under the RCP 8.5 scenario, as compared to a no climate change estimate of between 65.7 Mm3/year and 
82.3 Mm3/year, depending on which estimate is used15. Studies which took a mass -balance approach to 
changes in groundwater storage indic ated that under all climate change scenarios aquifers would be 
progressively depleted.16 The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable 
aquifer yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of 
groundwater abstraction is already between 85 -100% of the safe yield. The Barbados Water Authority (BWA)


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7 
 
  
17 water lost to bursts and leakage from the water distribution system  
18 Cashman (2021)  
19 According to the World Bank (2021), the population of Barbados is projected to peak in 2031 after which it is projected to de cline  
20 EPD and BWA (2018)  has estimated that their own abstraction is approximately 47 Mm3/year and that total abstraction could be as 
much as 62.5 Mm3/year when ot her sources are included. Recall that a lower estimate of safe yield given 
above is 65.7 Mm3/year. The BWA abstraction, includes real losses17, which have been reported as 
approximately 20.0 Mm3/year or some 38% of production.  Even removing all losses fro m the distribution 
system, which is unrealistic, would not be sufficient to offset the projected impact of climate change on aquifer 
yields again, even if the impact has been over -estimated18. The challenges in groundwater management 
become very apparent i n the increasing levels of salinity in groundwater (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1: Chlorinity levels in BWA wells (top panel) and monthly Standardised Precipitation Index 
values (12 -month period) at the weather observation station at the Caribbean Institute for 
Meteorology and Hydrology (bottom panel), for the period 2000 – 2020. Note how episodes with 
negative SPI values correla te with increasing chlorinity in the wells.  
 
Interventions to counter the impacts of climate change  
As a result of the projected effects of climate change on water quality and availability in Barbados, coupled 
with projected increases in the population19 and development growths that may attract more tourist arrivals, 
it will be necessary for Barbados to not only develop current wastewater management practices but also 
implement new technologies that are climate resilient and reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) em issions and 
identify new sources of water that can be used to recharge the underground aquifers to be later used as 
potable water after proper treatment. In terms of water consumption, irrigation is second only to domestic 
use. It is estimated that approxi mately 80 -90% of the water used for domestic activity is discharged as 
wastewater. This represents a sustainable source of wastewater that could be treated and used as reclaimed 
water in other productive activities where potable water quality is not requir ed.20 In October 2018, the


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8 
 
  
21 Barbados Environmental Protection Department and the Barbados Water Authority (2018). National Water Reuse Policy for Barbados. Pg. 4  
22 GEF (2019) National Package for Barbados for the CReW+ Project  
23 (Integrated Sustainability, 2021 – Baseline Report)  
24 Cashman (2021) Baseline Study and Wastewater Demand Analysis  
25 The FP060 project that builds resilience into the water supply system on Barbados includes the installation of a PV system to  ensure uninterrupted 
operation at the Bellle, Bowmanston and Hampt on pumping facilities.  Government of Barbados (GOB) enacted a National Water Reuse Policy (NWRP), which states that “the 
traditional interpretation of the term water must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to 
encompass treated wastewater (re claimed water), storm water and other sources as part of the total water 
resources ” 21. 
 
There are two municipal wastewater treatment facilities: the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) 
and the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant (SCSTP). The 30 -year-old BSTP has approximately 1,500 
connections and is a secondary treatment plant with a short ocean outfall. The SCSTP has advanced primary 
treatment works with an ocean outfall and accommodates approximately 3,000 connections, of which there 
are currently 2 ,000 active connections. The SCSTP had a UV disinfection system installed, but it never 
operated properly and was abandoned many years ago.22 
 
According to the 2010 population census, whilst virtually 100% of all households in Barbados are connected 
to the  water distribution system, only 10 to 1 5% are connected to one of these two centralised wastewater 
systems that do not have the capacity to disinfect the treatment plant effluent prior to being discharged 
through ocean outfalls23. The remaining households  in Barbados use pit latrines, septic tanks and 
soakaways. Private properties such as hotels and some businesses make use of package treatment plants 
and in some instances the treated wastewater is reused for landscaping purposes - currently there are 68 
package treatment plants in operation24. Apart from the latter scenario, there is little reuse of treated 
wastewater in Barbados.  
 
The infrastructure and facilities in place to manage water resources are also vulnerable to climate change. 
For instance, majority of the BWA’s operations are dependent on  energy from the grid. Whenever, a storm 
or hurricane or other climatic or non -climat ic factor disrupt power supply to pumping stations, water supply 
to the population is disrupted. Based on calculations by the BWA, in face of extended island wide power 
disruption, the BWA will have just under one day’s reservoir storage capacity. Recently , BWA began 
implementing grid-tied photovoltaic systems to reduce its energy cost and minimize it carbon footprint;25 
however, these efforts alone cannot mitigate the vulnerability of the water supply system to extreme storm 
events. Examples of climate par ameters that can affect wastewater infrastructure and assets include:  
 
Precipitation  
▪ Higher intensity, frequency and duration of precipitation events leading to infrastructure flooding and 
overflow conditions;  
▪ Increased inflow to sewers;  
▪ Increased likelihood and frequency of sewer flooding, overflows, and spills;  
▪ Increased surface erosion and introduction of sediment to sewers;  
▪ Excessive loading to wastewater sewage treatment works; and  
▪ Surface flooding, due to intense rainfall events, can lower the efficiency and efficacy of onsite 
wastewater treatment systems, such as soak -away fields.  
Wind  
▪ Increased wind loading on infrastructure assets and buildings.  
Temperature  
▪ Heat waves leading to reduced water availability and higher sewage contamina nt concentrations 
(less dilution) increased sewer related odour generation and release;  
▪ Increased hydrogen sulphide production (resulting in increased infrastructure damage due to 
corrosion); and  
▪ Increased environmental impacts of residual contaminants in cluding nutrient impacts due to elevated 
receiving water temperatures.


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9 
 
  
26 Notably, the lessons pertaining to ensuring that an enabling environment (policy, legislation and regulations and protocols) is in place, importance of 
education/sensitization not only the public, but decision -makers of the benefit s of wastewater reuse, training and capacity building in the enhanced 
technologies for operators, identifying a national champion (high profile policy maker or agency) to promote the project and its endorsement etc.  
27 Full project name is: An integrated ap proach to water and wastewater management using innovative solutions and  promoting financing mechanisms 
in the Wider Caribbean Region  
28 Full project name is: An integrated approach to water and wastewater management using innovative solutions and  promoting financing mechanisms 
in the Wider Caribbean Region  Ocean and Geotechnical  
▪ Increased incidents of storm surges affecting wastewater discharge and property flooding; and  
▪ Increased soil saturation impacting geotechnical stability to suppor t tanks and other infrastructure as 
well as affecting the efficiency of onsite wastewater treatment systems, such as soak -away fields in 
affected areas.  
 
The impact of climate change on groundwater resources also extends to on -site wastewater disposal, for  
such practices as septic fields.  On -site ground disposal of wastewater relies on the soil being unsaturated 
to effect natural biological, physical, and chemical treatment processes and protect groundwater quality.  
Saturated soil conditions result in sig nificantly lower treatment and enable pathogenic microorganisms to 
travel long distances through the soil, as well as result in surface failure and break -out of wastewater on the 
surface with potential health risks.  
 
Through a concerted effort, this Three  Rs (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R -CReWS)  project proposes to not only support the adaptation of 
Barbados to the water scarcity conditions that will be amplified by climate variability and change, but to also 
reduce its carbon footprint and GHGs emissions and serve as a practical example for Caribbean for climate 
resilient water and wastewater management systems, treated wastewater reuse and aquifer recharge 
through the enhancement of the wastewater tre atment process to the tertiary level.  
The 3R -CReWS will benefit from the lessons of the following projects and the project management team, 
which will work in close collaboration with the staff at BWA, will ensure these areas of complementarity are 
leverag ed:  
• The GOB received a loan from the Inter -American Development Bank (IDB) for the Water and 
Sanitation Systems Upgrade of the BWA that ran from 2011 to 2016. The project supported the 
modernization of the institutional setting of the water and sanitation  sector and improve water 
production infrastructure and the efficiency of the operations of the BWA. This project is benefiting 
from the work done towards wastewater management such as the preparation of the wastewater 
reuse master plan.  
• The Global Enviro nment Facility (GEF) funded Testing a Prototype Caribbean Regional Fund for 
Wastewater Management (CReW) project , which began in 2011 and completed activities in 2017. 
The project used an integrated and innovative approach to reduce the negative environmen tal and 
human health impacts from untreated wastewater discharges. Barbados was not a beneficiary 
country of this pilot project; however, the noted challenges and key lessons coming out of this pilot 
project are highly applicable to results of this project  to promote buy -in and sustainability26. However, 
there is an ongoing follow -up project called the CReW+, and Barbados is a beneficiary country,27 set 
to roll out activities related to (i) institutional, policy, legislative and regulatory reforms for Integrated 
Water and Wastewater Management (IWWM), Sustainable and tailor -made financing options for 
urban, peri -urban and rural IWWM; (ii) Provision o f innovative small -scale, local, rural, peri -urban and 
community -based solutions for IWWM; and (iii) Knowledge Management and Advocacy on the 
importance of IWWM order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.28 All the components of 
this project are co mplementary to the 3R -CReWS project since it strengthens the enabling 
environment and awareness of wastewater as a resource at the community level and promotes 
private sector buy -in. These are key areas that will promote the sustainability of the 3R -CReWS 
project.  
• The Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S -Barbados) 
project , which is funded by the GCF (FP060), includes the following complementary results (i) 
making Barbados society aware of the water cycle and climate change i mpacts threatening the 
island’s drinking water supply, and (ii) establishing a revolving fund strictly for supporting climate


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
 change adaptation ad mitigation actions in the water sector. These areas will provide awareness and 
finances for enhancing climate  resilience in the water sector, which are important for maintaining 
sustainability of the 3R -CReWS project results. In fact, the 3R -CReWS will expand the RAFF charter 
to promote the adoption of wastewater treatment systems and reuse options  
• The USAID fun ded Adaptation Measures to Counteract the Effects of Climate Change 
(AMCECC) project , executed under the Ministry of Environment and National Beautification (MENB) 
sets out proposals for stormwater policy and plans, which, when implemented, will enhance th e 
functioning of the sanitary sewer systems, which are designed solely for the transport of sewage but 
are currently frequently affected by the infiltration of stormwater.   
• The Roof -to-Reef Programme (R2R) is the Government’s sustainable development model  for the 
next decade and represents the country programme for Barbados. The primary focus is on improving 
the social and environmental circumstances of the people in Barbados. The R2RP will enhance the 
country’s ability to recover from climatic events. The  R2RP is hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter, 
Water, Energy, Waste, Land use, and Ecosystems Management. The thematic areas under the 
R2RP are aligned to Barbados’ NDC priority areas. Barbados intends to develop a pipeline of projects 
under the R2RP that  will improve the country’s resilience to climate change as well as increase its 
push to become carbon neutral by 2030. Some of the named projects such as the WSRN and this 
3R-CReWs will fall under the R2R umbrella.  
• Barbados received a second readiness programme from the GCF to advance Outcome 2: Country 
Programming Process and Outcome 4 Climate Finance strategies and project pipeline strengthened 
of the R2R Programme.  This preparatory support program will assist the National Designated 
Authority (NDA) in building the capacity needed to handle large cross sectoral projects involving 
multiple stakeholders, implementing entities and interest groups. The development of a Country 
Programme will assist in aligning the natio nal GCF approach with existing national 
policies/programmes. The Country Programme will provide clear guidelines in project selection and 
ensure that all projects are linked to the national green economy priorities and Barbados’ NDC and 
will also assist in  operationalizing the NDC and obtaining financing for national projects or 
programmes. The readiness support will also assist in identifying and exploring synergies with 
ongoing initiatives which can be scaled up.  
• Also notable is the proposed South Coast W ater Reclamation Project (SCWRP)  valued at USD105 
million and is aimed at transforming the existing South Coast Plant, into a futuristic Water Resource 
Recovery Facility. The goals of the project include: (I) augmenting existing water supplies, (ii) 
mitiga ting climate change effects, (iii) addressing seawater intrusion and sea level rise, (iv) 
diversifying potable water sources, (v) enhancing water supply resiliency and (vi) reducing the impact 
of treated effluent on marine life and the environment. At the time of this proposal writing this project 
was in the inception phase but is expected to be in full implementation at the start of the 3R -CReWS. 
There are significant synergies between these projects as both plants will be upgraded to produce 
tertiary leve l reclaimed water quality that will be suitable for non -potable reuse purposes. The 3R -
CReWS project will benefit from the lessons emerging from the implementation of the SCWRP to 
enhance efficiency and effectiveness as well as the momentum and stakeholder  buy-in and 
awareness as it relates to the use of reclaimed water that has been built by the SCWRP.  
 
Risks and Barriers  
Whilst  some degree of work has been advanced for the water sector, including wastewater; t his project is 
directly responding  to specifi c barriers that have hindered the government of Barbados to transform it is 
wastewater sector. These include:  
  
• Financial : Barbados has a high debt to GDP ratio - at the end of 2020 it was 144%. With the 
prolonged effects of COVID -19 on the tourism sector and increased government spending on health 
care in 2021, the debt to GDP ratio is expected to increase. Given the resour ces needed to service 
the debt, response to the COVID -19 pandemic and advance development and climate change 
priorities, there is limited fiscal space . To address water insecurity, which is a priority of the 
Government of Barbados, the use of  reclaimed wat er is becoming a critical resource.  More 
specifically, the transformation of the water and wastewater sector requires the utilization of


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
 reclaimed water for productive/economic purposes; however, the adoption of upgraded treatment 
process and technologies is necessary. The 3R -CReWS project is a part of this paradigm shift. The 
3R-CReWs has significant capital costs, most of which is covered by GCF funding, however, in the 
overall planned investment for transforming the sector , the GCF investment is less tha n a fifth of the 
planned investment. Further, the ownership and sustainability dimensions are critical and is the 
assumed responsibility of the Government of Barbados ; as such the Operations and Maintenance 
costs for the wastewater treatment systems, which is, and will continue to be, a significant part of the 
operating budget at the BWA.  
 
• Social  - the underlying paradigm shift of this project is a change in culture and attitude towards the 
use of water at the household level; however, there is limited knowledge and awareness about 
the usefulness of reclaimed water as a resource. Therefore, to del iver the paradigm shift 
envisioned, 3R -CReWS will enhance the knowledge and awareness of the public, including visitors 
(tourists) and the private sector to change current behaviour to better manage and conserve water 
or accept proposed water reuse practic es through a nation -wide public education and awareness 
programme and a strategy targeting the engagement of the private sector .  
 
• Institutional  – there is lack of trained staff  to meet the requirements of the upgrades  planned 
by for BSTP  and limited technical expertise in the private sector to manage and maintain 
wastewater systems implemented . The 3R CReWS was specially designed to promo te a paradigm 
shift in the adoption of wa stewater treatment technologies through the provision of specialized 
training to BWA and key stakeholders, inc luding from the private sector.  
 
• Technological:  there is inadequate up-to-date technologies in place at the BSTP to treat waste 
water at a  tertiary level and to support the  BWA ’s operations  in a manner that is effective, 
efficient and that promotes adaptation to and mitigation of climate change ; for instance , there 
is only 1 flow meter that was recently installed in December 2021, and prior to this there was a large 
gap in data on influent and effluent flows  and there is limited automated controls related to energy 
efficienc y and preventative maintenance. The 3R-CReWS is ensuring that state -of-the art 
technologies are being implemented that promote low carbon operations such as the installation of 
solar power to meet the energy demands of the upgrades, whilst also withstanding at least category 
3 hurricanes given the location of Barbados in the hurricane belt and climate projections of more 
intense and frequent hurricane season for the Caribbean. Further, 3R -CReWS will be implementing 
decision -support systems that increases energy effici ency, the longevity of equipment through better 
maintenance and management, and better response to the changes in the hydraulic capacity during 
storm surges and/or flooding that result in waters infiltrating the sanitary sewer system. Further, 
there is lim ited wide -spread use of up -to-date wastewater treatment technologies in the 
private sector due to the reason noted in institutional barriers/risks (limited capacities). To promote 
the adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse technologies in the private s ector, the project is 
investing in the development of an incentive programme as well as making resources available 
through a revolving fund (RAFF).  
 
• Regulatory:  whilst there is very recently updated legislation (last quarter of 2021) that speak to the 
use of wastewater treatment systems and reclaimed water, some legislations have not gotten 
approval from cabinet (still at the stage of a bill) and limited sensitiz ation to support 
mainstreaming . Further, the larger issue of enforcement is a serious risk since there is already 
evidence of institutional challenges related to the enforcement of legislation and policies . Therefore, 
this project will undertake a gap asse ssment to determine if any gaps exist across the emerg ing 
policies and legislation to ensure that the paradigm shift regarding  the use of wastewater 
technologies and reclaimed water are supported, promoted and enforced. There will also be an 
accompanying r oadmap that articulates how these emerging policies and legislation should be 
promoted and recommendations for enforcem ent.  
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
  
29 The IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (2019) predicts a global mean SLR of 0.43 - 0.55 - 0.86m by 2100 for RCP 
2.6, 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios, respectively, rela tive to the period 1986 -2005 (section 4.2.3.2, table 4.4), with” high  confidence in continued thermal expansion 
and the loss of ice from both the [Greenland] and [Antarctica ice] sheets beyond 2100” (section 4.2.3.5).  
 
 Background and Context  
Small Island Developing States (SIDS), such as Barbados, are directly exposed to the extreme impacts of 
climate change. By their very nature, sea level rise (SLR) is having a significant impact on the coastal zones, 
where communities and infrastruc ture tends to be concentrated. SLR needs to be considered in all aspects 
of long -term national planning, and more so in planning for critical public infrastructure which tends to have 
a design lifetime of several decades. SLR is reducing the solution space  available to Barbados, with options 
to protect assets or accommodate SLR diminishing, forcing solutions based on a retreat from the coastal 
zone (see Figure 2, below). This proposal is premised primarily on an approach to stretch the protect  and 
accommoda te solution space through augmenting the replenishment of the freshwater aquifer and thus 
reduce salination, arguably the most pressing impact of climate change on Barbados currently as virtually 
all freshwater used is extracted from groundwater. This will  create more time for the Government to respond 
to the inevitable impacts of SLR.29 
 
 
Figure 2: Decreasing solution space for small islands as sea level rises. Source: Haasnoot et. al. 
2021. “Pathways to coastal retreat”, Science, v.374(6548), pp.1287 -1290.  
 
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical componen t to help mitigate 
impacts on groundwater levels, tightly linked to overall island water resources. Tertiary treatment of 
wastewater will allow for the reuse of water for non -potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf 
maintenance, and rechargi ng the aquifer. Secondary treated sludge can be used as fertilizer for the 
agricultural community and activated sludge can be used in landscaping, turf maintenance of lawns, 
reclamation, soil erosion, and dump covering (CCCCC, 2019).  
 
The goal of 3R -CReWS  project is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and productivity of 
Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient water and energy management 
technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, rec ycled, reused, and conserved.  
 
To this end, t he main objectives of the  3R-CReWS p roject are to:


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
 1.  increase knowledge of wastewater generation including sources of wastewater and the quantity and 
quality impacts, as well optimize treatment and minimize ene rgy consumption and associated GHG 
emissions;   
2. build resilience into Barbados' wastewater management systems, which results in increased water 
availability, production, distribution, and access thereby improving the community’s resilience, health 
and well being, and water and food security;     
3. produce a treated wastewater effluent quality so that it can be reused for agricultural purposes, 
reducing stress on diminishing groundwater resources and potable water supplies as a result of 
climate change;   
4. enable the use of reclaimed water for aquifer recharge thereby reducing saline intrusion and 
contamination of ground water resources while enhancing water security, particularly during period 
of droughts for Barbados;  
5. reduce GHG emissions, increase self -sufficiency, contribute to the electricity grid and to contribute 
to the frequency stabilisation of the electricity grid and act as a power shortfall filler;   
6. Increase supply of locally sourced renewable energy that allo ws for a long -term source of revenue 
through a feed -in tariffs program;   
7. provide a standard and formal guidance to regulate and promote the use of reclaimed water and 
obtain greater by -in from stakeholders;   
8. build capacity and re -train BWA staff, includi ng the private sector, to conduct preventive maintenance 
and adopt climate -risk related adaptation strategies to increase the wastewater collection and 
treatment systems resiliency; and   
9. promote and demonstrate actions that encourage all water users in Ba rbados, including tourists, to 
conserve and efficiently use water resources.  
10. strengthens the enabling environment and, strengthening buy -in, ownership and leadership in the 
private sector for the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options and ha ving nation -wide 
public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water availability, 
wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options and promoting transparency and 
lessons emerging from this project       
 
For achiev ing the goal and specific objectives, the  3R-CReWS is organised into four  (4) key components as 
summarized in Figure 3.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
  
Figure 3: Summary of the Components of 3R -CReWS  
 
These 4 components are synonymous with the following 4 outcomes of the project:  
1. Enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level reclaimed water to improve the water 
sector’s resilience to climate change  
2. Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP  
3. Enhanced capacity and capability to support a preventative mai ntenance (PM) and climate resiliency 
programme  
4. An enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of reclaimed water  
 
Collectively, t hese four outcomes/components are designed in consideration of the barriers that exist in 
achieving a  paradigm shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse options  in 
Barbados. These barriers include the limited fiscal space that exist in a highly indebted country , limited 
technical capacities in the public and private sectors to fully maintain and advance the adoption of 
wastewater technologies, li mited knowledge and awareness about the usefulness of reclaimed water as a 
resource, and the absence of comprehensively developed and mainstreamed policy and regulatory 
framew orks that promote the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse o ptions, particularly 
at the household level.   
 
Outcome 1 of this project is the largest, in terms of budget, since it is primarily focused on the upgrades to 
the BSTP and trans fer of technology. Specifically, Outcome 1 is made up of four (4) outputs. Output 1.1 aims 
to achieve a climate resilient pathway for the water sector through the upgrade of the BSTP to a tertiary 
treatment system by converting the current CAS to a CAS -4 stage Bardenpho system and the installation of 
a RO membrane. This output supports the achievement of GCF’s ARA 2 and will resulting co -benefits, which 
include improving the quality in the near shore and marine environments, increase water available for the


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
 agriculture sector and the participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water. With higher 
quality water becoming available, this outcome includes as an output (1.2), the installation of a 9km pipeline 
that will facilitate the distributio n of the reclaimed water for irrigation and aquifer recharge purposes. This 
output supports the achievement of GCF’s ARA 1 and 2.  Given the highly technical nature of the upgrades, 
it is being assumed that expertise exists for the installation of the requ ired upgrades and that there will be 
favourable conditions for the construction works to be done in a timely and effective way. To complement 
the operations of the upgraded BSTP, there is an output (1.3) focused on the installation of critical decision -
support systems to adapt to climate change, promote climate mitigation through energy efficiency and 
provide the tools necessary to monitor wastewater flow and quality. For instance, a sewer monitoring 
programme, an on -site laboratory and software and equipme nt to automate control of the upgraded system 
will be implemented. This output is aligned to GCF’s ARA 3. A key assumption is that the staff at the BWA 
will consistently/routinely utilize the training and systems that have been implemented to optimize the 
operations of the BSTP. To further promote the paradigm shift in the use of reclaimed water, the final output 
(1.4) supports the installation of decentralized wastewater treatment systems in two Zone A locations in 
Barbados to harness reclaimed water, whic h will be utilized for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation 
through the installation of a 9km pipeline. Hence, this outcome and its supporting outputs will enhance 
resilience to climate change by promoting water security. This output is aligned to GCF’s ARA 1, 2 and 3. 
Efforts will be made to ensure the inclusion of women, youth, LGBTQIA, and other vulnerable populations 
in these processes for effective adaptation and use of the upgraded systems; support to ensure budget 
allocations are gender -respo nsive and aligned with the specific needs of women and men in target Zones  
Given that this final output is primarily funded  by the GOB, it is assumed that they remain committed to the 
upgrades and co -financing materialize.  
 
Outcome 2 is made up of one (1) output that is primarily focused on the installation of renewable energy PV 
systems, automated controls such as variable f requency drives (VFDs) and a sludge dewatering system. 
Collectively, these systems will ensure that there is low -emission  at the BSTP , which contribute s to the 
achievement of the country’s a low -emission development pathway. This output is aligned to GCF’s MRA 1,  
MRA3 and  ARA 3 and is contributing to  improved air quality since the impact of power outage linked to 
extreme climatic events will not impact the treatment processes at the plant.  As above, a key assumption is 
that the staff at the BWA will co nsistently/routinely utilize the training and systems that have been 
implemented to optimize the operations of the BSTP .  
 
Outcomes 3 and 4 collectively contribute to ARA1, ARA 2, ARA 3   and MRA1 and aim to create an enabling 
environment for achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches to the management of water resources, 
specifically wastewater, and thereby promoting water security in the face of a changing climate. Specifically, 
Outcome 3, which com prise two (2) outputs, is first targeting the enhancement of capacities and capabilities, 
primarily at the BWA, for managing, monitoring and operating the upgraded BSTP through the development 
of customized trainings, updating the Standard Operating Proced ures (SOPs) and Operational Manual and 
implementing a risk management framework. 12 customised courses will be developed/adopted under this 
project covering topics such as: SCADA system, UWI/BWA Gender Sensitivity Training program, climate 
change nexus wit h biosecurity and wastewater, PV refresher training course offerings from CVQ & NVQ 
(Caribbean and National Vocational Qualifications), industrial waste inspector, CCTV equipment Operator 
training program based on upgraded systems, laboratory testing, anal ysis and management, management 
of the decentralized wastewater treatment plants, maintenance of CAS and RO technologies, SOPs and 
operational manual updated, the risk management framework developed to meet the needs of the upgraded 
system, CMMS, sewer mon itoring and instrumentation and general wastewater course. It is assumed that 
there is willingness and the availability of BWA staff and other key stakeholders to participate in the training 
opportunities and that a total of 400 persons will be trained. No table is that this output is aiming to address 
some of the known risks with the implementation of this project, primarily that of limited capacities to promote 
the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options. The second and final output for this outcome is 
to promote innovation for the wastewater sector through the development of a strategic plan to guide the


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
 replication of water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor of Barbados. Given the highly 
specialized nature of this output, it is assumed that relevant technical expertise is available to develop the 
strategic plan.  
 
Outcome 4, which is made up of three (3) outputs, further strengthens the enabling environment through the 
development of a water and sanitation masterplan and a legislative review (Output 4.1). Of importance to 
note is that the legislative review will ide ntify gaps and recommendations for addressing same, as it relates 
to strengthening buy -in and the use of wastewater technologies and reuse options. The review process will 
ensure that gender differentiated needs and impacts of proposed amendments are consi dered and do not 
negatively impact the wellbeing of women and other vulnerable groups.  There will also be a concerted effort 
to promote ownership and leadership in the private sector for the adoption of wastewater technologies and 
reuse options through a t hree-pronged approach that includes a targeted engagement strategy, an incentive 
programme and access to the RAFF resources aligned with the priorities arising from Stakeholder 
consultations and in consideration of the unique needs of women and men  (Output  4.2). A key assumption 
here is that there is initial interest from the private sector. The final output (4.3) is focused on nation -wide 
public education and a wareness on the nexus between climate change and water availability, wastewater 
as a resource, wa stewater treatment and reuse options and promoting  transparency and lessons emerging 
from this project. There will be targeted PEA activities including school programmes, community 
consultations, workshops/sensitization sessions for key stakeholders such as farmers and private sector. 
The PEA campaign wil l include products such as videos/documentary, press releases of outputs of town hall 
meetings within communities, case studies, digital flyers, posters), 40 water Wednesdays (8 per year), 20 
newsletters (4 per year) and over 5000 combined posts on social media accounts. This output and its 
activities support the advancement of GCF’s outcome ARA 1 and enabling environment related to knowledge 
generation and learning. It is assumed that the updates are timely, relevant and accessible to a wide cross 
section of stakeholders - private sector, individuals, tourists, national agencies, civil society, therefore 
enabling the desired paradigm shift in attitudes for the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse 
options.  
 
The project will benefit a wider cross -section of stakeholders.  The reclaim water could benefit 186 hectares, 
155 farmers, including small scale and women farmers,  and 465 wage labourers that work on the farms. The 
reclaim water will be transfer from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical Gardens) then no rthwards to recharge point 
at Trents (Greenwich) (find points or take -offs along the way). 6 injection wells will be included in this option, 
while the BWA have an indication of where these could be implemented, a sub -activity to confirm the best 
points fo r injection. Note, the replenishing of the aquifers will benefit the entire population of Barbados.  
The 400 persons refer to the target for the following training is to have 50/50 distribution of males and 
females, where possible:  
- SCADA - 20 operators  
- Gend er Sensitivity - 300 staff members  
- Climate change nexus with biosecurity and wastewater - 300 staff members  
- PV training course - 25 members  
- Industrial waste inspector - 3 operators  
- CCTV equipment - 6 operators  
- Operator training - 8 operators  
- Lab technician  training – 3 technicians  
- Decentralized wastewater treatment facilities - 50 staff  
- CAS and RO technologies - 50 staff  
- SOPs, operational manual and risk management framework - 70 operators  
- CMMS - 70 staff members  
- Sewer monitoring and instrumentation - 25 wastewater operators  
- General wastewater course (safety, no exam) - 45 persons


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
  
The co -benefits identified   are related to social, gender, economic, adaptation, mitigation and environment, 
as follows:  
1. More water available for the agriculture sector thereby increasing its productivity (economic, social, 
adaptation)  
2. Improved water quality in the marine environment fr om improved management of wastewater. This 
will improve beaches and tourism in Barbados (environment, social, economic)  
3. Improved air quality from reduced GHG emission that will improve the environment, people’s health 
(social) and mitigation of climate cha nge. 
4. Increased participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water  
 
See summary details in section B.2(b) on co -benefits.  
 
More details on the outcomes and activities are included in Section B.3. The Theory of Change Diagram is 
at Figure 4, below.  
 
  
 
Figure 4: TOC for the 3R CReWS  
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
  
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food ARA 3  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
 Energy 
generation 
and access  
  industries, 
appliances  people and 
communities  and water 
security  Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Outcome 2  ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ 
Outcome 3  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Outcome 4  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Increased  
water 
availab ility for 
the 
agriculture 
sector  ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Improved 
water quality 
in the marine 
environment  ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Improved air 
quality  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Increased 
participation 
of women  in 
the 
production 
and use of 
reclaimed 
water  ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
As set out in Section B.2, the 3R -CReWS project has four (4) components:  
- Component 1 involves upgrading centralized and installing cluster wastewater collection and 
treatment to achieve a tertiary water -quality. The outputs of this component are: (1) The Bri dgetown 
Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary water -quality standard; 
(2) Recycled wastewater being reused to supplement non -potable uses including irrigation and 
aquifer recharge; (3) Decision making tools implemented to  mitigate climate change risks to the 
wastewater treatment and collection systems; (4) Onsite decentralized package treatment plants or 
cluster treatment facilities installed (2).  
- Component 2  intends to enhance the climate resilience and carbon -neutrality of the BSTP 
wastewater treatment system through photovoltaic energy, energy conservation and efficiency 
equipment. The main output of this component is improved emergency power and energy efficiency 
and reduction in emission at the BSTP.  
- Component 3  aims t o enhance the enabling environment for wastewater management through the 
development of standard operating procedures manual, flow and water quality monitoring, and 
institutional human capacity development. This component will result in improved technical 
capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain and monitor and implement climate 
change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
  
30 Integrated Sustainability (2021). Feasibility Study See Section 1.1.2  
31 See Section E.6 for the description on this activity and all other activities listed in this section.  - Component 4  focuses on educating the public and private sector on the importance of wastewater  
reclamation and address climate change issues affecting the water sector and enabling policy and 
legislation. The outputs of this component are: (1) Governance and planning frameworks 
updated/developed to enable wastewater reuse; (2) Funding mechanism for  the adoption of water 
reuse applications/ systems developed; and, (3) Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness 
Campaign Implemented.   
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse  
Barbados is almost entirely dependent on groundwater supplies (85% of potable water supply comes from 
ground water), which is directly impacted by the weather and climate. The overall implication of the available 
body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050.  Thi s is 
troubling as the indications are that the level of groundwater abstraction is already at between 85 -100% of 
the safe yield.  Approximately 57 Mm3/yr is extracted from groundwater resources for domestic potable water 
distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/yr is extracted for agricultural irrigation30. The exact amount of water 
extracted by agriculture is much higher as most points of extraction  are un-metered private wells.  
The outcome of this component is enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level 
reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change . The BSTP will be upgraded 
from a CAS to a CAS - 4Stage Bardenpho system and 2 onsite decentralized treatment plants (cluster) will 
be installed in 2 communities in Zo ne A locations to produce a high -quality effluent that is biologically and 
chemically safe. The effluent from the upgraded plants will be utilized for non -potable water applications 
including irrigation and aquifer recharge. This is expected to reduce the extraction of groundwater leading to 
reduced aquifer saltwater intrusion, and increased availability of groundwater during dry periods. This 
increase in availability of water during dry periods, will have positive impacts on women who predominantly 
underta ke domestic and care roles. There will also be monitoring systems implemented to address data 
gaps that exist and to facilitate enhanced management of the upgraded BSTP.  
 
The total budget of this outco me is USD39 million,  which is principally applied to t he upgrades associated 
with treatment plant (67%). The source of the fundin g is GCF in the amount of USD29.2 million  (grant)  and 
BWA in the amount of USD9. 3 million .  
 
Output 1.1:  The Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant is upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary 
water -quality standard.  
The BSTP is currently a secondary level treatment plant with water being released in the marine environment 
through an outfall. The BSTP will be upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary reuse water -quality  standard  
using the existing infrastructure and wastewater treatment process (Conventional Activated Sludge). The 
upgraded plant will result in tertiary treated waste water that can be reclaimed and is  suitable for non -potable 
water applications including groundwater augmentation  and irrigation . Figure 5 below depicts the existing 
BSTP and Figure 6 is a schema of the existing and upgraded system that has been agreed to by the GOB 
(See Feasibility Study for more details on options and assessment) . The upgrades will enhance the water 
security considering the projected climate change impacts on water resources for the island.  
Activity 1.1.131: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional activated sludge 
(CAS) biological treatment pr ocess at the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant to tertiary filtration 
and disinfection for achieving national reclaimed water -quality standards.


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
  
Figure 5: Bridgetown Wastewater Treatment Plant  
 
 
Figure 6: Existing and (Proposed) Upgraded System for BSTP  
 
The total budget of this output is USD 25.7.1 million,  which will be principally funded with GCF Funding.  
Output 1.2:  Tertiary treated reclaimed water is available to supplement non -potable use  
Sea level rise and salt -water intrusion of potable water aquifers coupled with changing weather patterns 
(intermittent and higher intensity rainfall) stress es Barbados water resources. In addition, agriculture 
continues to compete with other sectors for scarce resources such as water, land, labour and capital, and 
the GoB has increased its call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of 
farming as a response to climate change. Greater water availability, using reclaimed water, for irrigation 
purposes, should also lead t o improved food security.  
The supply of treated reclaimed wastewater to support irrigation developments in the Codrington -Neils -
Lears -Salters -Constant -Valley was deemed most suitable for this project  (See Figure 7)  and will provide


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
 benefits to  155 farmers  (60% males and 40% males) . In motivating and recommending this Option, the GOB 
stressed that this should be seen as a first Phase of a larger enterprise to extend and expand the use of 
treated reclaimed wastewater for irrigation purposes on lands along the west coast of Barbados and  up to 
the parish of St Lucy (See Feasibility Study Report ). Th e use of reclaimed water for irrigation purpose  
require s reverse osmosis membrane filtration to remove total dissolved solids to a concentration less than 
450 mg/L required by the Ministry of A griculture and Food Safety for agricultural irrigation applications.  
Activity 1.2.1:  Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to reduce the total dissolved 
solids concentration of the reclaimed water produced at the BSTP   
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells  (injection wells)  going from the 
BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge.  
 
Figure 7: Map of 9km pipeline from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical Gardens) with take -off at Hothersal 
roundabout to Friend ship plantation the turn south along ABC H’way And Then Turn North Along 
Belle Road up to Lears (Roberts Manufacturing) – irrigation can be done for lands on east and west 
of that road. Also take in Neil’s Plantation, Salters, Constant and Valley Plantatio n. 
 
The total budget of this output is USD 8.6 million , with USD 2. 5million to the finance the RO plant using GCF 
funding and USD6.1 million in funding from the BWA/GOB to finance the installation of the 9Km pipeline.  
 
Output 1.3: Decision -support tools and infrastructure implemented to mitigate potential climate 
change risks to the wastewater collection and treatment systems  
Decision -support tools (DSTs) and infrastructure upgrades are critical to enhance adaptive management to 
climate change. Storm surges and rising sea levels can cause saltwater entry into the wastewater collection 
system, which will impact the hydraulic and biological treatment capacities as well as reduce the quality of 
reuse water , which warrants the need for a sewer monitoring programme. This will allow for greater  
understand ing of  flows in the wet and dry season as well as the identif ication of  points of stormwater


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
  
32 As describe later in Section B.6, monitoring of water quality standard will be carried out firstly by BWA at the plant level (operational standards) and 
the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with Mini stry of Health, through the Analytical Services Laboratory will conduct testing and analys es water 
and wastewater samples . The Ministry  of Environment throug h the Environment Protection Department, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and 
Ministry  of Agriculture and Food Security, will  monitor the water quality and enforce codes governing usage of this treated wastewater.  infiltration into the collection system, considering the hydraulic capaci ty of the BSTP to inform remedial 
actions.  
Several decision -support tools and infrastructure are also needed to optimize the preventative maintenance 
programme of the upgraded BSTP. Recognizing that valuable hard -copy data w ere destroyed by fire in the 
past, an electronic Computerized Real -time Management System  (CMMS) information system will enable 
important information to be stored and readily accessed for analysis and will be less susceptible to potential 
damage. The tools wi ll optimize the electrical components to improve energy efficiency and reduce GHG 
emissions associated with the operations of the plant  
There is also need  for periodic monitoring of the quality of the reclaimed water to manage associated 
environmental and  social risks32. Therefore, testing will be done on effluent water quality , through the 
establishment of a laboratory,  to optimize operations control strategies and reduce energy consumption and 
GHG emissions as well as provide data as part of the public visibility programme to build their confidence 
and trust in the quality of the treated wastewater. This is also critica l element of ensuring that the  TDS 
concentration of reclaimed wastewater is less than 450 mg/L .  
Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the installation of flow 
measurement and rain -gauging equipment at the BSTP to identif y and address sources of inflow and 
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the 
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.  
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on -site laboratory facilities and pers onnel at the BSTP  to generate influent 
and effluent water quality data to inform operations control strategies that optimize operations and 
reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions.  
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real -time Management System (CMMS) at the BSTP to 
inform decision making and climate resilient building  
The Figure 8 below summarizes how these three activities will inform climate change adaptation and 
mitigation efforts.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
  
33 The GOB Groundwater Protecti on Zoning Policy established zones to guard against bacteriological contamination of the public water supply wells. The 
most stringent regulations are enforced in the Zone A areas, which are located immediately around all existing and potential public wate r supply sites.  Figure 8: Linkages between output 1.3 and  climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts.  
 
The total budget of this output is USD 1.0 million , which is principally applied to the procurement of  
Computerized Real -time Management System (CMMS)  (52%). T his output will be funded using GCF 
proceeds.  
Output 1.4: Decentralized treatment systems or cluster treatment systems installed  
Under this output climate resilience, water security , safeguarding of groundwater quality and achieving a 
paradigm shift in the use of reclaimed water will be promoted  through the installation of decentralized 
treatment systems  in 2 communities in Zone A locations33. The decentralized package treatment systems  
will provide enhanced collection a nd treatment systems that will produce reclaimed water suitable for 
agricultural irrigation and that will reduce the health risks associated with intense rainfall (vis -a-vis the current 
wastewater systems being used). This output will also expand the numbe r of beneficiaries of this project in 
a cost -effective manner since these communities are not serviced by either of the two STPs currently in 
operation in Barbados and the cost of distributing reclaimed water from the BSTP into the community is high.  
The implementation of the decentralized treatment systems will safeguard groundwater by eliminating the 
potential risk from contamination associated with  onsite wastewater disposal (pit latrines, septic tanks, and 
soak -away fields) . The risk of contamination is exacerbated by  rainfall intensive  conditions that saturate the 
soil, reducing the ability of the bacteria in the soil to treat the wastewater, and potentially causing the 
wastewater in the soak -away fields to reach ground water supplies or  surface and come into contact with 
the public. This output is part of the GOB’s larger programme to expand decentralized treatment systems 
into other communities  to promote the use of reclaimed water, reach households not connected to 
centralized treatmen t plant, allow households to be connected to the network of reclaimed water pipeline 
planned and address public health concerns . 
Activity 1.4.1:  Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment 
demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial 
non-potable water applications.  
 
Figure 9: Summary of the 2  Communities in  Zone A benefiting from 3 CReWS


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
  
34 Integrated Sustainability ( 2021). Feasibility Report for the 3R’s for Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R’s Crew Barbados) Preparation  
Project. See Section 1.5.6  
35 Integrated Sustainability (2021) Feasibility Study  
36 The additional 0.8 MW of power will be financed by the GOB but is not counted as part of the co -financing for this project ; albeit that government is 
currently in advanced negotiations to secure financing for this additional 0.8MW.  See Annex 24 for details on the two communities selected for the installation of decentralized treatment 
systems.  
The total budget of this output is USD 3.3 million and is totally finance by the BWA/GOB.  
Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency  in Wastewater Treatment  
Centralized wastewater management relies on expensive high -emission electricity supplied from 
conventional power plants that use fossil resources, which not only increases operational costs but also 
contributes to global warming. T he Bridgetown STP currently uses 4,500 kWh of energy per day which 
equates to energy costs of USD470,000 per year34 and the generation of approximately 17,200 CO 2e of 
direct GHG emissions from the treatment process (at an average flow of 4,100 m3/day) to approximately 
238,000 CO 2e (at an average flow of 56,700 m3/day)35.  
The outcome of this component is that  climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP . This 
will be realized by : 1)installing grid -tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems  to offset increased 
power consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3 
hurricane resistant solar panels; 2) implementing automated controls and energy efficiency measured within 
the upgraded centralized tre atment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce GHG 
emissions; and 3) installing  sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy efficiency and reduce the 
overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with the biosolids.    
The total budget of  this outcome is USD  3.3 million,  which is principally applied to the procurement  and 
installation of the 1 MW PV system and the watering technology  (81%). The outcome will be funded by GCF.  
 
Output 2.1: Energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies are implemented  
Currently 0.18 MW of solar power is in place at the BSTP. An additional 1.8 MW of power is required to 
accommodate the upgrades to the BSTP  and operate the RO plant to achieve the water quality standard set 
for agriculture reuse purposes. This output will deliver 1MW grid-tied PV system to offset the energy demand 
of the upgraded BSTP36, which will yield 2063M Wh of clean solar power per year  leading to an estimated 
GHG emission reduction of 1,411 tCO 2e per year  (or 35,275 tCO 2e over 25 years) . For more details,  see 
Feasibility Report ). The grid -tied PV system will be equipped with remote management controls, which will 
autom ate the supply from the grid to help manage intermittency and switching over between  the grid and 
solar PV system.  It is currently envisioned that PV panels will be installed at the BSTP (See Feasibility  Study  
for proposed use of existing space at the BSTP); howev er, as a last measure the BWA has identified 
alternative off -site for installation of the PV panel. One such is the Belle Pumping Station. If the latter is 
pursued,  then a net metering agreement will be entered into the Barbados Light and Power Limited . Aligned 
with previous PV system installation by the BWA, high efficient and durable  modules such as mono -
crystalline modules will be installed . There is an existing inverter room at BSTP but this will need to be 
retrofitted with additional switch gear s, electricity meter s and monitoring equipment. AC power from the 
inverter room will routed to the switch gear at the  BSTP. This power will be coupled with the main bus bar 
system and incorporat es an automatic transfer switch (ATS), which will be coupled either w ith the GENSET 
or with the Power Utility System. Approvals are required from the  Government Electrical Engineering 
Department (GEED), Barbados Light and Power (BL&P) and the Division of Energy.  
Besides  the installation of the gird -tied PV system, this output involves the implementation of energy efficient 
technologies and sludge  dewatering  equipment . This will further  reduce the overall energy footprint and


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
 reduce GHG emissions  associated with BSTP.  This involves implement ing automated controls and energy 
efficiency  equipment  and measures , including  variable frequency drives (VFDs), EE pumps, blowers , within 
the upgraded centralized  treatment processes. Currently, the dissolved oxygen in all bioreactors (contact 
chambers, stabilization chambers, aerobic digesters) is controlled manually, which is not optimal . The 
aeration is  one of largest energy demanding  component  of the plant, typically consuming 40% or more of 
the total energy demand ; as such  improvement in dissolved oxygen control will result in significant energy 
efficiency improvements. To this end, automatic control , which depend on the DO senor readings in the 
bioreactors,  will be installed.  Additionally, t he curren t dewatering, biosolids handling and disposal practice 
at BSTP  is not optimal. By implementing dewatering technology , biosolids will be capture and removed from 
the treatment process early, hence reducing the energy required to the effluent. Further, this enable the 
BWA to reduce the water content of biosolids resulting in mitigation co -benefit  of reduc ed  GHG emissions  
associated with the t rucking and disposal of  sludge  on a dedicated sludge spray zone. According  to the O&M 
Manual  [of the existing plant] , (1982) , the current sludge contains about 2% solids . If th is sludge can be 
dewatered   by up 20% solid , which is very typical with modern sludge dewatering technology, the volume of 
the sludge needing to be trucked out and disposed of would be reduced by up to 1 0% of the current volume. 
The installation of the dewatering technology would result in saving on  energy cost and  sludge transportation 
and labour, and the environmental benefits including the reduction in GHG emissions and oi l spills etc.   
 
Activity 2.1.1:  Install a grid -tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased 
power consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using 
Category 3 hurricane resistant solar panels  
 
Figure 10: Possible locations at the BSTP for the installation of the 1MW of solar panels.  
 
Activity 2.1.2:  Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures within the upgraded 
centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footpr int and reduce GHG emissions.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
 Activity 2.1.3:  Install sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy efficiency and reduce the 
overall GHG and CO 2 emissions associated with the biosolids.  
Since this component has one ou tput, t he total budget of this output is  as presented at the outcome level.  
 
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related 
renewable energy technologies  
This component respon ds to the  need for greater understanding among BWA staff of the nexu s between 
climate change and water availability and the impacts of climate change on infrastructure and operational 
measures to mitigate these impacts.  Additionally, over the past few years the maintenance focus at BWA 
has shifted from Preventative Mainte nance (PM) towards emergency breakdown maintenance due, in part 
to heavy rainfall events, and the lack of dedicated staff and financial resources for PM. Further, the west 
coast of Barbados is not sewer ed and the impact of saltwater intrusion into freshwat er resources  and nutrient 
loading into the nearshore marine environment are unknown  and further investigation  will support in bridging 
this knowledge gap and chart a path for arresting those issues on the west coast.  
The outcome of this component is to have enhanced capacity and capability to support the preventative 
maintenance and climate resiliency programmes . 
 
The total budget of this outcome is USD 1.6 million , which is principally applied to training and capacity 
building and knowledge transfer activities.  The outcome will be financed using 100% GCF  proceeds.   
 
Output 3.1:  Improved capabilities of wastewater technical personnel to operate, maintain and 
monitor and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management  
To complement the upgrades planned for the BSTP (Component 1 and 2), specialized training, enhanced 
awaren ess of operational risks and management of same and updated protocols and procedures are needed 
to be able to effectively manage, monitor and maintain the upgraded system. Not only are these areas 
important for operational effectiveness, but it is an impor tant element in building BWA’s capacity for 
implementing the preventative maintenance programme and ensuring sustainability of its operations post 
implementation of this project. See Figure 11 for the key areas that will be targeted for enhancing BWA’s 
capabilities. Notable is that approximately 12 customized courses covering SCADA, gender and climate 
change, PV systems, laboratory testing, analysis and management, CAS and RO technologies, sewer 
monitoring and instrumentation and wastewater, to note a few, will be delivered during the project. It is 
envisaged that approximately 400 individuals will be trained. Where possible, the Project will aim for parity 
in the number of individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly encouraged to participate i n the 
technical training programs thereby addressing the decision -making gap for women in technical thematic 
areas.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
  
Figure 1 1: Key areas that will be targeted for enhancing BWA’s capabilities  
The proposed centralized treatment and decentralized cluster treatment implementation strategy will 
increase the need for both the number of skilled operators and the operator skill development related to 
water reuse and renewable energy production. The project will ensure that recruitment processes  are 
gender resp onsive to address the underrepresentation of women as skilled operators. Similarly, the 
implementation of the sewer monitoring programme, including the CMMS will require operator training in 
planning for climate change impacts and the establishment of a ro bust operations information database, 
which is readily accessed for analysis and will be less susceptible to potential damage from fires or storm 
events potentially associated with climate change.  
The proposed upgrades require a shift in maintenance focus from emergency breakdown maintenance to 
preventative maintenance which is also of particular benefit to preparing for and adapting to climate change 
impacts. A review of current operational and mai ntenance practices highlighted there is a lack of adequate 
maintenance, with equipment generally only receiving attention resulting from breakdowns, as opposed to 
preventative maintenance through a robust, documented, maintenance management system. It also  
highlighted a lack of updated SOPs and manuals to guide operations. Improvements in documentation, 
procedures, training, prevention of sexual and gender based violence (SGBV), as well as the health and 
safety of field staff, will benefit both collection a nd treatment system performance. The upgrades of the 
SOPs, manuals and operations need to incorporate gender considerations as appropriate.  
There is also a need to develop and mainstream risk management framework into BWA’s project 
management and operations . This framework will encompass the full cycle of risk identification, assessment, 
and mitigation of impacts, including protection from and prevention of sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual 
harassment  (internal and external . This risk management framewor k will be developed in consultation with 
all departments to identify the risk register, existing controls and further actions needed and opportunities 
for improvement, and train staff in its operation and further development. The latter will be implemented  by 
BWA during the course of the project and assessed at the end of the project as a gauge of the level of 
sustainability built into the BWA’s operations.  
 Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the operations 
and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including photovoltaic equipment


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 Activity 3.1.2:  Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that addresses 
the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and environmental 
monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion 
considerations.  
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to support the sustainable 
management of B WA’s operations.   
The total budget of this output is USD 1.1 million . This output will be funded using GCF proceeds.  
 
Output 3.2:  A strategic plan is developed to guide the replication of water treatment facilities along 
the west coast  
There is future potential for augmenting potable water supply by installing additional RO treatment facilities 
along the west coast corridor which can intercept and collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable 
water standards to supplement drinking water re sources. This would support the objectives of this project of 
enhancing climate resiliency in the water sector.  Strategic engagement with community groups, including 
women’s groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that the plan considers the needs of women and  vulnerable 
groups a gender -responsive approach and that there is community -wide buy -in. 
 
Activity 3.2.1:  Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of water treatment facilities 
along the west coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem.  
The total budget of this output is USD 0.5 million . This output will be funded using GCF proceeds.  
 
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy -in and ownership within the 
private and public sectors are improved for climate resilient development planning for the water 
sector.  
The upgrades to the equipment and training of technical staff to manage them is not enough for a lasting 
and sustainable impact of this project. Stakeholders buy -in, adequate enforcement of legislative and 
governance frameworks and expanding leadership and ownership to the private sector are also critical to 
ensure that a sustainable market transformation occurs for the advancement of wastewater treatment and 
use of  reclaimed water in Barbados. For example, the legal regulatory framework in Barbados was very 
recently updated to enhance the regulation and scaling -up of wastewater treatment and use of reclaimed 
water. However, support is required to determine if any ga ps, including gender and vulnerability gaps  exist 
among the recently articulated policies and regulations, and the identification of a roadmap for addressing 
the gaps and enforcing the policies and regulations that are in place.  
Further, t o ensure the bes t development outcome of the project, the project and potential impacts should be 
well communicated with the public and stakeholders , throughout the project cycle , especially those 
disproportionately impacted by climate change such as youth and gender grou ps. 
The key outcome is that an enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of 
reclaimed water. The enabling environment speaks to the legislation, organizational structures and 
competency and strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving this outcome will significantly change the 
culture of the water sector in Barbados, building a level of part nership and professionalism that is needed to 
continually innovate and adapt to climate change, which in turn promotes sustainability for this project.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
 The total budget of this outcome is USD 1.6 million.  The source of the funding is GCF in the amount of 
USD1.3 million  and BWA \GOB  in the amount of USD 0.3 million.   
 
Output 4.1:  Governance and planning roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed water in a 
controlled and regulated manner.  
Having adequate enforcement of legislation related to wastewater mana gement, as well a long -term strategy 
in place, are paramount for the sustainability of the impacts of this project.   
Activity 4.1.1:  Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development Act, 
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent quality, 
treatment options and re -use requirements and applications  (see list below). The review will also include 
recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public -private partners hips, building 
codes, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities and access to males and females.  
The following policies/plans/legislation are either recently completed (2021) or in train, that are of relevance 
to the 3R -CReWS project:  
i. Tabling of the Planning and Development Regulations - General Development Order, Environmental 
Impact Assessment Regulations and the General Regulations  
ii. Final Revisions to the Physical Development Plan (in train)  
iii. Water Order Bill (Water Zoning) - approved by Cabinet and being prepared for approval of Parliament  
iv. Guidelines and Protocols for Potable Water Storage and Rainwater Harvesting  
v. Updated Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan - approved by Cabinet  
vi. Guidelines and Protocols for the Operation of Solid W aste Management Facilities - approved by 
Cabinet  
vii. The Integrated Blue Economy Policy Framework and Strategic Action Plan for Barbados - Approved 
by Cabinet  
 
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan  that includes an optimal combination of 
decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized 
reclaimed water being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower 
cost of reclaimed water transmission). This str ategy will also take into consideration the social, gender -
related and climate risks in the design and prioritizing of water reuse strategies.  
The total budget of this output is USD 445,000 , which is principally applied to the development of the water 
and sanitation master plan (66%). The source of the funding is GCF in the amount of USD 149,000 and BWA 
in the amount of USD 296,000.  
Output 4.2:  Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment 
and r euse applications by private individuals and businesses.  
This output underscores and addresses the importance of individual and private sector buy -in, ownership 
and adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse applications.  
Activity 4.2.1:  Develop a strate gy and action plan to engage the private sector in the provision and 
adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by -products such as 
activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment to identify opportunities for pu blic-private 
partnership in the water and wastewater sector, especially for the expansion of the decentralized onsite 
cluster wastewater systems.  The strategy will also promote gender equality and women empowerment.  
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive and socially 
inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re -use. Incentives for water 
conservation includes demand side management including pricing policies to incentivize reuse pra ctices. 
Proposed incentives can include: examine willingness to pay disaggregated by male and female headed


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 households  for non -potable reuse water versus payment for potable water as an incentive to use reuse 
water. This could be done as a stakeholder surv ey; Consider a scaled water use billing system to encourage 
water management and conservation; A reward system for individuals coming forward to identify potential 
non-revenue water (e.g. hydrants leaking, wet areas that shouldn’t be wet, illegal water con nections, etc.); 
reduced development cost charges for residential and commercial developments that establish their own 
water reclamation and reuse system; reducing impact on government infrastructure; reduced potable water 
rates for residential and commerc ial developments that establish their own water reclamation and reuse 
system; reducing impact on government infrastructure; reduced electrical power rates for residential and 
commercial developments that establish PV systems that feed into the grid (Europe , Canada and the US 
pay substantially more for green power that is privately produced); examine government fees related to 
development costs and see if water and energy conservation measures can obtain credits or reduce fees as 
incentive.  
Activity 4.2.3: Expand  and promote  the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide 
resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems.  
Barriers to financial inclusion or access to financial resources can prevent vulnerable groups , inclu ding 
female headed households  from participating in climate change adaptation and/or mitigation actions. The 
Barbados Water Authority (BWA) through the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados 
(WSRN S -Barbados) Project is establishing t he Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF). The RAFF aims 
to mobilise funds for use in the water sector adaptation and mitigation initiatives including those identified as 
priority in Barbados’ Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan. The broad objec tives of the RAFF are 
to: 
i. Empower communities to adapt to climate change and variability.  
ii. Mobilise funds for climate change adaptation and mitigation in Barbados.  
iii. Strengthen households and public and private sector entities involvement in climate actions.  
iv. Address the community needs for potable water by building resilience to climate change into the 
infrastructure of the BWA.  
v. Promote technology transfer by encouraging cost effective, efficient, and appropriate technologies 
for water consumption and conserv ation; and,  
vi. Build on existing climate change capacity building and awareness campaigns.  
 
The establishment of the RAFF was initial funded by the BWA and Government of Barbaods; however, 3R -
CReWS presents an opportunity to expand and promote the RAFF to support the Private Sector’s 
engagement in the wastewater sector. For example, adopting tech nologies that support the delivery and 
utilization of tertiary reclaimed water. The RAFF is seen as a critical element to engage the private sector; 
however, the existing RAFF needs to be examined and expanded to consider how resources could flow in 
and ou t to support activities related to the adoption of decentralized treatment systems as well as dual 
pumping, inter alia. See Annex 23 for the existing RAFF Charter as drafted under the WSRN project funded 
by the BWA. This Charter is to be updated to cover w astewater treatment systems and reuse options and 
other water sector considerations. Specifically, the 3R -CReWS project will engage consultant to update the 
governing instruments, through a gender informed consultative process, identify potential sources f or 
increase the capital inflow, ensure that updates to the governing instrument continue to promote the needs 
of vulnerable groups including persons living in poverty, and support the knowledge and promotion of the 
financing facility.  
 
It is important to note that no GCF p roceeds will be use to directly capitalise the incentive programme or the 
RAFF. GCF resources will be used be to strengthen the framework and creat e the knowledge products


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 needed to guide the Government and BWA in the setting up of the in centive programme(s) and the 
expansion and the RAFF.      
The total budget of this output is USD 352,000, which will be financed totally by GCF financing.  
 
Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented . 
This output is aiming to promote the business case for this project, thereby securing more buy -in and 
acceptance of this project’s scope and intended results. For instance, the nexus between climate change 
and water availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options etc. will be the 
basis of some of the PEA topics that will be targeting a wide cross section of beneficiaries through various 
mediums of information dissemination.  
Activity 4.3.1: Re -educate communities, teachers, st udents, farmers and businesses about the 
impact of climate change on water resources and their impact on water quality and quantity 
(availability as well as the importance of water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to 
building climate resi lience in the Water Sector. Develop program to provide educational support materials 
for teachers and participate in the delivery of public education programs and associated events that serve 
to educate students. This increases the general knowledge within  the community about water, so they can 
make informed decisions, starting with the water cycle and basic facts about water use to protect public 
safety before addressing water reuse. A change in public perception is required to be able to facilitate IPR. 
Water reclamation and reuse is practiced globally to address limited water resource conditions and drought. 
This also includes outreach programmes in schools, community -based organizations, and stakeholders’ 
groups across customer class as well as a Public Service Announcements and educational materials that 
addresses best practices for efficient water use, conservation, and reuse. Further, this activity will develop 
and provide information resources to private individuals and businesses for the adoption of decentralized 
onsite wastewater systems. The re -education programs will ensure to promote equal opportunities and 
access to men, women and the LGBTQIA community.  
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign for 
communi ty and visitors (tourists)  through workshops, videos, community town hall meetings, site tours 
(demonstration of the plant technology and by -product reuse) and consultations. Emphasis will be placed on 
assuring the general public about food safety to ensure there is public acceptan ce and trust in the agriculture 
produce from local farms using the treated wastewater as well as the improved resilience of the water sector 
and the direct and indirect benefits on ecosystem services and ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to spur 
greater pub lic and entrepreneurial involvement.  
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts , which is dedicated 
to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism 
and provide updat e to all stakeholders on the project activities. This page will include, to the best extent 
possible, functions such as audio, sub -titles and/or sign language to encourage social inclusion from 
disabled population. The project’s webpage will also ensure to  report project results disaggregated by 
gender, where possible.  
The total budget of this output is USD 0.9 million which will be financed totally by GCF financing.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
3R-CReWS Governance Arrangements  
In accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement  between the CCCCC and the GCF , the GCF  will 
enter into a Funded Activity Agreement  (FAA)  with the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre 
(CCCCC or referred to as “the  Centre”), in the form of a grant agreement, under which CCCCC, in its capacity 
as the Accredited Entity, shall administer the relevant GCF Proceeds to be used for the financing of the


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 Project. The Centre, as the Accredited Entity (AE), will guide implemen tation of this project in accordance 
with its accreditation credentials as well as guided by the terms FAA.   Guided by the Funded Activity 
Agreement (FAA) to be entered into once this project is approved and the Accreditation Master Agreement 
(AMA) between  the CCCCC and the GCF, the CCCCC will also ensure gender and social inclusion 
considerations are mainstreamed as much as possible into the execution of the project activities. All activities 
will adhere to the CCCCC environmental and social safeguards, wh ich complies with international standards 
and includes consideration of the most vulnerable peoples and a mechanism and to address any grievance 
that may arise  (see Section G for further details on Grievance Redress) . 
 
 
CCCCC will be the sole administrator of GCF funding and utilise the resources in accordance with the FAA 
to implement the to implement the activities as described in Section B.3 and detailed budget. The CCCCC 
will work closely, through its Programme Development and Manageme nt Unit (PDMU) and sign subsidiary 
agreements with the BWA to govern those activities that will be executed by the BWA. The Subsidiary 
Agreement will be legally binding and outline the detail s associated  financi ng and accounting , procurement 
and implementa tion, as well as contain the relevant provisions for the compliance by BWA with the 
requirements of the AMA and FAA. The CCCCC and BWA will co -execute this project.  As a Co -Executing 
Entity for this project, BWA will:  
a. Provide technical support to CCCCC for  the development of Terms of References and the 
procurement of equipment, goods and service to realise all Outputs; and,  
b. Be a part of the evaluation team that will review all expressions of interest, and technical and financial 
proposals related to the Pro ject. 
c. Report to the CCCCC as guided by the terms set out in the Subsidiary Agreement, procurement 
guidelines of the CCCCC and/or those of the Government of Barbados. This includes reporting to 
CCCCC on a quarterly basis detailing accomplishments, status of project activities, foreseeable 
delays and other risk at the time of reporting. These quarterly reports are essential to ensure 
compliance with CCCCC policies and accreditation credentials. These quarterly reports will also feed 
into annual and mid -term reports that will be submitted to the GCF. These reports will be coupled 
with field visit and site monitoring missions, which will include primary data collection and 
observations. There will be a final report at the end of the per iod of implementation. This report will 
also be accompanied by the final project financial audit to be completed by an independent and 
accredited auditor. All records on this project will be kept for at least five years for review by the GCF 
or its authori zed bodies after project completion.  
 
The Subsidiary Agreement will outline  the implementation arrangements for the 3R-CReWS project and 
constitutes a requirement of the associated Funded Activity Agreement between the G CF and the C CCCC. 
The Subsidiary Agreement will include clause that span the following areas: Definitions; Description, 
Activities of the Project and Funding; Implementation of the Project; Additional Obligations of BWA; 
Reporting Requirements of BWA; Representations,  warranties and Covenants of BWA; Intellectual Property 
and Ownership of Assets; Force Majeure; Duration of Agreement and Termination; Confidentiality; Notices; 
Governing Law; Dispute Settlement and General Provisions.  The schedules will include:  Descript ion and 
Activities of the Project; Project Budget showing the Breakdown of each Party’s Contribution; Co -financiers 
and contribution to Co -financing; Financial Management, Procurement and Implementation Arrangements; 
Implementation Plan; Proposed Compositi on and Functions of the Project Steering Committee; GCF 
Reporting Milestones; and, Events of Default.  
 
CCCCC as, an executing entity, will manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF 
proceeds as well as monitor and report on the on project activities to the GCF and Government of Barbaos, 
through the NDA office, in accordance with the FAA and AMA. Table 1 below identified the outputs /activities  
to be implemented and  the EE that will be responsible for the day to day management execution. The 
CCCCC will continue to work closely with key stakeholders, such as th e BWA, NDA, farmers,  households,


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
 private sector, government agencies, NGOs, Civil Society and academia, will be kept engaged throughout 
the project cycle. During  the PPF stage of the project stakeholder consultations were carried out and there 
is a general acceptance of the project and their responsibilities and the readiness to proceed with 
implementing the project once GCF approves funding. Throughout the implem entation phase, the 
consultant/vendor, executing entities and the CCCCC will continuously liaise and work closely with all 
relevant parties, in accordance with the Stakeholder Management and Engagement Plan and Gender Action 
Plan, for the timely and inclus ive execution of project activities and to produce quality products that are 
aligned with the deliverables and outputs of this project.  
 
Table 1: Responsibilities of Executing Entities  
 
Output  Key Activities  EE 
1.1 The Bridgetown 
Sewage Treatment 
Plant (BSTP) is 
upgraded to treat 
wastewater to a tertiary 
water -quality standard.  Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional 
activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment process at the Bridgetown 
Sewage Treatmen t Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for achieving 
national reclaimed water -quality standards.   CCCCC  
1.2 Tertiary wastewater 
is being reused to 
supplement non -
potable use  Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems  to 
reduce the total dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed water 
produced at the BSTP    
 
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells going from 
the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge  CCCCC  
 
 
 
BWA  
1.3 Decision -support 
tools and infrastructure 
implemented to 
mitigate potential 
climate change risks to 
the wastewater 
collection and 
treatment systems  
 Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the 
installation of flow measureme nt and rain -gauging equipment at the BSTP to 
identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer. 
Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the 
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.   
 
Activity 1 .3.2: Establish on -site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP 
to generate influent and effluent water quality data to inform operations 
control strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption 
and GHG emissions.   
 
Activity 1.3.3 : Implement a Computerized Real -time Management System 
(CMMS) at the BSTP to inform decision making and climate resilient building  CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
 
CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
CCCCC  
1.4 Decentralized 
treatment systems or 
cluster treatment 
systems installed  Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater 
collection and treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to 
produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial non -potable water 
applications.  BWA  
2.1 Energy efficiency 
and renewable energy  
technologies are 
implemented  
 Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid -tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems 
to offset increased power consumption associated with the centralized 
treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant solar 
panels  
 
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures 
within the upgraded centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall 
energy footprint and reduce GHG emissions.  
 
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering equipment t o improve energy 
efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with 
the biosolids.  CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
CCCCC  
 
 
 
CCCCC


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 3.1 Improved 
capabilities of 
wastewater technical 
personnel to operate, 
maintain and monitor 
and implement climate 
change adaptation 
planning strategies for 
wastewater 
management  Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to 
support the operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and 
treatment facilities including photovoltaic equip ment  
 
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational 
Manual that addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative 
maintenance, operator safety, and environmental monitoring, including risks 
posed by climate change and g ender and social inclusion considerations.  
 
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to 
support the sustainable management of BWA’s operations.  CCCCC  
 
 
 
CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
CCCCC  
3.2 A strategic plan is 
developed to guide the 
replication of water 
treatment facilities 
along the west coast 
corridor  Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of 
water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor for augmenting water 
supply and protecting the  west coast ecosystem.  
 CCCCC  
4.1 Governance and 
planning roadmaps 
enhanced to enable 
use of reclaimed water 
in a controlled and 
regulated manner  
 Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and 
Development Act, Wastewater Reuse  Bill and other related legislations for 
enhancing wastewater effluent quality, treatment options and re -use 
requirements and applications.  
 
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an 
optimal combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water 
reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized reclaimed water 
being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use 
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission).   CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
 
BWA  
 
4.2 Mechanisms 
developed/expanded to 
encourage the 
adoption of wastewater 
treatment and reuse 
applications by private 
individuals and 
businesses  Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector 
in the provision and adoption o f wastewater treatment technology and the 
utilization of wastewater by-products  such as activated sludge.  
 
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender 
sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage 
conservation, recycle, re -use.  
 
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to 
provide resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater 
systems.   CCCCC  
 
 
 
CCCCC  
 
 
 
CCCCC  
4.3 Gender Sensitive 
Public Education and 
Awareness Campaign 
Implemented.  Activity 4.3.1: Re -educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and 
businesses a bout the impact of climate change on water resources and their 
impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of 
water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate 
resilience in the Water Sector.  
 
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness 
Campaign for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, 
community town hall meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant 
technology and by -product reuse) and consu ltations.  
 
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS Project Web Page and social media 
accounts, which is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge 
products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to 
all stakeholders on the project activities.  CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
 
CCCCC  
 
 
 
 
 
CCCCC


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 35 
 
 The CCCCC project components will be executed by a Project Management Office (PMO) whilst those 
components under BWA will be executed under the management of the BWA Project Management Office 
(PMO), through a dedicated Project Team. More specifically, t he CCCCC will  secure the services of a Project 
Manager, a National Project Coordinator, a Project Engineer, a Procurement Officer, a Finance Officer and 
two (2) Admin istrative  Officers  that will work closely with BWA’s Project Management Off ice. The BWA PMO 
is staffed with Project Coordinators (one of which will be assigned to this project and will liaison closely with 
CCCCC), Procurement and Accounting Officers, Project Engineer and Engineering Assistant and will also 
draw upon the available  collective resources of the BWA and project implementation partners. In addition, 
the Project will be monitored by a Project Steering Committee comprising key stakeholders .  
 
The BWA PMO will be required to report to the General Manager of BWA, who in turn will report to the BWA 
Board of Directors and the Project Steering Committee (PSC). Additionally, the CCCCC PMO will also report 
to the PSC. The PSC is to provide a mechanism  for support, feedback, guidance, stakeholder participation 
and interagency coordination during project implementation, and to act as a catalyst for an ongoing 
coordination mechanism after implementation has been completed. The Committee will be required t o meet 
as necessary , but not less than biannually. The duties of PSC shall be as follows:  
(a) familiarisation with the arrangements for project implementation, including the intended project 
outcome, outputs, scope, financing arrangements, reporting requirements, implementation schedule, 
and other details contained in the appraisal report and financing agreements;  
(b) monitor progress in implementation of the Project towards achievement of the project output and 
project outcome;  
(c) ensure that potential thre ats to timely project implementation are identified and addressed;  
(d) facilitate the taking of policy decisions by the relevant authorities to ensure timely fulfilment of funding  
conditions;  
(e) review work plans on a semi -annual basis and ensure that recommendat ions with respect to 
adequate budgetary allocations are made, procurement activities are executed as scheduled, and 
that adequate controls;  
(f) ensure that stakeholder participation is appropriate and sustained throughout implementation and 
that stakeholder ex pectations are addressed;  
(g) facilitate a grievance redress mechanism that complies with GCF expectations on grievance redress 
to address concerns and complaints from the stakeholders, including the general public, with regards 
project implementation;  
(h) ensure that the Project remains aligned to the policy and strategic objectives of the GOB;  
(i) discuss the perspective of the entities from which its members are drawn on various issues, informed 
by the consultation of PSC members with their respective organisations;  
(j) monitor the performance of the Project Implementation Team; and  
(k) champion the Project, advocating for achievement of the project outcomes.  
  
The PSC will be chaired by the  Executive Director of the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre and 
co-chaired  by General Manager of the BWA, with the Project Manager (PM) or Project Coordinator (PC) 
serving as Secretary , who will be responsible for taking minutes for each PSC meeting and shared with the 
relevant stakeholders.  In addition, PSC shall comprise the f ollowing members:  
(a) Permanent Secretary (PS), Ministry of Transport Works and Water Resources Management, or their 
nominee;  
(b) PS, Ministry of Agriculture and Food and Nutritional Security or their nominee;  
(c) PS, Ministry of Finance Economic affairs and Investmen t or their nominee;  
(d) PS, Ministry of Health and Wellness, or their nominee;  
(e) PS, Ministry of Environment and National Beautification, or their nominee;  
(f) PS, Ministry of Energy and Businesses Development and Entrepreneurship  
(g) Director, Environmental Protection Department, or their nominee;  
(h) Director, Planning and Development Department, or their nominee;


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 36 
 
 (i) Director, Coastal Zone Management Unit, or their nominee;  
(j) Head of the Bureau of Gender Affairs, or their nominee;  
(k) Representative, Barbad os Chamber of Commerce;  
(l) Representative, Barbados Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation;  
(m) Representative, Barbados Agricultural Society;  
(n) Representative, Government Press and Public Relations  
(o) University  of the West Indies (UWI)  
 
 
Ably guided by this PSC, the CCCCC and BWA will have the final decision -making authority with respect to 
the implementation of the project .The Government of Barbados, through the  Ministry of Finance Economic 
affairs and Investment and Ministry of Transport , Works & Water Resource Management, will  be kept abreast 
of progress of the project. The NDA and the Minister with responsibility for water will serve as a conduit for 
updating the GOB on the process of the project and, where necessary, providing feedback  to the project 
board from the GOB. The BWA’s board of directors is expected to report to the Ministry on the status of 
various activities identified in this proposal. See Figure 11 presents the project management and reporting 
structure for the project.  
 
The Technical Working Group is made of r epresentatives from: BWA, Environmental Protection Department, 
Ministry of Health and Wellness, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Finance Economic 
Affairs and Investment, Coastal Zone Management  Unit, Government Analytical Services, and Planning and 
Development Department. This  group  guided the development of the proposal and will continue to guide the 
implementation of the project.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 37 
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF)
Caribbean Community 
Climate Change Centre 
(CCCCC )
Government of 
Barbados
Barbados Water 
Authority 
Board of Directors
Project Steering 
Committee (PSC)
CCCCC Programme 
Development and 
Management Unit
BWA Project 
Management Office
Barbados Water Authority 
Technical Working GroupMinistry
/BoardNDA /GCF
Project Implementation 
TeamPSC members reports
To ministries /departments
Technical guidance to 
PSC, CCCCC and BWA
Stakeholders (state and non -state ), Beneficiaries , ConsultantsGRMGRMNDA /CCCCC NDA /BWA
CCCCC /BWA Subsidiary Agreement 
 
 
Figure 1 2a: Project Management and Reporting Structure for the project  
 
Financial Flows and Implementation Arrangements  
The funding for the 3R -CReWS project will come from : (1) the Green Climate Fund  in the form of a grant;  
and (2) the BWA  in the form of a grant from the  Government of Barbados. The BWA contribution will be 
provided through the Ministry of Finance Economic Affairs and Investment, which has already sourced some  
of the co -funding required  including plans to  allocat e resources to the BWA from the  revenue generated by 
the Garbage and Sewage Contribution levy  to fund the two decentralised wastewater treatment plant  (Output 
1.4). 
 
CCCCC will not on grant any monies to the BWA nor will BWA on grant monies to the CCCCC. CCCCC will 
manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF proceeds. The CCCCC will procure 
all major goods and services for the project using international best practice and the appropriate procurement 
method in accordance with the procurement plan.  The CCCCC in accordance with its Accreditation Master 
Agreement, financial and accounting manual and procurement guidelines will procure goods, works and 
services for the realisation of the project outputs. As is CCCCC policy, funding provided by the  GCF is kept 
in a separate project bank account. The partners, providing co -financing, will manage their co -financing 
activities but will be obligated to the report to the CCCCC on the status of those activities. Those entities are 
not obligated to transfe r any monies to the CCCCC but must provide accounting evidence of transactions 
and expenditures towards their co -financing obligations. These are essential for monitoring and reporting to 
the GCF on an annual basis.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 38 
 
  
Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Caribbean Community Climate Change 
Centre (CCCCC )
Ministry of Finance /Barbados Water Authority
Public Funds , International Financial Institutions (IFIs), & Other Donors
Private Sector 
Mobilized
Good , works and services for the 
execution of Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.3.1, 
1.3.2, 1.3.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3, 3.1.1, 
3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.2.1, 4.1.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 
4.2.3, 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3
Good , works and 
services for the 
execution of 
Activities 1.2.2, 
1.4.1, 4.1.2
Expansion of BSTP Sewer Collection System
&
South Coast Project 
South Coast Plant Upgrade
Renovations and Upgrades
Renewable Energy System
Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall
Reclaimed Water Distribution
Expansion of Sewer Collection System
&
Adoption of Decentralised Treatment 
Technologies
3R-CReWS Project (BSTP )Parallel Financing Co-financingGCF Financing
Co-Financed Activities GCF Financed Activities 
 
Figure 12 b: Financial flows, inclusive of the system  upgrades that are parallel financing  
 
Capacity of the AE and EE to Implement  
The 3R -CReWs project builds upon the Centre’s more than 1 5 years of experience as a regional leader 
implementing catalytic pilot/demonstration type projects in the Caribbean Region, and scaling these up with 
national governments.  It also builds on the Centre’s established track record in implementing  projects 
related to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Further, as an Accredited Entity of the GCF, the Centre 
does ensure that appropriate due diligence is carried out to ensure that all transacti ons are executed with 
minimal transactional risk and all Executing Entities have to date, been assessed at a low or medium risk. 
The due diligence exercised revealed that the CCCCC has sufficient capacity and autonomy to enter into 
Agreements, with suffici ent legal and juridical capacity in doing so  (See Annex 9) . In terms of institutional 
due diligence, the CCCCC is properly constituted, and with Board approvals, is competent in taking on the 
tasks assigned in the funding proposal in their various roles. A lso, the Centre has an established track record 
in Barbados and working with the BWA through its PMO that is implementing another GCF funded project 
(FP060: Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados Project  (WSRN S -Barbados) ). 
 
The BWA i s responsible for managing, allocating and monitoring the water resources of the island with the 
view to ensuring their best development, utilization, conservation and protection in the public interest. The 
facilities of the Authority are situated in a num ber of locations across the country and these include pumping 
stations, reservoirs and major storage centres at Bowmanston, St John and the Belle, St Michael. The BWA 
supplies 97% of the island with water and obtains its water supply from twenty -four (24) groundwater wells,


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 39 
 
  
37 World Bank (April 2021) Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices. Pages 92 -93 
38 Central Bank of Barbados (16, Feb 2021). See http://www.centralbank.org.bb/news/article/10200/why -barbados -debt -to-gdp-ratio -has-risen -again.  
Accessed: 15 December 2021  
39 World Bank (April 2021)  two (2) springs, one (1) main privately owned reverse osmosis desalination plant as well as a small 
containerized desalination plant. This water is distributed through a network consisting of approximately two 
thousand five hundred kilom etres (2,500 km) of water mains, twenty -eight (28) reservoirs located both under 
and above ground and seventeen (17) re -pumping stations (booster -pumps). It is also responsible for the 
designing, construction, acquisition, provision, operation and maintena nce of water and sewerage works for 
the purpose of supplying water for public purposes and the receiving, treating and disposing of sewage, 
respectively. Though the water system is island -wide, the sewerage works consist of two centralized 
systems, the Bri dgetown Sewerage Treatment Plant, a secondary treatment facility commissioned in 1980, 
and the South Coast Sewerage Treatment Plant, an advanced preliminary treatment plant commissioned in 
2003.  
 
It is important to note that  the BWA Act and the Interpretat ion Act of Barbados notes that the BWA Act 
establishes the BWA as a Body Corporate and  the Interpretation Act outlines that such a body has all the 
powers of a legal person, which includes the power to enter into contracts in its own name and the power to 
sue and be sued.  It is against this legal standing that the CCCCC and BWA will enter into a subsidiary 
agreement.  
 
As a strong partner to the CCCCC, t he BWA’s PMO  has a track record of implementing water and 
wastewater  project and  is currently managing 5 projects to a total value of USD82 million for the water and 
wastewater sector running through to 2024. In addition to externally funded projects, the PMO handles 
internally financed projects, processes payments, liaises with minis tries, and prepares progress and financial 
reports on projects. The BWA therefore has a resourced and experienced team of professionals working 
within the PMO.  It is also worth mentioning that the BWA has built it capacity (knowledge and understanding) 
of the GCF and its reporting require. This was largely achieved through the development of, and ongoing 
activities of, WSRN S -Barbados  Project. Further, a Financial Management Capacity Assessment (FMCA) of 
BWA’s oper ations was carried out to enable BWA to act  as an executing entity for the WSRN S -Barbados  
(See Annex 27) .  
     
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Barbados Economic State of Play  
Since the financial crisis, 2008, the Barbadian economy remain s sluggish and the onset of the COVID -19 
pandemic has worsened  this plight  Inflation rates have been around 4% per year over the last 4 years and 
is projected to remain at around 3% per year in the medium term. A combination of economic circumstances 
and shock from exogenous  factors ( including  international commodities prices, natural disasters and the 
COVID -19 pandemic ) led to a situation where public debt -to-GDP ratio increased consistently from 55% of 
GDP in 2008 to 148% in 2017 37 and although it droppe d to 120% in 2019, it increased to 144% by the end 
of 2020 .38 At the end of the first quarter of 2021 Barbados’s GDP is estimated to have contracted by 17.3% 
and the current account deficit is expected to have increased to 7.8%39. The unemployment rate ros e to 
10.8% as of September 2019 following public sector layoffs of almost 1,000 persons in 2018 stemming from


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 40 
 
  
40 In June 2018, in response to the worsening fiscal and external liquidity position, the newly elected government announced the  home -grown  BERT Plan 
aimed at restoring macroeconomic stability. It included the suspension of debt payments and a comprehensive restructuring of domestic and external 
debt. The completion of the public debt restructuring in December 2019 reduced economic uncertainty prior to the coronavirus pandemic. Under BERT, 
debt is targeted to reach 60 percent of GDP by FY2033/34. In addition,  in 2018, Barbados entered into an adjustment program under the IMF’s Extended 
Fund Facility. (World Bank (April 2021)  
41 Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean. 2019. Pages 2 -3 
42 World Bank (April 2021)  
43  IADB (2020)  
44 World Bank (2021)  
45 See OSCOVIDA Open Science COVID Analysis available at: https://oscovida.github.io/countries -incidence -rate.html  Accessed: 6/10/2021. The rating is 
based on the total number of cases over the past 7 days/total population  
46 Barbados Loop News (July 10, 2021). Available at: https://barbados.loopnews.com/content/caddle -ashfall -causes -87-million -loss Accessed: 
06/10/2021  the introduction of the Barbados Economic Recovery and Transformation (BERT) Programme40 41. With the 
onset of the pandemic, unemployment rates in creased further 42 43 44 
Further, Barbados has been increasing in the proportion of the population living in poverty from 15.1% in 
2010 to 17.2% in 2016, according to the 2016 -2017 Barbados Survey of Living Conditions. While there is no 
estimate of monetar y poverty since then, it is likely that the poverty rate increased in the two years leading 
to 2020, in line with the observed economic slowdown due to job losses, business closures, and decline in 
remittances caused by the pandemic. Furthermore, Barbados experienced a rapid spread of COVID -19 in 
January 2021 and again in August 2021, with the latter rates including the Delta variant that is more 
contagious. The high level of infectious rate of the delta variant is reflected in that statistics as the number  
of new daily cases being reported for the month of October 2021 were in the 300s pushing Barbados to be 
the fourth country in the world for the 7 -day incidence rate (rating report for 6 October 2021)45. 
On March 20, 2020, the Prime Minister announced a co mplement of social, monetary and financial policy 
measures in response to the pandemic which increased public expenditure. For instance, a total of USD10 
million was allocated for social assistance to allow for an increase in the transfers paid by the Welf are 
Department, and the Household Survival Program. BWA was asked to reconnect the water supply for 
households that had it cut off. Monetary policy changes included the Central Bank of Barbados reducing its 
discount rate for overnight lending from 7% to 2% , it reduced the securities ratio for banks from 17.5% to 5% 
and eliminated the 1.5% securities ratio for non -bank deposit taking licensees. The Central Bank also 
announced its intention of collateralizing loans for up to six months as liquidity support fo r licensees, if 
required. In terms of financial policy measures, the government requested additional financing support from 
international financial institutions, which included the possibility of extending the IMF Extended Facility Fund 
(EFE) envelope by U SD100 million, to USD390 million, and disbursing a USD80 million policy -based loan 
from IDB.  
Apart from the recession and the global pandemic, Barbados has experienced two natural hazards in 2021 
that has taken an additional toll on the economy. The first is the fallout from the eruption of the La Soufrière 
Volcano in Saint Vincent and the Grenadi nes, which erupted in April 2021 resulting in damages and losses 
of approximately BBD87.1 million from impacts to a majority of the productive sectors; for example, in 
agriculture, up to 40% of crops are expected to have a reduction in yields and the massi ve clean -up efforts 
created significant impact on the water sector, as there was an unprecedented draw on water resources, 
which put pressure on reservoir levels and compromised water availability to households and industries that 
depend on water for produ ction46. 
 
The second natural hazard was the passage of Hurricane Elsa on 2 July 2021 that resulted in power outages, 
fallen trees, flash flooding and damaged roofs. Whilst there were no reported deaths, it was the first hurricane 
to hit Barbados in 65 year s. No estimation of damage and losses were found but given that there was 
significant disruption to businesses during a year where there was already significant disruption to economic 
activity, it is safe to say that productivity of sectors was further str etched.


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 41 
 
  
47 Government of Barbados has recently pledged USD$12,000,000 to assist in the emergency operations for  the two wastewater treatment facilities in 
Barbados.  
48 Amanda Lynch -Foster (2018), The South Coast Sewage Crisis: A Timeline, Nation News , Bridgetown, Barbados. Retrieved on August 5, 2018 from: 
http://www.nationnews.com/nationnews/news/121736/south -coast -sewage -crisis -timeline  . Level of Concessionality  
Despite these setbacks, the Government has spent significantly and is still looking to further invest in building 
the water sector’s resiliency due to the serious situation of the water infrastructure in Barbados and its role 
in underpinning economic activity . The Government of Barbados has utilized funding from its budgetary 
allotment47 (Fiscal), the Tourism Enhancement Fund and regional and international funding, including a 
USD55 million loan from the IDB, to carry out upgrades and well needed repairs on sections of the systems48.  
The 3R -CReWS project is one part of the larger endeavour on the part of the GoB to adapt to the impact of 
climate change. The country is facing a climate crisis in which water availability to support the economy is 
going to be curtailed and is already impacting food security through the high cost of importation, a situation 
that is expected to be increasingly aggravated through the global impact of climate change on food and 
supply chains. To c ounter this, Barbados is seeking to increase food production as an adaptation measure. 
This ambition cannot be realised without making water accessible to farmers so it is imperative that means 
be found to address current and future water scarcity constrai nts. At present large volumes of precious water 
resources are going to waste through being disposed in the surrounding ocean after a single use. This linear 
model of water provision and use has to change  to a closed loop through reuse and replenishment .   
BWA, the sole water service authority in Barbados, is critical to guaranteeing the water security of Barbados. 
However, given the impending impacts of climate change, BWA needs to position itself to continue to 
guarantee this security. It is expected that its function in the future will not only be limited to the production 
and distribution of water but also demonstrating, raising awareness, and building capacity within localities 
about water conservation, storage and treatment. The need for this comes agai nst the background that BWA 
needs to improve its efficiency and build greater resilience to climate variability and change. Here, efficiency 
refers to minimizing its operation and maintenance costs and increasing the amount of water available to 
the public  whilst at the same time minimizing its impact on the environment. This project support the 
Government of Barbaods and BWA efforts to build resilience  in the water sector by closing the cycle  of water 
use and reuse  by introducing reuse  of reclaim  water.   
The use of reclaim water is not widespread and there are some reservations by the public to utilise the 
resource hence the investment in upgrading  the plants to generate water to quality reuse must be coupled 
with enabling environment and public education needed to sustain the paradigm shift in behavio ur and 
attitude .  
The GOB is seeking to provide that basic infrastructure and to use it as a platform to launch further expansion 
of the Circular Economy as envisaged in the (Moore, et al., 2014) and the follo w-on Partnership for Action 
on Green Economy (PAGE) with the United Nations Environment Programme. To this end , the total 
envisaged capital investment in provisioning infrastructure for the Bridgetown and South Coast System is 
USD183 million in the short -term rising to USD251 million in the medium term. The Table 2 below captures 
the relative contributions to capital costs planned for the water sector. Just looking at the capital investments 
planned for the Bridgetown System – GCF's proportion is 57% and 37 % in the short and medium terms, 
respectively. At a national scale, GCF’s contribution amounts to 22% in the short -term, falling  to 16% in t he 
medium term .. Details on the sources of capital funds is depicted in Table 3.  
Table 2: Relative Short - and Mediu m-Term Contributions to Capital Costs  
Item Green Climate 
Fund  BWA  GoB  Total  
Bridgetown 
System  Short -
term Amount  USD39.5m  USD29.9m  - USD69.4m


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 42 
 
 % 57% 43% - 100%  
Medium -
term Amount  USD39.5m  USD29.9m  USD48.0m  USD107.4m  
% 37% 28% 35% 100%  
South 
Coast 
System  Short -
term Amount  - USD2.3m  USD111.3m  USD113.5m  
% - 2% 98% 100%  
Medium -
term Amount  - USD2.3m  USD131.3m  USD133.6m  
% - 1.7%  98.3%  100%  
Total  Short -
term Amount  USD39.5m  USD32.2m  USD111.3m  USD183.0m  
% 22% 18% 60% 100%  
Medium -
term Amount  USD39.5m  USD32.2m  USD179.4m  USD251.0m  
% 16% 13% 71% 100%  
Source: Cashman (2021)  
 
Table 3: Source of Funding for Upgrades and Expansions to the Centralized Systems  
Source of Funds  
Capital Cost Item  Green Climate 
Fund  Govt of 
Barbados  
BWA  Govt of 
Barbados  
Ministry of 
Finance  Total  
Capital Costs Bridgetown  
• Bridgetown Plant Upgrade  
• Renovations and Upgrades  
• Renewable Energy System  
• Reclaimed Water 
Distribution  
• Expansion of Sewer 
Collection System  
o Phase I  
o Phase II  
o Phase III  
o Phase IV  
o Phase V  
Subtotal   
US$38.682  
 
 
 
US$0.840  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
US$39.522   
 
US$1.770  
 
 
 
 
US$7.300  
 
 
 
US$10.070  
US$4.050  
US$2.675  
US$4.050  
 
US$29.915   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
US$48.0001 
US$48.000   
US$38.682  
 
US$1.770  
 
US$0.840  
 
 
US$7.300  
 
 
 
US$10.070  
US$4.050  
US$2.675  
US$4.050  
US$48.000  
US$117.437  
Capital Costs South Coast  
• South Coast Plant Upgrade  
• Renovations and Upgrades  
• Renewable Energy System  
• Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall  
• Reclaimed Water 
Distribution  
• Expansion of Sewer 
Collection System  
Subtotal   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
US$1.410  
 
US$0.840  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
US$2.250   
US$64.050  
 
 
 
 
 
 
US$12.000  
 
US$41.300  
 
US$20.0002 
 
US$131.350   
US$64.050  
 
US$1.410  
 
US$0.840  
 
 
US$12.000  
 
US$41.300  
 
US$20.000  
 
US$133.600  
Total  US$39.522  US$32.165  US$179.350  US$251.037  
 15.7%  12.8%  71.5%  100%  
Source: Cashman (2021)


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 43 
 
 1 Future expenditure for expansion of the sewer collection system to service Greater Bridgetown – 
post 2030.  
2 Expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection system to service the South Coast area – 
2025.  
The planned capital expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection systems for the South Coast and 
Greater Bridgetown would occur after the completion of the upgrades to the two Sewage Treatment Plants.  
This level of concessional financing, given fiscal space a nd the programme on which the GOB is embarked 
upon, is very appropriate when compared to the overall investment being made. It is critical to the realisation 
of the financial and economic benefits that would flow from the programme. The project risk is bei ng 
shouldered by the GOB considering that more than 60% of the financing will come from long -term loans.  
Given the fiscal position of the GOB and the BWA, and the need to provide a platform for low carbon climate 
resilient development means that minimisin g the debt burden is imperative. In this light the level of 
concessionality requested is considered minimal.  
 
The concessionality will benefit the following stakeholders:  
• 155 f armers through increased and assured availability of water for irrigation, enabling the expansion 
of irrigated agriculture for new entrants,  
• Communities through increased employment opportunities,  
• Local businesses supporting the farming sector through increased economic activity,  
• General population through increased f ood availability and security,  
• The BWA through the reduction in the need to exploit additional water resources to support irrigated 
agriculture and placing addition stress on scarce resources while meeting demand for potable water 
supply, exacerbated by th e impact of climate change,  
• Visitors to Barbados through the maintenance and improvement of the marine environment and 
ecosystems,  
• Visitors and the general population through reduced public health risks associated with deterioration 
in bathing water qualit y, 
• The BWA through improved training and capacity to manage the operation and maintenance of 
wastewater systems, minimization of the cost of operation and maintenance of the collection systems 
and sewage treatment plants, and ability to conform to regulato ry requirements concerning quality of 
service and water quality regulations,  
• The BWA through increased income generation through the sale of treated reclaimed water,  
• The Government of Barbados through increased economic activity contributing to revenue inc ome 
by maintaining visitor numbers, increased economic activity and employment in the agriculture 
sector, and stimulation of the circular economy development opportunities,  
• The general population through increased awareness of the impacts of climate change  and 
incentives encouraging conservation, recycling and reuse.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 44 
 
  
49 Cashman, 2021  Dimensions of Sustainability  
The design of this project has strategically included key activities that will foster sustainability even after the 
project  is implemented . A snapshot of the dimensions of sustainability and the key contributing results and/or 
activities of this project are presented in Figure 13. Additional context is provided below, and for more details 
on any referenced activity or output, see Section B.3  
 
Figure 13: Snapshot of the dimensions of sustainability promoted by 3R -CReWS  
 
Economic/Financial Sustainability  
This project recognizes that in the face of adverse climate change related weather conditions, it is important 
to have systems in place to manage and operate the wastewater infrastructure as efficiently as possible. 
Therefore, the following monitoring systems will be implemented by this project to reduce damage to the 
wastewater systems and also promote a culture of preventative maintenance that will extend the lifetime of 
the equipment, reduce operational costs and increase financial sustainability in the long term: (i) the 
development of a robust Computerized Real -time Management System  (CMMS) to establish a core 
electronic data collection, operation and maintenance programme (ii) the implementation of a sewer 
monitoring program to identify sewer segments with a disproportionate amount of wastewater flow to the 
incremental number of conn ections along that segment to mitigate against hydraulic surge impacts and load 
variations as a result of major storm events; and (iii) establish on -site laboratory facilities and personnel at 
the BSTP  to generate influent and effluent water quality data t o inform operations control strategies that 
optimize operations and reduce energy consumption (See output 1.3).  
 
Also, revenue generation will come from the following four sources, all of which will be institutionalized and 
exist beyond the 5 -year timefra me for this project49:  Economic Sustainability
Multiple revenue 
streams -GSC levy, sale 
of nutrients and 
reclaimed water, Feed -in 
Tarrifs
Increased productivityInstitutional Sustainability
Technical training for 
BWA staff
Decision support 
systems -CMMS, EE, 
sewer monitoring
Updated SOPs and 
Operational manual
Risk Management 
Framework in place
Optimal staffing structure
Strengthened 
partnerships with private 
sector
Long term strategy for 
urban water reuse
Legislative review to 
support wastewater 
reuse Social Sustainability
Greater food security 
and health of the 
population
Stronger partnership, 
leadership and 
professionalism in the 
water sectorEnvironmental Sustainability
Safeguarding of 
groundwater quality in 
Zone A
Tertiary quality 
wastewater for reuse, 
including aquifer 
recharge which reduces 
saline intrustion
Reduced vulnerabilities 
to the sewer system and 
therefore reduced 
environmental 
contamination
Reduced GHG 
emissions from 
installation of renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency technologies
Cease disposal of 
wastewater to sea via 
outfallGender Equality
Gender sensitive PEA 
campaign, incentive 
programme, private 
sector engagement 
strategy, water reuse 
strategy, BWA staffing 
structure, project 
webpage, management 
of the RAFF, SOPs and 
operational manual
Diverse stakeholder 
consultations


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 45 
 
  
50 Ibid i. Income generated from GSC levy,  
ii. The sale of nutrients/ fertilizer generated from the treatment of the wastewater,  
iii. From Feed -In Tariffs for renewable energy generated onsite from Photo Voltaic solar panels,  
iv. Sale of reclaimed treated wastewater.  
 
Using the project’s investment in the PV system as an example, the PVs to be installed will generate 1MW 
of PV that will yield 2,063M Wh of clean solar power per year. This is enough to power the plant upgrades 
and contribute to the local power grid, further reducing Barbados’ dependence on diesel for power and GHG 
emissions. The applicable Feed -in Tariff for a PV system of between 1 MW an d 5 MW is 23.25 BBD 
cents/kWh50, which equates to earnings of USD 479,647.50 per year  to offset energy bills and free up 
resources otherwise used for the electricity bill for maintenance of equipment and staff training, as needed.  
 
Further, the BWA, on beha lf of the people and government of Barbados, will take ownership of the major 
outputs of this project as such it will be responsible for ensuring the sustainability of this assets  and their 
operations. As such revenue generated for these investments will b e played back into their operation and 
maintenance and will be complemented with resources  from the Garbage and Sewage Collection Levy 
(GSC) , which was  introduced by GOB in 2019 to cover the cost of operating and maintaining the wastewater 
system . Currentl y, the GSC  collects BD$0.25 per household/day to support operation and maintenance of 
wastewater system.  See the Feasibility and Financial Model for more details on the O&M costs required for 
sustainability of this paradigm  shift in the utilisation of reclaimed water.    
 
At the national level, it is envisaged that the potential for advancing sustainable development (e.g. see 
section D.3 for more details on linkages to the SDGs) through this project will be significant and will result in 
Barbados being a more attractive investment destination for both regional and international tourists. Greater 
water availability will positively impact residents and businesses throughout Barbados and can directly and 
indirec tly lead to greater employment.  
 
The successful impetus to the private sector both through the envisaged measures under this project 
(Output s 4.2 and 4.3 ) and through the development of a circular economy would catalyse  support for the 
development of busin ess opportunities for the private sector, creating job opportunities and having appositive 
multiplier effect for government revenues.  To expand on the approach and expectation of the private sector 
investment, it is envisioned that the private sector will play a critical role in scaling up/replicating the 
decentralized package plants and RO plants along the west coast, implement a waste to energy facility and 
use by-products  of the wastewater in production of fertilizer. The government is committed to de -risking the 
sector to attract private sector investment, including the farmers (e.g. Agricultural Cooperatives), who may 
utilise  reclaimed water and by-products  of wastewater  treatment.  This Project will expand the RAFF to 
support the Private Sector’s engagement in the wastewater sector. For example,  adopting technologies that 
support the delivery and utilization of tertiary reclaimed water. In addition, the RAFF is seen as cr itical 
element to engaging the private sector; however, the existing RAFF needs to examine and expand to 
consider how resources could flow in and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralize 
treatment systems as well as dual pumping, inter alia .   
 
 
Institutional Sustainability  
This project addresses institutional strengthening and sustainability through the following key activities:  
i. Ensuring that up -to-date training is provided to all BWA staff to create a skilled and competent human 
resource pool to manage the upgraded STP (Activity 3.1.1)


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 ii. Integrating decision support systems such as the electronic CMMS information system, a sewer 
monitoring programme, automated controls for improved energy efficiency, on -site laboratory to 
inform bett er decision -making and planning by the BWA (All of output 1.3) and a risk management 
framework (Activity 3.1.3)  
iii. Updating the SOPs and Operational Manual to address the requirements of the upgraded system, 
preventative maintenance, operator safety etc., and  training on same to ensure there is institutional 
knowledge and understanding of the operational procedures (Activities 3.1.2 and 3.1.1, respectively)  
iv. Strengthening BWA’s partnerships with the private sector, civil society and public through a private 
sector engagement strategy and action plan, PEA programme, expansion of the RAFF and a 
designated project website (Activities 4.2.1, 4.3.2, 4.2.3 and 4.3.3, respectively)  
v. Establishing a  gender responsive water and sanitation master plan to guide long term pl anning for 
the sustainable management of the water sector and for further strengthening resilience to climate 
risks (Activity 4.1.2)  
 
  One of the main consideration in the development of the project was the capacity of the BWA to sustainable 
operate and maintain the outputs of this project. The conclusion to retain a CAS treatment process 
considered the O&M cost as well as the capacity of existing BWA staff. The feasibility study identify that the 
CAS had the least O&M cost and the cost of tra ining (re -training) BWA staff would be a fraction of the cost 
if an another treatment process was to be adopted. Further, the BWA already has some capacity to manage 
CAS system up to secondary treatment. By updating the SOPs and providing the incremental t raining the 
capacity of the BWA will be enhance to support the operations and maintenance of the tertiary wastewater 
treatment system.  The BWA is committed to maintaining the human capacity necessary to sustain the 
operations of the upgraded plants.  
Socia l sustainability  
Enhancing stakeholders’ (private sector, farmers, individuals): (I) engagement and buy -in (through the 
engagement strategy and action plan) (ii) awareness and understanding of climate change and the water 
sector (through the PEA and train ing programmes), and (iii) accessibility to funding resources (through the 
RAFF) will collectively change the culture of the water sector in Barbados towards stronger partnerships, 
leadership and professionalism that is needed to continually innovate and a dapt to climate change, as well 
as improve individuals’ well -being and economic viability. These are key elements for promoting social 
sustainability after the project’s resources are used up. As noted above, the water and sanitation master 
plan (Activity 4.1.2) to be developed with ensure there is a long -term plan in place to further strengthen the 
well-being of the population as it relates to the water sector. Also notable is that agriculture continues to 
compete with other sectors for scarce resources su ch as water, land, labour and capital, and the GoB has 
increased its call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of farming as a 
response to climate change. Greater water availability, for irrigation purposes, should also lea d to improved 
food security and health and well -being of the population.  The outputs of Component 4 are critical to social 
acceptance and spur demand. The component target farmers and communities. In particular, the 
development of incentive programme and p ublic awareness. During consultations with farmers, there was 
overwhelming consensus coming out of the discussions. Farmers are supportive of the use of treated 
wastewater.   Farmers have been experiencing the impact of prolonged dry periods, which they say  are 
happening more frequently and they are losing income.   So having access to water would be a great relief 
to them.   Some cited the benefit of the nutrients in the wastewater (See Baseline Report Wastewater 
Demand and Market Analysis).     
 
Environmental  Sustainability  
This project has the potential to significantly increase overall environmental sustainability through the 
following activities:  
i. Producing tertiary quality reclaimed water that is safer for the environment (Activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.1) . 
Previous studies by Irvine, Oxenford and Suckoo (2021) have demonstrated the positive impact that


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 47 
 
  
51 Cashman (2021)  the implementation of centralised wastewater systems have on the marine environment.  The higher 
level of treatment and operation to be achieved through the u pgrading, training and capacity building 
will ensure that the two Sewage Treatment Works continue to make a positive contribution51 
ii. Safeguarding of groundwater quality in Zone A through the installation of two decentralized 
wastewater collection and treatm ent systems (Activity 1.4.1)  
iii. Enhancing knowledge for the expansion of wastewater treatment technologies along the west coast 
for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1)  
iv. Frequently monitoring effluent characteristics and quality prior to reuse (aquifer recharge and/or 
agriculture reuse) which will safeguard groundwater quality and agriculture soil quality (Activity 1.3.2)  
v. Implementing a sewer monitoring programme that can reduce or mitigate vulnerabilit ies from 
excessive flooding and/or stormwater runoff that can otherwise result in environmental pollution from 
“overflowing” of the sewage system (Activity 1.3.1)  
vi. Installing renewable energy and energy efficient technologies (PV, automated controls and slu dge 
dewatering) that will reduce GHG emissions (all of output 2.1)  
vii. Promoting water conservation, recycle, re -use options (Activities 4.2.2, 4.3.1 and 4.3.2)  
 
In summary, with respect to Circular Economy, the use of reclaimed water provides a positive means  of 
reducing demands on water resources. If this facility is not developed, then demand for water would have to 
be met through greater groundwater abstraction, depleting aquifers and enhancing the risk of saline 
intrusion.   
 
The Government of Barbados thr ough the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security have determined the 
TDS concentration of reclaimed wastewater intended for agricultural irrigation applications must be less than 
450 mg/L. Ayers and Westcot in 1985 (See Feasibility Study), has been repea tedly re -referenced for the 
Water Quality for Agriculture guidance, which indicates that regardless of the nature of the soil or application, 
a TDS of less than 450 mg/L is inconsequential, and TDS concentrations of up to 2000 mg/L may have a 
slight to mod erate impact on soil that can be managed or addressed.  This water quality standard  takes  into 
consideration the potential impact on existing irrigation systems that minimize the negative impact on the 
efficiency of the irrigation systems. For example, sprinkler systems are not recommended. However, drip 
irrigation is recommended and supported  due to the characteristics of the TDS standard set by the 
authorities. This is intended to minimizing the chances of system clogs. As part of the monitoring of water 
quality process, the follow activities are critical:    
• Activity 1.2.1:   Install reverse o smosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to reduce the total dissolved 
solids concentration of the reclaimed water produced at the BSTP     
• Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the installation of flow 
measurement and rain -gauging equipment at the BSTP to identify and address sources of inflow and 
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the 
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.   
• Activity 1.3.2: Establi sh on -site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP to generate influent 
and effluent water quality data to inform operations control strategies that optimize operations and 
reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions.    
• Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real -time Management System (CMMS) at the BSTP to 
inform decision making and climate resilient building   
• Activity 1.2.1 is important for bringing down the TDS levels in the water; whereas, Activity 1.3.2 will 
support real time testing and moni toring of water quality, with protocols for shut off if there are 
unfortunate contaminants detected. 1.3.3 will allow for real time monitoring and automatic and remote 
shut-down of the system if need. This include the implementation of meters .


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 48 
 
 The plannin g for long-term assessment and monitoring of residual in the soil under irrigation by reclaimed 
water has already  started. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture is  develop ing protocol and 
procedure for monitoring medium to long -term changes in  soil chemistry. This aspect was discussed during 
stakeholder consultation  sessions and meetings of the T echn ical Working Group . Further, t he monitoring of 
water quality standard will be carried out firstly by BWA at the plant level (operational standards)  and the 
Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with Min istry of Health, through the  Analytical Services Laboratory 
will conduct periodic testing and analyse water and wastewater samples. The Ministry  of Environment 
through the Environment Protection De partment, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Food Security, will  monitor the water quality and enforce codes governing usage of this 
treated wastewater.  
 
Gender Equality  
The issue of gender equality is high on the agenda for this project because issues emerging from the gender 
analysis point to the fact that a gender gap exists within the BWA related to more men than women being 
involved in the technical work of the Wastewater Sector Infrastructure and Services and that BWA appears 
to lack t he human resource, institutional and information capacity to identify the causes of vulnerability 
among women and other vulnerable groups. The youth and community members will be considered beyond 
consultation for training as they will form an integral part of the Training and outreach activities, which is 
expected to result in the long -lasting paradigm shift. In addition, the public education plan and campaign 
being prepared will address all sectors of the community, users of reclaimed water and potential users of 
the produce or services, with targeted messages and sector specific town hall meetings and training.   
 
The project, especially the co -financing component will continue to conform to the BWA’s recruitment policy 
which does not discriminate based on gender, which is also in line with the GCF’s and AE’s policies and 
guidelines on gender and social inclusion. In addition, as an example, the Project will conduct Gender 
training with BWA staff and key stakeholders linked to Activity 3.1.1, inter alia , which aim for a 1:1 
proportional representation of both genders engaged in these activities. The SOPs of the AE and the BWA 
include provisions for representation of both genders as the Gender Action Plan aims to be congruent wit h 
the obligations of the established Gender Action Commitments of the Green Climate Fund, which states: “By 
adopting a gender -sensitive approach in its mandate on climate change, the Fund commits to contributing 
to gender equality, as enshrined in internat ional agreements and national constitutions, and other human 
rights agreements.”   
 
Therefore, the following key activities are earmarked for this project to strengthen gender equality within 
BWA’s operations and the overall management of the water sector i n Barbados:  
i. There will be stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that will aim to 
engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings (all Components)  
ii.  There will be social and gender safeguards to ensure that women, children and the vulnerable 
are protected during community infrastructure improvements (Activity 1.4.1)  
iii. There will be gender sensitive community engagement to ensure that needs of both 
femal e and male headed households are incorporated when installing decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems in the Belle Zone A area and Bellevue Gap Zone A 
(Activity 1.4.1)  
iv. There will be a gender sensitivity training programme for BWA staff (Activity 3.1.1)  
v. The updated SOPs and operational manual to include gender and social inclusion considerations, 
including provisions of the prevention of SGBV (Activity 3.1.2)  
vi. The legislative review will ensure to promote gender equality and limit gender biased legistliat ive 
provisions (Activity 4.1.1)


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 49 
 
  
 vii. The water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private sector will 
collectively mainstream gender   and promote women empowerment, as appropriate (Activities 
4.1.2 and 4.2.1)  
viii. A gender sensitive and  socially inclusive incentive programme will be developed to encourage 
water conservation, recycle, re -use (Activity 4.2.2)  
ix. The management of the expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality as a requirement 
(Activity 4.2.3)  
x. The PEA campaign will be designed to be gender sensitive (Activity 4.3.2)  
xi. The project’s webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where 
possible (Activity 4.3.3)  
 
See Section G.2 for more details on gender mainstreaming in the 3r -CReWS  
 
 Figure 2


---
*Page 56*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
39,390,9 13 USD  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  39,390,913     
(vii) Results -based 
payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
10,608,150   USD  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniorit
y 
Barbados Water 
Authority (BWA)  Grant Gr
ant 
 10,608,150  USD ($)  Enter  
 N/A N/A  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
49,999,063  USD  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max . 250 words, 
approximately 
0.5 page ) Tax Exemptions  
Goods and Services procured with the GCF Proceeds for the implementation of the 
Project will be exempt from eligible taxes and duties accorded under Article XIX and 
Article XXVI of the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) Act, 2015 
and Article 19 of the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean Community Climate Change 
Centre (CCCCC). The BWA, as stat utory body, also enjoys tax exemptions from eligible 
taxes and duties. However, any applic able taxes that is not covered und er the instrument 
establishing the respective  entities, the project shall be borne these cost  and the Fund 
shall not be required to make any additional contribution for the payment of taxes during 
the implementation of th e Project.  
 
Parallel Financing  
The BSTP is public owned and is managed by the BWA, which is a Statutory 
Body, charged with supplying the island with potable water as well as the 
provision of wastewater treatment and disposal services to the sewered areas o f 
Bridgetown and the South Coast. The BWA is also responsible for the monitoring, 
assessment, control and protection of the water resources in the public’s 
interest.  Recalling Table 3; there is approximately USD133 Million in upgrades 
planned for the SCSTP . In an effort to mitigate the effects of climate change on 
the island’s potable and non -potable water supply and  increase resilience to 
climate change and reduce the impact of the primary treated effluent on the


---
*Page 57*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 marine environment, BWA secured funding for  the upgrade of the SCSTP to 
tertiary treatment level that is suitable for crop irrigation and recharge of 
groundwater aquifers through a newly designed and constructed water 
reclamation distribution network system.  Specifically, non -potable water 
reclamation involving use of reclaimed water for agricultural  food crop irrigation 
in River Plantation area and for non -potable aquifer recharge in Christ Church 
aquifer will be advanced. Properly managed water reclamation projects are and 
will continue to be essential for the island’s  sustainable water resource 
management and sustainable development.  
 
In-Kind  
Contributions are not identified in the budget above; however it is envisioned that 
during implementation, the project will benefit from some in -kind contribution from 
the Government of Barbados and the BWA through the provisions of 
meeting/training rooms and the utilities and facilities to facilitate capacity building 
and sensitization events. Further, the BWA mechanical machinery and 
equipment are available and required these may be provided to support the 
smooth implementation of the project activities. The BWA and CCCCC will keep 
track of these in -kind contribution and report on these as deem ed necessary.   
C.2. Financing by component  
Component  Output   Indicative cost  GCF financing  Co-financing  
 million USD ($)   Amount  Financial 
Instrumen
t  Amount  Financial 
Instrumen
t Name of 
Institutions     million 
USD ($)   million USD 
($)  
Component 
1: 
Wastewater 
Reclamation 
and Reuse  Output 1.1 The 
Bridgetown Sewage 
Treatment Plant 
(BSTP) is upgraded 
to treat wastewater 
to a tertiary water -
quality standard.  25,672,660  25,672,660  Grants  -   
Output 1.2 Tertiary 
wastewater available 
to supplement non -
potable use  8,637,000  2,530,000  Grants  6,107,000.00  Grants  GOB/BWA  
Output 1.3 Decision -
support tools and 
infrastructure 
implemented to 
mitigate potential 
climate change risks 
to the wastewater 
collection and 
treatment systems  1,003,375  1,003,375  Grants     
Output 1.4 
Decentralized 
treatment plants or 
cluster treatment 
facilities installed  3,230,000  -  3,230,000.00  Grants  GOB/BWA  
Component 
2: Renewable 
Energy and 
Energy 
Efficiency in Output 2.1 Energy 
efficiency and 
renewable energy 
technologies 
implemented  3,264,000  3,264,000  Grants


---
*Page 58*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 Wastewater 
Treatment  
Component 
3: 
Capabilities 
to operate, 
maintain, 
expand and 
monitor 
wastewater 
and related 
renewable 
energy 
technologies  Output 3.1 Improved 
technical capabilities 
of waste water 
technical personnel 
to operate, maintain 
and monitor and 
implement climate 
change adaptation 
planning strategies 
for wastewater 
management  1,139,056  1,139,056  Grants  -   
Output 3.2 A 
strategic plan is 
developed to guide 
the replication of the 
brackish water RO 
treatment plant 
along the west coast 
corridor  486,000  486,000  Grants  -   
Component 
4: Capacities 
(regulatory, 
governance, 
awareness), 
buy-in and 
ownership 
within the 
private and 
public 
sectors 
improved for 
climate 
resilient 
development 
planning for 
the water 
sector  Output 4.1:  
Governance and 
planning roadmap 
developed to enable 
wastewater reuse in 
the public and 
private sectors.  445,000  149,000  Grants  296,000.00  Grants  GOB/BWA  
Ouput 4.2: 
Mechanisms 
developed/expande
d to encourage the 
adoption of 
wastewater 
treatment and reuse 
applications by 
private individuals 
and businesses  352,000  352,000  Grants  -   
Output 4.3 Gender 
Sensitive Public 
Education and 
Awareness 
Campaign 
Implemented.  858,785  858,785  Grants     
Project 
Management  Project Management 
Resources  2,220,280  1,750,280  Grants  470,000.00  Grants  GOB/BWA  
Monitoring and 
evaluative data 
generation and 
collection activities  160,000  160,000  Grants     
Financial Audits  150,000  150,000  Grants     
Indicative total cost  (USD)  47,618,156  37,515,155.51  10,103,000.00  
Contingency
*                             
2,380,908                                                                 
1,875,757.78                                                                                                              
505,150.00  
Total                           
49,999,063                                                               
39,390,913.29                                                                                                         
10,608,150.00


---
*Page 59*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 * Contingency is expected to cover unforeseeable expenditures and changes related unforeseen adjustment in prices, 
particularly inflationary pressures that outside the control of the project, and unpredictable events during project 
implementation which do not constitute a Major Change. Approval, in writing, for the use of contingency on a case by 
case basis is required from the GCF.  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Capacity Building Activities  
Outcomes 3 and 4 of this project will include targeted capacity building activities. Under outcome 3 
there will be specialized and customized training for BWA employees to be able to operate, manage 
and maintain the upgraded systems installed under this pr oject (Activity 3.1.1). This includes training 
in the PV installations, the CAS equipment upgrades, RO technology implemented, decentralized 
treatment sites equipment installed, automated systems installed such as the CMMS, the sewer 
monitoring instrumenta tion and the updated SOPs, and the operational manual and risk management 
framework to be implemented (See Activities 3.1.2 and 3.1.3, respectively). There will also be training 
in SCADA, which is currently in place but not operable since the BWA does not have the technical 
knowledge or expertise to maintain it. Also, there will be a University of the West Indies Gender 
Sensitivity Training program developed for BWA that examines climate change and the nexus with 
the water sector and gender considerations. Notable is that some of these trainings will also be open 
to the private sector, as appropriate, to support the sustainability of the investments made through 
the RAFF mechanism. This Project will expand the RAFF to support the Private Sector’s engagement 
in the wastewater sector. For example,  adopting technologies that support the delivery and utilization 
of tertiary reclaimed water. In addition, the RAFF is seen as critical element to engaging the private 
sector; however, the existing RAFF needs to examine and expand to consider how resources  could 
flow in and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralize treatment systems as well 
as dual pumping, inter alia .   
 
Under outcome 4, there will be capacity building at two levels: (i) re -education of communities  on how 
to use rec laimed water and best practice for agriculture and  other  non-potable  uses , teachers, 
students, farmers and businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their 
impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importan ce of water reuse activities 
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate resilience (Activity 4.3.1); and (ii) a gender -
sensitive public education and awareness campaign examining the same issues of climate resilience 
and the water sector and the  role of wastewater treatment and reuse, conservation, recycling etc 
(Activity 4.3.2). The key difference is that the first capacity building activity will be more structured, 
such as short courses, whilst the second will be more mass media type informatio n products. See 
Section B.3 (Project description) for more details on these activities.  
 
The combined budget for Activities 3.1.1, 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 is USD1.3 million.  
 
Technology Transfer Activities  
Majority of outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are heavily focused on technology solutions and 
innovations that are instrumental for the move towards a low -emission and climate resilient pathway 
water and wastewater sector in Barbados . Outcome 1 is primarily  focused on upgrades to wastewater 
treatment that will improve its quality to a level that is eligible for reuse functions including aquifer 
recharge and irrigation of agricultural land. The upgrade option selected is the Conventional Activated 
Sludge (Act ivity 1.1.1) with a Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plant (Activity 1.2.1) because of (I) lowest capital 
cost, (ii) lowest power consumption & least Green House Gas associated emissions, (iii) lowest 
expected operator staff time (operating cost), (iv) most familiar t echnology for operations staff, (v) 
ability to meet the Barbados government’s proposed reuse water quality standard, (vi) and simplest 
use of existing infrastructure and process components for the upgrade to the BSTP. Outcome 1 also


---
*Page 60*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 includes investments in  decision support tools, which include a sewer monitoring programme that is 
equipped with flow measurement and rain -gauging equipment at both the Bridgetown and South 
Coast Sewage Treatment Plants to identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer 
(Activity 1.3.1) and a Computerized Real -time Management System (CMMS) to inform decision 
making and climate resilient building (Activity 1.3.3). The final output for outcome 1 (output 1.4) is 
highly innovative in nature since the GOB will be piloting decentralized wastewater collection and 
treatment systems at two “Zone A” locations to produce reclaimed water for domestic/commercial 
non-potable applications. The lessons emerging from this output will be critical for scaling up and 
replicating this approach to wastewater management in communities not connected to the STPs (i.e. 
95% of Barbados)  as well as in other Caribbean countries  
 
All of outcome 2 (installations of PV, automated controls for energy efficiency (EE) and sludge 
dewatering) is a bout renewable energy (RE) and energy efficient technology transfer, which not only 
supports the achievement of GCF’s low -emission impact potential, but the GOB’s goal to have zero 
emission by 2030 as enshrined in the Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP)  2019 -2030.  
 
A key element of technology transfer is having the right incentives and legal framework in place. In 
this regard, activities 4.1.1 (legislative review) and 4.2.2 (incentive programme) can be considered 
as key.  
 
The combined budget for Activi ties 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.3.1, 1.3.3, 1.4.1, 4.1.1, 4.2.2, 4.3.2 and all of 
outcome 2 is  USD42.9 million.


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framew ork.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Contribution to the Fund’s Objectives  
The 3R -CReWS project is directly aligned to the Fund’s strategic vision of promoting the paradigm shift 
towards low -emission and climate -resilient development pathways in the context of sustainable development 
and supporting developing countries, like Barb ados, to implement the requirements of the Paris Agreement 
and the UNFCCC. Overall, the project is anticipated to have an impact on 136,220  direct beneficiaries and  
indirect ly benefi t 141,601 persons . Given  the importance of water to the health sector and the two main 
productive sectors of Barbados - agriculture and tourism, the importance of this project for promoting 
sustainable development is underscored.   
 
Mitigation Impact  
It is expected that this project can avoid about 35,275 tCO 2e over 25 years ( See Annex 22  for calculations). 
The policy and regulatory environment in place in Barbados are currently highly conducive for the use of 
renewable energy technologies. The GOB is pursuing a goal of zero e mission by 2030 and the policy for a 
climate -neutral Barbados is regulated in the Electric Light and Power Act (ELPA), which prescribes feed -in 
tariffs related to solar, land -based wind, anaerobic digestion and solid biomass. This project will maximize 
the renewable energy sources that can benefit from feed -in tariffs whilst also facilitating a shift to low -
emission sustainable development pathway in Barbados. The noted CO 2 equivalent emission reduction from 
this project is purely based on the 1 MW of PV to  be installed to offset the increased power consumption 
associated with the upgrades. However, it is also notable that EE will be increased through the installation 
of variable frequency drives, EE pumps and a sludge dewatering system. There is not adequat e information 
available at the proposal stage, such as characteristics of the sludge, to estimate reduced emissions due to 
EE; however, the monitoring plan for the project aims to track the changes in EE over the lifespan of the 
project.  
 
Also notable is that the BSTP is estimated to consume about 4,500 kWh of energy per day which equates 
to energy costs of USD470,000 per year52. Currently there is 0.18M W of PV power installed and through this 
project, an additional 1MW of PV panels  will mounted to off -set the demands of the upgraded system.  
 
Adaptation Impact  
All of the components of this project are designed to contribute to increased climate -resilient sustainable 
development with emphasis on the water and wastewater sector. The following specific detail s per 
component of this project should be noted and how they promote climate -resilient sustainable development 
in Barbados:  
• Component 1  will not only install wastewater treatment technologies that are energy efficient, but 
several decision support tools wi ll be implemented to support the management and maintenance of 
the upgraded STP, particularly for hydrometeorological hazards such as rainfall, including severe 
storms. The decentralized package collection and treatment systems that will be constructed in two 
communities located in Zone A will address severe water shortages for approximately 22553 
households and is considered to be a “good demonstration” of strengthening the adaptive capacities 
of individuals and businesses to climate risks associated with water availability  
 
52 Cashman, 2021  
53 The 225 households are to benefit in terms of “reducing water shortages” entails direct and indirect benefits from the decent ralized treatment facilities 
by establishing access to wastewater treatment facilities, thus resulting in reclaimed water for non -potable purposes and reducing the strain on the 
potable water resources. In addition, this also increases their resilience to water shortages, as additional non -potable water resources would be available.


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 • Component 2  is primarily focused on renewable energy and energy efficiency , however, climate 
resilience is being promoted in the infrastructure installed, where appropriate, for example the PV 
systems will utilize solar panels resistant of at least Category 3 hurricane.  
• Components 3 and 4  will collectively create an enabling env ironment for the implementation of 
climate -responsive wastewater technologies and the use of reclaimed water. This will be achieved 
through the strengthening of (i) institutional and regulatory systems (ii) awareness of climate threats 
and risk -reduction p rocesses and (iii) adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. In 
terms of institutional strengthening, the targeted training for operators will promote awareness of 
water availability and the nexus with climate variability and change and SOPs  to be developed will 
be mindful of climate risks posted to the upgraded system and measures to mitigate/manage these 
risks. The legislative review will ensure to promote climate change and the water sector as well as 
identify any gaps for further strength ening of climate resilience. The public re -education and 
awareness programmes will also highlight the nexus between water availability, climate change and 
the role of reclaimed water in building resilience. This critical for enhancing knowledge and attitud e 
toward reclaim water as the famers, schools and communities will be engaged through various 
medium, including formally organised events, training sessions, structure weekly TV and radio 
programmes, and social media.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
3R-CReWS paradigm shift  
This project aims to enable a  paradigm shift in the  wastewater management practices of Barbados that 
includes the use of low carbon and climate resilient water and energy management technologies and 
strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved to enhance the health, 
wellbeing and productivity of Barbadians. Based on the TOC,  this will be realized through four outcomes that 
are inter -dependent and complementary to provide a holistic approach to achieving this goal. The medium -
term results (outcomes) of this project will enable the technology transfer required for adaptation to , and 
mitigation of , climate change and will establish the foundation for sustainability, innovation and market 
transformation through the strengthening of (i) governance and legislative frameworks, (ii) technical 
capacities and capabilities among the key stakeholders of the project, and (iii) private sector and public buy -
in and leadership. For more details at the output and activity level in Sections B.2 (a) and B.3.  
 
Achieving this paradigm shift required the project design  to place emphasis towards put ting processes, 
structures, stakeholders, knowledge and systems in place that would catalyse  scalability, replicability, 
learning, and an enabling environment. The sections below demonstrate how the project addresses these 
areas to increase the paradigm sh ift potential.  
 
Scaling -up and replication  
In the context of Barbados, the interest in the use of reclaimed water has been documented for some time; 
for example, the IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was drafted in 2008, identified the need to encourage 
reclamation of wastewater as a key recommendation from stakeholder consultations. Further, additional 
interviews that were undertaken during the PPF phase of this project confirmed that there is still strong 
support for the use of reclaimed water for non -potable uses. Examples of types of non -potable uses and 
level of support by interviewees are depicted in the Figure 14 below.


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
  
Figure 14: types of non -potable uses and level of support by interviewees  
Source: Feasibility  Study Report (2021)  
 
Apart from a clear signal of interest, including at the policy level; the demand for reclaimed water from just 
the perspective of the agriculture sector is high. For instance, the overall estimated volume of reclaimed 
water that will become available (supply) from the upgrade to the BSTP is 5000 m3/day (baseline scenario) 
with a projected 21,900 m3/day by 2050 and noting that in the southern part of Barbados alone, there is at 
least 2,700 hectares54 of land eligible for irrigation, and  given that the irrigation water needs is between 35 
to 50 m3/hectare/day, then a minimum of 94,500 m3/day and a maximum of 118,500 m3/day would be 
required  (demand)55. The implication of these figures is that the demand for reclaimed water for agricultura l 
irrigation outweighs the volume that will be made available by this project; this high demand is testament of 
the urgent need and high potential for scalability and replicability of this project.  
 
Further, this project’s scalability and replicability wi ll be enhanced by specifically targeting a combination of 
activities targeting private sector engagement (see more details in Section B.3, Output 4.2 and some of 
Output 4.3) since they can have an important role in scaling the decentralized wastewater coll ection and 
treatment systems in areas not serviced by the BSTP or SCSTP. Recalling that these two plants only serve 
5% of the population of Barbados, then the scope for scaling this technology is expansive.   
 
Given that there is existing interest in the u se of treated wastewater, coupled with the types of activities 
targeted by this project that will enhance opportunities for the private sector and households to advance the 
application of wastewater treatment technologies, then this project is further cons idered to have high 
potential for scaling up without equally increasing the total costs of implementation.  
 
Further, the highly innovative nature of this project provides strong potential for replication across the 
Caribbean. It should be underscored that  Barbados is a role model for the Caribbean leading in many 
development areas, in particular, the country’s approach to climate change mitigation and adaptation. A 
crucial example is the Barbados’ Roof to Reef programme (R2R). which has been recently appla uded by the 
GCF Executive Director, Dr. Glemarec. In a recent mission he stated that “We are indeed extremely 
interested in the Roofs to Reefs Programme approach because it could serve as a model to a number of 
countries on how to integrate water, land, ag riculture, energy in a conservative approach. So for me this visit 
 
54 2,700 is the total hectares of ln is eligible for  irrigation in the southern part  of the island; however, this project is delivering water to 235 hectares.  
55  Cashman, 2021


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 is worth gold…” 56. This is to say that lessons and recommendations emerging from this project, which is 
aligned to the delivery of the R2R, can provide guidance and serve as a model for other Caribbean countries 
that are also exposed to the same climate risks and effects.  
 
Knowledge Sharing and Learning  
A majority of the components of this project have activities to support the creation or strengthening of 
knowledge, collective learning processes or institutions. Component one will include the installation of 
several decis ion-making tools to address data gaps that exist and facilitate enhanced management of the 
upgraded STP. For example, the on -site laboratory at BWA (Activity 1.3.2) for monitoring influent and effluent 
will collect data that is important for promoting tran sparency and accountability in terms of treated wastewater 
quality, which in turn, will have an important role in building and maintaining consumers’ trust in wastewater 
as a resource and the overall impact of this project and beyond its life. There are al so important monitoring 
systems that will be installed that will provide data on flow rates (Activity 1.3.1) for better managing climate 
change related risks that can impact on the wastewater system. The resulting datasets from the various 
monitoring syste ms will not only address a serious data gap that exists at the BWA, but more importantly, it 
will allow for enhanced estimations of wastewater characteristics and the performance of the upgraded 
system, including the impacts of climate change and GHG emiss ions (from biosolids). Components three 
and four are heavily focused on training of technical wastewater personnel and Public Education and 
Awareness (PEA), respectively. The former is important for strengthening institutions and the latter for further 
strengthening buy -in for the adoption of wastewater technologies and use of reclaimed water. This project 
will also have a monitoring and evaluation plan and a dedicated webpage (Activity 4.3.3) for reporting and 
sharing of lessons and best practices.  
 
Also notable is that the President of Barbados, who was the Chair of the Conference of Heads of Government 
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) between January 1st and June 30th, 2020, serves as the Lead 
Head of Government within CARICOM, bearing responsib ility for the CARICOM Single Market and Economy 
(CSME) 57. This provides a conduit for the President to share innovative technologies and case studies, such 
as this project, among other Heads of Government for visibility and replication. In addition, the r ole of the 
CCCCC, a CARICOM  Specialized Agency, as the Accredited Entity that will implement this project means 
that they are also well positioned to share lessons on this project for replications in other CARICOM  States.  
The BWA is member of The Caribbean  Water and Wastewater Association (CWWA), which is a regional 
non-governmental organization established by an Act of Parliament in Trinidad & Tobago in 1991. The 
CWWA is a grouping of water, wastewater and solid waste professionals in the public and privat e sectors. 
Through the avenue the BWA will share the lessons learnt. Further, the project will develop a project website, 
which is critical knowledge management and dissemination tool. Lastly, the CCCCC as regional organization 
is home to the largest repos itory of climate change data and information, including lessons learnt, for 
CARICOM member states. The lessons learnt from this project will be shared with other countries in region.  
 
Creating an Enabling Environment  
Primarily components 3 and 4 of this pr oject will have long lasting effects on the sustainability of outcomes 
and results beyond completion of the intervention. Under component three, investments in technical 
capacities to operate, maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable energy techno logies being 
implemented is key for sustainability. This is why customized training certification will be developed by this 
project in collaboration with academic institutions for access by all BWA employees with considerations for 
access by contractors, p roject partners, and other key stakeholders in Barbados. Having a cadre of highly 
trained operators at the BWA will ensure that there is a well -developed preventative maintenance (PM) 
program to extend the life of the equipment and to keep it functioning a t the design level to maintain effluent 
 
56 https://barbadostoday.bb/2021/10/26/bdos -project -model -hailed -as-best -practice -for-climate -change -mitigation/   
57 This is an arrangement among the CARICOM Member States for the creation of a single enlarged economic space through the removal of  restrictions 
resulting in the free movement of goods, services, persons, capital and technology .


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 quality and reduce any environmental impacts or health and safety issues. Majority of component four is 
designed to strengthen the enabling environment. Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is 
awareness o f the up -to-date legislation, mechanisms are in place bolstering private sector engagement in 
the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology through various approaches (engagement 
strategy, incentive programme, expanding the RAFF and targete d PEA materials). All of these activities are 
considered to be essential in light of the baseline situation and once implemented successfully, the national 
capacity would be strengthened to sustain and scale up the use of wastewater technologies and reclai med 
water in Barbados.   
 
Regulatory Framework and Policies  
The GOB, as an indication of their commitment to advancing water security in Barbados, has updated several 
legislations (See details in Section B.3, Output 4.1). The aim of this project is to revi ew them and outline a 
road map for promoting them as well as highlighting recommendations for addressing any gaps identified, 
particularly as it relates to ensuring sustainability of the results of this project. Further, a water and sanitation 
master plan will be developed, which is a strategic planning document that will give life to the recently 
updated legislations. Collectively, these outputs will help to strengthen the overall regulatory and policy 
frameworks governing wastewater in Barbados.  
 
Contrib ution to National Climate -Resilient Development Pathways  
Component two of this project strongly supports the achievement of the Barbados National Energy Policy 
(BNEP) 2019 -2030, which aims to achieve the 100% renewable energy and zero emission by 2030. 
Centralized wastewater management relies on expensive high -emission electricity supplied from 
conventional power plants that use fossil resources, which not only increases operational costs but also 
contributes to global warming.  
 
This project is also in support of the achievement of the R2RP. The R2RP provides the overarching 
framework that allows the integrated approach to addressing the negative impacts of climate change. The 
R2RP is the Government’s sustainable development model for the next decade and represents the country 
programme for Barbados. T he primary focus is on improving the social and environmental circumstances of 
the people in Barbados. The R2RP will enhance the country’s ability to recover from climatic events and is 
hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter, Water, Energy, Waste, Land use,  and Ecosystems Management. This 
project is in alignment with 4 (Water, Energy, Waste and Ecosystems Management) of the 6 thematic areas. 
Notable is that the thematic areas under the R2RP are also aligned to Barbados’ Nationally Determined 
Contribution (ND C) priority areas.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Linkages between 3R -CReWS and the SDGs  
The benefits and priorities of this project are fully aligned with several SDGs. A mapping of the project results 
to the SDGs shows that there is alignment with 8 out of the 17 SDG goals. See details in the Table 4 below.  
 
Table 4: Linkages of the Project to the SDG Goals and Targets  
 
Benefits and Priorities of 3R -
CReWS  Linkage to SDG 
Goals  Linkage to SDG Targets  
Overall, the four components of 
this project aspire to achieve 
Goal 6, 13 and 17 through the 
use of carbon neutral and climate 
resilient water a nd energy Goal 6  
CLEAN WATER 
AND SANITATION  
  6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing 
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release 
of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the 
proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially 
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally


---
*Page 66*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 management technologies and 
strategies that ensures water is 
protected, managed, recycled, 
reused, and conserved  6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources 
management at all levels, including thr ough 
transboundary cooperation as appropriate  
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water -related 
ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, 
rivers, aquifers and lakes  
6. By 2030, expand international cooperation and 
capacity -building support to developing countries in 
water - and sanitation -related activities and 
programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, 
water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and 
reuse technologies  
6. B Support and strengthen the participation of local 
commu nities in improving water and sanitation 
management  
Goal 13  
CLIMATE ACTION  
  13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to 
climate -related hazards and natural disasters in all 
countries  
13. A Implement the commitment undertaken by 
developed -country  parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of 
mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all 
sources to address the needs of developing countries 
in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and 
transparen cy on implementation and fully 
operationalize the Green  
13. B Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon 
as possible  
Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective 
climate change -related planning and management in 
least developed countries and  small island developing 
States, including focusing on women, youth and local 
and marginalized communities  
The upgrades to the BSTP 
(achieving tertiary reclaimed 
water quality and renewable 
energy use) and the 2 
decentralized treatment systems 
to be insta lled in Zone A are in 
support of the transfer and 
dissemination of environmentally 
sound technologies  Goal 17. 
STRENGTHEN THE 
MEANS OF 
IMPLEMENTATION 
AND REVITALIZE 
THE GLOBAL 
PARTNERSHIP 
FOR  
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT  17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination 
and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to 
developing countries on favourable terms, including on 
concessional and preferential terms, as mutually 
agreed  
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse  
The p roduction of high -quality 
reclaimed water suitable for 
reuse by agriculture farms in 
Barbados will be particularly Goal 2  
ZERO HUNGER  2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production 
systems and implement resilient agricultural practices 
that increase productivity and production, that help 
maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for


---
*Page 67*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 beneficial during the dry season 
and drought periods, which are 
projected to be more severe due 
to climate change.    adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, 
drought , flooding and other disasters and that 
progressively improve land and soil quality  
Less wastewater will be sent to 
the marine environment via 
outfalls  Goal 11  
SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES  11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita 
environmental impact of cities, including by paying 
special attention to air quality and municipal and other 
waste management  
Component 2: Renewable Energy and energy efficiency in wastewater treatment  
A high priority of this project is to 
promote renewable energy to 
offset the additional energy 
needs of the upgraded system 
while contributing to GHG 
emission reduction  Goal 7  
AFFORDABLE 
AND CLEAN 
ENERGY  
  7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of 
renewable energy in the global energy mix  
7.3 B y 2030, double the global rate of improvement in 
energy efficiency  
7. B By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade 
technology for supplying modern and sustainable 
energy services for all in developing countries, in 
particular least developed countries, sma ll island 
developing States, and land -locked developing 
countries  
The upgraded BSTP will be 
retrofitted with decision making 
tools and infrastructure that 
optimizes performance of the 
upgraded system.  Goal 9  
INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE  9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit 
industries to make them sustainable, with increased 
resource -use efficiency and greater adoption of clean 
and environmentally sound technologies and industrial 
processes, with all countries ta king action in 
accordance with their respective capabilities  
9.a Facilitate sustainable and resilient infrastructure 
development in developing countries through 
enhanced financial, technological and technical 
support to African countries, least developed c ountries, 
landlocked developing countries and small island 
developing States  
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related renewable 
energy technologies  
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy -in and ownership within the private 
and public sectors are improved for climate resilient development planning for the water sector.  
Training, PEA and employment 
opportunities to promote equal 
opportunities for men and 
women.  
The legislative review will include 
recommendations for enhancing 
equal opportunities and access to 
men and women in the water and 
wastewater sector. Also, the 
water  and sanitation master plan 
will take into consideration social 
and gender related risks in  the Goal 5  
GENDER 
EQUALITY  
 
GOAL 4  
 LIFELONG 
LEARNING 
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR ALL  5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and 
equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of 
decision making in political, economic and public life  
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and 
enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender 
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls 
at all levels


---
*Page 68*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 design and prioritization of water 
reuse strategies.  
    
 
In addition to the foregoing, the impact potential of this project from an environmental, social, economic and 
gender -sensitive development perspective is highlighted below.  
 
• Environmental co -benefits  
- This project can avoid approximately 35,275 tCO 2e over the estimated 25 years’  lifespan of the 
PV to be installed  
- Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent meet environmental standards for use by 
agriculture sector and aquifer recharge  
- Improved air quality in the areas in proximity of the  plants from the enhanced systems to deal 
with biosolids.  
- Reduced groundwater contamination at the sites within Zone A benefiting from decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems  
- Increase groundwater supply by using the reclaimed water to replenish aquifers  thereby creating 
a greater amount of potable water and increasing water security though indirect potable reuse.  
- Reduced wastewater runoff and nutrient loading in the marine environment.  
 
• Economic co -benefits  
- Construction works to be done under this project at the BSTP and 9km pipeline will create jobs 
and new opportunities for local business, which will lead to positive impacts on local income, 
increased trading activities, empowerment of local contractors and suppliers. Construction will 
create more  than 100 temporary jobs which is significant considering the size of Barbados’ active 
population (~100 thousand persons), all of which should be recruited locally. To this number, 
dozens more temporary jobs will be added from the Consultancies related to baseline studies and 
strategic plans to be developed under this project. Whilst these will be open to international 
tender, there are local Universities and technical experts that exist and could potentially secure 
some of the contracts  
- As a statutory inst itution of the Government of Barbados, the  project will reduce, in the short and 
medium, the demand for foreign exchange and external debt financing. The mix of financing 
instruments being use for development in the water and wastewater sector (no limited to 3R -
CReWS) will aid in easing the fiscal constraints  facing the country.  
- Increase in energy security and the achievement of low -carbon operations at the BSTP will 
reduce operational costs  
- Training will enhance preventative maintenance, which will extend the life cycle of the equipment 
and help to reduce breakdown maintenance that can come with a high financial and 
environmental cost  
- There should be increased private sector interest and engagement in the adoption of wastewater 
management technologie s and use of reclaimed water and other by-products . This will promote 
technology transfer and the emergency of a market related to wastewater sector that will generate 
green jobs and have positive impacts on the economy.  
 
• Social co -benefits  
- There will be an increase in potable water security by eliminating potable water demands for 
applications that can use non -potable reclaimed water, as well as the increased use of reclaimed 
water would also allow the agricultural industry to be more resili ent to the impacts of climate 
change.   
- Improve awareness and buy -in from the public, farmers, teachers, students, businesses, tourisms 
and stakeholders (including the BWA) associated


---
*Page 69*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 - Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent quality meets he alth standards.  
- Improved data (from flow meters, laboratory tests, CMMS) will enhance evidence -based decision 
making as it relates to the management of the BSTP for meeting the needs of its stakeholders  
- The primary use of the water will be for irrigation  purposes; however, when the demand for the 
reclaimed water decreases the water will be used to recharge the aquifer. It is important to note 
that although the primary use is for agricultural purposes, the recharge of the aquifers is 
important; however, us e for agriculture decreases the demand pressures on the aquifers.      
 
• Gender -sensitive development impact  
- Gender -sensitive development is a priority for this project as evident by its investment in long term 
strategies and plans for the water sector that promote gender equality and women empowerment 
and/or gender related risks to amplify the project’s gender s ensitive development impact.  
- A gender sensitive PEA campaign will ensure stakeholders are aware of their gendered impact 
on water quality and quantity (availability) as well as the gendered effects of climate change on 
the water sector. Appropriate medium s for information dissemination (including the project’s 
webpage on BWA website) will be utilized to ensure that women and men and specific vulnerable 
groups have access to the information  
- The project will result in increased  participation of women  in the production and use of reclaimed 
water .  
- More details on the gender mainstreaming activities are details at sections B.6 (Exit Strategy and 
Sustainability) and G.2 (Gender Assessment and Action Plan)  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Vulnerability of Barbados  
Barbados exhibits many of the characteristics of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) that makes it 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change and other extreme hydro -meteorological events. These 
characteristics include relative geographical location, sm all physical size, concentrations of population and 
infrastructure in narrow coastal areas, restricted economic base and reliance on natural resources, combined 
with inadequate, technical and institutional capacity for adaptation (Mimura et al. 2007). Majo rity of 
Barbados’s critical infrastructure, population and economic activity is located within the coastal zone. 
Specifically, over 60% of the island’s total population is located in the three coastal parishes of St. James, 
St. Michael and Christ Church on  the west and south coasts. Therefore, the vulnerability of the population 
and critical infrastructure to sea level rise, storm surge and inundation is high as a result of its location.  
 
Environmental risks : Barbados faces the adverse effects of climate c hange and natural hazards, with their 
attendant economic and social challenges, including unsustainable debt levels, arising in part from extreme 
weather events and slow onset events impacting national income flows, increasing indebtedness and 
impairing re payment capacity. For those reasons and given that the climate crisis affects both the natural 
environment as well as the social and economic stability of the country, Barbados considers climate change 
to be a significant threat to its growth and prosperit y. When vulnerability is examined as an aggregate 
function of demographic and socio -economic inputs, this country is among those Caribbean nations most 
vulnerable to climate change. Further, there are factors unique to the country that add to or further co mplicate 
its environmental risks, and include, among others58: 
• Water scarcity as a result of Barbados’s unique hydrogeology;  
• Relatively early socio -economic development compared to other SIDS in the region, which has led 
to a highly modified natural environment, unsustainable development practices in the past, loss of 
ecosystem services, lack of green spaces, ageing infrastructu re and housing stock, among others; 
and,  
 
58 Stennett -Brown (2019) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0219250.g008


---
*Page 70*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
   
 • High population density, which leads to high demand for already scarce resources, competition for 
space, exacerbated risk of natural hazards, etc.  
Social and economic risks : Climate change will impact already vuln erable groups disproportionately, 
including youth and women, as well as lower income communities. Alongside the direct environmental effects 
of climate change, the following social and economic impacts are equally important:  
• Health: including increased hea t stress and greater prevalence of water and vector -borne diseases;  
• Tourism: including damage to coastal tourism infrastructure, biodiversity and landscape. Any 
negative change in the quality of these tourism products will impact on the sector’s desirabili ty, 
demand and competitiveness.  
• Water resources: reduced water availability for the population of Barbados resulting from drought or 
groundwater contamination from flooding, soil or pollutant infiltration or saline intrusion; and  
Fishery and agricultural i ndustries: loss of domestic and/or international competitiveness resulting 
from drought, flooding and storm damage, saline intrusion, pest and invasive species outbreaks and 
spread, and ecosystem destruction.  
This project directly addresses the risks of re duced water resources, which are further amplified by climate 
change, through wastewater recycling and reuse, associated with climate change in Barbados. This is a 
dilemma currently being faced by all persons in Barbados, albeit the vulnerable groups that this project will 
address include farmers. The island’s drinking water supply is used extensively by small farmers as their 
irrigation water supply. There is extensive use of conventional sprinkler systems and drip irrigation systems 
since the government o ffers rebate incentives for the use of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems but there is 
no surface irrigation (basin, furrow, flood recession) in the conventional sense, but the term is used to include 
the use of garden -hose flooding and hand -watering; a nd there is little reuse of wastewater for irrigation. It 
should further be recognized that women, who are among the most vulnerable to climate change, comprise 
majority of the labour force involved in land preparation, weeding, crop protection and irrigat ion59. 
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country  
The Inter -American Development Bank’s Barbados Survey of Living Conditions 2016/2017 found that overall 
levels of poverty were rising, up from 15% in 2010 to 17%. A further 11% of the population was considered 
to be vulnerable. The Survey estimated that 21% of women were poor while 14% of men were poor. In 
addition, 13% of women were considered vulnerable while 10% of men were considered vulnerable. Female 
poverty and vulnerability stem s both from direct and indirect discrimination, in the workplace and in social 
contexts. The 2010 Country Assessment of Living Conditions found that 32% of children in Barbados live in 
poverty. The child poverty rate was nearly double for those households in which females were the main 
income earners than in those in which a male was the highest income earner: 41% compared to 22%60.  
The overall unemployment rate is estimated to be around 10%, with female unemployment rate at 8.5% and 
male unemployment rate  at 11.6%. Women were also more likely than men to be under -employed: 1.7% of 
employed women would work more hours, compared to 1.6% of employed men. Unpaid family workers tend 
to be exclusively female61. This situation has been exacerbated since the onset of the COVID pandemic, as 
evident by the findings of a rapid assessment survey undertaken by the IDB in June 2020 which indicated 
that almost half of respondents that were employed before the pandemic r eported losing their job (IDB 2020). 
Not surprisingly, the shock affected low -income households more harshly (5 % reported job losses) 
compared to middle and high -income ones (40% and 28%, respectively) 62. The adverse fiscal and GDP 
impact of the pandemic  has been significant. While the government achieved the targeted primary balance 
surplus equivalent to 6% of GDP for the fiscal year 2019/20, the current account deficit increased to 6.2% 
and real economic activity contracted by some 18% during 2020 and 3 % in the first quarter of 2021, as the 
 
59 FAO. 2015. AQUASTAT Country Profile – Barbados. Food  and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Rome, Italy  
60 UNDP, UNICEF, UNWomen (2020). Barbados Covid -19 Heat Report. Human and Economic Assessment of Impact  
61 Ibid 
62 World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Globa l Practices.


---
*Page 71*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 sharp decline in tourism negatively impacted the economy as a whole63. With a global economic recession 
extending well into 2021, the outlook is negative.  
Also notable is that between 2020 and 2021 alone, Barbados ha s had to manage the impacts suffered from 
the synergies between the pandemic and two other crises: (1) the volcanic ash crisis, following the eruption 
of La Soufrière in neighbouring  St. Vincent and the Grenadines in early 2021, which has severely affected  
Barbados’ agricultural sector, and more temporarily business and health and (2) the passage of Category 1 
Hurricane Elsa on July 1, 2021 that was the first in 65 years causing widespread housing stock damage and 
loss of key utilities such as power, intern et and water causing further reduced productivity of key sectors 
during the pandemic. The effect of these three shocks to the economy of Barbados coupled with its high 
level of indebtedness will stymie  the GOB’s capacities and resources to adapt to the fur ther climate impacts 
that will inevitably follow. This project is considered to be timely in advancing the much -needed adaptation 
to climate change, as well as enabling Barbados to meet its aspirational goal to achieve a fossil fuel -free 
economy and to red uce GHG emissions across all sectors to as close to zero as possible by 2030.  
Furthermore, a recent assessment of the water and wastewater sector in Barbados revealed that there is 
limited human and financial resources which limit the ability to monitor a nd enforce compliance with legal 
and regulatory requirements pertaining to water and wastewater management in Barbados. Further, there is 
need for better policy coordination across sectors particularly with respect to economic development 
planning; tourism  and agricultural development planning need to consider water availability and wastewater 
management issues64. As such, a key component of this project is to provide the requisite training to the 
operational staff at the BWA to ensure they can operate and maintain the new technologies to be installed.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The GOB ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 and the 
Kyoto Protocol in 2000. In September 2015, Barbados communicated its first Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC Secretariat, then on 22 April 2016, Barbados signed and ratified the 
Paris Agreement, which entered into force on 4 November 2016. The ambitions of the P aris Agreement to 
limit the average temperature increase to 1.5 °C compared to pre -industrial temperatures meant that the 
overall level of ambition in 2015 INDCs would be too low65. Notwithstanding Barbados' historically low level 
of responsibility for the  increase of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, the GOB, in its 2019 
Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) and Implementation Plan, have set the aspirational goal to achieve 
a fossil fuel -free economy and to reduce GHG emissions across all s ectors to as close to zero as possible 
by 2030.   
In the area of climate change adaptation, Barbados maintains several important legal frameworks. Broadly 
speaking, adaptation in Barbados is framed within the following legal tools: The Proclamation of the Planning 
and Development Act, and the 2021 Physical Development Plan (PDP), which includes climate change 
considerations for the first time and has been already approved by the Cabinet. The 2021 PDP addresses 
the critical impacts of cl imate change on Barbados through policies and strategies that enable the people to 
thrive and remain resilient under changing climate conditions. The Roofs -to-Roofs Programme (R2RP) 
operationalizes the PDP and provides the vehicle through which public inve stment will be directed. R2RP 
objectives are to:  
(i) Make low - and middle -income homes more resilient to extreme weather events as well as possible 
loss of the electricity grid and potable water distribution systems;  
(ii) Increase freshwater storage capacity and water use efficiency;  
 
63 2021 Barbados NDC Update (July 2021)  
64 GEF (2019). National Package for Barbados under the CReW+: an integrated approach to water and wastewater management using innovative sol utions 
and promoting financing mechanisms in the Wider Caribbean Region (RG -G1016) Project  
65 GOB (2021). Barbados 2021 Update of the First Nationally Determined Contribution. Available at: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Barbados%20First/2021%20Barbados%20NDC%20update%20 -
%2021%20July%202021.pdf . Accessed 20 November 2021


---
*Page 72*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 (iii) Reduce carbon emissions through the deployment of distributed renewable energy generation;  
(iv) Decrease land -based sources of marine pollution;  
(v) Implement more sustainable land (and marine space) use practices;  
(vi) Make critical u tility, water and sanitation and road infrastructure climate resilient; and  
(vii) Restore the reduced coral reef ecosystem services particularly on the west and south coasts of the 
island.  
This project directly supports the achievement of objectives 3, 4 and 6 o f the R2RP.  
Also, the Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013 -2020  analysed structural, systemic and 
external factors that influence and impede sustainable growth in the Barbadian economy and proposes a 
series of adjustments aimed at achieving reform , recovery and sustainability in the Barbadian economy 
through new development pathways.  The following sections of this Strategy have been identified to be 
critically addressed by this project: section 2.1 Tourism, 2.2 Agriculture, 2.6 Reduction of GHGs, 3 .1 
Education and Training, 3.8 Environmental Sustainability and Green Economy. These sections are also 
aligned with the Barbados’ National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) , which was approved by Cabinet in 
May 2012. The primary goal of the NCCP is to establish  a national process for adapting to climate change 
effects and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions over the short, medium and long term, in a manner that 
is coordinated and consistent with the broader sustainable development aspiration which was one of the  
mitigation demonstration measures approved by the National Climate Change Committee.  
In addition, climate change adaptation and mitigation actions are incorporated into the following: White Paper 
on the Development of Tourism in Barbados and National Adap tation; Coastal Zone Management Plan; 
Storm Water Management Plan. Important to note that recent Cabinet Papers have included approval to 
upgrade the South Coast Sewage Treatment Works to tertiary level treatment and a water reuse policy 
paper. Green paper s under development include a revision of the Groundwater Zoning Policy to change the 
definition and extent of the existing zones, the development of an integrated wastewater management policy, 
a stormwater management policy and a nearshore management poli cy. The aim of these initiatives is to 
create a framework for the integrated management of water resources (IWRM). In addition to this, the BWA 
has received funding to develop a Water and Wastewater Management Master Plan. Overall, there is an 
impetus to o verhaul the management of the water sector and to address the institutional challenges brought 
to the fore by the 2015 -16 drought and sewerage crisis on the South Coast that had become manifest over 
the last five years.  In 2020, a Government Green Paper “Water Protection and Land Use Zoning Policy” 
(MEWR, 2020) set out proposals for changes in the Zoning taking into account the emerging threats, 
proposing changes to the zoning and requirements for treatment of wastewaters .  The Green Paper marks 
a move towards a system where contamination of the groundwater is controlled at source. This entails: 1) 
prohibiting suck wells as the primary means of wastewater treatment, 2) development of communal 
wastewater treatment facilitie s, and 3) provision of guidance for wastewater treatment. Further, the 
Government of Barbados (GOB) enacted a National Water Reuse Policy (NWRP), which states that “the 
traditional interpretation of the term water must expand beyond conventional freshwater  sources to 
encompass treated wastewater (reclaimed water), storm water and other sources as part of the total water 
resources ”. These policies coupled with significant investment that the Government of Barbados is 
channelling  towards this sector are evide nt of the Government commitment to seeing a paradigm shift in the 
how reclaimed water is managed and utilized.  
 
The following are relevant legislation and policies from the water sector perspective: The Barbados Water 
Authority Act (1980): establishes the Barbados Water Authority; Underground Water Control Act (1953): 
provides for the control and use of the underground sources of water supply in the island. It establishes a 
Water Board for the purpose of this Act. Licenses from the Board are required for th e sinking of wells and 
for the obstruction of underground water; Heath Services Act (1969): allows the Minister to divide Barbados 
into health and sanitation districts. The Minister has the power to construct sewers. This Act also prohibits


---
*Page 73*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 taking water fr om public taps without permission; Irrigation Act (1967): allows the Chief of Agriculture to carry 
out surveys, investigation or research for irrigation purposes, to distribute water and to control or operate 
waterworks; Prevention of Floods Act (1951): ma kes provision for measures for the prevention of floods; 
National Water Conservation Plan: comprises two parts: long -term ongoing measures such as leakage 
reduction and universal metering and short -term measures such as temporary shutdown of parts of the 
system on a rotational basis or temporary licence restrictions on private abstractions (UN, 2004); 
Groundwater Zoning Policy:  implemented through the Town and Country Planning Office in collaboration 
with the BWA, it controls development in areas of ground water abstraction as a way of protecting 
groundwater resources (2008).Most recently, the BWA established a Wastewater Department (WWD) to 
properly manage Barbados’ wastewater problems, including building resilience into the country wastewater 
systems. Also , a National Water Reuse Policy was enacted in October 2018, which sets as the vision that 
water is a national resource which shall be used to improve the quality of life for citizens, maintain the natural 
biodiversity of the land, and promote domestic, ag ricultural and industrial activities in support of sustainable 
development and a green economy. The policy objective is to promote the safe use of reclaimed, storm and 
non-potable water in urban, agricultural and the industrial sectors such that human heal th and environmental 
quality is not compromised. Collectively, these policy and legal frameworks provide the basis for the 
implementation of this project, which will also seek to strengthen gaps that exist, especially for 
expanding/scaling -up wastewater re use in Barbados.  
Other notable policies which this project is aligned with include:  
The Barbados Sustainable Development Policy (2004) sets out the landscape for sustainable 
development from a Barbadian perspective. Embedded within the Policy are the adop ted sustainable 
development principles namely: quality of life, conservation of resources; economic efficiency; equity; and 
participation. In the context of water resources management, the policy sought to conserve available 
freshwater and within the agric ultural sectors it encouraged the use of organic fertilizers and promoted 
natural resources recycling and reuse, where possible.  
The National Strategic Plan of Barbados 2006 -2025  recognises that protecting and preserving our natural 
and built environment is vital to achieving sustainable development. Goal four of the document sought to 
promote and facilitate the sustainable use of our renewable resources, including the maintaining  a safe and 
reliable water supply, and the wise management of our non -renewable natural resources. The strategic plan  
proposes a series of strategies which are designed to kindle the development of a green economy.  
The foregoing indicates that there is strong political will and country ownership for implementing the results 
of this project. Whilst Barbados does not have a finalized GCF country programme (currently being 
undertaken through a readiness proposal with th e GCF), technical capacities exist and are continually being 
built for the management of GCF funded projects through the implementation of one project and two 
readiness projects. The project, called the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in B arbados 
(WSRN S -Barbados), has a value of USD45.2 million (USD27.6 million financed by GCF) was launched in 
May 2019 with a finalization date in 2024. This project is also focused on increasing the climate resiliency of 
the water sector and has the CCCCC a nd the BWA as Executing Entities and are under the supervision of 
the NDA.  
 
 
The CCCCC coordinates the Caribbean region’s response to climate change, working on effective solutions 
and projects to combat the existing and projected environmental impacts of  climate variability, climate 
change and extreme weather events. Guided by its Regional Strategic Framework – Achieving Development 
Resilient to Climate Change (2009 – 2015), and its accompanying Implementation Plan (2011 -2021) to 
actualize the Framework, the Centre provides climate change related policy advice and guidelines to the 
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Member States through the CARICOM Secretariat and to the United 
Kingdom (UK) Caribbean Overseas Territories. In its role as a Climate Centre, the e ntity is recognised by


---
*Page 74*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 the UNFCCC, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and other international agencies as the 
focal point for climate change issues in the Caribbean. It has also been recognised by the United Nations 
Institute for Training and  Research (UNITAR) as a Centre of Excellence, one of an elite few. Further, the 
CCCCC has an established and proven track -record as the leader in climate change adaptation planning 
and management studies throughout the Caribbean and have implemented substa ntial climate change 
response initiatives projects funded by donors such as the European Union, the German Development Bank, 
UN-ECLAC and IDB, to note a few. This proven track record will ensure effective and efficient project delivery 
and guarantee the su stainability of programme outcomes and impacts. More importantly, the CCCCC is the 
repository of current state -of-the-art climate change models in the Caribbean region.  
As the AE, the CCCCC will provide overall management for the project and facilitate in formation sharing and 
marketing via its online portal. Its role as an AE also includes having overall responsibility and oversight for 
the project, which involves project implementation and supervision, financial management, and project 
monitoring and repo rting. The partners will share equally in the implementation of the respective portions of 
the programme. Further, for better project coordination, and taking a programmatic approach, the CCCCC 
has established the Programme Development and Management Unit (PDMU). The PDMU is comprised of 
a Project Manager, a National Project Coordinator, a Project Engineer, a Procurement Officer, a Finance 
Officer and two (2) Admin Officers  and will draw upon the other collective expertise within the Centre to carry 
out the  Project Implementation function. All activities will be scrutinized alongside the Centre’s approved 
Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS), Gender, Stakeholders’ Consultation and Anti -Money 
Laundering and Countering Financing for Terrorism (AML/CFT) Pol icies to ensure they are in consonance 
with the objectives of those Policies. Furthermore, gender and no -discriminatory considerations and strict 
adherence to financial best practices will be pursued.  
The NDA has and continue to support the development of this project and is committed  to leading the charge 
to see this project approved and implemented in Barbados. The NDA has provided a letter of no -objection 
to accompany this projects submission to the GCF (See  Annex 1 ). The NDA has also signal the willing lead 
effort to  ensur e continued  political buy -in and support at the highest levels of government and will function 
as the GCF’s contact person in country. The  NDA will provide in -kind support, through the Pub lic Investment 
Unit, to assist  with the implementation of the project activities under the  project, in particular those activities 
that require coordi nation among line ministries and engagement with the GCF on reporting and verification. 
Further, the techn ical-working group66, which is a cross -sectoral group of high -level technical officers, will 
continue to provide technical guidance during implementation and draft cabinet papers for reporting the 
cabinet  on matter pertaining to the project.     
 
Country o wnership through  stakeholder engagement and consultations is the cornerstone of the 3R -CReWS 
project . Since its inception , even more so during the PPF stage, several stakeholders  were engaged and 
consulted. These consultations were critical to arrive at final proposal that response  to needs of the people 
of Barbados. The list of stakeholders consulted can be found in the stakeholder analysis as well as the 
Feasibility  Study. Going  forward, as is demonstrated by the activities outline in Component 3 and 4, this 
project will continue to engage all relevant national and community level stakeholders of Barbados, which 
will encompass both the public and private sector . This is critical for the outputs to resulting in outcomes and 
outcomes into desired paradigm  shift, sustainability and impact beyond the life of the 3R -CReWS Project.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Adequacy of Financial Structure  
The instrument of funding requested for the implementation of this project is a combination of grants from 
the GCF and co -financing from the BWA . These funds will be used for creating a paradigm shift in the 
 
66 The Technical Working Group has representatives from: BWA, Envi ronmental Protection Department, Ministry of Health and Wellness, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Finance Economic Affairs and Investment, Coastal Zone Management Unit, Government Analytical Services, 
and Planning and Development Dep artment.


---
*Page 75*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 wastewater management practi ces of Barbados through the deployment and transfer of appropriate 
technologies and the promotion of an enabling environment that promotes institutional, financial, social and 
environmental sustainability (See Section D.3) . 
 
A spreadsheet -based Dynamic Eco nomic and Financial Model (DEFM) was developed for this project (See 
Annex 3), which was premised on four development cases ranging from: a ‘base case’ of no development, 
no reuse, and no climate change; a ‘no growth’ case with planned developments, climat e change and reuse 
of reclaimed water; a ‘business as usual’ case with more planned developments incorporated, climate 
change, the reuse of reclaimed water, and modest population and economic growth, and; a ‘growth and 
development’ case in which there is s ignificant expansion of the wastewater collection systems and hence 
flows through the treatment plants, climate change, the reuse of reclaimed water and moderate population 
and economic growth (See more details in Annex 2 ). This model considered the programmatic approach 
that is being utilised to transform the management of wastewater. The model considers  the investments to 
be made at the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant (SCSTP) and a similar pipeline that is being 
consider ed for delivery of reclaimed water associated with the SCSTP to farmers on the east of the island  
(see Table 2 and 3 in Section B.5) . The results of the DEFM are shown in the Table 5 below.  
  
Table 5: Model Output Results  
 Base case  
 
USD million  No growth  
 
USD million  Business as usual  
USD million  Growth & 
development  
USD million  
Total NPV Capital & 
Operational Costs  US$209.70  US$302.76  US$302,76  US$372.8 9 
NPV Benefits  US$73.37  US$139. 60 US$195.1 7 US$451.53  
Benefit Cost Ratio  0.34 0.46 0.64 1.21 
IRR - - - 9.1%  
GHG emissions  
• Tonnes 
avoided  
• NPV Avoided 
costs   
42,800  
US$0.45   
75,155  
US$0.7 8  
90,971  
US$1.8 2  
164,713  
US$3. 10 
Net farm revenues 
generated  - US$121.578  US$148.866  US$258.877  
Multiplier effect of 
farming employment  - US$5.601  US$6.858  US$11.926  
Import substitution  - US$21.7 5 US$43. 50 US$72.49  
Public health benefits  US$0.34  US$0.34  US$0.34  US$0.34  
Environmental 
benefits  US $581.46  US $581.46  US $581.46  US $581.46  
Social Cost Benefit 
Ratio  3.1 3.1 3.5 4.1 
Source: Cashman, 2021  
 
The results indicate the sensitivity of outcome s to the volume of wastewater flow generated and supporting 
irrigated agriculture. Financial viability improves due to a combination of increased treated water flows 
supporting irrigated  agriculture and the generation of additional income to farmers. The Cost -Benefit ratio 
and Internal Rate of Return improve as more wastewater is generated. The results indicate that whilst the 
capital and operational costs increase from the “Business as U sual” to the “Growth and Development” case 
by 23%, the benefits increase by over 130%.  When the economic benefits are taken into account, the Social 
Cost-Benefit Ratio improves across the board due to the role a healthy marine environment plays in 
support ing Barbados’ tourism sector. The positive Social Cost -Benefit ratios reflects the wider social and 
environmental benefits that would flow from implementation of the project.   
 
Also notable is that the DEFM also explored 5 sets of sensitivity analyses (I)  alternative assumptions of 
inflation and discount rates, (ii) the impact of water savings technology, (iii) the effect of Climate Change, (iv) 
alternative tariffs for water supplied to agriculture, and (v) alternative Development Scenarios. Findings


---
*Page 76*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 recon firm the importance, from a financial standpoint, of having sewerage systems that are able to collect 
and treat sufficient volumes of wastewater for reclamation and onward provision for reuse. The onward 
provision for reuse of treated wastewater is critica l to generating income to offset the capital and operational 
costs. The initial costs of establishing the sewage and distribution infrastructure will be high, but the marginal 
capital cost of treating wastewater and supplying reclaimed water decreases with  each addition unit of 
volume. At the same time the marginal benefit of having an extra unit of volume increases. The financial 
Benefit -Cost ratios become positive as more water is collected and provided for irrigation. The Benefit -Cost 
ratio increases to greater than 1 when the benefits from the development of irrigated agriculture are added 
for the Business -as-usual case. The ratio continues to increase as more water is made available for reuse. 
Hence, investment in the capital works that on the one side increase the volume of wastewater collected 
and on the other make it available for productive reuse is a necessity in order to realise the potential benefits. 
Secondly, the financial outcome is sensitive to the assumption of the tariff for the provision of  irrigation water. 
Whilst changes in tariffs have a similar effect as increasing wastewater collection volumes, increasing tariffs 
is less desirable due to the likely substitution and income effects (Hicksian substitution). Increases in tariffs 
might affec t the level of economic activity by irrigation farmers with other effects on the local economy and 
food imports.   
In summary the DEMF found that the project will be financially sustainable given that with the investments 
proposed the income revenue stream s will be greater than the capital and operational expenses. This 
assumes that GCF grant funding is made available  and other complementary projects to 3R -CReWS project 
are implemented .  If it is not the case and debt financing instruments are used, then this will have a negative 
effect on financial performance indicators. And the project has the capability of increasing revenues through 
opportunities to expand collection coverage. In addition, the project will benefit the BWA through institutional 
strengthening and capacity building improving its planning and management capabilities. It supports 
initiatives within the BWA of structuring its activities towards a greater emphasis on forward planning and 
the proposed implementation of an Innovations Divi sion and a Strategic Planning and Regulation Division.  
 
Use of Best Practices and Available Technologies  
In additional to the findings of the financial and economic model, efficiency and effectiveness will be 
promoted by this project through the following:  
• The final upgrade considerations that were selected for this project met several criteria that were 
hinged on efficiency and effectiveness. The evaluation criteria included: land area requirement, 
operator skill level requirement, technology ada ptability, capital cost, operating labour cost, energy 
requirement, process robustness (including ability to accommodate wastewater variability), water 
quality achieved and water reuse applications (See Integrated Sustainability 3R -CReWS Conceptual 
Design Report: Section 3.5).  
• The construction of smaller decentralized sewage collection and treatment sites with a cluster of 
connections within sensitive groundwater extraction zones (Zone A) is a lower cost strategy that 
focuses financial resources for wastew ater management on areas with the greatest potential to 
impact groundwater resources (environmental costs) and be impacted by climate change either due 
to the need for additional water resources due to drought (social and economic costs)  
• The PV systems to be installed will withstand of at least category 3 hurricanes thereby promoting 
both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits.  
• Strengthening the engagement of the private sector through various avenues (RAFF mechanism, 
training, engagement strate gy, incentive programme)


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target 
scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  The interest in wastewater reuse has been 
documented for some time; for example, the 
IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was 
drafted in 2008, identified the need to 
encourage wastewater reuse as a key 
recommendation from stakeholder 
consultations (CEHI, 2008). Further, the legal 
regulatory framework in Barbados has been 
recently updated to better inform wastewater 
management and reuse options, quality and 
standards. T hese include the Zoning Policy, 
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater 
Reuse Bill to note a few. This signal of interest 
in the use of treated wastewater is an important 
precondition for scaling up the scope and 
impact of this project. However, there are  no 
pipelines installed to date to transport reclaimed 
water for irrigation and aquifer recharge 
purposes.  Low An additional 235 
Hectares of agriculture 
land available to 
implement irrigation, 
aquifer recharge and other 
non-potable water uses. 
An increase in the volume 
of wastewater captured 
and treated to tertiary 
levels for non -potable 
water uses. The marginal 
capital cost of treating and 
supplying reclaimed water 
decreases with each 
additional unit of volume of 
wastewater that becomes 
available.  An enabling 
environment is 
strengthened for 
wastewater treatment 
technology deployment, 
dissemination and 
innovation  The 9km pipeline to be installed will enable the distribution 
of reclaimed water to farmers located in the parish of St. 
Michael, which is one of four options investigated in the 
feasibility study. The option selected (9km pipeline) is 
considered by the GO B to be the first phase of a larger 
enterprise to extend and expand the use of reclaimed 
water for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non -potable 
water uses. It is envisioned that the distribution pipeline 
should be extended further north along the west coas t of 
Barbados and up to the parish of St Lucy to irrigate an 
additional 235 hectares of agriculture land. The extension 
of the pipeline coupled with the expansion of the 
decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach 
will increase the volume of wastew ater collected, treated 
and reclaimed for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non -
potable water uses. The latter will also be supported 
through the legislative review, the water and sanitation 
masterplan and public education and awareness activities 
planned u nder this project. For instance, the promotion of 
dual system plumbing in households and businesses to 
facilitate the use of reclaimed water for non -potable 
purposes in households and businesses. Also notable is 
that this project is specifically targeting a combination of 
activities targeting private sector engagement since they 
can have an important role in scaling -up the decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems approach. Specifically, this


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 project has earmarked the following activities that will 
enhance  the ability of the private sector to scale -up the 
decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach: (i) 
development of an action plan for the engagement of the 
private sector in the provision and adoption of wastewater 
treatment technology and the util ization of wastewater by-
product , (ii) expansion of the Revolving Adaptation Fund 
Facility (RAFF) to provide resources to private individuals 
and businesses for the adoption of decentralized onsite 
wastewater systems (iii) development and implementation 
of a gender sensitive and socially inclusive incentive 
programme to encourage wastewater reuse applications 
(iv) undertaking a review of the legislative framework to 
support enforcement of what is in place and to identify 
gaps that needs attention for the us e of reclaimed water, 
including in the engagement of the private sector (v) the 
PEA campaign will include materials to encourage, 
promote and train the private sector to take advantage of 
the potential markets opportunities for the expansion of 
decentraliz ed onsite and cluster wastewater systems and 
the adoption of water reclamation technologies  
Replicability  As of 2018, there were sixty -eight (68) private 
wastewater treatment plants of which eighteen 
(18) used the treated wastewater for reuse 
applications. However, there is no treatment of 
wastewater and reuse in any of the identified 
Zone A locations. There i s 1 RO plant installed 
along Spring Garden on the west coast of 
Barbados, which also happens to be privately 
owned. A review by the GEF CReW+ initiative 
found that participating countries (Antigua and 
Barbuda, Belize, Guyana, Saint Lucia, Trinidad 
and Toba go, Barbados, Jamaica, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines and Suriname) show 
evidence of establishing wastewater as a 
national priority. However, activity towards 
implementation of the Protocol Concerning 
Pollution from Land -Based Sources and 
Activities (LBS P rotocol) provisions is limited. Low An additional 16 Zone A 
communities to benefit 
from the installation of 
decentralized wastewater 
treatment systems 2 -3 
RO plants installed along 
the west coast corridor 
Replication of this project 
in at least 2 CARICOM 
member states  Recalling that the BSTP and the SCSTP plants only serve 
10 to 1 5% of the population of Barbados, then the scope 
for replicating the decentralized wastewater treatment 
systems is expansive. Recently the Government of 
Barbados has identified 18 Zone A locations as priority 
areas for the installation of decentralized was tewater 
treatment systems. Zone A areas are identified as 
locations most sensitive to groundwater contamination as 
a result of wastewater and are most sensitive to climate 
related risks with a limit to water resources. Therefore, the 
decentralized wastewat er treatment systems to be 
installed in the Belle Zone A area and Bellevue Gap Zone 
A area under this project will serve as an opportunity to 
learn lessons for replication in the other 16 Zone A 
locations in the near future. It is envisaged with 
strengthen ed private sector engagement through the 
activities planned under this project, the decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems will be replicated across


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 These countries have pointed to the limited 
availability of financial resources for 
infrastructure, capacity -building, appropriate 
technology and research and development 
needed to make the much -needed 
improvements in the wa stewater sector  the country. Further, based on lessons learned from the 
Spring Garden Reverse Osmosis Plant (See Feasib ility 
Study), which is the first of its kind in Barbados, this project 
will support investigations and strategic planning for the 
installation of water treatment facilities along the west 
coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting 
the west c oast ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). Finally, the role 
of the CCCCC as the AE coupled with their role as a 
CARICOM  Specialized Agency implies that they are 
ideally positioned to promote the lessons emerging from 
the use of reclaimed water and creation of a was tewater 
market to other CARICOM  Member States. The likelihood 
of replication in other SIDS is also increased by the fact 
that the fourth and fifth IPCC reports indicated that there 
will be increased water stress due to increasing 
temperatures, reduced annu al rainfall and salinization of 
freshwater resources.  
Sustainability  Policy, incentives and Legislation  - the legal 
regulatory framework in Barbados has been 
recently updated to better inform wastewater 
management and reuse options, quality and 
standards. These include the Zoning Policy, 
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater 
Reuse Bill to note a few.  
Technical Capacity  - a recent internal 
discussion paper (at BWA) noted that the 
managerial span of control at BWA was too 
wide and is inefficient and ineffective, 
particularly for the wastewater section. This is 
coupled with the fact that external training  
opportunities are very limited, and an internal 
training program is lacking at the BWA.  
Operations and equipment  - the maintenance 
focus at BWA has shifted from Preventative 
Maintenance (PM) towards emergency 
breakdown maintenance due to lack of 
dedicated  staff and financial resources for PM. 
The operational manuals a very dated. There 
are no functional automated control systems Low 
 Paradigm shift in the use 
of reclaimed water among 
the entire population of 
Barbados (demand side)  
Green jobs created and 
sustained in the medium 
to long term through the 
expansion of the 
knowledge and skills 
capacity and the creation 
of a market related to 
wastewater sector (supply 
side).  
The project will make a 
positive contribution to the 
achievement of 
Sustainable Development 
Goals, specifically Goals 
2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17  Under component three, enhancement of capabilities 
(technical and operations management) to operate, 
maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable 
energy technologies will be advanced which is key for 
sustainability. Having a cadre of highly trained operators 
at the BWA will  ensure that there is a well -developed 
preventative maintenance (PM) program to extend the life 
of the equipment and to keep it functioning at the design 
level to maintain effluent quality and reduce any 
environmental impacts or health and safety issues. 
Majority of component four was designed to strengthen 
the enabling environment for promoting sustainability. 
Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is adequate 
legislation related to wastewater reuse and adoption of 
treatment technologies, bolster ing private sector 
engagement in the provision and adoption of wastewater 
treatment technology through various approaches 
(engagement strategy), putting in place a long -term water 
and sanitation masterplan to guide long term planning for 
the sustainable ma nagement of the water sector and for 
further strengthening its resilience to climate risks, 
recommending options for an incentive programme for


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 that optimizes energy efficiency of the current 
water treatment systems. The SCADA system 
installed at the lift stations and the flow are not 
operational at this time.  promoting the use of wastewater technologies and use of 
reclaimed water by households and businesses, 
expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials.  
 
  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result 
Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final67 
Total amount of 
GHG emission 
reduction  Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered Reports of Solar Photovoltaic Energy 
(PV) generation, BLP monthly 
electricity bills and statements of 
credit (from Feed in Tariffs) and  
BWA Engineering in Operations and 
Maintenance Report  
 
BLP monthly electricity bills and 
statements of credit (from Feed  in 
Tariffs) and  
BWA Engineering in Operations 
and Maintenance Report  
 0 No change 
from 
baseline by 
2026.  1,635  tCO 2e avoided 
by 2028  
 
 
40,875  tCO 2e avoided 
over 25 years  Plant upgrades and PV 
system implemented 
one year before project 
closure.  
 
 
Co2 grid emission 
factor is 0.684.  
 
Quantity of net 
electricity generation 
by the 1MW PV is 
2,063 MWh per year  
 
Assume life term of  PV 
system is  
approximately 25 
years.  
 
Energy e fficient 
technology and 
controls are operating 
optimally and reduction 
in energy consumption 
 
67 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan 
period which is defined as the  maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 of 328.5 MWh 
achieved.  
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered Reports of Solar Photovol taic Energy 
(PV) generation, BLP monthly 
electricity bills and statements of 
credit (from Feed in Tariffs)  and  
BWA Engineering in Operations and 
Maintenance Report  0 No change 
from 
baseline by 
2026.  1,411  tCO 2e avoided 
by 2028  
 
 
35,275 tCO 2e avoided 
over 25 years  Plant upgrades and PV 
system implemented 
one year before project 
closure.  
 
 
Co2 grid emission 
factor is 0.684.  
 
Quantity of net 
electricity generation 
by the 1MW PV is 
2,063 MWh per year  
 
Assume life term of  PV 
system is  
approximate ly 25 
years.  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary 
1.3: Installed 
renewable energy 
capacity  Site inspections, equipment 
specifications, procurement reports, 
BWA Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Completion, BWA 
Engineering in Operations and 
Maintenance Report  0.18 MW of 
solar panels in 
place at BSTP  No change 
from 
baseline  by 
2026 . 1.18 MW of solar 
power  installed by 
2028  Conditions are 
favourable  for the 
installation of the PV 
panels.  
The PV panels are 
routinely monitored 
and maintained/  
repaired to ensure they 
function optimally.  
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  
 Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered BLP monthly electricity bills and 
statements of credit (from Feed in 
Tariffs) and  
BWA Engineering in Operations and 
Maintenance Report  0 No change 
from 
baseline . 224 tCO 2e avoided by 
2028  
 
5,600  tCO 2e avoided 
over 25 years  
 Energy efficient 
technology and 
controls are operating 
optimally  and reduc tion 
in energy consumption  
of 328.5 MWh 
achieved .


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  
 Supplementary 
1.1: Annual 
energy savings  BLP monthly electricity bills and 
statements of credit (from Feed in 
Tariffs) and  
BWA Engineering in Operations and 
Maintenance Report  0 (Power 
consumption  at 
BSTP  2017 -
2020  averag ed 
approximately 
1,642.5  MWh 
per year. ) No change 
from 
baseline . Annual energy savings 
of 328.5 MWh per year 
relative to the baseline 
by 2028.  BSTP fully upgraded 
and operational  at 
least one year before 
project closure.  
 
Energy efficient 
technology and 
controls are operating 
optimally.  
Total number of 
direct and 
indirect project 
beneficiaries  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached  Ministry of Agriculture 
database/records on Farmers in 
target areas, registration forms for 
training  
events/workshops/consultations, 
website analytics for project website 
and social media accounts, site 
visits, survey/questionnaire reports .  0 20,500 
direct 
beneficiarie
s by 2026 
(10,045 
males and 
10,455 
females)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16,500 
indirect 
beneficiarie
s by 2026 
(8,085 
males and 
8,415  
females)  277,821  (136,132males 
and 141,689 females)    
(excluding tourists) 
direct and  indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
(1,377,200 if average 
annual tourists arrival 
is included)68  by 2028  
 
136,220 direct 
beneficiaries by 2028  
(66,748 males and 
69,472 females)  
 
141,601 , indirect 
beneficiaries by 2028 
(69,384 males and 
72,217 females)  Assume successful 
education and 
communication 
programs for 
communities and water 
sector technical staff; 
Participation in 
awareness workshops 
and campaign, and 
buy-in  
Assume policies and 
legislation change to 
promote the use of 
reclaimed water for 
non-potable water 
uses including urban 
irrigation of 
landscaped areas, 
toilet and urinal 
flushing, vehicle, and 
road surface washing, 
building cooling, etc.  
ARA1 Most 
vulnera ble Core 2: Direct and 
indirect Ministry of Agriculture 
database/records on Farmers in 0 20,000 
direct  Assume successful 
education and 
 
68 Direct beneficiaries are considered to be all households connected to the STPs, users of reclaimed water, population benefiti ng from the decentralized system, participants of training, fishermen and the tourism 
sector (through reduced impact from ocean ou tfalls). Individuals connected to the STP is estimated to be approximately 15% of the population. Using the median, of 15% of  277,821 = 41,674; Individuals benefiting 
from the decentralized wastewater systems = 646; Users of the reclaimed water  (total trai ned)  = 155  (280)  farmers; 400 employees at BWA from customized training; 750 students from school programme; 92,250 
persons engaged at the community  level consu ltations and public education and awareness efforts;  120 private businesses engaged and 100 new jobs created.  wastewater  Tourists = 1,237,200 average between 
2014 -2018 (WorldBank Data). Direct and indirect stakeholders: all of Barbados or 277,821 persons (based on the 2010 census of a to tal population of 277,821)


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 people and 
communities  
 beneficiaries 
reached  target areas, registration forms for 
training  
events/workshops/consultations, 
website analytics for project website 
and social media accounts, site 
visits, survey/questionnaire reports .  beneficiarie
s by 2026 
(9,800 
males and 
10,200  
females)  
 
16,500 
indirect 
beneficiarie
s by 2026 
(8,085  
males  and 
8,415 
females ) 
 
 93,300 direct 
beneficiaries by 2028 
(47,583 females, 
45,717 males)  
 
141,601, indirect 
beneficiaries by 2028 
(69,384  males  and 
72,217 females ) communication 
programs for 
communities and water 
sector technical staff; 
Participation in 
awaren ess workshops 
and campaign, and 
buy-in  
Assume policies and 
legislation change to 
promote the use of 
reclaimed water for 
non-potable water 
uses including urban 
irrigation of 
landscaped areas, 
toilet and urinal 
flushing, vehicle, and 
road surface washing, 
building cooling, etc.  
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water 
security  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached  Ministry of Agriculture 
database/records on Farmers in 
target areas, site visits, 
survey/questionnaire reports, 
census reports, by parish. BWA 
water supply records.  0 120 
persons 
(farmers 
directly) 
benefiting 
(72 males 
and 48 
females) by 
2026.  
 
 
0 persons 
indirectly 
benefiting  280 persons directly 
benefiting (168 males 
and 112 females) by 
2028  
 
 
 
 
 
116,000 indirect 
beneficiaries by 2028 
(56,850 males and 
59,150 females) by 
2028  The 2010 census is 
still reflective of the 
population today  
Assume policies and 
legislation change to 
promote the use of 
reclaimed water for 
non-potable water 
uses including urban 
irrigation of 
landscaped areas, 
toilet and urinal 
flushing, vehicle, and 
road surface washing, 
building cooling, etc.  
 
Persons will access 
the RAFF and 
implement wastewater


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 treatment technologies 
and utilise reclaimed 
water on farmes.  
 
1000  private entities 
will benefit from 
lessons learnt and 
strategy for involving 
private sector in the 
wastewater sector.  
ARA3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment   Core 2: Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached  BWA Reports, 
Survey/questionnaire reports  for 
Zone A areas, Training workshop 
report and evaluation survey, 
Project Documents Report, site 
visit and observations.   0 550 
individuals 
(275 males 
and 275 
females) 
directly 
benefiting  
by 2026.  
 
 
0 persons 
indirectly 
benefiting  42,880 individuals 
(21,121 males and 
21,759 females) 
directly benefiting  by 
2028  
 
 
129,249 indirect 
beneficiaries by 2028 
( 63,332 males  and 
65,917 females ) by 
2028  41,746 is 
approximately 15% of 
the population of 
Barbados  
 
 
Average household 
size in Zone A area s is 
2.87 persons.  
 
 
Number of jobs 
created is estimated 
based on procurement 
plan and estimate 
number persons 
required to exclude the 
works contract. 26 
individual contracts, 6 
consulting firm 
contracts (3 persons 
per contract) and 8 
works and non -
consult ing services 
contracts (average 7 
persons per contract).  
 
13,410 individuals 
(4624 Zone A


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 households) will 
indirectly benefiting 
from knowledge and 
lessons learnt for 
implementation of the 
two decentralise 
plants .  
 
SOP and Training of 
BWA Staff will benefit 
BWA entire customer 
base.  
 
Upgrade to the plant 
will indirectly benefit 
the population 
(100,000 less direct 
beneficiaries) of 
Bridgetown .  
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water 
security  
 Supplementary 
2.3: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
with more climate -
resilient water 
security  Ministry of Agriculture 
database/records on Farmers in 
target areas, site visits, 
survey/questionnaire reports, census 
reports, by parish. BWA water 
supply records.  0 120 
persons 
(farmers 
directly ) 
benefiting  
(72 males 
and 48 
females)  by 
2026.  
 
 
  280 persons directly 
benefiting ( 168 males 
and 112 females) by 
2028  
 
  The 2010 census is 
still reflective of the 
population today  
Assume policies and 
legislation change to 
promote the use of 
reclaimed water for 
non-potable water 
uses including urban 
irrigation of 
landscaped areas, 
toilet and urinal 
flushing, vehicle, and 
road surface washing, 
building cooling, etc.  
 
ARA3: 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  Supplementary 
2.5: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
adopting BWA Reports, Survey/questionnaire 
reports for Zone A areas, Training 
workshop report and evaluation 0 550 
individuals 
(275 males 
and 275 42,880 individuals 
(21,121 males and 
21,759 females) 41,746 is 
approximately 15% of 
the population of 
Barbados


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 innovations that 
strengthen 
climate  
change resilience 
(number of 
individuals)  survey, Project Documents Report, 
site visit and observations.   females) 
directly 
benefiting  
by 2026 . 
 
 
 directly benefiting by 
2028.  
  
 
Average household 
size in Zone A areas is 
2.87 persons.  
 
 
Number of jobs 
created is estimated 
based on procurement 
plan and estimate 
number persons 
required to exclude the 
works contract. 26 
individual contracts, 6 
consulting firm 
contracts (3 persons 
per contract) and 8 
works and non -
consulting services 
contracts (average 7 
persons per contract).  
 
13,410 individuals 
(4624 Zone A 
households) will 
indirectly benefiting 
from knowledge and 
lessons learnt for 
implementation of the 
two decentralise 
plants . 
   
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
  
 
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  Policy, incentives and 
Legislation - the legal 
regulatory framework in 
Barbados has been 
recently updated to 
better inform wastewater 
management and reuse 
options, quality and 
standards. These 
include the Zoning 
Policy, Planning and 
Development Act, 
Wastewater Reuse Bill 
to note a few. Barbados 
has adopted an 
incentive approach, 
using market 
instruments to achieve 
sustainable tourism 
practices. The Tou rism 
Development Act 
(2002), states that an 
operator who incurs 
expenditure in improving 
the wastewater disposal 
system be allowed a tax 
credit of 20% of the 
capital cost of fittings, 
pipes and pumps used 
in the improvement of 
the wastewater system. 
The po licy and 
regulatory environment medium  High degree to which 
the GCF investment  
strengthens institutional 
and regulatory 
frameworks for low 
emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  The overall aim of the project's 
emphasis on the legislative framework 
is to create a roadmap that (i) 
promotes what is now being 
institutionalized for the wastewater 
sector, as well as (ii) strengthening 
any gaps identified (See Activity 
4.1.1). Hence, th is project will play a 
key role in strengthening the 
legislative framework. Further, the 
project will be developing a long -term 
water and sanitation master plan that 
will be based on international best 
practice and takes into consideration 
the current wate r protection, land use 
and water reuse policies, recent 
studies and assessments in the water 
and sanitation sectors as well as 
current and planned capital 
expenditure projects, including the 
3R-CReWS, when approved. Hence, 
this master plan will support and  
promote a coherent and 
comprehensive planning approach to 
the management of the water and 
sanitation sector. There will be a high 
attainment on institutional 
strengthening given the project's 
contribution to building technical 
capacities of BWA through ta rgeted 
and customized training (SCADA, 
operator, CAS, RO, CMMS etc.), 
enhancing operational effectiveness Nation al 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 88*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
 in place in Barbados are 
currently highly 
conducive for the use of 
renewable energy 
technologies. The GOB 
is pursuing a goal of 
complete 
decarbonisation  by 2030 
and the policy  and efficiency (automating control 
systems, updating SOPs and 
operational manuals, establishing an 
onsite laboratory, implementing sewer 
monitoring an d risk management 
protocols etc,) and providing 
sustainable financing streams from 
the expansion of the RAFF whilst 
reducing operational costs through 
the implementation of 1.0 MW of solar 
power and establishing a preventative 
maintenance programme.  
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  Currently both STPs are 
only able to achieve 
secondary water quality 
and hence limiting the 
use of reclaimed water.  
 
Further, there is a 
recurring issue of break -
down of equipment and 
limited interoperability 
due to dated equipment 
being used or some not 
functioning e.g. the 
dissolved oxygen 
sensors in the tanks do 
not work, the pump is 
dated and cannot 
communicate with the 
SCADA computerized 
real-time management 
system that is in place.  
 
A very small number of 
businesses and none of 
the communities in the 
18 Zone A locations 
utilize decentralized low High degree to which 
GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  There will be a high attainment of 
technology deployment and 
innovation by this project that will not 
only increase resilience to climate 
change, but will also aid in the 
mitigation of climate change. Firstly, 
currently there is no tertiary level 
wastewate r treatment facility on the 
island. The primary objective of this 
project is to achieve tertiary level 
reclaimed water quality for building 
resilience to climate change. The 
technologies that will be adopted for 
the upgrades are of international 
standards.  Also notable is that 
decentralized wastewater treatment 
systems to date is only being done by 
a few private sectors, for instance, the 
Coverly Housing Development, which 
integrated this technology from the 
design stage. This project will allow 
the Governm ent of Barbados and the 
BWA to further deploy decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems across 
the island, particularly to existing 
housing developments/communities 
not served by the centralized National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
  
  
 wastewater treatment 
systems.  
 
There is 1 RO plant 
installed along Spring  
Garden on the west 
coast of Barbados, 
which also happens to 
be privately owned.  wastewater treatment facilities (i.e. 
SCSTP and BSTP). Based  on lessons 
learned from the Spring Garden 
Reverse Osmosis Plant (See 
Feasibility Study), which is the first of 
its kind in Barbados, this project will 
support investigations and strategic 
planning for the installation of water 
treatment facilities along t he west 
coast corridor for augmenting water 
supply and protecting the west coast 
ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). A climate 
responsive management of the 
centralized wastewater systems will 
be implemented by this project. This 
project is deploying technologies t hat 
will strengthen response to short term 
and long terms climate related 
hazards by implementing decision -
support tools and infrastructure such 
as the sewer monitoring programme 
and CMMS (Output 3.1).  
Core indicator 7: Degr ee 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  The legal regulatory 
framework in Barbados 
has been recently 
updated to better inform 
wastewater 
management and reuse 
options, quality and 
standards. Barbados 
has also adopted an 
incentive approach, 
using market 
instruments to achieve 
sustainable tourism 
practices. The Tourism 
Development Act 
(2002), states that an 
operator who incurs medium  High Degree to which 
GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  This entire project can be considered 
as a key driver for market 
development/transformation as it 
pertains to wastewater treatment and 
reuse options within the water sector 
context but will have national 
ramifications given the importance of 
water to our d aily lifestyles, not to 
mention Barbados' agriculture sector.   
 
The first two components of this 
project showcase the technologies 
that can make water reclamation 
viable whilst reducing risks to climate 
variability and change and also 
contributing to GHG emission 
reduction. The latter of which National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
  
  
 expenditure in improving 
the wastewater disposal 
system be allowed a tax 
credit of 20% of the 
capital cost of fittings, 
pipes and pumps used 
in the improvement of 
the wastewat er system.  
 
Yet, a  very small 
number of businesses 
and none of the 
communities in the 18 
Zone A locations utilize 
decentralized 
wastewater treatment 
systems.  
 
There are limited PEA 
campaigns on 
wastewater technologies 
and non -potable reuse 
options as wel l as on 
any of the legislative and 
incentive frameworks in 
place.  
 
 
 contributes to significant savings from 
use of renewable energy, which 
provides contributions for the 
expansion of the RAFF mechanism 
that will in turn be used to support 
local investment (individuals and 
businesses)  in the adoption of 
wastewater treatment and reuse 
technologies.  
 
The engagement of the private sector 
is a key feature of this project. There 
will be a strategic plan for the 
engagement of the private sector in 
the provision of wastewater treatment 
servi ces (e.g. the replication of 
replication along the west coast 
corridor and the implementation of 
decentralized wastewater treatment 
systems in new developments) and 
the utilisation of wastewater by-
products  (e.g. energy recovery and 
organic fertilizers). F urther, there will 
be incentives for small businesses 
through the development of an 
incentive programme (Activity 4.2.2) 
and the expansion of the RAFF 
(Activity 4.2.3).  
 
Market transformation is further 
strengthened through the creation of 
an enabling and an investor friendly 
environment. This project's 
investment in building technical 
capacities of wastewater personnel 
(Activity 3.1.1), promoting public and 
targeted stakeholders (businesses, 
schools) buy -in and support for the 
use of reclaimed water (outpu t 4.3)


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
  
  
 and undertaking a legislative review 
and gap analysis related to 
wastewater reuse in Barbados 
(Activity 4.1.1).  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learni ng 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Knowledge generation 
and learning is currently 
limited at the BWA due 
to limited financial 
capacities and to some 
extent technical 
capacities. For example: 
valuable hard -copy data 
was destroyed by fire in 
the past. There is limited 
to no  historical 
information on flow and 
raw or treated 
wastewater constituents.  
There is no laboratory at 
the BSTP to provide 
information on influent 
and effluent qualities.  
 
These fundamental data 
sets would be imperative 
to better understand the 
baseline situation of the 
wastewater sector and 
to inform the use of 
appropriate techno logies 
and setting standards.   low High degree to which 
GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation 
and learning processes, 
and use of good 
practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  The generation of knowledge and 
building of learning processes are 
important elements for this project 
since they are key to the sustainability 
strategy of the project. Under 
component 1, there are a number of 
decision support tools, as noted at 
core indic ator 6 above, that will be put 
in place to enhance the management 
of the BSTP that not only enhance 
cost effectiveness of the BSTP 
operations (reduced energy 
consumption, preventative 
maintenance programme) but also 
builds resilience to climate change. 
Under component 3, the project will 
provide targeted and specialised 
training for BWA and other key 
agencies to manage, monitor and 
maintain the upgraded system as well 
as on key outputs of the project such 
as updated manuals, SOPs, the risk 
management framew ork to be put in 
place etc. Further, the risk 
management framework (Activity 
3.1.3) itself is considered to contribute 
to effective learning since it calls for 
an iterative process to identify the risk 
register, existing controls and further 
actions needed  and opportunities for 
improvement. Component 4 will have 
a gender sensitive public education 
and awareness campaign that 
includes targeted training for 
teachers, students, farmers and National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
  
  
 businesses and the general public, 
including tourists on the impact of 
climate change on water resources 
and their impact on water quality and 
quantity (availability as well as the 
importance of water reuse activities 
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to 
building climate resilience in the 
Water Sector. There will also be a 
dedicated project webpage with an 
associated knowledge management 
strategy to effectively share 
information and promote learning or 
awareness building regarding the 
various outputs of the project.  
 
In terms of the use of good practices, 
methodologies and st andards, the 
feasibility studies that informed the 
design of this project ensured that 
international best practices and 
standards are being met for 
technologies being implemented.  
 
Further, the highly innovative nature 
of the project, the scale at which i t is 
being implemented and the urgent 
need for adaptation to climate change 
risks for the water sector, as 
demonstrated by the climate rationale 
(Section B1), makes the learning 
potential and opportunity for 
identifying good practices and 
standards a high priority for this 
project. This is why the M&E plan for 
this project sets out a mid -term and 
end-of-term evaluation and the project 
team will include M&E specialisation 
to ensure that case studies on best


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
  
  
 practices can be documented. 
Further, the role of t he CCCCC, a 
CARICOM  Specialized Agency, as 
the Accredited Entity that will 
implement this project means that 
they are also well positioned to share 
lessons on this project for replications 
in other CARICOM  States.  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  by 
2026  Final  by 2028  
Outcome 1 :   
Enhanced availability, 
management and use of 
tertiary level reclaimed 
water to improve the 
water sector’s resilience 
to climate change  Volume of treated 
wastewater  
(reclaimed water)  
utilized for aquifer 
recharge and /or 
agricultural irrigation 
per year  BWA consumption figures 
(water meters installed at 
farms along the 9km 
pipeline and at infiltration 
wells)  0 
Currently the 
secondary treated 
wastewater from 
BSTP is piped to 
a sea outfall  No change from 
baseline  2.25 million m3 
per year  being  
utilize for 
aquifer 
recharge 
and/or 
agricultural 
irrigation  There is public buy -in for 
the use of treated 
wastewater  
Quality of the 
reclaimed water  BWA laboratory reports, 
interviews with farmers 
and other users  There is no 
wastewater flow 
or 
influent/effluent 
water quality data 
available for the 
BSTP. This 
challenge is 
complicated by 
the fact that there 
is no onsite 
laboratory or lab 
technician  No change 
from baseline. 
Plant upgrade 
ongoing.  Reclaim water 
meeting  the 
require d total 
dissolved 
solids of less 
than 450 mg/L 
(established by 
the Barbados 
Ministry of 
Agriculture ) 
 
Onsite 
laboratory The on -site laboratory is 
operational and able to 
monitor the quality of t he 
effluent regularly


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
  
  
 being utilise to 
monitor water 
quality and 
producing 
reports.  
# of direct 
beneficiaries 
(Disaggregated by 
type and sex). Type: 
farmers (by sex), 
households (by sex of 
HH head)  BWA project reports, 
BWA consumer reports 
for decentralized 
locations and farms, MOA 
reports on farmer 
beneficiaries  0 No change 
from baseline. 
Pipeline and 
plant upgrade 
ongoing.  155 farmers 
(60% males 
and 40% 
females) along 
the 9k pipeline 
route, 225 
households 
(approximately 
646 HHs( from 
the 2 
communities 
benefiting from 
reclaimed 
water and 
utilizing 
decentralized 
wastewater 
systems  There is public buy -in for 
the use of reclaimed 
water for augment 
groundwater supplies, 
and the future indirect 
potable reuse of same  
Output 1.1 : The 
Bridgetown Sewage 
Treatment Plant is 
upgraded to treat 
wastewater to a tertiary 
water -quality standard  # of STPs that can 
treat water to tertiary 
water quality standard  Laboratory reports, 
reports of contractors 
hired to upgrade the 
BSTP, BWA progress 
reports, site 
visits/observation, 
Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of 
Completion  BSTP and 
SCSTP are 
currently 
secondary 
treatment plants 
that are not 
suitable for 
wastewater reuse 
such as aquifer 
recharge and 
agricultural 
irrigation.  No change 
from baseline. 
Upgrade 
should be 
ongoing.  1 Tertiary 
Level STP 
(BSTP) GOB authorities remain 
committed to the 
upgrades and co -
financing materialize, as 
committed. Expertise 
exists for the installation 
of the required upgrades. 
Favourable conditions 
exist for the construction 
works to be done.


---
*Page 95*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
 Output 1.2 : Tertiary 
treated reclaimed water 
is available to 
supplement non -potable 
use Km of pipeline 
installed for 
transporting tertiary 
treated wastewater  Site visits/observation, 
Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of 
Completion  0 km of pipeline  3 km pipeline  
installed  9 km pipeline  
installed  GOB authorities remain 
committed to the 
upgrades and co -
financing materialize, as 
committed. Continued 
stakeholder buy -in 
Volume (m3) tertiary 
treated waste water 
made available per 
day Reports from flow meter 
installed at BSTP, 
laboratory reports on 
water quality  0 0 5000 m3 of 
treated 
wastewater per 
day There is public buy -in for 
the use of reclaimed 
water for augment 
groundwater supplies, 
and the future indirect 
potable reuse of same  
Output 1.3 : Decision -
support tools and 
infrastructure 
implemented to mitigate 
potential climate change 
risks to the wastewater 
collection and treatment 
systems  # of decision -support 
tools and equipment 
implemented to 
mitigate potential 
climate change risks 
(Disaggregat e by type 
- CMMS, flow meters, 
laboratory)  Consultant/contractors 
reports, equipment 
purchase orders, site 
visits/observation, 
Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of 
Completion for 
Laboratory, BWA Monthly 
flow rate reports  There are limited 
functional 
decision support 
tools at the 
BSTP. The 
influent and 
effluent flow 
meters are not 
working. In 
December 2021 
a flow meter was 
installed at the 
BSTP. The 
SCADA system 
that operates that 
is in place is not 
fully automated 
since some of the 
equipment it 
should m anage 
are too old to be 
linked to the 
SCADA, e.g. the 
pumps at the 10 flow meters 
install ed 1 CMMS in 
place  
10 flow meters 
installed  
1 on-site 
laboratory 
retrofitted  Appropriate technical 
skillsets exist to conduct 
flow measurements and 
gather and analyse  
samples; adequate 
testing and reporting is 
enforced. Willingness 
and ability of staff to 
utilize/adopt CMMS 
system, update regularly, 
ensure all documentation 
is completed and 
filed/stored properly.


---
*Page 96*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
  
  
 BSTP, and the lift 
station do not 
have automated 
valve . Further, 
there is also need 
for more 
computers and 
training for 
technical staff to 
better interface 
with SCADA  
Output 1.4 : 
Decentralized 
treatment systems or 
cluster treatment 
systems installed  # of decentralized 
treatment plants 
operational  site visit/observation, 
photographs, interviews 
with neighbouring 
communities, reports of 
contractors hired to build 
the decentralized 
systems, Supervising 
Engineer's Certification of 
Completion  No decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment plants 
currently 
managed by 
BWA.  2 decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment 
plants 
implemented in 
2 communities  2 decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment 
plants 
implemented in 
2 communities  GOB authorities remain 
committed to the 
upgrades and co -
financing materialize, as 
committed. Continued 
stakeholder buy -in 
Outcome 2 :  Climate 
resilient low carbon 
operations achieved 
at BSTP  Energy intensity of the 
BSTP (energy 
consumption/total 
water treated per 
year)  BSTP energy bills, 
influent and effluent 
flows, equipment 
horsepower and model 
information  TBD - the 
technologies in 
place are about 
40 years old for 
the BSTP, in 
particular, the 
aerobic digesters 
in the plant are 
energy intensive. 
Also, there is no 
preventative 
maintenance 
programme and 
basic decision 
support tools are No change 
from baseline.  Energy 
consumption/to
tal water 
treated per 
year reduce by 
at least 20%  System will operate at 
full capacity within the 
projected life term of 
approximately 25 years.


---
*Page 97*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
  
  
 either inoper able 
or not in place.  
Output 2.1 : Energy 
efficiency and 
renewable energy 
technologies are 
implemented  # of MV of PV 
installed  BSTP electricity bill, 
License to operate the PV 
system from the Division 
of Energy, GOB Electrical 
Engineering Department 
(GEED) certificate of 
compliance, site 
visits/observation  0.18 MW of solar 
panels in place at 
BSTP  0.18 MW Additional 1.0 
MW of solar 
panels 
installed = 1. 18 
MW of solar 
power  installed 
at BSTP  Technical expertise 
exists to install the PV 
panels,  
# of EE technologies 
implemented 
(disaggregate by type 
- sludge dewatering, 
automated controls)  site visits/observation, 
Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of 
Completion  BSTP does not 
undertake sludge 
dewatering. The 
SCADA is 
operational but 
there are limited 
control 
capabilities.  No change 
from baseline. 
Upgrades 
should be 
advancing.  Sludge 
dewatering 
system 
installed  Technical expertise 
exists to design and 
install EE technologies  
Outcome 3 : Enhanced 
capacity and capability 
to support a 
preventative 
maintenance (PM) and 
climate resiliency 
programme  % of persons trained 
are directly involved 
(utilizing knowledge 
from training) in the 
implementation, 
maintenance, 
operations and 
management of the 
BSTP  BWA HR information 
system, work sheets/work 
assignments , Post and 
Pre workshop evaluation  0 20% of persons 
trained are 
directly 
involved 
(utilizing 
knowledge 
from training) in 
the 
implementation
, maintenance, 
operations and 
managemen t of 
the BSTP  80% of 
persons 
trained are 
directly 
involved 
(utilizing 
knowledge 
from training) 
in the 
implementation
, maintenance, 
operations and 
management 
of the BSTP  Funding is identified by 
BWA to remedy the 
issues detected early by 
the CMMS and risk 
management framework 
as well as other systems 
implemented such as the 
sewer monitoring 
programme. These 
systems function 
effectively. BWA staff 
understand how to use 
the systems 
implemented and follow -
up accordingly  
Output 3.1 : Improved 
capabilities of 
wastewater technical # of customized 
trainings 
developed/adopted  Final course 
materials/training 
pack age BWA completed 
the following 
training courses Customised 
courses 
developed/ado12 customised 
courses 
developed/adoSkilled trainers are 
available to lead course 
design and execution


---
*Page 98*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
  
  
 personnel to operate, 
maintain and monitor 
and implement climate 
change adaptation 
planning strategies for 
wastewater 
management  during 2021:  
UWI/BWA 
Gender 
Sensitivity 
Training - 500 
staff members  
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety 
Certification 
Training - 25 
people  
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety short 
course online 
available for all 
staff (749)  
Media Training 
for staff to 
present 
effectively - TBC 
by HR  
Heavy equipment 
operator/Defensiv
e driver training - 
TBC by HR  
Diploma in 
Procurement and 
Supply (CIPS) - 1 
staff member 
enrolled  
Diploma in 
Insurance - 1 
staff member 
from legal and pted for:  
SCADA system  
UWI/BWA 
Gender 
Sensitivity 
Training 
program and 
climate change 
adapted and 
delivered for 
BWA 
operations.  
Climate change 
nexus with 
biosecurity an d 
wastewater  
PV refresher 
training course 
offerings from 
CVQ & NVQ 
(Caribbean and 
National 
Vocational 
Qualifications)  
Industrial waste 
inspector  
CCTV 
equipment  pted covering 
topics such as:  
SCADA 
system  
UWI/BWA 
Gender 
Sensitivity 
Training 
program 
(including 
SGBV 
prevention) 
and climate 
change 
adapted and 
delivered for 
BWA 
operations.  
Climate 
change nexus 
with 
biosecurity and 
wastewater  
PV refresher 
training course 
offerings from 
CVQ & NVQ 
(Caribbean 
and National 
Vocat ional 
Qualifications)  
Industrial 
waste 
inspector  
CCTV 
equipment


---
*Page 99*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
  
  
 compliance dept.  
Annual Fraud 
Conference 
participation via 
IDB 
Non-revenue 
water training via 
IDB 
Supervisory 
management 
training  
Executive 
Development 
course  
Personal 
Development 
core sills course  
Customer 
services  
Working at 
elevated heights - 
12 persons  
MSC in Water 
and 
Environmental 
Management - 1 
person  Operator 
training 
program based 
on upgraded 
systems  
Laboratory 
testing, 
analysis and 
management  
Management 
of the 
decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment 
plants  
CAS and RO 
technologies  
SOPs and 
operational 
manual 
updated as 
well as the risk 
management 
framework 
developed to 
meet the 
needs of the 
upgraded 
system  
CMMS  
Sewer 
monitoring and 
instrumentatio
n   
General 
wastewater


---
*Page 100*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
  
  
 course (safety, 
no exam)  
# of persons trained 
(disaggregated by 
sex) registration forms for 
trainings, certificates of 
completion  BWA Staff 
members 
completed the 
following training 
courses during 
2021:  
UWI/BWA 
Gender 
Sensitivity 
Training - 500 
staff members  
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety 
Certification 
Training - 25 
people  
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety short 
course online 
available for all 
staff (749)  
MSC in Water 
and 
Environmental 
Management - 1 
person (ongoing)  
 
No staff member 
has been trained 
in any of the 
following - 
SCADA,  The target for 
the following 
training is to 
have 50/50 
distribution of 
males and 
females where 
possible:  
 
SCADA – 20 
operators/techn
icians    
 
Gender 
Sensitivity – 
200 staff 
members (new 
staff and staff 
lost by attrition)    
 
PV course – 25 
members from 
electrical 
section  
 
Industrial waste 
inspector - 3 
operators  
 
CCTV 
equipment - 6 
operators  The target for 
the following 
training is to 
have 50/50 
distribution of 
males and 
females:  
 
SCADA - 20 
operators  
Gender 
Sensitivity - 
300 staff 
members  
Climate 
change nexus 
with 
biosecurity and 
wastewater - 
300 staff 
members  
PV training 
course - 25 
members  
Industrial 
waste 
inspector - 3 
operators  
CCTV 
equipment - 6 
operators  
Operator 
training - 8 
operators  Willingness and 
availability of BWA staff 
to participate in training 
opportunities. Assumes  
a total of 400 individuals 
trained (no double 
counting)  
 
There are equal number 
of men and women 
working the areas of 
specialized training, 
therefore achieving 
parity in training targets.


---
*Page 101*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
  
  
 Climate change 
nexus with 
biosecurity and 
wastewater, PV 
training, industrial 
waste inspector, 
CCTV 
equipment, 
operator training, 
lab technician 
training, 
decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment 
facilities, CAS 
and RO 
technologies, 
SOPs, 
operational 
manual and risk 
management 
framework, 
CMMS, Sewer 
moni toring and 
instrumentation.  Lab technician 
training – 3 
technicians  
Decentralized 
wastewater 
treatment 
facilities - 50 
staff  
CAS and RO 
technologies - 
50 staff  
SOPs, 
operational 
manual and 
risk 
management 
framework - 70 
operators  
CMMS - 70 
staff members  
Sewer 
monitoring and 
instrumentatio
n - 25 
waste water 
operators  
General 
wastewater 
course (safety, 
no exam) - 45 
persons  
 
Assumes a 
total of 400 
individuals 
trained (no


---
*Page 102*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
  
  
 double 
counting) (50% 
males and 
50% females)  
# of documents 
updated/developed 
(disaggregate by type 
- SOPs, operational 
manual, risk 
management 
framework)  Final risk f ramework, 
SOPs. O&M manual and 
project document  0 manuals 
updated. The 
O&M manual 
currently being 
utilized was 
published in 1982 
when the BSTP 
was 
commissioned. 
Risk 
management 
framework not 
adopted by BWA  
The SOPs are 
also dated.  1 updated set 
of SOPs  
1 updated O&M 
manual  
1 risk 
management 
framework  1 updated set 
of SOPs  
1 updated 
O&M manual  
1 risk 
management 
framework  Expertise available to 
support the updating of 
documents. 
Stakeholders are 
available and actively 
participate.  
Output 3.2 :  A strategic 
plan is developed to 
guide the replication of 
water treatment 
facilities along the west 
coast  # of plans completed 
for the replication of 
the brackish water RO 
treatment plant along 
the west coast 
corridor  Final strategic plan  0 plans exist  1 strategic plan 
completed  1 strategic plan 
completed  Expertise available to 
undertake the study  
Outcome 4 : An 
enabling environment is 
created for wastewater 
technologies and use of 
reclaimed water  and 
promote ownership and 
leadership in the 
private sector  # of private 
businesses (by 
ownership 
Male/Female)  and 
individuals (by sex) 
adapting wastewater 
technologies for 
enhan ced treatment 
and/or use of 
wastewater   MOUs/agreements, 
interviews with private 
businesses and 
individuals.   As of 2018, there 
were sixty -eight 
(68) private 
wastewater 
treatment plants 
recorded for 
Barbados.  No change 
from baseline . 20 private 
businesses 
and individuals 
adapting /utilizi
ng wastewater 
technologies 
for enhanced 
treatment 
and/or use of 
wastewater  Businesses and 
individuals are interested 
in wastewater systems 
and its benefits and 
leverage the 
mechanisms available 
(incentives and RAF F) 
and provide co -financing, 
if needed


---
*Page 103*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
  
  
 Level of effectiveness 
of the re -education 
and public education 
programme  
 
 
 
Number of persons 
aware about 
wastewater reuse and 
technologies.  Interviews with training 
beneficiaries, training 
evaluation reports  
 
 
 
 
 
Post workshop 
evaluations  TBC - KAP 
survey planned 
for activity 4.3.1 
to establish 
baselines and 
training needs  
 
 
Limited 
Awareness  and 
public outreach  Training 
material 
developed and 
available.  
 
 
 
1000 persons  
heighten  
awareness  
after training 
and public 
outreach  Statistically 
significant 
differences  in 
KAP from the 
baseline KAP 
survey.   
 
 
10,000  
persons 
heighten  
awareness   
and public 
outreach  Trainees find the training 
relevant and apply the 
knowledge gained.  
Output 4.1 :  
Governance and 
planning roadmaps 
enhanced to enable 
use of reclaimed water 
in a controlled and 
regulated manner  # of roadmaps/action 
plans, with 
recommended 
actions, completed 
(Disaggregate by 
type: legislative 
review, master plan)  Final master plan, 
legislative review report 
and knowledge products  There is a long 
list of policy and 
legislation 
relevant to 
wastewater 
management in 
Barbados. The 
most recent 
include the 
Planning and 
Development Act, 
Water Reuse Bill 
and Regulations.  1 Legislative 
review 
comp leted; 
knowledge 
products 
(video, booklet, 
infographic) 
developed  
1 water and 
sanitation 
master plan 
completed  1 Legislative 
review 
completed; 
knowledge 
products 
(video, booklet, 
infographic) 
developed  
1 water and 
sanitation 
master plan 
completed  Expertise  available to 
undertake review. 
National technical 
authorities provide timely 
input and 
recommendations in the 
review process. There is 
buy-in to implement the 
recommendations of the 
legislative review  
Output 4.2 :  
Mechanisms 
developed/expanded to 
encourage the adoption 
of wastewater 
treatment and reuse 
applications by private 
individuals and 
businesses.  # of stakeholder 
engagement 
tools/mechanisms 
developed. 
(Disaggregate by 
type: engagement 
strategy/action plan, 
incentive pro gramme, 
RAFF)  consultant reports, final 
tools - strategy, action 
plan, incentive 
programme, interviews 
with relevant Ministry, 
Department or Agency 
(MDA), RAFF 
documentation, 
MOUs/Agreement with No incentive 
programme in 
place for 
wastewater 
reuse, no private 
sector 
engagement 
strategy in place 
and the RAFF is 1 private sector 
engagement 
strategy 
completed, 
RAFF 
documentation 
reflects 
wastewater 
reuse, report 1 private 
sector 
engagement 
strategy 
completed, 
RAFF 
documentation 
reflects 
wastewater Stakeholders are 
receptive t o the 
engagement strategies 
and are interested in 
wastewater reuse.


---
*Page 104*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
  
  
 private sector, marketing 
and educational materials 
on the RA FF not 
operationalized 
as yet (to be 
done by WSRN 
project)  on 
recommendatio
ns for incentive 
programme 
completed  reuse, report 
on 
recommendati
ons for 
incentive 
programme 
completed  
Output 4.3 :  Gender 
Sensitive Public 
Education and 
Awareness Campaign 
Implemented.  
 # of persons 
benefitting from 
education and training 
activities 
(Disaggregated by 
sex) social media analytics, 
website analytics, 
registration forms, photos  BWA hosts the 
following types of 
PEA related 
activities:  
Water 
Wednesdays - 5 
minutes on TV 
talking about 
water related 
issues  
General Town 
Hall meetings  
Community 
Outreach - open 
discussions /conv
ersations 
between 
individuals and 
Senior Staff at 
BWA in Churches  
Community Walk 
Through - open 
discussions/conv
ersations 
between 
individuals and 
Senior Staff at 
BWA  
BWA also has 6 schools (mix 
of prim ary and 
secondary) per 
year for 2 years 
= 12 schools x 
25 students per 
school=  300 
students (50% 
males and 50% 
females) .   
 
4-8 community 
consultations 
(Town halls , 
outreach, walk 
through etc) 
per year = 8 -16 
communities 
over 2 years x 
75 persons per 
commu nity = 
600-1200 
community 
persons (50% 
males and 50% 
females)  
 
3 sessions 
(workshops, 6 schools per 
year for 5 
years = 30 
schools x 25 
students per 
school = 750 
students  (50% 
males and 
50% females)  
 
6 community 
consultations 
per year for 5 
years = 30 
communities 
over 5 years = 
2250 
community 
persons  (50% 
males and 
50% females)  
(assuming 
attendance of 
75 persons per 
consultation)  
 
14 sessions 
(workshops, 
meetings, MIBP A and BWA will be 
involved in the 
communication strategy. 
Communication about 
this Project, in suitable 
formats and inclusive of 
all stakeholders, will be 
ongoing throughout the 
life of the Project. There 
is the willingness of 
people to attend and 
share fe edback at the 
consultation activities 
planned.


---
*Page 105*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
  
  
 Instagram  and 
Facebook  that 
provides of 
updates.  meetings, 
training etc) 
each targeting 
15 farmers 
convened = 45 
farmers  (60% 
males and 40% 
females)   
 
3 sessions 
(workshops, 
meetings, 
training etc) 
each targeting 
15 priv ate 
sector = 45 
private 
businesses  training etc) 
each targeting 
20 farmers 
convened = 
280 farmers. 
This will 
include 
targeted 
training for the 
155 farmers  
(60% males 
and 40% 
females)  along 
the 9km 
pipeline 
benefiting from 
reclaimed 
water for 
primarily 
agriculture 
(and possible 
other reuse 
purposes)  
 
8 sessions 
(workshops, 
meetings, 
training etc) 
each targeting 
15 private 
sector = 120 
private 
businesses  
# of project updates 
available on the website analytics, project 
webpage 
review/observation, BWA 0 At least 150 
updates 
comprising the At least 300 
updates 
comprising the Updates are timely, 
relevant and accessible 
to a wide cross section


---
*Page 106*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
  
  
 dedicated 3R -CReWS 
project webpage  progress reports to 
CCCCC  following  
formats:  
Videos/docume
ntary, press 
releases of 
outputs of town 
hall meetings 
within 
communities, 
case studies, 
digital flyers, 
posters), 20 
water 
Wednesdays (8 
per year), 10 
newsletters (4 
per year)  following 
formats:  
Videos/docum
entary, press 
releases of 
outputs of town 
hall meetings 
within 
communities, 
case studies, 
digital flyers, 
posters), 40 
water 
Wednesdays 
(8 per year), 
20 newsletters 
(4 per year)  of stakeholders - private 
sector, individuals, 
tourists, national 
agencies, civil society  
# of project updates 
available on the 
dedicated social 
media accounts  social media account hits, 
views, likes - YouTube , 
Instagram, Twitter  and 
Facebook  0 At least 1500 
combined posts 
on the social 
media accounts  At least 5000 
combined 
posts on the 
social media 
accounts  
(expected to 
reach over 
90,000 
persons)  Followers find the 
information useful and 
return frequently for 
updates  
Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
More water available for 
the agriculture sector  % of the total ground 
water resources 
extracted and used 
for agricultural BWA consumption data, 
flow meters measuring 
reclaimed water 
produced, BWA reports, 
site visit and 
observations.On farm 
survey/meter readings  16% of total 
extractions is 
used for 
agriculture 
purpuses ,  No change 
from baseline   10% of total 
extractions is 
used for 
agriculture 
purpuses . BSTP upgrades 
completed and 
distribution system in 
place.


---
*Page 107*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
  
  
  
69 Approximately 57 Mm3/y is extract ed from groundwater resources for domestic potable water distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/y is extracted for 
agricultural irrigation (See Feasibility Study).  
70 H2S levels to be baseline at the beginning of the project.  Similarly, the mid -term and fina l targets will be determined at the beginning at the project relative 
to the baselined. The BWA recently made some adjustments to the plant’s operations as such it would be best to baseline the complaints using Ja nuary to 
December 2022.   purposes. 
purposes69.  
Improved water quality 
in the marine 
environment  Amount of wastewater 
discharged into 
marine environment  BWA Reports and flow 
meters data, Research, 
project documents, site 
visit, survey of plant 
employees.  An estimated 
2.25 million m3 
per year of 
treated 
wastewater 
discharged into 
marine 
environment.  No change 
from baseline  Less than 10% 
of treated 
wastewat er 
discharged 
discharged into 
marine 
environment . BSTP upgrades 
completed and 
distribution system in 
place.  
Improved air quality in 
the proximity of the 
plant  Level of H2S 
emissions  
 
Number odour 
complaints from 
communities 
surrounding of the 
BSTP and lift stations 
received per year  Survey in surrounding 
communities and plant 
employees, 
Environmental Protection 
Department (EPD) 
reports, Ministry of Health 
reports.  TBD70 TBD  TBD BSTP fully upgraded and 
operational.  
 
Increased participation 
of women in the 
production and use of 
reclaimed water  Number of persons  
(by sex), , involved in 
the production 
reclaimed water  
 
Number of persons 
(by sex) involved in 
the use of reclaimed 
water  BWA Human Reso urce 
Department, Ministry of 
Agriculture Database, 
Project reports, surveys.  8.6 males to 1 
female working at 
the BSTP  
 
 
 
 
0 No change 
expected  
 
 
 
 
No change 
expected  5 males to 1 
female working 
at the BSTP  
 
 
 
62 female 
farmers 
utilising of 
reclaimed 
water  BWA increases female 
staff by 3 females 
holding current males 
staff of 26 constant.  
 
 
Women have and or gain 
access to agriculture 
lands and financing and 
training needed to 
participate in the


---
*Page 108*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
  
  
 production and u se of 
reclaimed water.   
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. 
Add rows as needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in se ction E.5. Similarly, please number 
sub-activities as shown below to associate to the related activity.  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and 
convert/upgrade the existing 
conventional activated sludge (CAS) 
biological treatment process at the 
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant 
to tertiary filtration and disinfection for 
achieving national reclaimed water -
quality standards.  The CAS represents the simplest 
process configuration to operate and 
the least expensive to implement 
(similar in operation to the existing 
BSTP Contact Stabilization CAS 
process) and w ill achieve a high 
tertiary water quality suitable for reuse 
applications. As no expansion of the 
sewer or additional is contemplated 
that would need to increase the 
treatment capacity beyond the current 
CAS process capabilities, the existing 
contact stabi lization could be 
upgraded by reconfiguring the existing 
aerobic, contact stabilization, sludge 
digestion and clarifiers into a pre -
anoxic/aerobic configuration to 
achieve complete nitrification and high 
efficiency denitrification to meet the 
maximum total  nitrogen concentration 
requirement of 5 mg -N/L, along with 
the addition of two new clarifiers, 
tertiary filtration and disinfection.  
Recirculation pumps, mixers and 
disinfection will also need to be added 
to achieve a water quality suitable for 
water reu se applications.  
 
The first step of a CAS system is the 1.1.1.1. Contract for detailed 
enginee ring design  
1.1.1.2. Prepare tender package 
including the detailed drawings and 
specifications and bidding documents  
1.1.1.3. Public consultations  
1.1.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install 
Earthwork and Foundation, Mech. 
Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and  
Aeration, Electrical and 
Instrumentation  
1.1.1.5  Commissioning & 
Reinstatement  1.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report  
1.1.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
1.1.1.3 - 1 report on public 
consultations  
1.1.1.4 - 1 CAS 4 -stage Bardenpho 
installed at the BSTP location  
1.1.1.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Completion


---
*Page 109*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
  
  
 aeration tank, where the wastewater is 
mixed with air to activate micro -
organisms. The aeration basin is 
followed by a secondary clarifier or 
settling tank. During this step, micro -
organisms with their adsorbed organic 
material settle. Water from the clarifier 
is transported to installations for 
disinfection and final discharge or to 
other tertiary treatment units for 
further purification.  
 Activity 1.2.1:  Install reverse osmosis 
(RO) membrane filtration systems to 
reduce the total dissolved solids 
concentration of the rec laimed water 
produced at BSTP  The reverse osmosis is a water 
separation technology where 
dissolved contaminants in water are 
physically removed by passing under 
pressure through a semipermeable, 
thin film membrane. The process is 
similar to the way your b ody’s cells 
absorb water. Reverse osmosis will 
remove up to 98% of dissolved 
contaminants such as: minerals, salts, 
metals and organic matter that may be 
present in a water supply. Pores in the 
reverse osmosis membrane are so 
small that only water molecule s pass 
through. The contaminants are 
rejected and discarded as wastewater.  
 
RO treatments will be required to 
remove total dissolved solids (TDS) to 
meet TDS <450 mg/L  1.2.1.1. Prepare tender package 
including the detailed drawings and 
specifications and bidding documents  
1.2.1.2. Contract for detailed 
engineering design and installation  
1.2.1.3. Construction of Earthwork and 
Foundation and installation of RO 
plant incl uding, Piping, Electrical and 
Instrumentation  
1.2.1.4  Commissioning of 7,200 m3/d 
capacity RO System  1.2.1.1 - 1 tender package with 
detailed drawings, specifications and 
bidding documents  
1.2.1.2 - 1 engineering design report  
1.2.1.3 - 1 RO plant instal led and 
operationalized  
1.2.1.4 - 1 Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Completion  
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline 
and 6 aquifer recharge wells going 
from the BSTP for irrigation and 
aquifer recharge  Length of pipeline is 9 kms that will go 
from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical 
Gardens) with take -off at Hothersal 
roundabout to Friendship plantation 
the turn south along ABC H’way And 
Then Turn North Along            Road 
up to Lears (Roberts Manufacturing) – 
irrigation can be done for lands on 1.2.2.1. Contract for detailed 
engineering design for pipeline and 
aquifer recharge wells including 
surveying geotechnical investigation, 
traffic management plan and 
easement  
1.2.2.2. Prepare tender package 
including the detailed drawings and 1.2.2.1 - 1 engineering design report 
and management plan  
1.2.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawin gs, specifications and bidding 
documents  
1.2.2.3 - 1 public consultation report  
1.2.2.4 - 9km pipeline installed and 
operationalized


---
*Page 110*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
  
  
 east and west of that road.  
Also take in Neil’s Plantation, Salters, 
Constant and Valley Plantation.  
Assume 6 aquifer recharge wells will 
be included in this option  specifications and bidding documents  
1.2.2.3. Gender Sensitve Public 
consultations  
1.2.2.4. Procure,  Construct & Install 
Earthwork and Foundation, Piping and 
Instrumentation  
1.2.2.5. Construct & install aquifer 
recharge wells  
1.2.2.6  Commissioning  
 
 
  1.2.2.5 - 6 aquifer recharge wells 
installed and operationalized  
1.2.2.6 - 1 Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Compl etion  
Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer 
monitoring programme that will 
include the installation of flow 
measurement and rain -gauging 
equipment at the BSTP to identify and 
address sources of inflow and 
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms 
that identify an d reduce or mitigate 
vulnerabilities in the wastewater 
collection systems will also be 
investigated.  Monitoring includes the installation of 
flow measurement and rain gauging 
systems at the BSTP, within 
manholes, and visual (qualitative) 
observations duri ng wet and dry 
weather. Installation of sensors with 
alarms that detect when the water 
levels are at or above a critical height 
in the area of the manholes to act as 
an early detection system that will 
help the BWA/drainage division to 
respond to potential  flooding early will 
also be undertaken. BWA will 
implement real -time evaluation of 
climate -related risks by establishing a 
routine data analysis program based 
on inputs provided from the flow 
meters and rain -gauging stations to be 
able to take mitigat ion/response 
actions in a timely manner  1.3.1.1. Prepare tendering package 
for detailed design, equipment 
specification and bidding requirements  
1.3.1.2. Select vendor and procure 
equipment  
1.3.1.3. Install equipment and test  1.3.1.1 - 1 engineering design reports 
with equipment specifications  
1.3.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
1.3.1.3 - Sewer monitoring equipment 
installed and operationalized  
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on -site 
laboratory facilities and personnel at 
the BSTP to generate influent and 
effluent water quality data to inform 
operations control strategies that 
optimize operations and reduce An on -site laboratory will be 
established at the BSTP to analyse  
influent and wastewater treatment 
effluent quality for BSTP and the Zone 
An area cluster wastewater treatment 
plants, when they have been 
established. There will also be routine 1.3.2.1. Contract for engineering 
design  
1.3.2.2. Prepare tender package 
including the detailed drawings and 
specifications and bidding documents   
1.3.2.3. Select vendor, retrofit and 
equip laboratory at BSTP for 1.3.2.1 - 1 laboratory design report 
and equipment specifications that 
meet the needs o f the upgraded 
system - location, layout, equipment, 
reagents, protocols, staffing etc.  
1.3.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding


---
*Page 111*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
  
  
 energy consumption and GHG 
emissions.  (monthly) tes ting of groundwater wells 
that have been identified for aquifer 
recharge (among others managed by 
BWA).  analysing influent and effluent quality  
1.3.2.4. Recruit laboratory technicians  
1.3.2.5  Commissioning  documents  
1.3.2.3 - 1 on-site laboratory 
established and analysing influent 
and effluent quali ty  
1.3.2.4 - 2 laboratory technicians in 
place and managing the on -site 
laboratory  
1.3.2.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Completion  
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a 
Computerized Real -time Management 
System (CMMS) at the BSTP to 
inform decision m aking and climate 
resilient building  Develop a computer model -based 
simulation and control program to 
enable operations staff to track and 
interpret operations data and 
determine appropriate process 
changes. BWA currently uses SCADA 
that requires some addi tional 
equipment to enhance its capacity to 
function as an automated CMMS.  1.3.3.1. Contract for system design 
and equipment specification  
1.3.3.2. Prepare tender package with 
detailed drawings, specifications and 
bidding documents  
1.3.3.3. Procure, insta ll and configure 
a reporting software program, sensors 
for the tanks to monitor dissolved 
oxygen content and sludge, brackets 
for mounting sensors and displays for 
sensors installed.  
1.3.3.4. Establish a scheduled 
triggering system to ensure that when 
PM is due on a piece of equipment the 
Supervisor assigned to the equipment 
is alerted so they may assign the work 
to a staff member, or other team 
member  
1.3.3.5. Track the performance for a 
minimum of one year to confirm and 
verify calibration under seasona l 
operating conditions and to ensure 
that PM tasks are being completed  1.3.3.1 - 1 CMMS design report and 
equipment specifications  
1.3.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
1.3.3.3 - a) 1 SCADA reporting 
software installed, b) 8 DO sensors 
and brackets installed and working, c) 
2 sludge sensors installed and 
working, d) 3 displays installed and 
working  
1.3.3.4 - 1 triggering system manual 
developed  
1.3.3.5 - 1 annual CMMS 
performance report with 
recommendations completed  
Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small 
(cluster) decentralized wastewater 
collection and treatment systems in 
Zone A locations to produce reuse 
quality water for domestic/commercial 
non-potable water applications.  The decentralized wastewater 
systems will address the collection, 
treatment and disposal of the sewage 
in each area. The designs will 
consider the reuse of treated effluent  
generated within the service area and 
the safe disposal or use of excess 1.4.1.1. Contract for engineering 
design for collection, treatment, and 
disposal of sewage in the areas. This 
should include: Drone and 
topographic survey of the areas, 
social survey for the areas to 
determine extent of existing sanitary  1.4.1.1 - 1 engineering design report  
1.4.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
1.4.1.3 - 1 report on public 
consultations  
1.4.1.4 - 2 small decentralized


---
*Page 112*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
  
  
 treated effluent, if applicable. The 
design will continuously and reliably 
meet effluent and biosolids 
requirements that are in full 
compliance with GOB Environmental 
Protection Depa rtment Regulations  facilities, pit latrines, existing methods 
of wastewater disposal, Horizontal 
alignment of roads (for access and 
maintenance), Design of drainage and 
other infrastructure  and Effluent reuse 
or disposal systems  
1.4.1.2. Tender package including the 
detai led drawings and specifications 
and bidding documents  
1.4.1.3. Public consultations  
1.4.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install 
Earthwork and Foundation, Mech. 
Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and 
Aeration, Electrical and 
Instrumentation  
1.4.1.5  Commissioni ng wastewater collection and treatment 
systems installed and operationalized  
1.4.1.5 -1 Supervising Engineer's 
Certification of Completion  
    
Activity 2.1.1:  Install a grid -tied 
Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy 
Systems to offset increased power 
consumption associated with the 
centralized treatmen t plant process 
upgrades using Category 3 hurricane 
resistant solar panels  To reduce the amount of emissions 
generated from energy consumption 
the PV system, with battery storage, 
will be ground -mounted in close 
proximity to the BTSTP WWTP. The 
installation of the PV systems will 
require civil and electrical work. 
Approvals are required from the 
Government Electrical Engineering 
Department (GEED), Barbados Light 
and Power (BL&P), and the Division of 
Energy. MESBE (Ministry of Energy, 
Small Busine ss and Entrepreneurship) 
would have an interest in reviewing 
proposed renewable energy design 
options, such as solar.  2.1.1.1. Contract for engineering 
design and specifications for the PV 
system  
2.1.1.2. Application to Division of 
Energy, BLPC, GED and T own and 
Country Planning for PV system 
(including ESIA, if deemed necessary)  
2.1.1.3. Preparation of tender 
document for the installation of the 
grid-tied PV  
2.1.1.4. Select vendor and install  
2.1.1.5. Undertake certification and 
licensing process for t he 
commissioning of the PV system  2.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report  
2.1.1.2 - 1 application to Division of 
Energy, BLPC, GED and Town and 
Country Planning  completed  
4) 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
5) 1 MW of PV equipment installed  
6) 1 Certificate and License of 1MW 
of PV  
Activity 2.1.2:  Implement automated 
controls and energy efficiency 
measured within the upgraded 
centralized treatment processes to 
reduce the overall energy footprint 
and reduce GHG emissions.  The power for aeration is normally the 
largest energy consumption within the 
plant, typically consuming 40% or 
more of the total energy demand, 
even a small improvement in 
dissolved oxygen control can result in 2.1.2.1. Undertake engineering 
assessment of control systems to 
minimize power consumption  
2.1.2.2. Prepare tender package 
including th e detailed drawings and 
specifications and bidding documents   2.1.2.1 -1 engineering assessment 
report  
2.1.2.2 -1 tend er package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents


---
*Page 113*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
  
  
 significant energy efficiency 
improvements. Hence, the installation 
of variable speed blower controls will 
allow BWA to minimize energy input at 
the BSTP  2.1.2.3. Select mechanical -electrical 
contractor and install variable 
frequency drives (VFDs), EE pumps , 
blowers  and other EE equipment  2.1.2.3 - EE equipment installed and 
operating  
Activity 2.1.3:  Install sludge 
dewatering equipment to improve 
energy efficiency and reduce the 
overall GHG and CO2 emissions 
associated wit h the biosolids.  The wet sludge contains about 2% 
solids according to the O&M Manual, 
(1982). If the sludge can be 
dewatered to have 15% to 20% solids 
content, which is very typical with 
modern sludge dewatering 
technology, the volume of the sludge 
needing  to be trucked out and 
disposed of would be reduced to only 
roughly 15% to 10% of the current 
volume.  2.1.3.1. Engineering design and 
specifications including assessment of 
quantity of biosolids  
2.1.3.1. Prepare tender package 
including the detailed drawi ngs and 
specifications and bidding document   
2.1.3.3. Select vendor to provide WAS 
Pump, centrifuge package, solids 
dewatering, holding tank and chemical 
equipment   
2.1.3.4. Construct and Install sludge 
dewatering technology including 
piping and electric al E&C  
 
 2.1.3.1 - 1 engineering design report  
2.1.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed 
drawings, specifications and bidding 
documents  
2.1.3.3 - Goods received report  
2.1.3.4 - 1 sludge dewatering system 
installed and operationalized  
    
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide 
specialized and customized training  to 
support the operations and 
maintenance of wastewater collection 
and treatment facilities including 
photovoltaic equipment  Before launching the CMMS, all staff 
must be educated and trained on  the 
system. Training will also be extended 
to other Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies, as appropriate. The 
following training topics have been 
deemed a priority given the scope of 
this project and being cognizant of 
BWA's training needs:   
SCADA, Gende r Sensitivity, PV 
installations, Sewer monitoring 
instrumentation installed (flow meters, 
rain gauges), SOPs and operational 
manual updated, CAS and RO 
upgrades, CMMS, decentralized 
treatment system maintenance, lab 
technician training, industrial waste 
inspector training, CCTV equipment, 3.1.1.1. Conduct an assessment to 
develop and implement customised 
courses  
3.1.1.2. Prepare training materi als  
3.1.1.3 (a). Pre -workshop evaluation  
3.1.1.3 (b) Convene training 
sessions/workshops and prepare 
reports for the following areas - 
SCADA, Gender Sensitivity, PV 
installations, Sewer monitoring 
instrumentation installed (flow meters, 
rain gauges), SOP s and operational 
manual updated, CAS and RO 
upgrades, CMMS, decentralized 
treatment system maintenance, lab 
technician training, industrial waste 
inspector training, CCTV equipment, 3.1.1.1 - 1 Assessment report  
3.1.1.2 -Training materials for the 
various courses/workshops 
developed  
3.1.1.3 (a) - pre workshop evaluation 
reports,  
3.1.1.3 (b) - 12 Training reports with 
registration forms and training 
evaluations completed  
3.1.1.3 (c) - post worksh op evaluation 
reports


---
*Page 114*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
  
  
 and operator training. These are 
approximately 12 training topics which 
might be merged pending contractors 
used.  and operator training  
3.1.1.3 (c) Post workshop evaluation  
Activity 3.1.2:  Update Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOP) and 
Operational Manual that addresses 
the requirements of the upgrades, 
preventative maintenance, operator 
safety, and environmental monitoring, 
including specific risks posed by to 
climate change and gender and social 
inclusion considerations adaptation 
and preventative maintenance.  Update Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) and Operational 
Manual with operational duties and 
responsibilities that are reflective of 
the requirements of the upgraded 
systems and technologies, and that 
promote an optimal preventative 
maintenance programme, operator 
safety, and environmental monitoring, 
including specific risks posed by to 
climate change and gender and social 
inclusion con siderations adaptation 
and preventative maintenance.  3.1.2.1. Develop baseline report to 
review or develop standard operating 
procedures and operational manuals 
to reflect the requirements of the 
upgrades  
3.1.2.2. Convene consultations with 
relevant stake holders to review and 
feedback on the draft SOP and 
operational manual  
3.1.2.3. Finalize SOP and operational 
manual  
3.1.2.4. Develop knowledge products 
on the SOP and OM  
3.1.2.5. Convene workshops on the 
SOP and OM  3.1.2.1 - 1 baseline report for the 
updating of the SOP and OM  
3.1.2.2 - 1 stakeholder consultation 
report based on sessions with 
stakeholders to update the SOP and 
OM 
3.1.2.3 - 1 updated SOP and OM  
3.1.2.4 - knowledge products on SOP 
and OM  
3.1.2.5 - 1 workshop report  
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement 
a risk management framework to 
support the sustainable management 
of BWA’s operations.  This risk management framework will 
be developed in consultation with all 
departments to identify the risk 
register, existing controls and further 
actions needed and opportunities for 
improvement, and train staff in its 
operation and further development. 
The latter will be implemented by 
BWA during the course of the project 
and assessed at the end of the project 
as a gauge of the level of 
sustainabil ity built into the BWA’s 
operations.  3.1.3.1. Develop baseline report on 
the existing risk management 
framework for BWA’s operations 
3.1.3.2. Convene consultations with 
BWA staff to elaborate the risk 
register and other key sections of the 
risk management  framework  
3.1.3.3. FInalize the risk management 
framework  
3.1.3.4. Convene training on risk 
management framework  
3.1.3.5. Evaluate/Review and update 
the risk management framework 
annually to ensure it is 
current/relevant to the existing 
operational env ironment  3.1.3.1 - 1 baseline report  
3.1.3.2 - 1 consultation report of 
sessions with BWA staff to elaborate 
the risk management framework 
(RMF)  
3.1.3.3 - 1 final updated risk 
management framework  
3.1.3.4 - 1 training report  
3.1.3.5 - 1 evaluation/review report on 
the suitability of the RMF and 
recommendations  
Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop 
a strategic plan for the installation of 
water treatment facilities along the 
west coast corridor for augmenting This will promote indirect potable 
reuse options for wastewater. This 
increases the utility and beneficiaries 
of treated wastewater since it can be 3.2.1. 1. Conduct  a situation and gap 
analysis of the wastewater disposal 
practices and its effects on ground 
water supply along the west coast 3.2.1.1 - 1 situation and gap analysis 
report  
3.2.1.2 - 1 report on stakeholder 
consultations convened (for validation


---
*Page 115*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
  
  
 water supply and protecting  the west 
coast ecosystem.  treated by an existing RO plant and be 
distributed through the existing water 
network to all consumers.  corridor.  
3.2.1.2. Conduct stakeholder 
consultations (for validation and 
sensitization)  
3.2.1.3. Develop a Strategic Master 
Plan to construct reverse osmosis 
water treatment plants to extract and 
treat brackish groundwater, extracted 
from areas impacted by decentralized 
onsite wastewater ground disposal 
practices along the west coast 
corridor , to produce drinking water.  and sensitization)  
3.2.1.3 - 1 Strategic Master Plan  
    
Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative 
review to promote the Planning and 
Development Act, Wastewater Reuse 
Bill and other related legislations for 
enhancing wastewater effluent quality, 
treatment options and re -use 
requirements and applications. The 
review will also include 
recomme ndations for strengthening - 
private sector engagement, public -
private partnerships, building codes, 
resiliency to climate change and equal 
opportunities and access to males and 
females.  There has been legislative 
advancement of the wastewater 
agenda in Ba rbados during the 
conceptualisation of this project. 
Hence, the project will support the 
advancement of wastewater related 
provisions through knowledge 
management products and the 
elaboration of a road map with key 
actions.  4.1.1.1. Baseline assessment of  
legislations and recommendations of 
what is required to advance 
wastewater treatment and reuse in 
Barbados  
4.1.1.2. Convened 
interviews/stakeholder consultations  
4.1.1.3. Develop road map with key 
actions to advance wastewater 
treatment and reuse in Barb ados  
4.1.1.4. Convene workshops  on 
validation and stakeholder 
sensitization  
4.1.1.5. Prepare knowledge 
management products such as 
videos, booklet, infographics etc., to 
promote awareness of what is 
required.  4.1.1.1 - 1 baseline report with 
recommendati ons 
4.1.1.2 - 1 report on interviews and 
consultations with key stakeholders   
4.1.1.3 - 1 road map (strategic action 
plan)  
4.1.1.4 - 1 report on workshops 
(validation and sensitization)  
4.1.1.5 - Knowledge products 
developed (video, booklet, 
infographic)  
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and 
sanitation master plan that includes an 
optimal combination of decentralized, 
cluster and centralized water 
reclamation and reuse applications, 
with the centralized reclaimed water The lessons emer ging from this 
project can provide key input into the 
shaping of this strategy based on the 
combination of centralized and 
decentralized wastewater treatment 
technologies being implemented, as 4.1.2.1. Undertake situational analysis 
on the water and sanitation sector in 
Barbados, including a review of water 
resources planning  and governance  in 
Barbados, generated by BWA, similar 
studies in the Caribbean region f rom 4.1.2.1 - 1 situational analysis with 
recommendations report based on  
literature review and stakeholder 
consultations  
4.1.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder 
consultations


---
*Page 116*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
  
  
 being transmitted and used for 
agricult ural irrigation or industrial use 
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water 
transmission). This strategy will also 
take into consideration the social, 
gender -related and climate risks in the 
design and prioritizing of water reuse 
strategies.  well as lessons from the use of 
renewable energy technologies a nd 
engaging the private sector.   other international institutions and 
consideration of implications and 
recommendations of the current water 
protection and land use policy and the 
water reuse policy.  
4.1.2.2. Convene 
meetings/consultations with key 
stakeholders  
4.1.2.3. Develop a wat er and 
sanitation Master Plan  
4.1.2.4. Convene high level meetings 
to validate and promote awareness of 
the findings and recommendations 
and foster commitment to implement 
the strategy  4.1.2.3 - 1 water and sanitation 
master plan  
4.1.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder 
sensitization report  
Activity 4.2.1  :  Develop a strategy and 
action plan to engage the private 
sector in the provision and adoption of 
wastewater treatment technology and 
the utilization of wastewater by-
products  such as activated sludge. 
This includes conducting an 
assessment to identify opportunities 
for public -private partnership in the 
water and wastewater sector, 
especially for the expansion of the 
decentralized onsite cluster 
wastewater systems. The strategy w ill 
also promote gender equality and 
women empowerment  Private sector buy -in is essential for 
sustainability, scalability and 
replicability; therefore, strategic 
approaches for engaging and 
collaborating with these important 
stakeholders during, and after this 
project, will be identified. There is a 
potential role for the private sector to 
collaborate with BWA to utilize the 
dewatered sludge from the STPs and 
sludge the decentralized locations and 
process it for energy recovery, the 
recovery of nutrients an d/or the 
production of bio -solids which could 
be sold as a fertilizer or soil 
conditioner.  Such a facility would also 
accept other forms of waste from 
other industries and that this would be 
needed to be able to achieve input 
volumes to make such a facili ty 
commercially viable.   4.2.1.1. Undertake a baseline analysis 
of the private sector capacity and 
needs for engaging in the provision 
and adoption of wastewater 
technologies and use of wastewater 
by-products .  
4.2.1.2. Convene 
consultations/meetings with  key 
stakeholders  
4.2.1.3. Prepare strategy and action 
plan 
4.2.1.4. Develop knowledge products 
4.2.1.5. Convene stakeholder 
validation and sensitization workshop 
(s) 4.2.1.1 - 1 baseline analysis report  
4.2.1.2 - 1 report of stakeholder 
consultation  
4.2.1.3 - 1 private sector strategy and 
action plan  
4.2.1.4. Knowledge products 
available  
4.2.1.5. 1 report on stakeholder 
validation and sensitization


---
*Page 117*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
  
  
 Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and 
identify recommendations for a gender 
sensitive and socially inclusive 
incentive programme to encourage 
conservation, recycle, re -use. Incentives for water conservation 
includes demand side management 
including pricing policies to incentivize 
reuse practices. Proposed incentives 
can include:  
-Examine willin gness to pay for non -
potable reuse water versus payment 
for potable water as an incentive to 
use reuse water.  This could be done 
as a stakeholder survey  
-Consider a scaled water use billing 
system to encourage water 
management and conservation  
-A reward system for individuals 
coming forward to identify potential 
Non-Revenue water (e.g. hydrants 
leaking, wet areas that shouldn’t be 
wet, illegal water connections, etc.)  
-Reduced development cost charges 
for residential and commercial 
developments that estab lish their own 
water reclamation and reuse system – 
reducing impact on government 
infrastructure  
-Reduced potable water rates for 
residential and commercial 
developments that establish their own 
water reclamation and reuse system – 
reducing impact on gover nment 
infrastructure  
-Reduced electrical power rates for 
residential and commercial 
developments that establish PV 
systems that feed into the grid 
(Europe, Canada and the US pay 
substantially more for green power 4.2.2.1. Conduct a desk review of best 
international gender -oriented practices 
and strategies for consideration in 
produ cing education and promotional 
materials and programs "best" suited 
to Barbados.  
4.2.2.2. Convene wide stakeholder 
consultations and surveys to inform 
the design of the incentive 
programme. This includes community 
level reach.  
4.2.2.3. Develop the framewo rk for the 
gender sensitive and socially inclusive 
incentive programme  
4.2.2.4. Convene high level meetings 
to validate and promote awareness of 
the findings and recommendations 
and foster commitment to implement 
the incentive programme  4.2.2.1 - 1 report on desk review  
4.2.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder 
consultations  
4.2.2.3 - 1 framework for the gender 
sensitive and socially inclusive 
incentive programme  
4.2.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder 
sensitization report


---
*Page 118*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
  
  
 that is privately produced)  
-Examine govern ment fees related to 
development costs and see if water 
and energy conservation measures 
can obtain credits or reduce fees as 
incentive  
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving 
Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to 
provide resources for the adoption of 
decentralized onsite wastewater 
systems.    RAFF to provide financing for 
retrofitting, plumbing and the 
installation of treatment systems. The 
RAFF will also be expanded to 
provide resources for enabling end 
users of reclaimed water to adapt the 
necessary technology to utilize 
available reclaimed water supply 
(such as small -scale irrigation and 
drainage systems, renewable energy 
and energy efficien cy technologies 
and water conservation technologies). 
Energy savings accruing to the BWA 
associated with the PV systems in 
Component 2 will be used to expand 
the RAFF, which is being 
implemented as part of WSRN S -
Barbados.   4.2.3.1. Convene consultations with 
private and public sector to determine 
scope of support to be covered by the 
RAFF finances.  
4.2.3.2. Update of the RAFF charter  
4.2.3.3. Sensitization on the updated 
RAFF to provide an overview of the 
resources available for the adoption of 
decentrali zed onsite wastewater 
systems.     
4.2.3.4. Production of marketing and 
educational materials on the RAFF re: 
availability of resources for the 
adoption of decentralized onsite 
wastewater systems and modalities 
for accessing resources  4.2.3.1 - 1 report o f stakeholder 
consultation and recommendations 
for the operationalisation of the RAFF 
to provide resources to private 
individuals and businesses for the 
adoption of decentralized onsite 
wastewater systems.    
4.2.3.2 - 1 updated RAFF charter  
4.2.3.3 - 1 report on RAFF 
sensitization activities  
4.2.3.4 - RAFF marketing and 
educational materials developed  
Activity 4.3.1: Re -educate 
communities, teachers, students, 
farmers and businesses about the 
impact of climate change on water 
resources and their impact on  water 
quality and quantity (availability as 
well as the importance of water reuse 
activities and indirect potable reuse 
(IPR)) to building climate resilience in 
the Water Sector.  Develop program to provide 
educational support materials for 
teachers and participate in the 
delivery of public education programs 
and associated events that serve to 
educate students. This increases the 
general knowledge within the 
community about water, so they can 
make informed decisions, starting with 
the water cycle and basic facts about 
water use to protect public safety 
before addressing water reuse. A 4.3.1.1. Undertake KAP survey to 
establish baselines and training needs 
of schools, farmers, communities and 
the private s ector.  
4.3.1.2. Produce grade -appropriate 
educational materials regarding 
limited groundwater resources, 
understanding of hydrogeology related 
to water quality protection on 
Barbados, and other water 
conservation aspects. Consultant to 
also identify optim al modalities for 4.3.1.1 - 1 KAP survey report  
4.3.1.2 - Grade -appropriate 
educational materials  
4.3.1.3 - Training programmes for 
communities, farmers and businesses  
4.3.1.4 - Training session convened 
and reports for 30 school session, 30 
community sessions, 14 sessions 
targeting farmers and 8 sessions 
targeting private sectors convened  
4.3.1.5 - final eval uation report of the


---
*Page 119*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
  
  
 change in public perception is 
required to be able to facilitate IPR. 
Water reclamation and reuse i s 
practiced globally to address limited 
water resource conditions and 
drought.  
This also includes outreach 
programmes in schools, community -
based organizations, and 
stakeholders’ groups across customer 
class as well as a Public Service 
Announcements and ed ucational 
materials that addresses best 
practices for efficient water use, 
conservation, and reuse. Further, this 
activity will develop and provide 
information resources to private 
individuals and businesses for the 
adoption of decentralized onsite 
wastewa ter systems. The re -
education programs will ensure to 
promote equal opportunities and 
access to men, women and the 
LGBTQIA community.  implementation  
4.3.1.3. Develop training programmes 
for communities, farmers and 
businesses on the nexus of climate 
change and water sector and options 
for conservation, recycle, re -use. 
Consultant to also identify optimal 
modalities for  implementation  
4.3.1.4. Implement training sessions 
through mediums deemed most 
suitable  
4.3.1.5. Final evaluation of 
effectiveness of training and lessons 
learned  effectiveness of the training and 
lessons learned  
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement 
a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness 
Campaign for community and visitors 
(tourists) through workshops, videos, 
community town hall meetings, site 
tours (demonstration of the plant 
technology and by -product reuse) and 
consultations. Emphasis will be placed 
on assuring the general public about 
food safety to ensure there is public 
acceptance and trust in the agriculture 
produce from local farms using t he Campaigns tend to be more 
successful when citizens are 
genuinely included in the decision -
making process.  This includes public 
opinion regarding the water utility or 
other agencies that promote the reuse 
project, and early public outreach to 
build trust in the community, with the 
dissemination of factual information 
beginning at the highest levels in the 
community.  By engaging the support 
of key stakeholders, they can be later 4.3.2.1. Develop a communication 
strategy to address the public 
information needs surrounding all the 
activities of the project – pipeline 
works, upgrades to the BSTP, 
decentralised plant installati on etc.   
4.3.2.2. Implement the activities of the 
PEA that should include: 
videos/documentary, town hall 
meetings within communities, multi -
media (social, newspaper, Radio and 
TV), demonstration sites, case 4.3.2.1 - 1 communication strategy  
4.3.2.2 - At least 300 updates 
comprising the following formats:  
Videos/documentary, press releases 
of outputs of town hall meetings 
within communities, case studies, 
digital flyers, posters), 40 water 
Wednesdays (8 per year), 20 
newsletters (4 per year)  
4.3.2.3 - 1 report on the effectiveness 
of the PEA campaign


---
*Page 120*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
  
  
 treated wastewater as well as the 
improved resilience of the water 
sector and the direct and indirect 
benefits on ecosystem services and 
ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to 
spur greater public and 
entrepreneurial involvement.  called upon to provide endorsements 
of water reuse.  
 
Develop and implement educational 
materials that gai n public acceptance 
of climate -related risks and water 
conservation measures. Include 
broader awareness campaign to 
address issues to manhole covers as 
a result of human interference. Create 
demonstration sites at the end user 
location sites to showcase th e benefits 
of reusing treated wastewater for 
irrigation.  studies, educational materials (flyers, 
posters)   
4.3.2.3. Final evaluation of 
effectiveness of the PEA programme 
and lessons learned  
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS 
Project Page and social media 
accounts,  which is dedicated to 
transparent measures of reporting, 
knowledge products, identify/host a 
link to the Redress Mechanism and 
provide update to all stakeholders on 
the project activities.  Develop a project dedicated website 
to serve as an education, awareness 
and transparency tool that provides 
news/updates on the implementation 
of the project activities (iii) publishes 
education and awareness products 
and (iv) serves as a redress 
mechanism among others  
 
This page will include, to the best 
extent possible, functions such as 
audio, sub -titles and/or sign language 
to encourage social inclusion from 
disabled population. The project’s 
webpage will also ensure to report 
project results disaggregated by 
gender, where possible.  
 
There will be a Kno wledge 
Management Strategy that identifies 
that goal/vision for knowledge 
management the project, provides a 4.3.3.1. Develop a knowledge 
management strategy (KMS) that will 
utilize the web page.  
4.3.3.2. De velop project web page.  
4.3.3.3. Implement KMS including 
custom materials for the project 
website and update social media 
accounts to extend the reach of the 
PEA materials. This includes 
YouTube, Twitter, Instagram and 
Facebook accounts.  4.3.3.1 - 1 knowledge management 
strategy  
4.3.3.2. - 1 project web page  
4.3.3.3. - 1 KMS and 5000 posts on 
social media - YouTube, Twitter, 
Instagram and Facebook accounts 
combined


---
*Page 121*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
  
  
 roadmap that highlights the approach 
that will be taken to implement this 
strategy, identifies key persons for 
implementing KMS, identifies and 
describes how the different project 
components will be addressed under 
the KMS, and required resources 
(time, budget and expertise) for 
executing each activity  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Project M&E Arrangements  
Indicators underpin an M&E system’s practical applicability as they serve to help practitioners know when outcomes or results  have or have not 
been achieved and inform adjustments to current interventions and decision maki ng toward future interventions. The performance indicators for the 
3R-CReWs comprise a mix of GCF core and supplementary indicators as well as project specific indicators. The M&E plan identifies  the data source, 
data collection tools, frequency, and budge t requirements for monitoring all the indicators of the project. The detailed logframe for the project contains 
the baselines and targets associated with the indicators. Collectively these tools (M&E Plan and Logframe) will provide the g uidance required to  
monitor and periodically evaluate the performance of the project and identify key lessons. There will also be a dedicated pro ject officer assigned 
with the M&E responsibilities given that this project spans a wide cross section of direct beneficiaries and  stakeholders including communities, 
farmers, government agencies and businesses. Hence, consultations and follow -up with them on the quality of products or services developed and 
lessons will be extensive.  
 
Two types of evaluations will be undertaken during the lifetime of the 3R -CReWS project – a formative and summative evaluation. Notable is that a 
key requirement of the GCF is that an assessment of the level of achievement of the paradigm shift potential b e undertaken during these stages of 
the project using a three -point scale scorecard template (to be developed by the Secretariat).  
 
Formative evaluation is generally undertaken during a project’s implementation for trying to understand why a program works  or doesn’t, and what 
other factors (internal and external) are at work during a project’s life to improve the project’s design and chance of succe ssfully achieving the 
desired outcomes. The formative evaluation will complement the final summative evaluati on. The summative evaluation of 3R -CReWS will use a 
balance of both quantitative and qualitative methods to get a better understanding of what the project has achieved, and how or why. There will also 
be emphasis on unintended consequences, the evaluation drivers of accountability and will be more outcome -focused than process focused.  
 
CCCCC -GCF Reporting Arrangement


---
*Page 122*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
  
  
 CCCCC reporting to the GCF fund will be guided by GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Accredited Entities, its Ac creditation Maste r 
Agreement and terms to be agreed in the funding agreement. Aligned with GCF’s Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Acc redited Entities, 
CCCCC will undertake continuous monitoring of the project through site visits and quarterly reports, which will  feed into semi -annual performance 
reports and an annual performance report.  
 
The Annual Performance Reports (APRs) will include the financial management reports and progress report on all activities. It  will identify potential 
risk to project activities a nd remedial action(s). These reports will also evaluate the activities against the targets set out in the logical framework, 
which are in accordance with the GCF investment framework criteria. CCCCC monitoring and reporting will consider feedback fro m dire ct 
beneficiaries: communities, farmers, businesses, and government agencies. This approach allows for a bi -directional flow of information that is not 
only important for monitoring their satisfaction with the products and allowing them to continually feedb ack on design elements but also to ensure 
that buy -in and ownership for relevant products and services are being built at the national level for sustainability, replicability, and scalability 
purposes.  
  
At the mid -term of the project the formative evaluation report will be submitted to the GCF for review. There will also be a final repor t at the end of 
the period of implementation, which will provide a holistic view of the achievements of the project, imp act, effectiveness, and efficiency (financial 
and economic), financial records, stakeholder feedback and lessons learnt. This report will also be accompanied by the final project financial audit 
to be completed by an independent and accredited auditor. All  records on this project will be kept in accordance with Clause 15.01(c) of the CCCCC’s 
Accreditation  Master Agreement.  The CCCCC will submit in English the final project report, including the final evaluation report, to the GCF within 
6 months of the com pletion of the project.  
  
BWA -CCCCC Reporting Arrangements  
To ensure the project continue to be both viable and sustainable, detailed timely reporting, monitoring and evaluation will b e carried out. The BWA, 
through the project implementation unit, will pr ovide CCCCC with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with CCCCC project 
management and performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as me asured through 
the indicator's performanc e targets, (b) key implementation issues, solutions and lessons; (c) status of implementation of the ESMP (d) updated 
procurement plan and (e) updated implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 month s of physical  completion 
of the Project. Financial audits of all accounts will also be conducted on a yearly basis. Within 3 months of physical comple tion of the Project the 
BWA will submit a project completion report to Government of Barbados and CCCCC.  
 
The Figure 15  below shows the key M&E elements, processes and relationships at play. The middle of the figure shows that there are 2 monito ring 
and evaluation processes happening; monitoring will be done continuously, and evaluation is slated for the mid and end -of ter m. Importantly, the 
tools and processes will be similar, except for the frequency of occurrence. At the top is the demand side, that is, the key persons or institutions that 
are demanding transparency and accountability. As can be seen from the Figure, the  demand side provides the impetus for the need for M&E (yellow


---
*Page 123*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
  
  
  
 
 
 arrows) and are the primary recipients of the M&E information (blue arrows). At the lower end if the supply side, that is per sons with information and 
leadership for the M&E processes.  
 
 
Figure 15: Interactions of key M&E elements, processes and relationships  
 
Monitoring: continuous process  
Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe, 
surveys, questionnaires, interview guides  
Processes: literature reviews, site visits, 
consultations, interviews undertaken 
weekly, monthly, semi -annually, as 
appropriate  
DEMAND SIDE : GCF,  Government of Barbados, Citizens of Barbados, Civil Society, AE  
Evaluation: mid and end -of term  
Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe, 
surveys, questionnaires, interview 
guides  
Processes: literature reviews, site visits, 
consultations, interviews undertak en at 
the mid and end -of-term 
 
SUPPLY SIDE : Project Implementation Unit, AE, BWA, Beneficiaries, key national 
agencies.


---
*Page 124*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
As part of output 3.1 (activity 3.1.3), a comprehensive technical and operational risk assessment, including 
climate change risks, will be undertaken as a central element of the paradigm shift and sustainability of the 
investments. A risk monitoring and management system will be established in BWA as a permanent 
management capacity. An overview of this output can be found in the relevant sections of this document (e .g., 
B.2, B.6 and E), with details provided in the Fe asibility Study (Annex 2 ) in particular includes a detailed list of 
technical and operational risks of the wastewater treatment operation. In this section a brief summary of the 
technical and operational  risks will be provided, with an emphasis on risks associated with project management 
and implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Wastewater treatment is a crucial public service that needs to be available at all times. The introduction of new 
infrastructural facilities for the treatment of wastewater carries risks associated with interruptions during 
construction, starting up the new procedures and staff experience.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
BWA staff are very familiar with the current facilities at the WTPs that will see facility upgrades. They will be 
engaged in the planning of the installation works from the beginning and be fully consulted and engaged during 
the implementation of the works. The suppliers of the new facilities will be required to install and start operation 
of all facilities, fine -tune installations over an initial operating period, as well as training of BWA staff.  
 
Infrastructure works will be un dertaken during the season when there is relatively little flow going through the 
system (e.g. outside of the main tourist season and when rains are typically low). The built -in capacity of the 
system will be utilized to buffer flows during any planned dis ruptions (such as disconnecting and reconnecting 
pipes between sub -systems), such that the system overall remains functional. Considering that the planned 
investments are for new modules to be added to the existing facilities, such planned disruptions are expected 
to be few. In the event that unexpected disruptions do occur, possibly due to external events, ocean outfall of 
raw sewage may be required as a solution of last resort, but it is not expected that this will be necessary.  
 
Further details on the fa cilities to be installed and their integration with existing facilities can be found in Annex  
2. 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Climate change forecasts indicate a reduction of rainfall of about 9% by 2050 compared to current rainfall. The 
incidence of severe storms with high rainfall events, however, is expected to increase. Such storms have the 
potential to overwhelm the wastewater treatment, as a result of surface  run-off of rain entering the sewerage 
system.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The sewerage system in Barbados is designed to only convey wastewater but storm water  enters the sewerage 
system during episodes of high rainfall nonetheless. Two main sources of stormwater entry have been 
identified: (1) manhole covers of the sewerage system are lifted by local neighbours to alleviate surface


---
*Page 125*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119 
   
 flooding; and (2) contrary to  the building code, several larger residential buildings have connected downspouts 
to the sewerage connection.  
 
The project includes activities under output 1.3 to (1) identify areas where excessively large inflows generate 
from and to notify non -compliant  building owners of their violation of the building code with an instruction to 
remediate the situation; and (2) to remove or restrict operating access to the manhole covers.  
 
If ocean outfall of raw sewage occurs, the impacts are mitigated due to the fact  that the concentration of waste 
is strongly reduced by the large volume of stormwater in the effluent.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Geologically speaking, Barbados is a limestone dome, largely formed from coral reefs over millennia. As a 
result, the subsoil is relatively porous due to significant karstification. Infiltration of tertiary treated effluent from 
the WTPs may reach the aquifer rapidly through crevasses and cav es, rather than permeate slowly through 
the soil, which could lead to contamination of the aquifer.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Barbados has a world -class geological survey, with special emphasis on the porosity of the limestone 
formations. This is driven by the importance of the limestone formation for the water supply of Barbados – 
being the only reservoir of freshwater on the island – as well as for the structural integrity of all buildings and 
infrastructure (mapping of sink holes).  
 
Figure 16: Typical karstic sub -soil in Barbados. Source: https://climatechangebarbados.com/water -
resources/  
 
The effluent from the WTPs is regularly tested to ensure compliance with regulations, particularly in relation to 
bio-safety and dissolved nutrients. The infiltration zones for the treated wastewater will be selected on the basis 
of expert knowledge of the limestone formation in BWA and other relevant government agencies. Given  that 
the Environmental Protection Department runs regular tests on the water quality to ensure that it meets World 
Health Organization standards for drinking, any contamination will be observed quickly and addressed 
immediately.


---
*Page 126*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Low 
Description  
In general, Barbados has a well -developed regulatory system, for natural environments, built -up areas, 
economic activities (such as tourism), infrastructure, and others. Compliance and enforcements, however, 
are not always effective.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Regulatory gaps will be addressed through the project and BWA will be supplied with monitoring tools to 
support enforcement of regulations.  
 
Behavioural change, such as on water use and misuse of the sewerage system, in the general population 
and government staff will take time to materialize. The project has several activities focused on sensitization 
and awareness -raising. In combination with a growing awareness  of the impacts of climate change on 
Barbados in the general population, it is expected that the irrational use of water and the sewerage 
infrastructure will reduce over time.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Low 
Description  
Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) considerations into the 
implementation of the proposed activities as well as its management.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project has been assessed according to the GCF's environmental and social protection standards and 
associated risks and mitigation measures have been identified (sections G.1 and G.2 and relevant annexes). 
A Gender Action Plan has been developed (annex 8) and will be implemented to  ensure that gender equality 
is incorporated into all interventions. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has also been 
designed based on a detailed analysis of the proposed activities. The ESMP will provide a framework for 
ensuring that proj ect activities do not have a negative impact on the environment, women, or disadvantaged 
groups.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Low Medium  
Description  
Procurement process may be compromised by application of sanctioned entities to tenders.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Procurement of goods and services for the project will be undertaken by CCCCC. CCCCC has in place a 
procurement system that complies with international standards. In particular, CCCCC will not contract any 
party who is on the United Nation sanctions list.  
 
Barbados is a participant in FATF and its regional body CFATF.


---
*Page 127*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121 
   
 There are no United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanction regimes currently under implementation for 
Barbados. In addition, no individual, entity or other group listed on the UNSC sanction s list, including the 
consolidated list, will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer or beneficiary.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Low Medium  
Description  
Currency fluctuations may impact the budget of the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
All international services will be procured in USD, hence there are no forex risks. The Barbadian Dollar is 
pegged to the USD at a rate of 1USD = 2BBD and has been stable for at least 10 years – domestically 
procured services are therefore also free of currency exchange risk.  
 
Procurement of goods for the facility upgrades at the WTPs, however, will be internationally tendered and 
may be subject to price flu ctuations when specified in a currency other than USD. The tender documents 
will require bidders to quote the goods in USD as well as local currency, if relevant, such that factoring of 
currency fluctuations are visible to both parties.


---
*Page 128*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Initial screening of the project activities indicates that the project has an ESS category B rating. This is 
because while construction is taking place, it is as an expans ion of existing facilities and without generating 
significant levels of waste or other environmental impacts. No land acquisition or displacement of peoples or 
assets is foreseen. Nevertheless, and in compliance with government regulations, a full ESIA and  an 
associated ESMP have been developed as part of this funding proposal. The ESIA and ESMP are annexed 
to this document as annexes 6A (ESIA, 2 volumes) and 6B (ESMP). The ESMP follows the Environmental 
and Social Safeguards Policy and Performance Standard s (2015) of CCCCC.  
 
The ESIA reports on the area that comprises the project intervention areas, as well as their surroundings, 
specifically defined according to each environmental issue’s characteristics. Direct and indirect influence 
areas were defined for most of the project components. The general direct influence areas include the area 
for the implementation of the water reclamation facilities and other areas attached to the construction works 
(such as construction sites and temporary support structures). Indirect influence areas correspond to a buffer 
around the different direct influence areas where effects from the construction activities or during the 
exploration phase may be felt.  
Most of the project’s impacts will arise during the constru ction phase , due to construction activities: land 
clearance, demolition, trenching and excavation, operation of heavy machinery, truck traffic, among others. 
These are likely to cause temporary to short -term negative impacts such as soil erosion, pollution  (noise, 
dust, and possible spillages) and disturbance of the local people’s everyday life. Mitigation is usually possible 
for most of these impacts, meaning that most of them should be of low significance after adequate action 
and management. No high sign ificance negative impact was identified; the two “moderate” negative impacts 
are alteration / destruction of terrestrial habitats and traffic disruption and congestion. The alteration / 
destruction of terrestrial habitats occurs when habitats like forested  rangeland areas (in the area with the 
aquifer recharge wells and service areas) are affected. Traffic disruption and congestion will occur due to 
circulation of heavy -duty vehicles transporting materials to and from the working sites as well as heavy 
mach inery circulation, in addition to works occurring next to roads (pipe laying). Chapter 3 in the ESMP 
contains mitigation measures for these two moderate impacts, as well as for a host of other risks and impacts.  
 
The operational phase  will bring the major expected positive impacts, with the most relevant ones being in 
different domains, such as: improved resilience to climate change effects; reduction of polluting pressures 
potentially affecting groundwater quality; increase quantity and quality of groundwa ter resources in the St. 
Thomas – St. Michael aquifer; reduction of sewage pollution in the Constitution River; improvement of water 
quality in Carlisle Bay; improvement of air quality and reduced GHG emissions; energy recovery from waste; 
enhancement of t he ecological quality of the marine environment; project according with urban and territorial 
planning; employment opportunities; improved conditions for the agricultural sector and increased water 
availability for domestic purposes; increased attraction o f tourists; improved public health; education of the 
general public and awareness.  
 
Avoiding negative impacts during the operational phase requires diligent and efficient facility management, 
including maintenance and timely replacement of critical compone nts prior to failure. BWA developed and 
applies operation and maintenance (O&M) plans, which will be amended to include the facilities implemented 
under the project. Elements to be covered in the O&M plans include monitoring of groundwater; BSTP 
influent a nd effluent; marine water; odour; coral reef health. All these monitoring programmes will result in 
periodic reports delivered to the competent government agencies (and CZMA in the case of the coral reef 
monitoring), including the ESIA authority.  
 
Overall,  the ESIA does not identify any significant negative environmental and social impacts from the 
implementation of the project, specifically due to the upgrade of the Bridgetown STP, the implementation of 
the aquifer recharge facility, the reclaimed water pi peline and the two onsite decentralized treatment plants 
and associated wastewater collection areas. Some negative impacts of low and moderate significance have 
been identified in the construction and operation phases, but these can be adequately mitigated  by the


---
*Page 129*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123 
   
 suggested measures, alongside a rigorous implementation of the ESMP. On the other hand, the project will 
generate multiple important positive impacts, affecting different spheres such as climate change resilience, 
ecology and socioeconomics, active ly contributing to a general development of the region, and more 
specifically to an improved water supply management and a safer and more reliable water provision. 
Concretely, the project will improve resilience to climate change effects on water scarcity through the 
increase of quantity and quality of groundwater resources in the St. Thomas – St. Michael aquifer and by 
improving conditions for the agricultural sector. In fact, adopting systems that enhance the wastewater 
systems enables the country to acce ss water resources that otherwise would not have been put into 
productive use. This helps to alleviate some of the water scarcity issues affecting Barbados, which are 
exacerbated by climate change. These actions will also complement ongoing activities aime d at building 
climate resilience in the water sector of Barbados. Indeed, some positive impacts from this project are 
cumulative with those arising the upgrade of the South Coast STP also foreseen in the near future. The 
project will enhance the ecological  quality of the marine environment and the water quality of the Carlisle 
Bay. At the same time, it will help to improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions through enhanced 
resources management, specifically through the production of renewable energy (thr ough solar energy and 
biogas).  
 
Executing Entity capacity to implement the ESMP  
BWA, as the promoter of the project and the governmental institution responsible for water supply and 
wastewater treatment in Barbados, as well as being an executing entity of the project, has a central role in 
the implementation of the ESMP and ensuring that all the enhancement and mitigation measures, and 
monitoring activities are communicated to and carried out by trained BWA staff or other competent 
authorities. Th e management of public concerns and external information requests also falls under the 
responsibility of BWA. Additionally, the BWA will be responsible for the approval of changes to the ESMP, 
as well as the approval and adoption of additional mitigation m easures that were not foreseen during the 
ESIA and ESMP stages but that may be deemed necessary as the project progresses.  
 
BWA shares some responsibilities with the Planning and Development Department and the Environmental 
Protection Department, the centr al government entities that coordinate and advise on all environmental 
issues, including ESIA procedures and requirements. Shared responsibilities include ensuring that the 
findings and recommendations of the ESIA are integrated in the overall project desi gn, costing, cost -benefit 
analyses, project management and implementation arrangements. This will be accomplished by the revision 
of submitted documentation as well as periodical site visits and issuance of recommendations.  
 
CCCCC, in its capacity as accredited entity to the GCF, will ensure that the implementation of the ESMP 
complies with GCF policies and guidelines.  
 
Reporting on the implementation of the ESMP will be undertaken jointly by BWA and CCCCC, in compliance 
with GCF policies. Further deta ils are provided in Annex 11. Chapter 8 in the ESMP (Annex 6B) provides 
more details on the institutional arrangements related to safeguards monitoring and reporting.  
 
Stakeholder consultations and grievance redress  
Grievance redress is a critical componen t of this project for both the CCCCC and the GCF and it is intended 
that stakeholders will have a plethora of options to express grievances. It is known that projects having 
strong grievance redress mechanism are usually less exposed reputational risk, les s disruptions and more 
importantly it increases  in buy -in and ownerships for projects. Not only is a GRM important for those affected 
by the project, even if it was unintended, but more importantly it provides  a genuine opportunity to for the AE 
and IE to hear the complaints as it relates to the nature and extent of grievances . It clearly articulates the 
process through which anyone being affected by the project can submit a grievance and is confident that it


---
*Page 130*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124 
   
 will be addressed in a systematic, fair, transpa rent and timely manner. Furthermore,  it will seek to ensure 
that the complainant identity is protect, in so far as to prevent any change of victimization. Operationalization 
of the grievance  or complaints mechanism will be layered in this regard . There wil l be three levels offered by 
the AE. The first level is at the EA level the second by the AE and the third by the funder. In the community 
communication strategy information will be shared on what are grievance and the avenues available to the 
communities for their voices their concerns.  
 
The CCCCC in is ESP&SP outlines considerations for grievance redress .  The centre allows for a ll 
complaints, concerns, queries, and clarifications regarding projects/programmes supported by the Centre 
can also be filed with the Centre using the following address: complaints@caribbeanclimate.bz ; or via the 
following website link https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/contact -us/complaints/ . Project will be monitored 
during implementation and will proactively  check on the risk that were identified at the project development 
stages as it related to activity that were likely to cause inter ruptions to the communities. The centre  goes 
even further by allowing complainants  to lodge their griev ance in another format they  are comfortable.  
 
This proposed project has been developed through extensive consultations will all stakeholders involved. 
Consultations have taken place with, inter alia : 
• Government agencies that are mandated in fields where water management is relevant, including 
infrastr ucture development, agriculture, environmental protection, and environmental health.  
• Private sector entities that use and/or discharge large quantities of water.  
• University of the West Indies, gender related issues  
• Climate change experts from the Governmen t and related agencies, such as the Caribbean Institute 
for Meteorology and Hydrology.  
• Farmers, on their willingness to use reclaimed wastewater for irrigation of crops.  
• General population, on their willingness to consume agricultural produce grown with re claimed 
wastewater.  
 
A full account of stakeholder consultations and a stakeholder management and engagement plan for the 
implementation of the project is included in Annex 7.  
 
Barbados has an Office of the Ombudsman, established by an Act of Parliament in 2009. All government 
agencies, including the BWA, are subject to investigations by the Ombudsman in response to complaints 
from members of the public after having received a written complaint. This is the principal grievance redress 
mechanism  of Barbados, and all activities of the project are covered under this arrangement. Additionally, 
the project will establish an internal grievance redress mechanism, managed by the PSC, as a first -level 
mechanism to address complaints and concerns from all  stakeholders.  
 
Disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports will follow the requirements of the GCF Information 
Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy.  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
Barbados has no Indigenous Peoples communities and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy therefore does 
not apply.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Gender Assessment, Findings and Recommendations  
A gender assessment and action plan were completed in a participatory manner. Focused discussions with 
Key informants, including from the BWA was undertaken.  The assessment examined the gender equality


---
*Page 131*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125 
   
 challenges facing Barbados and the BWA as an institut ion. The Gender Analysis Process Model used to 
conduct the gender equality assessment comprised of four main parts, namely Gender Screening, Gender -
Related Data Collection, Gender Impact Assessment and Mainstreaming Gender in the Project Cycle in 
conformit y with the GCF standards and the CCCCC Gender Policy. Key findings emerging from the four 
phases are that:  
1. Barbados has made significant human development gains, the results have not always translated to 
improvement in gender equality. revealed that at the national level, there is a 60% gender gap among 
parliamentarians, a 14% gender gap among, and a 60% gender  gap among the Cabinet Ministers. 
Import to note is that Barbados has a female prime minister.  
2. There still remains gender segregation of roles, except in technical professions and among 
legislators/managers, where there are still marginally more men than women. However, A Gender 
Analysis of Labour Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six Caribbean Countries” stated that 
Barbados has been recognized as one of the Caribbean countries leading the way on closing the 
gender gap in the workplace.  
3. The BWA has more  men involved in the technical aspects of the Wastewater Division management 
role, while women serve in more administrative capacities.  
4. There are many issues where both men and women share similar views on wastewater collection 
and treatment among the stak eholders in Barbados. However, men seemingly more concerned with 
paying for wastewater improvement.  
5. Men and Women in Barbados are concerned that climate change will affect the quantity of drinking 
water. In a perception survey conducted on ,  85% of women  and 58% of men rated as very 
concerned.  This is reflective of the statistical data showing that in general, women engage in more 
water related tasks within the household, such as cooking, cleaning, and washing, and therefore tend  
to report greater amount s of water usage (Suchorski, 2009).  Expansion of decentralized sewage 
treatment systems will have increased benefit for women as a result.  
6. Some of the legal instruments  governing the wastewater sector  are outdated because they have 
been in force for over forty years and as such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade 
its systems and operations and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector and the 
Project at this time.  The project will provide the avenue to update the  legislation, including gender 
responsive considerations.  
7. It is necessary for the BWA Board of Directors to adopt appropriate policies for maintaining Project 
standards to ensure gender issues are considered and to guide the decisions made and actions 
taken by Project personnel to ensure gender issues are considered in the implementation process. 
Therefore, Stakeholder Engagement processes carried out by the BWA needs to be gender 
responsive to adeqautely respond to the needs of male and female headed house holds.  
8. Members of the BWA Board, and BWA staff, require continued training and awareness of gender 
sensitivity especially so that they can recognize privileges and discrimination around gender.  
 
The key recommendations emerging are the need to:  
1. Encourage the GOB to create an enabling legal environment that amends the BWA legislation with 
a gender and vulnerability lens;  
2. Establish a gender -balanced PSC;;  
3. Appoint a Project Manager who is skilled in gender sensitivity issues;  
4. Appoint a Social and gender Specialist to ensure that project actions are gender responsive;  
5. Approve guidelines for the preparation of annual project operational plans and budgets;  
6. Approve mechanisms for quality assurance in the procurement of products/services;  
7. Adopt gender -related policies to guide decisions and actions associated with project activities like 
staffing, administration, and activity monitoring, evaluation, and reporting;  
8. Collect, store, retrieve, and analyse gender disaggregated empirical data for use in making  critical 
decisions;


---
*Page 132*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126 
   
 9. Set up a project office with office facilities to cater for gender differences of the staff;  
10. Conduct training for the project staff to build their gender sensitivity capacity; and  
11. Establish a mechanism to ensure gender sensitivity in a ll stakeholder  engagement processes.  
 
Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan  
The intended impact of the gender mainstreaming action plan is to (i) increase the participation of women 
and LGBTQIA persons in decision making and raise the awareness of men, women a nd vulnerable  
communities on gender issues to minimize discrimination against vulnerable groups including LBTQIA; and 
(ii) improve the quality of life for vulnerable residents, especially women, and children of Barbados in the 
areas of health, agriculture , and employment.  
 
The following outputs and activities have been included in the project to advance these gender 
mainstreaming goals:  
 
• Output 1.4:   Decentralized treatment plants or cluster treatment facilities installed  
• Activity 1.4.1:  Construct two s mall (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment 
demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial 
non-potable water applications. This activity will ensure that consultative processes capture the views 
of both male and female headed households in a manner that informs the roll out and connection of 
services to these two communities. Mixed methods of engagement will be employed, including 
focused conversations with women’s groups and female farm ers.  Additionally, in the implementation 
of this activity the project will ensure that  communities are protected from sexual and gender -
based violence and gender -based discrimination . The Project will therefore set up mechanisms 
to capture community concerns in a gender sensitive manner and that will prohibit exploitative, 
abusive and harassing  conduct by workers of the BWA, contractors and subcontractors.  
 
• Output 3.1:  Improved capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain and monitor and 
implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management  
o Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the  
operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including 
photovoltaic equipment. This activity will include gender sensitivity and climate change 
training  for BWA employees and private sector  
o Activity 3.1.2:  Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that 
addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and 
environmental monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social 
inclusion consideratio ns. 
• Output 4.1:  Governance and planning roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed water in a 
controlled and regulated manner.  
o Activity 4.1.1:  Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development Act, 
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other r elated legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent 
quality, treatment options and re -use requirements and applications. The review will also 
include recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public -private 
partnerships, building cod es, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities and 
access to males and females . 
o Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an optimal 
combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse 
applications, with the centralized reclaimed water being transmitted and used for agricultural 
irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission). This 
strategy will also take into consideration the social, gender -related  and climate risks in the 
design and prioritization of water reuse strategies .


---
*Page 133*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 127 
   
 • Output 4.2:  Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment 
and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.  
o Activity 4.2.1:  Devel op a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector in the provision 
and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by-
products  such as activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment to identify 
opportuni ties for public -private partnership in the water and wastewater sector, especially for 
the expansion of the decentralized onsite cluster wastewater systems. The strategy will also 
promote  gender equality and women empowerment  
o Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a re view and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive and 
socially inclusive incentive programme  to encourage conservation, recycle, re -use. 
o Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide resources 
for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems.  The management of the 
expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality and social inclusion as a 
requirement  
• Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.  
o Activity  4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign  
for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall 
meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant technology and by -product reuse) and 
consultati ons. Consultations will include, but will not be limited to representative groups of 
vulnerable communities, including with the Association of Women in Agriculture.  
o Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which is 
dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to 
the Redress Mechanism and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. This 
page will include, to the best extent possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or 
sign language to encourage social inclusion from disabled population. The project’s 
webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where 
possible.  
 
Implementation arrangements of the project that will promote gender mainstreaming  
In addition to the gender sensitive results and activities flagged above, the following implementation 
strategies will be utilized by the project implementation unit to further strengthen gender considerations in 
the day-to-day operations of the project:  
1. There will be gender sensitive stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that 
will aim to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings (all Components)  
2. CCCCC Procurement policies, which promote adherence to the Centre’ gende r policy and action 
plan 
3. Monitoring of indicators will disaggregate information by sex, where possible  
4. The AE’s gender specialist is available to provide technical advice and quality control for the 
mainstreaming of gender in the results and activities ide ntified above, as well as to support the 
analysis of the sex disaggregated monitoring and evaluation information collected routinely to inform 
planning and decision making on gender mainstreaming, including the early identification of possible 
unplanned ne gative gender issues emerging because of the project’s activities.  
5. The Project PSC will strive to ensure gender balance and will include a representative from the 
Barbados Gender Bureau.  
6. The Project Manager will present to the PSC a report on the Project’s  Gender Action Plan annually.  
7. All members of the Project Management Team will receive gender sensitivity training on an annual 
basis.  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 134*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 128 
   
 Financial Management and Accounting  
As an accredited GCF entity, CCCCC’s Financial Management, Accounting and Procurement procedures 
are aligned with the standards required by the GCF. This project will be subjected to the same financial 
management and accounting standards, unless  otherwise agreed with the Donor. These are detailed in the 
CCCCC Financial Manual and summarized below.  
It is the CCCCC’s practice to open a new foreign currency bank account for all externally funded projects. 
The utilisation of an old or existing bank a ccount for a new project is prohibited. The signatories for the new 
bank account are authorised by the Executive Director of the CCCCC. Closure of the project’s bank account 
takes place within 180 days of a final financial audit or the last disbursement if  a financial audit is not 
undertaken within those 180 days.  
Project budgets are prepared and agreed during the conceptualization and form part of the final proposal 
and project agreement between the CCCCC, an Executing Agency and a Donor. All project budge ts are 
uploaded to the accounting software to form the budget baseline required for accounting and financial 
tracking and reporting, which is necessary for variance analysis and time -specific analysis. The Project 
Manager/Coordinator is responsible for the  provision of detailed budgets to the Financial Administrator.  
The financial year for the project is dependent on the stipulations within the Project Agreement including the 
official commencement date of the project; however, Project Financial Reports are generated on a periodic 
basis (monthly, quarterly, and annually) or as otherwise required by the Project Manager/Coordinator or 
stipulated in the Project Agreement. Financial reports include the following information to date (in both 
currency and percentag es): 
• Commitments  
• Expenditure  
• Un-committed funds  
• Undisbursed  
• Variance  
Counterpart (if applicable)  
Project payments and disbursements must be executed in alignment with the approved Project Agreement 
and related budget (or its most current amendment). All pa yments are initiated by the Project 
Manager/Coordinator and request for payments are signed by the Project Manager /Coordinator and clearly 
outline the following:  
• The Name of the Project (as per Agreement)  
• The name and code of the budget line(s) and agains t which the payment(s) should be made  
• The amount to be paid  
• Approved signed supporting documents which verify delivery or acceptance of the item to be paid 
(such as invoice, approved deliverable, and signed deliverable slip)  
CCCCC financial records are audited annually by an independent accounting firm, which is selected using 
a competitive bidding process every 5 years. To allow for a smooth and timely audit, CCCCC provides 
assistance to the independent auditors in the following areas of planning, invol vement, interim procedures 
as well as provide schedules, documents and information requested by the auditors in a timely manner. 
Upon receipt of the completed audited financial statements and accompanying report(s), the CCCCC 
reviews and responds in writin g to all management letter or other internal control and compliance report 
findings and recommendations made by the independent auditor. These audited financial statements and 
accompanying reports are subject to review and scrutiny by members of the broad of directors who form the 
Finance Committee.  
 
Procurement  
As the AE , the  CCCCC will manage the funding garnered for the implementation of the project and would 
be responsible for providing and contracting the  goods and services  associated the activities that are directly


---
*Page 135*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 129 
   
 funded by the GCF; whereas, the BWA will conduct procure ment related to the cofinanced activities. The 
CCCCC will periodically reporting on the progress of the project’s implementation , including the co -financed 
activities,  in close coordination and BWA the NDA. The procurement will be processed in accordance w ith 
the procurement guidelines and policies of CCCCC. Information on the process and the results of 
procurement activities undertaken are usually included in the  APRs  mid-term progress  and completion 
reports . Further, as a key stakeholder co -executing part ner, the inputs of the BWA are critical  to the 
completion of any procurement package. .The Procurement Plan (See Annex 10) utilizes the following 
methods of procurement:  
• International Competitive Bidding  
• Limited International Bidding  
• Regional Competitive Bidding  
• Shopping  
• Direct Contract  
• Community Participation  
The methods selected are determined by a threshold model. These thresholds are detailed in CCCCC 
procurement manual.    
The Centre’s Procurement Policies and Manuals is implemented in aligned with other policies, include:  
(i) Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism Policy.  
(ii) Gender Policy and Action Plan  
(iii) Financial & Accounting Policy Manual,  
(iv) Environmental and Social Safeg uards Policy and Performance Standards  
(v) The CCCCC Manual for Project Formulation  
(vi) The CCCCC Manual for Project Monitoring, Review, Reporting and Evaluation.  
(vii) The CCCCC Standard Operating Procedures for Project Cycle Management  
(viii) Employee Protection (Whistle -blower) Policy.  
To support the Centre’s Procurement Principles, a Code of Conduct governs the actions of (i) all the Centre’s 
staff and others in their direct or indirect involvement in the procurement and (ii) Bidders and Vendors who 
must adhere to the C entre’s Code of Conduct for Bidders and Vendors and comply with all legal requirements 
related Prohibited Practices (See the CCCCC Procurement  Policy and Manual71).  
 
AML/CFT  
Barbados has in place a sophisticated legal, regulatory and institutional framewo rk to ensure compliance 
with Financial Action Task Force (FATF) regulations. The Anti -Terrorism Act of 2002 is the main legal 
instrument in this context.72 Barbados is a participant in the FATF, as well as its regional body the Caribbean 
Financial Action T ask Force (CFATF).The Financial Services Commission is the lead government agency 
for the implementation of AML/CFT regulations, making available guidelines for specific target groups and 
sectors.73 
 
The CCCCC is committed to full compliance with international standards, the Money Laundering and 
Terrorism (Prevention) Act, Chapter 104 of Belize and any other applicable legislation in the territories of its 
Members. This commitment is set forth in this Policy which defines the guiding principles for adequate 
prevention and control. The CCCCC identifies, seeks out and accepts funding ONLY from established 
reputable and legitimate sources, which themselves have pledged strict compliance with the standard 
international legal framework governing prevention of ML and TF. The institution upholds the Rule of Law to 
 
71 https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/ccccc -procurement -manual/   
72 http://www.fsc.gov.bb/attac hments/article/12/Anti -Terrorism%20Act%20Cap.158.pdf   
73 https://barbadosfiu.gov.bb/Topic/aml -cft-guidelines/


---
*Page 136*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 130 
   
 ensure that its work and that of its partners and beneficiaries is free from criminal interference and that 
resources are used for the intended purpo se. 
The CCCCC, by its inherent construct, mandate and corresponding geographic location has to be ever 
vigilant against criminal elements intent on exploiting the vulnerabilities of the Caribbean Region. Identified 
susceptibilities of CARICOM Member States  include: law enforcement constraints, location, free trade, cash - 
culture and offshore financial industry. Recognizing these predispositions is the first step by the CCCCC in 
instituting necessary systems to maintain a high degree of transparency, integri ty and public confidence in 
the management and functioning of the Centre  to ensure it cannot be misused for ML and TR.  
The CCCCC does not associate with terrorist organizations nor distribute or allocate funds to partners who 
support, carryout or advocate  terrorist activity. The CCCCC is committed to ensuring that the risk of its 
business machinery being exploited for the purpose of money laundering and of our donor funds being 
diverted to terrorist activity is abated.  
The CCCCC has a mandate to serve the Member States of CARICOM in coordinating Climate Change 
response. While the Centre’s  focus is on Climate Change as per its mandate, it can ill afford to protect the 
climate system and ignore the corrosive effect of ML and TF on the social and political ins titutions of the 
Caribbean. To effectively contribute in the detection and prevention of ML and TF, the CCCCC is committed 
to ensuring that its business apparatus is transparent, distinguishable and trustworthy.  All the business 
processes of the CCCCC are  therefore operated upon the principle of economy, efficiency, integrity and 
transparency.  
In this regard, the CCCCC has instituted robust procurement and accounting procedures that ensure:  
(i) A system to conduct due diligence on new clients  
(ii) meticulous mana gement and accounting of all financial transactions.  
(iii) appropriate controls are in place to ensure that all funds are fully accounted for and are spent in a 
manner that is consistent with the purpose and objectives of grant agreement and/or the CCCCC’s 
manda te. 
(iv) annual internal and external audits are performed and comprehensive financial statements are 
prepared and available for review by Members and submitted to donors, as required  
(v) compliance with the accountability measures required by its significant donor s.  
As part of its transparency framework, the CCCCC also maintains information on the purpose and objectives 
of its stated activities as well as the identity of its, Board of Governors and Executive Director of its Technical 
Secretariat. This information is available directly from the Technical Secretariat and is accessible to the 
public on its website.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for co nfidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 137*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 131 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicab le 
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template pro vided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ 
 Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 
22a  
Annex 
22b Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)  
Adaptation Beneficiaries


---
*Page 138*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 132 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. ☒ Annex 23  Final RAFF Charter  
☒ Annex 24  Decentralised Treatment Plant Site Information   
 
☒ Annex 25  Risk Register and Framework for Monitoring    
☒ Annex 26  CCCCC Board Resolution for Entity Work Programme    
☒ Annex 27  BWA FMCA 2018  
☒ Annex 28  Feasibility Study - South Coast Project


---
*Page 139*
---

The Hon. Ryan Straughn, M.P.  
MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE  & ECONOMIC AFFAIRS  
MINISTRY OF FINANCE , ECONOMIC AFFAIRS  & INVESTMENT  
Government Headquarters,  
Bay Street, St. Michael, BB11156, Barbados, W.I . 
     Tel.: (246) 535 -5300      Fax: (246) 535 -5629  
Our Ref.: 5634/1 Vol. 1  
18 July, 2022  
       Bridgetown, BARBADOS  
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Caribbean Community Climate Change  
Centre (CCCCC)  regarding THE R’s (REDUCE, REUSE AND RECYCLE) FOR 
CLIMATE RESILIENCE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS IN BARBADOS (3R -
CReWS).  
Dear Sir/Madam  
We refer to the project titled THE R’s (REDUCE, REUSE AND RECYCLE) FOR CLIMATE 
RESILIENCE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS IN BARBADOS (3R -CReWS)  in Barbados  as included in  
the funding proposal submitted by The Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)  to us on 
24 February 2022 . 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of  Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs & 
Investment, the Nationa l Designated Authority  of Barbados. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is  implied that:  
(a)The government of Barbados  has no- objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities,
strategies and plans of Barbados ;
(c)In accordan ce with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the project as included in the  
funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Kind regards,  
____________________________  
Hon. Ryan Straughn M.P.  
Mini ster 
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment  
BARBADOS  
GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOSNo-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 140*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information  
Project or programme 
title  The R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval  No 
Sector (public or 
private)  Public 
Accredited entity  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) 
Environmental and 
social safeguards (ESS) 
category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location(s) of project  or 
target country or 
location(s) of 
programme  Barbados 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Friday, September 16, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English 
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Barbados  
Link to disclosure  ESIA  Volume  1: 
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EYEivJMLvSJKnCIvvniOEl4BwXJIIgSFzG5de6MqrHQezQ?e=sQ
3LrH  
ESIA Volume II:  
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZaMO5IbNeRDtan7E3jg51QBc9TqzWbJ0vV0JFCd8mpLCQ?e
=FC0gOz  
Off-shore Assessment:  
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZ84el -xC0VClP -
A7CNFm6oB1H1R0C6DwJt7gUVurmgYfw?e=1Mpw2N  
Annexes:  
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/ESwuDQzm5jhEvLz7aDaHiDYBDV5WWxOE5lqA37TyQSVSIQ?
e=gj2HHJ


---
*Page 141*
---

Other link(s)  Project Page: 
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r -crews/ 
 
Baseline Study:   
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EXg06jjOqhhIn3suOUtvSCkB7OT2sBUn8BoWgzbluu71sg?e=n
UvBy0   
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) for 3R -CReWS Volume 1 and 2”. Additional 
information can be found in the Baseline Study for the ESIA  and 
Appendix 4 Off -Shore Modeling and Assessment . These can be 
access via the link provided above.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Friday, September 16, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Barbados  
Link to disclosure  https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EfJb_c2hadREtZMEwxYc5yUBZgIsrn 6P8Oscmp12wugNlw?e=l
5t9Nw    
Other link(s)  Project Page: 
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r -crews/ 
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for 3R -CReWS” . 
Environmental and Social Management  System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Friday, September 16, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Barbados


---
*Page 142*
---

Link to disclosure  Stakeholder  Analysis  and Action  Plan:   
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/Ea77c5IweVtCimz5s2ipuUwBcr_yDT2ax4bhvQuA7xjHew   
 
Gender  Analysis  and Action  Plan:  
https://cccccbze -
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EWC50lyMbcREizItzf8tMJcBtnhRkQ pD5u5W5nAADycrSA?e=I
vQaj9    
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  The Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan and Gender Analysis 
and Action Plan can be accessed via the links above.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 16, 2022  
Place  CCCCC HQ (hard copies),  
3rd Floor, David L. McKoy Business Center  
Bliss Parade, P.O. Box 563  
Belmopan, Belize, Central America  
 
Barbados Water Authority (website and hard copies)  
Pine Commercial Estate  
The Pine, St. Michael  
Barbados  
 
Office of the Prime Minister  (hard copies)  
Government Headquarters  
Bay Street  
St. Michael  
Barbados, W.I.  
 Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources (hard copies)  
Pine East/West Boulevard  
The Pine  
St. Michael  
Barbados, W. I  
 Ministry of Environment and Natural Beautification (hard copies)  
10th Floor Warrens Tower II  
Warrens  
St. Michael, BB12001  
Barbados,  W. I.  
 
Environmental Protection Department  (hard copies)  
LV Harcourt Lewis Building  
Dalkeith  
St. Michael  
 Government Information Service  (hard copies)  
Old Town Hall, Cheapside, Barbados


---
*Page 143*
---

Public Library  
Fairchild Street  
Bridgetown  
St. Michael  
Barbados, W.I.  
Other locations include Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant, 
Project Launch Event, Town Hall Meetings  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Monday, October 17, 2022  
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting Monday, October 17, 2022  
Not
e: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 144*
---

G
CF/B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 144 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP192 
Proposal name:  The R’s (Reduce, Reuse a nd Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados  (3R-CReWS)  
Accredited entity:  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)  
Country/(ies):  Barbados 
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project design addresses the identified 
financial, social, technological and regulatory 
barriers for Barbados ( a water -stressed 
country facing climate threats ) in taking up 
wastewater treatment to diversify its water 
sources by moving from a linear model of 
water use to a circular  economy mode using 
best practices and technologies . Social acceptance towards wastewater and 
reclaimed water as a resource  could be a 
concern, so implementation of c omponent 4 
would be key.  
The GCF grant contribution is the only way  to 
make the project viable (regardless of the 
level of tariff) for a fiscal ly constrained 
country with a debt to GDP ratio standing at 
140% in 2020 and a poverty rate of 20% . In 
addition, the dynamic economic and f inancial 
model results are sensitive to the vol ume  of 
treated wastewater. The results indicated 
that whil e the capital and operational costs 
increase  by 23% , from a business -as-usual 
level to a growth -and-development phase , 
the benefits increase by over 130%.  
2. The Board may wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of  proposed  conditions and
recommendations”, respectively .
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background  
3. The impact of climate change is already evident in Barbados.  Barbados is experiencing
“absolute water scarcity” . Approximately 310 m3 of water is available per person per year ,


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 145 
 
 
placing Barbados among the most water scarce countries in the world , and this problem is likely 
to become worse due to climate change. The country is facing a climate crisis:  
(a) Average temperature s are anticipated to rise by about 1.0  °C by 2041 –2060 under the 
SSP2 -4.5 scenario, with daily minimum temperatures increasing by 1.3  °C;  
(b) The number of consecutive hot days ( i.e. heatwaves) has  already increased and is likely 
to continue to do so;  and  
(c) Annual mean precipitation is projected to decrease by about 9%, extending the dry 
season by two months and impact ing rainwater  run-off and groundwater  recharge and 
salinity.  
4. Water availability is essential to support the economy , and the climate crisis  is already 
impacting food security through the high cost of importation, a situation that is expected to be 
increasingly  aggravated. To counter this, Barbados is seeking to increase food production as an 
adaptation measure. This ambition cannot be realized without making water accessible under 
current and future water scarcity constraints.  
5. At present , large volumes of prec ious water resources are going to waste because of  
disposal  in the surrounding ocean after a single use. This linear model of water provision and 
use must change. Investment in the collection and treatment of wastewater is necessary to provide the basic in frastructure needed to move from a linear to a circular economy model 
where water can be reused for productive purposes . 
6. The circular economy maximizes the use of scarce resources and minimizes the 
necessity to find and then dispose of additional resources. This can only happen if the basic infrastructure is put in place to provide the foundation on which the circular economy can take off. The proposed activities promote water security through engineering work s (including 
software  use)  and through the creat ion of an enabling environment . The proposed activities are 
likely to be an effective adaptive response to the risk . 
7. The goal of 3R -CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, well- being and 
productivity of Barbadians by using  carbon neutral and climate -resilient water and energy 
management technologies and strategies that ensure water is protected, managed, recycled, reused and conserved.  This will be achieved through four outcomes and ten output -level results , 
as described in more  detail in section 2.2 of this assessment.  
(a) Outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are the largest, in terms of budget, as they are focused 
on infrastructure works and transfer of technology :  
(i) Specifically, outcome 1 aims to achieve a climate- resilient pathway through the 
upgrade of the Bridgetown sewage treatment plant  (STP) to a tertiary treatment 
system and the installation of decentralized wastewater treatment systems in 
two Zone A locations in Barbados to harness reclaimed water, which will be u sed 
for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation through the installation of a 9 km 
pipeline. Climate resilience is also built into various phases of the water reclamation process through the installation of dec ision support tools and 
infrastructure ; and  
(ii) Outcome 2, which spans the installation of renewable photovoltaic ( PV) energy 
systems, automated controls such as variable frequency drives , and a sludge 
dewatering system, will contribute to achiev ing the low-emission pathway. 
Currently 0.18 MW of solar power is in place at the B ridgetown STP. An 
additional 0.8 MW  is proposed, deliver ing 1MW of renewable energy ; 
(b) Outcomes 3 and 4 are “soft” developmental measures  that primarily aim to :


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 146 
 
 
(i) Create an enabling environment for achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches 
used for  manag ing water resources (specifically wastewater ), and thereby 
enhancing water security in the face of a changing climate. Specifically, o utcome 
3 aims at  enhanc ing capacities and capabilities,  primarily at the Barbados  Water 
Authority (BWA) , for managing, monitoring and operating the upgraded system ; 
providing customized training ; updating the standard o perating procedures and 
the o perational manual; and implementing a risk management framework ;  
(ii) Outcome 4 further strengthens the enabling environment through a legislative 
review, strengthening buy -in, ownership and leadership in the private sector for 
the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options ; having nation- wide 
public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water 
availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options ; 
and promoting transparency and lessons emerging from this project ; and  
(iii) Outcomes 1 and 4 are expected to yield co -benefits related to the social, 
economic, adaptation, mitigation and environmental sectors.  
8. The project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas ( GHG) emission s by 40 kilotonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent ( ktCO 2eq) over its 25 -year life span , resulting from  the PV installation. 
It will directly benefit 136,220 residences ( almost half of the total population  of Barbados ) by 
provision of accessible and reliable water . 
9. The total project cost is around  USD 50 million with a request to GCF to finance USD 
39.4 million  (78.8 per  cent ) in the form  of grant. The remaining cost will be covered by BWA . It 
is worth noting that the total envisaged capital investment in provid ing infrastructure for the 
Bridgetown and Sou th Coast System is USD  183 million in the short  term , rising to USD  251 
million in the medium term. At a national scale, the GCF contribution amounts to 22% in the 
short term, falling to 16% in the medium term. The economic and efficiency analysis and 
assessment foun d that the grant provided by GCF is the only case where the project is profitable 
regardless of the value of the water  reuse tariff.   
10. The environmental and social safeguards category of the project is Category B, and the 
accredited entity (AE) has submitted relevant documentation (environmental and social 
management framework) as part of the funding proposal package. Disclosure on the AE’s 
website is also completed in accordance with  the Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund . 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : Wastewater reclamation and reuse (total cost: USD 38.54  million; GCF  cost:  USD 
29.2 1 million ) 
11. Component 1 involves installing centralized and decentralized cluster wastewater 
collection and treatment systems to achieve tertiary1 water  quality for multiple non -potable 
water reuse applications that will increase water availability and the water sector’s resilience to 
climate change. The key interventions are:  
(a) Installing  conventional activated sludge biological treatment process ; 
(b) Installing  a run -off membrane filtration system;  
(c) Construct ing a 9 km pipeline for irrigation and aquifer recharge;  
(d) Implement ing a sewer monitoring programme (involving flow measurement and rain 
gauging equipment ); 
 
1 There are three levels of water treatment: primary removes heavier solids; secondary degrades the remaining 
biological contents in the water; and tertiary removes pathogens and results in potable (drinkable) water.


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 147 
 
 
(e) Establish ing an on-site laboratory ; 
(f) Implement ing the c omputerized real-time management system ; and  
(g) Construct ing two decentralized treatment facilit ies in Zone A – Belle Vue and Belle 
Tenantry.  
12. This component aims to enhance availability, management and use of tertiary -level 
reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change . Upgrad ing the 
Bridgetown STP to treat wastewater to a tertiary water  quality standard, including the two on -
site decentralized treatment plants , will benefit the groundwater system by reducing the 
extraction of groundwater and thus reduc ing aquifer saltwater intrusion ; increas ing availability 
of groundwater during dry periods ; and enhanc ing water security considering the projected 
climate change i mpacts on water resources for the island. In addition, it will increase water 
availability for agricultural/irrigation purposes and support irrigation developments in the 
Codrington -Neils -Lears -Salters -Constant -Valley , which should also lead to improved fo od 
security. It will provide benefits to 155 farmers (60% males and 40% fe males).  
13. Regarding  paradigm shift, this component offers scalability and replicability : it should 
be seen as the first phase of a larger enterprise to extend and expand the use of treated 
reclaimed wastewater for irrigation purposes on lands along the west coast of Barbados and up 
to the parish of St Lucy ( see Feasibility Study Report). Activit ies 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 would make it 
feasible through the installation of reverse osmosis to ens ure the appropriate water quality for 
irrigation purposes and groundwater injections , and the pipeline and six aquifer recharge wells 
for transfer ring the water for agricultural development and augmenting the groundwater 
system.  
14. Component 1 will upgrade and install wastewater treatment technologies that are 
energy efficient (mitigation benefits), but  it will also implement  several decision support tools 
to help with  manag ing and maint aining  the upgraded STP, particularly for hydrometeorological 
hazards suc h as rainfall, including severe storms. These decision support  tools will optimize the 
preventative maintenance programme of the upgraded B ridgetown STP and protect data during 
hazards. The decentralized package collection and treatment systems that will b e constructed in 
two communities located in Zone A will address severe water shortages for approximately 225 
households , and is considered to be a “good demonstration” of strengthening the adaptive 
capacities of individuals and businesses to climate risks associated with water availability (adaptation benefits). The decentralized package treatment systems will provide enhanced 
collection and treatment systems that will produce reclaimed water suitable for agricultural 
irrigation and that will reduce the hea lth risks associated with intense rainfall ( compared with 
the current wastewater systems being used). This output will also expand the number of 
beneficiaries of this project in a cost -effective manner , because  these communities are not 
serviced by either of the two STPs currently in operation in Barbados and the cost of 
distributing reclaimed water from the B ridgetown STP into the community is high. 
Furthermore, these two sites will safeguard groundwater by eliminating the potential risk from contamination  associated with on -site wastewater disposal . 
15. In addition, implementing the sewer monitoring programme and the water quality 
monitoring system by establish ing on-site laboratory facilities will inform operations control 
strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions and inform decision -making and climate -resilient building.  Finally, the proposal  addresses  a number 
of Sustain able Development Goals (e.g.  SDG s 2, 6 and 11 ). 
16. The total budget of this outcome is USD  39 million, which is principally applied to the 
upgrades associated with treatment plant (67  per cent ). The source of the funding is GCF in the 
amount of USD  29.2 milli on (grant) and BWA in the amount of USD  9.8 million.


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 148 
 
 
Component 2 : Renewable energy and energy efficiency in wastewater treatment (total cost: USD 
3.26 million; GCF  cost:  USD 3.26 million ) 
17. Component 2 focuses on enhancing the climate resiliency and carbon -neutrality of the 
Bridgetown STP wastewater treatment system through the installation of renewable PV energy ; 
and energy conservation and improved efficiency measures through install ing grid -tied PV , 
install ing automated controls and install ing slud ge dewatering technologies. The main output s 
of this component are improved emergency power and energy efficiency , and reduction in 
emission at the B ridgetown STP . 
18. The outcome of this component is achiev ing climate -resilient low carbon operations at 
Bridge town STP. This will be realized by:  
(a) Installing grid -tied PV r enewable energy systems to offset increased power 
consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using 
category 3 hurricane -resistant solar panels. A  1 MW grid -tied PV system will be 
delivered  to offset the energy demand of the upgraded B ridge town STP ,2 which will 
yield 2, 063  MWh of clean solar power per year , leading to an estimated GHG emission 
reduction of 1, 635  tCO 2eq per year (or 40,875  tCO 2eq over 25 years) ; 
(b) Implementing automated controls and energy efficiency measure s (including variab le 
frequency drives, and energy -efficient  pumps and blowers) within the upgraded 
centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce GHG 
emissions; and  
(c) By installing and implementing dewatering technology, biosolids will be captured and 
removed from the treatment process early, hence reducing the energy required to process the effluent. Further, this will enable BWA to reduce the water content of 
biosolids resulting in a mitigation co -benefit ; namely,  reduced GHG emissions associated 
with the trucking and disposal of sludge at  a dedicated sludge spray zone. Installing the 
dewatering technology would result in saving s on energy cost s and sludge 
transportation and labour, and environmental benefits including the reduction in GHG 
emissions and oil spills.  
19. A strategic plan is provided in t he funding proposal to guide the replication of water 
treatment facilities along the west coast. There is future potential for augmenting the potable 
water supply by installing additional run- off treatment facilities along the west coast corridor , 
which would intercept and collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable water standards 
to supplement drinking water resources. This would support the project objectives enhancing 
the climate resiliency of  the water sector.  
20. The total budget of this outcome is USD 3.3 million, which is principally applied to the 
procurement and installation of the 1 MW PV system and the sludge de watering technology (81  
per cent ). The outcome will be funded by GCF.  
Component 3 : Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related 
renewable energy technologies  (total cost : USD 1.63 million; GCF  cost:  USD 1.63 million)  
21. Component 3 focuses  on enhancing options for scaling  up wastewater reuse and 
enhancing the capabilities of technical personnel at BWA  (and other ministries, department and 
agencies, as applicable)  to promote sustainability and the enabling environment for wastewater 
management through the development of standard operating procedures and an operations 
 
2 The additional 0.8 MW of power will be financed by the Government of the Bahamas but is not counted as part of the 
co-financing for this project; albeit that Government is currently in advanced negotiations to secure financing for this 
additional 0.8  MW.


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 149 
 
 
manual, flow and water quality monitoring, and institutional human capacity development. In 
short:  
(a) Update the standard operating p rocedure s and the operations manual; 
(b) Develop and implement a risk management framework at BWA ; and  
(c) Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of run- off treatment facilities  
along the west coast . 
22. This component will improve the technica l capabilities of water technical personnel to 
operate, maintain and monitor, and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies 
for wastewater management  and related renewable energy technologies . It will improve the 
knowledge of the BWA staff of the links  between climate change and water availability and the 
impacts of climate change on infrastructure and operational measures to mitigate these impacts.   
23. This component  will deliver training to  approximately 400 individuals. In addition, it 
will in vestigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of water treatment facilities 
along the west coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast 
ecosystem (see para. 19 above). This would support the objectives of this project of enhancing 
climate resiliency in the water sector.  
24. The outcome of this component is to have enhanced capacity and capability to support 
the preventative maintenance and climate resiliency programmes  and to ensur e sustainability 
after  implement ing this project . 
25. The total budget of this outcome is USD  1.63 million, which is principally applied to 
training and capacity -building and knowledge transfer activities. The outcome will be financed 
using 100  per cent  GCF proceeds.   
Component 4: Capacities (r egulatory, governance, awareness), buy- in and ownership within the 
private and public sectors improved for climate -resilient development planning for the water 
sector (total cost: USD 1. 66 million; GCF cost: USD 1.40 million)  
26. Component 4 focuses on enhancing the enabling environment for wastewater 
management by advancing and educating  the public and private sector on the importance of 
wastewater reclamation and of  address ing climate change issues affecting the water sector and 
enabling policy and leg islation. This component will achieve that through:  
(a) Undertak ing a legislative review and provid ing a road map ;  
(b) Develop ing a water and s anitation master plan;  
(c) Develop ing private sector engagement strategies ; 
(d) Undertak ing a review and providing  recommendati ons on an incentive programme to 
encourage conservation, recycling and reuse; 
(e) Expand ing the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility ( RAFF) for the adoption of 
wastewater treatment technologies ; 
(f) Re-educat ing key stakeholders and implement ing public education and awareness  
campaign ; and  
(g) Develop ing a project web page and social media accounts to share progress on the 
project . 
27. The outputs of this component are: (1) g overnance and planning frameworks 
updated/developed to enable wastewater reuse; (2) a funding mechanism for the adoption of 
water reuse applications/systems developed; and (3) implement ation of  a gender -sensitive 
public education and a wareness campaign implemented.


---
*Page 150*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 150 
 
 
28. The key outcome is that an enabling environment is created for wastewater 
technologies and use of reclaimed water. The enabling environment refers to the legislation, 
organizational structures and competency and strategies that need to be put in place. Ach ieving 
this outcome will significantly change the culture of the water sector in Barbados, building a 
level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to continually innovate and adapt to 
climate change, which in turn promotes sustainability for thi s project.  
29. This component is critical for  support ing the replicability and scalability of the project 
by providing mechanisms to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse 
applications by private individuals and businesses.  The expansion  and promotion RAFF to 
provide resources for adopting  decentralized on -site wastewater systems are  key to addressing 
inclusion and/or access to financial resources so that vulnerable groups are not prevented from 
participating in climate change adaptation and/or mitigation actions. BWA , through the Water 
Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S -Barbados) p roject is 
establishing the RAFF , which will  focus  on the public sector. The RAFF aims to mobilize funds 
for use in water sector adaptation and mitigation initiatives , including those identified as 
priorities in Barbados’ Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan. E stablish ing the RAFF 
was initially funded by the BWA and the Government of Barbados ; however, 3R -CReWS 
presents an op portunity to expand and promote the RAFF to support private sector engagement 
in the wastewater sector (e.g. adopting technologies that support the delivery and utilization of 
tertiary reclaimed water) . It is important to note that no GCF proceeds will be paid to or made 
available under the RAFF.   
30. In addition, this component includes implementing a gender -sensitive public education 
and awareness campaign, which  will be promoting  the business case for this project, thereby 
securing more buy -in and acceptance  of this project’s scope and intended results. For instance, 
the nexus between climate change and water availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options, and so on  will be the basis of some of the public education and 
awarenes s topics that will be targeting a wide cross -section of beneficiaries using  various 
information dissemination  methods . 
31. The total budget of this outcome is USD  1.66 million. The source of the funding is GCF in 
the amount of USD 1.40 million and BWA /the Government of the Bahamas  in the amount of USD 
0.26 million.  
Project management and monitoring and evaluation  (total cost: USD 2.53 million; GCF cost: USD 
2.06 million ) 
32. The project management, including the monitoring and evaluation cost will be solely 
covered by GCF.  
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                          Scale:  N/A  
33. As a cross- cutting project, it is expected that the project will  bring both adaptation and 
mitigation benefits, although with a focus on the former  (over 90  per cent ).  
34. The project is expected to avoid emissions of  40,875 tCO 2eq over the 25-year life span  of 
the 1  MW PV to be installed to offset the increased power consumption associated with the 
upgrades of the B ridgetown STP . Additional GHG emission reduction s may be also result from 
using  sludge  and sludge dewatering technology , and energy -efficient pumps (with the  detailed 
contribution of those to  be determined after the detailed design is set during implementation ).


---
*Page 151*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 151 
 
 
35. On the adaptation side, t he project will directly benefit 136 ,220  people resulting from an 
increase  in the availability of  climate -resilient sustainable , and indirectly benefit 141,601 
persons , excluding the projected increase in tourists to the region.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                   Scale:  N/A  
36. The project will address the primary barriers to public and private investment s in 
wastewater treatment in  Barbados, including high capital cost, lack of expertise, unfamiliarity 
with  technologies and associated risks, and the immature regulatory environment . It will create 
a paradigm shift in the approaches to manag ing and diversif ying water resources ( specifically 
wastewater ) and thereby  the project will promot e water security in the face of climate change. 
It serves as a demonstration for the nation’s future wastewater  projects and private sector 
participation and interest in the wate r sector, thereby scaling up the decentralized waste water 
collection and treatment . The model can also be expanded and replicated in the Caribbean 
region where water systems are becoming more vul nerable to climate threats   
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                   Scale:  N/A  
37. In addition to achieving increased climate resilience for the water sector of  Barbados 
and reduc ing GHG emission s by deploy ing renewable energy, the project brings about positive 
social, economic, environmental and gender co -benefits  and is  aligned with 8 out of the 17 
Sustainable Development Goals  (2, 5, 6, 7, 9 11, 13, 17).  
38. The pro ject will deliver environmental co -benefits through reducing the amount of  
wastewater that will be discharged to rivers , thereby reducing water pollution and improv ing 
the quality of soil for agriculture and other land -use activities. In terms of e conomic s, provi ding  
GCF grants will ease the fiscal constraints facing the country, create jobs through the  project  
construction and expansion of economic activities in the water consumption industry ( e.g. 
tourism and agriculture). It is expected to increase private sector interest and participation in 
the adoption of wastewater technologies and the use of reclaimed water and other by -products  
(e.g. nutrients and fertilizers) . The gender -sensitive approach taken by this project will ensure 
that concerns and challenges from women, children and marginal ized groups are taken into 
consideration throughout the project implementation . It will also result in increased 
participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                        Scale:  N/A  
39. This project is designed to address the specific financial, social , institutional and 
technological barriers that have hindered the G overnment of Barbados so that it can  transform 
its wastew ater sector  by moving away from a linear water “ use to waste ” model to a circular 
economy model of water use. In recognition of the projected effects of climate change on water 
quality and availability, coupled with the growing population and economy , the country need s 
to develop wastewater management practices, implement  new technologies that are climate 
resilient and low carbon, and identify new sources of water to recharge the underground 
aquifers  for supply augmentation .  
40. Barbados  currently  has a high debt to GDP ratio  that  stood at 144  per cent  at the 2020 
year end  and is expected increase  due to the G overnment’s spending on the health sector to 
combat the prolonged impact of the COVID -19 pandemic . This indicates a very limited fiscal 
capacity to borrow from the international capital market ; therefore the GCF grant is much 
needed to cover the capital costs for this project  and its national program me, through parallel 
finance .


---
*Page 152*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 152 
 
 
41. In addition, w astewater  treatment and reuse i s a relatively new concept in the country, 
so Barbados lacks  trained staff , both in BWA and the private sector, with expertise in designing, 
managing and maintaining wastewater systems. Necessary legislation on  the use of wastewater 
treatment systems and reclaimed water has not  yet be en approved by the C abinet . The design of 
the proposal reflects  these identified barrier s, and the project is  much needed to create the 
paradigm shift in the wastewater sector and thereby build the country’s  resilience to climate 
change.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                        Scale:  N/A  
42. The interventions proposed under this project are  aligned with the country’s  nationally 
determined contribution  and relevant national plans , including the 2021 Physical Development 
plan, the Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013 –2020, the National Climate Policy, 
the Development of Tourism in Barbados and the n ational adaptation  plan , all of which noted 
the importance of improving climate resilience to water security through diversifying the 
sources of water , which  this project aims to achieve  through  investment in wastewater 
treatments and its use  for agricultural and supply augmenta tion .  
43. The AE, the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre ( CCCCC ) is a GCF direct access 
entity and as such has been recognized as the focal point for climate change issues in the 
Caribbean . It has a proven track record in the planning , management and implementation of 
climate change adaptation and mi tigation. The AE can further benefit from GCF’s dedication in 
supporting direct access entities through its direct access strategy.  
44. The proposal design is a result of collective efforts amo ng stakeh older s, including  
government agencies ( e.g. the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources, the Ministry 
of Environment and National Beautification, the Ministry of Tourism and International 
Transport, and the Ministry of Economic Affairs an d Investment), private sector agencies, non -
governmental organizations  and affected communities. The project will continue to engage with 
the wider stakeholders at the national and community level  during the implementation and 
make sure their needs and concerns are addressed . The national designated authority  also 
provided a letter of no  objection and expressed its willingness to lead effort s for continued 
political buy -in and support at the highest levels of government.  
3.6 Efficiency and e ffectiveness                                                  Scale:  N/A  
45. The mitigation cost is estimated at USD 98  per tonne CO 2 which excludes the 
undetermined quantity of  GHG emissions avoided owing to the  use of sludge to generate energy 
and energy -efficient pumps in the wastewater treatment  plant . This mitigation cost is on the 
high side  resulting from GCF being sole financer to cover the costs of mitigation activities,  the 
small scale of PV installation, and the intensive capital investment into upgrading of the 
automated controls and energy efficien cy measures.  
46. The results of the  financial analysis with and without GCF scenario s (50 :50 grant/high -
concessional loans ; 100  per cent  grant)  show that GCF providing in full grant is the only case 
where the project is profitable regardless of the considered water reuse tariff. The current tariff 
level for irrigation/agricultural uses stands at USD 0.6/m3 so the project would have to double 
the figure to make it viable without the GCF grant . However, with the level of poverty increas ing 
from 15.1 per cent in 2010 to almost 20  per cent  in 2020, an  increase in tariffs would affect the 
level of economic activity by irrigation farmers with other effects on the local economy and food imports.   
47. GCF concessional ity would deliver benefits for the following beneficiaries :


---
*Page 153*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 153 
 
 
(a) Farmers , through increased and assured availability of water for irrigation, enabling 
the expansion of irrigated agriculture for new entrants , and through reduction  in the 
need to use additional water resources to support irrigation ; 
(b) Communities,  through increased employment opportunities, and l ocal businesses 
supporting the farming sector ;  
(c) General population through increased food a vailability and security ;  
(d) Visitors to Barbados through the maintenance and improvement of the marine 
environment and ecosystems  through reduce contamination ; 
(e) Visitors and the general population , through  reduced public health risks ; 
(f) The BWA , through improved training and capacity development and increased income 
generation ; and  
(g) The Government of Barbados through increased economic activity . 
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
48. Project overview . The project aims to contribute to the enhancement of the health, 
well -being and productivity of Barbadians by using carbon neutral and climate- resilient water 
and energy management technologies and strategies that ensure water is protected, manag ed, 
recycled, reused and conserved. It involves upgrading the Bridgetown STP and installing cluster wastewater collection and treatment to achieve a tertiary water quality. The project will also 
install PV energy, energy conservation and efficiency equipment and renewable bioenergy at 
the Bridgetown STP. In addition, it will provide institutional capacity -building by developing 
standards for water quality monitoring and training of personnel. Expected environmental and 
social co -benefits include reduced air  and water pollution , and improved access to water for 
irrigation and other non -potable uses.  
49. Environmental and s ocial risk category. The project falls under Category B of the GCF 
environmental and social categorization system. The project is essentially a n environmental 
mitigation project and hence its environmental risks/impacts are mostly positive with only moderate environmental and social  risks. The inherent risks of using recycled wastewater for 
aquifer recharge and irrigation have been greatly reduce d by the adoption of several key design 
features including , principally, the upgrading of wastewater treatment to achieve tertiary 
quality wastewater, and further treatments such as subjecting reclaimed water t o a reverse 
osmosis process and the applicatio n of additional measures to control for alkalinity and 
hardness prior to recharge.  
50. Safeguard instrument . The AE  has undertaken an e nvironmental and s ocial impact 
assessment (ESIA) and has prepared an e nvironmental and s ocial management plan (ESMP) for 
the project. Detailed site- specific environmental and social assessments and management plans 
will be prepared for various aspects of the project during the engineering design phase s, namely 
the installation of (a) pipelines; (b) PV systems; (c) decentralized wastewater treatment plants; 
(d) reverse osmosis filtration systems; and (e) upgrading of the B ridgetown STP. A condition is 
included in term sheet for the AE to deliver and disclose these studies.  
4.1.1.  Compliance with the GCF environmental and social safeg uards ( ESS)  standards 
51. ESS1 (Assessment and management of e nvironmental and s ocial risks and 
impacts) . An ESIA was conducted on the bas is of the general specifications from the project


---
*Page 154*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 154 
 
 
feasibility study. In general, since the designs and locations of the facilities have not yet been 
specified, the impacts and risks,  and the mitigation measures identified, are still mostly generic 
and not site -specific. It is recommended that the detailed site-specific assessment s that will be 
prepared at the d esign phase dis cuss the presence of residents and establishments near and 
around the project sites, their socioeconomic status, presence of any disadvantaged or 
vulnerable groups (e.g. homeless  people , informal settlers, itinerant vendors) and whether and 
how they will b e impacted by or benefit from the project.  
52. ESS2 (Labo ur and w orking conditions) . ESS2 is relevant in the project because 
workers will likely be hired during construction by contractors , while additional workers and 
staff are likely to be hired by BWA duri ng the operation of the upgraded sewerage system. 
Based on the information provided by the AE, construction activities will create approximately 
100 –125 temporary jobs at peak including labourers and skilled personnel. The project 
management is also expect ed to directly hire 10 people with qualifications and training in 
specific fields and 20 skilled personnel at the peak of the project.  
53. The ESIA has determined  the occupational health and safety risk s of the project to be 
moderate for the construction phase and a detailed plan is presented in the ESMP. Safety 
hazards associated with construction personnel are presented in the ESMP, along with the 
proposed measures to be implemented by the contractor fo llowing national and international 
standards. To ensure those measures are followed effectively by all people involved, a manual 
outlining them will be distributed in an appropriate format and made accessible at the 
workplace. This will also include measur es that will be taken if the regulations are violated. 
Moreover, the contractor will appoint a person/team who will be responsible for the implementation of the health and safety measures. Strict implementation of the country’s labour 
laws will address any  potential violations of labo ur standards in the project. It is recommended 
that the AE establish a process for assessing risks related to labour in supply chains and mitigate them accordingly.  
54. ESS3 (Resource e fficiency and p ollution control) . The project  is expected to improve 
efficiency in the use of water and energy resources, and ambient air and water quality. Water 
use efficiency is increased by recovering and recycling wastewater for non -potable uses , while 
energy efficiency is achieved through the i nstallation of PV panels, automated control systems, 
and a biodigester using sludge and food wastes. River and marine water pollution is expected to 
decrease because direct discharges of raw sewage and treated wastewater to these water 
bodies are intended to be reduced. The plume dispersion simulation indicates that under 
normal discharge scenario s, which occur 90  per cent of the time, only approximately 900m3 per 
day of reverse osmosis discharge is released at designated sea outfalls : the release will not 
present any significant faecal coliform and total suspended solids plumes in the sea.  
55. The project is also expected to improve groundwater quality because the expansion of 
sewerage services displaces some of the pit latrines in critical zones,  while direct  use of 
reclaimed water for irrigation reduces the need for underground water abstraction, and aquifer 
recharge of tertiary water reduces intrusion of salt water and contaminated water into the 
aquifer. Moreover, emissions of odorous compound s, which had b een the subject of complaints 
by communities around the B ridgetown STP are expected to be reduced with the 
rehabilitation/improvement and proper maintenance of the facility ’s odo ur-control systems. 
The ESMP also provides a comprehensive environmental monit oring plan, which includes the 
quality of influent and effluents of the STPs, groundwater quality, surface water quality and 
ambient air quality.  
56. ESS4 (Community h ealth, safety and s ecurity) . Communities near the project will be 
exposed to construction -related safety hazards during the construction phase , including risks of 
accidents and exposure to harmful substances. During the operations phase, they may also be exposed to risks associated with possible infrastructure failure due to natura l disasters or 
industrial accidents resulting in catastrophic release of untreated wastewater. The ESIA


---
*Page 155*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 155 
 
 
includes  the impact of construction on the safety and mobility as well as nuisance and health of 
communities. These impacts, although likely to occur, h ave a magnitude of low to moderate,  
which can be readily brought down to negligible to low levels with standard mitigation 
measures. The ESIA  considered the vulnerability of the system from natural disasters and the 
provision of  various measures , includin g structural resistance to earthquakes, alternative power 
supply, alternative discharge routes, and stormwater drainage. The project design includes 
features such as drainage improvements, the installation of back -up generator, and emergency 
discharge of w astewater, which minimizes the risk of catastrophic failure.  
57. The ESIA determines  that the overall impact of the recharge on underground water 
quality will be positive , given current contamination from pit latrines coupled with excessive 
water abstraction. In case of malfunction/failure of the B ridgetown STP and decentralized 
sewage treatment plants, raw wastewater will be discharged via the outfall through the 
computeri zed real-time management system  which, together with  the monitoring programme 
envisioned and made possible under Output 1.3 , is a failsafe system to prevent low quality 
wastewater from leaving the plant. The tertiary wastewater intended for irrigation will undergo 
reverse osmosis treatment prior to conveyance into the fields. This process will remove total 
dissolved solids and thus also harmful pathogens from the wastewater. The Ministry of Health 
and the Ministry of Agriculture will also carry out crop and  soil monitoring to identify any 
potential adverse accumulation over the medium to long  term.  
58. The BWA is currently completing the groundwater models and carries out periodic 
groundwater quality monitoring. These efforts will be enhanced with the establish ment of the 
laboratory. A vulnerability analysis of the aquifer was done in Burnside (2009) using the 
DRASTIC method,  which rated the island as having high to extremely high vulnerability. The 
system provides monitoring and control to minimize the risk of long -term deterioration.  
59. ESS5 (Land a cquisition and involuntary resettlement) . Although the ESIA indicated 
that the project will exclude activities that “would require involuntary physical and economic 
displacement of people”, new structures will be built on lands outside of current plant 
perimeters. These include the expansion of the sewerage service in the B ridgetown  STP, the two 
new decentralized sewage collection and treatment plant systems, the reclaimed water 
pipelines, the injection and monitoring we lls, and installation of solar PV power plants, among 
others. Aside from these, the project could potentially  require temporary facilities and 
easements during construction that may entail lease or temporary possession of private lands. 
Lastly, the establi shment of project facilities may impose encumbrances to private lands in 
terms of permanent restrictions of access and/or changes or restriction in land use. Given that 
the project area is densely populated and may contain informal settlers, the project may involve 
compulsory land acquisition/land use restriction, and/or displacement of dwellers/occupants. 
The term sheet includes a request for a detailed survey of the ownership status and occupancy 
profiles of the lands to be used or affected by the project  and a resettlement action plan in case 
acquisition of private properties or displacement of occupants cannot be avoided.  
60. ESS6 (Biodiversity c onservation and s ustainable management of l iving natural 
resources) . The project ’s impacts on terrestrial biodiversity and natural habitat will be very 
minimal. The physical activities are planned for areas mainly occupied by agriculture, pasture 
and cities/urban areas. The current conditions of coral reefs around the project ’s designated 
outfalls have been assessed by the Barbados Coral Reef Monitoring Program as “ poor ” to “very 
poor”. The natural ecology of Carlisle Bay is expected to improve as the pollution load is 
reduced.  
61. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS7: Indigenous p eoples. The AE notes that the 
standard is not applicable to the project and represents that it has conducted due diligence in 
accordance with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.


---
*Page 156*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 156 
 
 
62. ESS8 (Cultural h eritage) . According to the ESIA, construction works for the r eclaimed 
water pipeline (RWP) will take place within the limit of the UNESCO World Heritage 
Conservation Area’s buffer and there is a listed building located close to the projected 
construction sites, about 30 met res from the planned RWP alignment. Also, near the 
construction  zone, one Cultural Heritage Conservation Area has been identified that contain s 
buildings of special architectural and historical importance. However, t he ESIA does  not indicate 
whether and how these buildings will be affected by the construction or the o peration of the 
RWP. Given that the routes of the pipelines are yet  to be finalized, it is recommended that the AE 
undertake due diligence on locations of final sites and alignments of facilities and their possible 
impacts on cultural heritage structures in project areas as part of the detailed design studies.  
63. Stakeholder engagement and i nformation disclosure.  The project underwent 
stakeholder consultations during the preparation of the ESIA between December 2020 and 
December 2021. The consultations consisted of meetings, workshops, presentations and 
informal discussions involving members of Barbadian civil society, including non -governmental 
organi zations and community groups, institutional representatives in the water sector and the 
general public. A stakeholder engagement plan was provided with the funding proposal. It 
identifie s the various stakeholders, their key interests in relation to the project, methods of 
information dissemination and information expected to be provided. The plan will be updated 
and adjusted throughout the project implementation period. It is recommended that the AE 
disclose the detailed environmental and social assessments and management plans that will be 
prepared as part of the detailed design phase of the pr oject. 
64. Grievance redress m echanism.  The ESMP outlines the mechanisms for feedback and 
adjustment. As described, the mechanism provides the means for stakeholders to air questions, complaints, and compliments/suggestions about the project, by mail, email, f ax, site or by other 
means of communication during construction and operation phase. However, contact details 
have not been provided in the documentation. The mechanism is linked with the site 
inspections, monitoring and audits to confirm proper implementa tion of the ESMP, as well as 
effectiveness of mitigation. The grievance redress mechanism is also described in the 
stakeholder engagement plan. An external communication plan with an independent grievance 
redress mechanism will be designed and will include  actors from each of the relevant groups.  
65. Implementation arrangements.  The ESMP provides detailed discussions of the 
institutional arrangements for the implementation of the environmental and social management 
measures, including the roles and responsibil ities of the various authorities and offices,  and an 
analysis of the capacity -building needs for the implementation of the ESMP as well as the 
responsibilities for reporting and review.   
66. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment  safeguarding . The revised 
GCF Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM -2021/18 requires safeguarding 
from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH)  in GCF- financed activities. The 3R -
CReWS ESIA highlights section 154 of the Barbados Law on sexual offences and further states that in cases of SEAH the AE   will consult and work with the relevant government ministry, 
department or non- governmental organizations  to ensure that the survivors are placed in a safe 
location and protected from  further victimization. As required  and mentioned in the t erm sheet, 
the AE is required to undertake or incorporate due diligence on SEAH as part of the 
environmental and social due diligence of the proposed project. It is recommended that t he AE 
should co nduct first level due diligence on SEAH to ensure that the activities proposed for GCF 
financing adhere to the SEAH provisions of the GCF Revised Environmental and Social Policy.   
4.2 Gender policy  
67. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan (GAP) and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the Updated Gender Policy of the GCF. The gender


---
*Page 157*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 157 
 
 
assessment was prepared using primary data collected from sources such as a stakeholder 
survey and two key informant interviews and desk review of avai lable secondary information.  
68. Barbados has ratified a number of international conventions. Among them are the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the 
Beijing Platform for Action. At the regional level the Caribbean Community has a gender 
equality strategy to assist member countries with full implementation of the Beijing declaration. 
Barbados has a draft national gender policy that is yet to be approved. National laws for fostering better gender equality in clude the Employment Act and the E mployment Sexual 
Harassment Act for preventing the discrimination of women in the workplace. A national 
bureau of gender affairs has been established to monitor and evaluate the government’s gender 
equality policies, plans  and programmes , and to integrate gender in all national development 
policies and programmes to advance equity and equality.  
69. The gender assessment provided by the AE analyses gender issues at the BWA as the 
entity responsible for delivering water and waste water services in the country. It mostly 
employs men , with few women in technical positions ( in line with the national gender 
imbalance in science, technology, engineering and mathematics sectors)  or in leadership roles , 
as reflected in  their lower partici pation in decision -making spaces.  
70. Women are more likely to be affected by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse and poor 
management than men due to their gender roles as caregivers and homemakers , which means 
that they are dominant water users and have more direct contact with food and waste. In 
addition, women are more likely to suffer from the effects of contaminated water. These issues 
are compounded by the fact that there is a low percentage of Barbadians currently able to 
access the BWA wastewater collection and treatment facilities,  many of whom are low -incomes 
households comprising women and vulnerable peoples . Furthermore, reduced water 
availability owing in part to climate effects disproportionately affects women and increase s 
their unpaid domestic workloads.  
71. In the agricultural sector, women engage in farming activities on small subsistence plots 
and farms to support their families, while men are mainly involved in cash crop production. Women are faced with barriers in accessing finance for improving irrigation technologies due to 
lack of collateral.  
72. The GAP includes activities, performance indicators, sex -disaggregated targets, 
timelines, responsibilities, and estimated costs for implementation. The GAP includes activities 
that are mainly focused on participation of women and men in the project , namely : stakeholder 
consultations involving women and women’s groups on the water and sanitation plan; inclusion 
of gender considerations in the W astewater Reuse Bill and other relate d legislation for 
enhancing wastewater requirements and applications; training of BWA staff on gender 
sensitivity; a public education and awareness campaign on the impact of climate change on water resources ; and an internship programme for women at BWA wastewater division in 
collaboration with training institutions to improve their representation in technical positions. In addition, access to project benefits is demonstrated through female and male -headed 
households who will gain connection to decentralize d wastewater treatment systems in Zone A 
as part of the project.  
73. The project will have a social and gender specialist who will be responsible for 
supervising the implementation of the GAP as well as reporting on its progress.  
74. The AE is recommended to take  into consideration the following issues and submit a 
revised GAP. The GAP can be improved by including more activities that demonstrate access to 
the project’s benefits by both women and men. For example, access to reclaimed wastewater by 
women and men fo r irrigation purposes, and access to the RAFF for decentrali zed on -site 
wastewater systems, including by businesses owned by women and female -headed households. 
Measures that will be taken to reduce costs of connection and tariffs to reclaimed water,


---
*Page 158*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 158 
 
 
espec ially for female small scale subsistence farmers , and decentrali zed wastewater treatment 
services for female -headed households given their limited resources to pay can also be included 
in the GAP. Additionally, expected outcomes from participation and acce ss to benefits from the 
project can be included in the GAP , such as increased availability of water and wastewater 
treatment services, and how stakeholder engagement will be used to address the reservations 
that women and men may have regarding the use of wastewater for non -potable purposes as 
well as barriers that impede payment for water and wastewater services. Targets in the GAP 
will also need to be rationali zed against baseline information. It is not clear whether the 
baseline study undertaken for the project includes information on gender or how such information was used to set the current targets in the GAP. s .
  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
75. The total financing is USD 49,999,063 of which USD 39,390,913 is GCF grant financed. 
Co-financing of USD 10,608,150  is a grant provided by BWA. C o-financing is at a ratio 1:0.27 and 
21 per cent  of total financing.   
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low  risk)  
76. CCCCC will act in its capacity as the AE , and also the executing entity (EE) with BWA as 
the co-executing entity for some of the activities. We view positively that CCCCC has a track 
record of working with BWA in Barbados in another GCF project currently u nder 
implementation (FP060 Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S -
Barbados)); and that BWA is both EE  and co -financier , given its strong implementing capability 
in water and wastewater sector in Barbados.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific e xecution risks ( medium risk)  
77. Capacity -building activities under components 3 and 4 represent 7  per cent of the total 
GCF funding requested and may not result in realizing long -term benefits as expected, in 
particular the benefit of creat ing an enabling environment as part of exit strategy and 
sustainability beyond the project. Execution delays could occur as capacity -building activities 
require buy -in from the private sector and local communities.  
78. Co-financing from BWA  will be provided ultimately by the G overnment of Barbados 
through the Ministry of Finance , Economic Affairs and Investment (USD  10,608 ,150  in the form 
of a grant) and may not be realized. The G overnment of Barbados (rated Caa1 stable by 
Moody’s : unchanged  since July 2019) is constrained by high debt levels and weak economic 
growth. The COVID -19 pandemic has also weakened the G overnment ’s balance sheet and 
delayed its ambitious reform agenda. However, relatively high  income levels and low exposure 
to foreig n-currency -denominated debt support creditworthiness. We derive comfort from the 
Ministry of Finance , Economic Affairs and Investment , which has already sourced some of the 
co-financing required to BWA; the G overnment ’s recent debt restructuring has signif icantly 
improved its fiscal position and we expect debt metrics to improve gradually over the next few 
years as the economy opens up and the G overnment rebuilds its primary surplus; and existing 
covenants in the term sheet.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk ( high risk )


---
*Page 159*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 159 
 
 
79. The beneficiary country, Barbados, is not subject to United Nations Security Council 
restrictive measures. The AE has confirmed that project activities and its related counterparties 
do not pose significant risks with respect to United Nations Security Counc il sanctions. The AE, 
along with BWA ( a state-owned company ) will act as the EE. The AE has performed a 
comprehensive capacity assessment on the BWA and the results did not include any major 
issues in relation to an EE’s ability to carry out the planned ac tivities.  The AE has assessed that 
money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and sanctions related risks are  of 
low probability and medium impact. Throughout the project – inclusive of procurement matters 
– , the AE will apply its standard set of controls to manage all fiduciary risks. The GCF Office of 
Risk Management and Compliance ( ORMC ) and the Compliance Team note that Barbados 
continues to be listed by the Financial Action Task Force as a jurisdiction with strategic 
deficiencies in its anti -money -laundering and countering the financing of terrorism  regime . 
Taking into consideration this high exposure, it is recommended that the AE embed enhanced 
due diligence and controls in all project activities. ORMC/Compliance has conducted a review of 
the project in accordance with relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any 
material issue or deviation wi th respect to compliance issues. Based on available information 
for this funding proposal, the ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of “ high ” 
and has no objection to this request proceeding to the next steps for processing.  
4.3.5.  Project viability and concessionality  
80. With regards to c omponent 2: Renewable energy and energy efficiency in wastewater 
treatment, one of the intended outputs is about the adoption of energy efficiency and renewable 
energy technologies. There are established business models  in terms of adoption of energy 
efficiency and renewable energy technologies and , once installed , these provide relatively 
predictable and stable revenue streams. The use of GCF grants represent s 8 per cent of total GCF 
funding requested for component 2 . The p roposed  conc essionality level  is justified on the 
understanding that the project will create a circular economy, the enabling environment to be 
more attractive for the private sector as part of exit strategy and sustainability beyond the 
project, and t reating water asset s as a new asset class. As a result, the project will ultimately 
generate adaptation benefits for the population of Barbados. In addition , financial analysis 
results show that GCF providing  in full grant is the only case there the projec t is profitable .  
4.3.6.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)   
81. If approved, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in terms of 
result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.7.  Recommendation  
82. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.


---
*Page 160*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add.02 
Page 160 
 
 
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Medium 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  High  
4.4 Fiduciary  
83. CCCCC is the AE and the EE of the p roject. BWA will co -execute the p roject as the EE. 
CCCC, as the AE, will administer the relevant GCF p roceeds to be used for the financing of the 
project and will guide implementation in accordance with its accreditation credentials as well as 
guided by the terms of the funded activity agreement ( FAA) . In addition, CCCCC, as the EE, will 
manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF proceeds, as well as 
monitor and report on the project a ctivities to the GCF and the Government of Barbados, 
through the office of the national designated authority, in accordance with the FAA and 
accreditation master agreement ( AMA) .  
84. BWA, as the co -EE, will provide technical support to CCCCC for the development of 
terms of reference and the procurement of equipment, goods and service; and will be part of the 
evaluation team and report to the CCCCC as guided by the terms set out in the Subsidiary 
Agreement, the procurement guidelines of the CCCCC and/or those of the Government of 
Barbados. 
85. The CCCCC project components will be executed by a p roject management office (PMO), 
whil e those components under BWA will be executed under the manage ment of the BWA PMO 
through a dedicated p roject team. In addition, the p roject will be monitored by a project 
steering committee comprising key stakeholders.  
86. Funding for the project will come from: (1) a grant from GCF; and (2) the BWA in the 
form of a gr ant from the Government of Barbados through the Ministry of Finance , Economic 
Affairs and Investment. CCCCC will not on -grant any monies to the BWA, nor will BWA on -grant 
monies to the CCCCC. The CCCCC will procure all major goods and services for the proj ect using 
international best practices and the appropriate procurement method in accordance with the 
procurement plan. The CCCCC , in accordance with its AMA, financial and accounting manual and 
procurement guidelines, will procure goods, works and services  for the reali zation of the project 
outputs.  
87. Funding provided by the GCF will be kept in a separate project bank account. The 
partners providing co -financing will manage their co -financing activities but will be obligated to 
report to the CCCCC on the sta tus of those activities. Those entities are not obligated to transfer 
any monies to the CCCCC but must provide accounting evidence of transactions and expenditures towards their co -financing obligations.  
88. The project will be audited annually by an independ ent accounting firm, which is to be 
selected using a competitive bidding process every five years.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting


---
*Page 161*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 161 
 
 
89. As a cross- cutting project, 3R -CReWS aims to generate mitigation and adaptation results 
targeting five GCF results areas. I n terms of mitigation impact, the project is estimated to reduce 
GHG emissions by 40,875 tCO 2eq over the lifespan of 25 years.  Regarding adaptation impact, 
the project will benefit 277,821  beneficiaries, the country's total population, out of which 
136,22 0 are direct, and 141,601 are indirect.  The ex -ante estimates are in accordance with the 
GCF core indicators and further details regarding calculation methodology has been submitted 
in annex 22 of the funding proposal. Please find detailed assessment regarding monitoring and evaluation below:  
(a) The theory of change adequately explains how the results chain will cascade from the 
goal statement of the project to the proposed activities and also identifies the linkages 
between outputs, barriers and risks. Artic ulating the goal statement and outcomes helps 
readers to understand the project intervention’ s climate impact and ancillary benefits 
(co-benefits) ; 
(b) The logical framework has been well designed in accordance with the GCF integrated 
results management framework . The project is expected to reali ze the paradigm shift by 
building the necessary infrastructure to scale wastewater treatment and use in the intervention area, implementing a replicable solution for other Cari bbean states and 
achieving sustainability through knowledge generation and capacity -building focused 
outputs ; 
(c) The quantitative integrated results management framework  indicators are identified 
well, cover all the applicable GCF results areas, and include the  necessary details about 
monitoring instruments and baseline/mid -term/final target values.  For the  GCF results 
are on enabling environment, all four core indicators are selected with a low and medium baseline level. The project is expected to build a comp rehensive enabling 
environment for water security and other climate change projects at the national level;  
(d) The project has listed relevant project -specific indicators for project outcomes and 
outputs to enable all -round monitoring of the project’s results. For co -benefit indicators 
“Level of H 2S emissions”  and “Number of odour complaints from communities 
surrou nding of the B ridgetown STP and lift stations received per year ”, the baseline and 
target will  be submitted at the end of the inception phase of the project implementation ; 
and 
(e) Annex 5 ( implementation timetable)  has been provided in a format allowing tracking of 
implementation progress and milestones  at the output and activity level. The 
monitoring and evaluation  plan provided in a nnex 11 is beneficial in understanding the 
indicator -level breakdown of the monitor ing budget.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
90. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 25 May 2016 and it became effective on 23 January 
2018. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation is due to lapse on 22 January 2023, and 
the re -accreditation of the Accredited Entit y has not yet been approved by the Board.  The GCF 
can execute an FAA with an a ccredited entity that is (1) is under a valid A ccreditation term and 
(2) has an executed and effective AMA (including an amended and restated AMA) for 
accreditation terms followi ng the initial term.  
91. The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
92. The proposed project will be implemented in Barbados. The GCF has signed a bilateral 
agreement on privileges and immunities with Barbados.


---
*Page 162*
---

 
GCF /B.34/02/Add. 02 
Page 162 
 
 
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
93. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the FAA  in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within 
180 days3 from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat . 
 
 
3 The GCF can only execute a funded act ivity agreement with an Accredited Entity that has an executed and effective 
AMA (including an amended and restated AMA).


---
*Page 163*
---

G
CF/B. 34/02/Add.02 
Page 163 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP192 
Proposal name:  The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R -CReWS)  
Accredited entity:  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre  (CCCCC)  
Country/(ies):  Barbados 
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential   Scale:  Medium  to high  
1.1.1.  Adaptation Impact  
1. Barbados is among the most densely populated and  water -scarce countries in the world ,
w
ith a  population density of 660 people  per km2 and a water availab ility estimated at
approximately 305–310 m3 per person per year.
2. The proposal argues that climate change would increase water stress through th e
f
ollowi ng impacts, expected for 2040 –2060 :
(a) The m ean annual daily maximum temperature would  increase by about 1.0  °C and the
mean annual daily minimum temperature would  increase by about 1.3  °C;
(b) The number of heatwaves  has already increased over the period 1991 –2020 and is
expected to increase further with increasing temperatures ; and
(c) Annual mean precipitation would  decrease by about 9  per cent, especially in the May –
July season, extending the dry season by two months.
3. The decreasin g amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing
evapotranspiration due to higher temperatures will set the stage for increased drought , which
will further decrease underground recharge rates and increase salinization of aquifers, w hich
provide 95 per cent  of the island’s potable water supply. The overall implication of the availab le
bo
dy of  studies suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease by around 50  per cent  by
2
050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of groundwater abstraction is already between
85 and 100  per cent  of the safe yield.
4. The proposed project aims to enhance water -related climate resiliency through the
following  main activities:
(a) Upgrade of the existing Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) to  achieve water
quality for reuse: conversion to Bardenpho configuration, and installation of tertiary
filters and a reverse osmosis unit;
(b) Construction of a distribution system and injection wells, to allow for irrigation reuseand aquifer recharge;
(c) Install ation of two pilot treatment plants;


---
*Page 164*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 164 
 
 
(d) Installation of a 1 MW photovoltaic (PV) system in the BSTP to meet energy 
requirements of the upgrade;  
(e) Implementation of energy efficiency measures and sludge dewatering at the BSTP; and  
(f) Provision of technical and institutional capacity -building and support including, among 
other things : the operation and maintenance of the BSTP ; a strategic plan t o guide the 
replication of water treatment facilities ; a review of water -related legislation ; the 
develop ment of  a water  and sanitation master plan  and an action plan to engage the 
private sector ; the expansion and promotion of  the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility 
(RAFF) to provide resources for the adoption of decentralized on -site wastewater 
systems;  and a public e ducat ion and  awareness c ampaign . 
5. Direct beneficiaries are estimated at 136,000 people, which is roughly half the 
population of the island. Indirect beneficiaries comprise the rest of the population, who would 
benefit from the strengthened institutional capacity  including, among other things , legislation 
review, development of a water and sanitation master plan and an action plan to engage the 
private sector, and a public education and awareness campaign.  
6. The BSTP  is a conventional activated sludge system, with  a design capacity of 9,000 
m3/day . There is no available  data on current  wastewater flow  and quality . Hence, the proposal 
estimat ed the flow based on water consumption, national average per capita consumption and 
number of properties connected to the sewer in Bridgetown.  Only 5  per cent  of the properties in 
Bridgetown are assumed to be connected to the sewer . According to this estimation, the plant 
would be currently receiving an average dry weather flow of approximately 1,400 m3/day . On 
the other hand , the proposal states that “ This [flow] is significantly lower than the flow 
operations staff indicate is received by the plant, who indicated wastewater flows approach the 
plant capacity at times ”, and that the system also receives commercial sources of w astewater. 
For these reasons, a nominal flow of 9,000 m3/day  was assumed to assess upgrading costs.1 In 
the opinion of the independent TAP, uncertainty in plant influent characteristics (i.e. flow  rate 
pattern and concentrations of incoming pollutants) at the design stage is a major cause of plant 
failure and inefficient design , with potential ly severe implications during the operation and 
maintenance of the facility .  
In a meeting with the independ ent TAP, the proponent further clarified that subsequent to the 
preparation of the baseline report, a water meter was installed to collect the daily flow data, and 
that samples have already been taken to characterize the raw influent, and are being analysed.  
7. In spite of th e clear lack of knowledge on current average and peak flows, the upgrade of 
the BSTP  to a four -stage Bardenpho configuration was designed to  increase the treatment 
capacity to 15,000 m3/day .2 The proposed  upgrade includes  two new aerobic reactors, two new 
secondary clarifiers and  two new tertiary filters.  
 
 
1 Feasibility Report, pages 5 and 6.  
2 Feasibility Report, page 32.


---
*Page 165*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 165 
 
 
 
8. An assessment of wastewater flows and quality should have been carried out prior to 
investment decision -making. The accredited entity  indicates that “ As there is no histo rical 
wastewater quality analysis data available, the wastewater characteristics were estimated 
based on typical North American wastewater characteristics ”. The four -stage Bardenpho 
process is a biological nitrogen removal (BNR) process. Extensive experien ce in BNR 
wastewater treatment pla nts indicates that having adequate influent characterization is key for 
successful design. BNR success depends to a large extent o n the influent flow characteristics, 
namely the ratios of readily biodegradable chemical oxy gen demand  and total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
Every municipality has a distinct wastewater characteristic and so sampling campaigns should 
have been made to make a proper influent characterization.  
9. Upgrades to Bardenpho with  tertiary filters and reverse osmosis  would be necessary for 
achieving reuse standards . But the high uncertainty in future influent flows, and the very high 
treatment capacity proposed (15,000 m3/day ) seems exaggerated based on the current 
situation.  
10. In response to the independent TAP’s  comments on plant capacity and sewer 
connections,  the proponent stated that “Efforts are being made to install equipment to 
undertake measurements to determine what t he inflow rates actually are… ” and that 15,000 
m3/day  is not the future capacity but the current “ peak daily flow that the plant can cope with ”. 
However, the Feasibility Report clearly states that the current peak flow capacity of the BSTP is 
36,000 m3/day , and that the proposed modifications would “ …increase the design capacity of 
the system from existing 9,000 m3/d to 15,000 m3/d…”.3  
11. The proponent also responded that “ It is expected that over the medium -long term the 
Government of Barbados and BWA [Barbados Water Authority] will realise significantly greater sewer coverage in the Bridgetown area ”, and that expanding the wastewater collection system 
would entail connecti ng a maximum of 16,000 additional properties (approx imately  41,000 
people), with an estimated budget for the expansion of the collection system of US D 48 million . 
It provided no details on how the expansion would be scheduled.  
12. The proponent also described other specifics related to the extension of the sewer 
coverage: (a) t here are areas that suffer from overflow of the septic tanks when the 
groundwater level rises, and for this reason are already identified and prioritized for connecting 
them to the sewera ge system (750 households) ; and  (b) there are two hotels planned for 
construction that would be connected to the system. These would contribute an additional 
600,000 –800,000 US gal/day ( 2,300 -3,000  m3/day). The government would pay for the intra-
domiciliary connections, including all the works that need to be done inside the households. The 
 
3 Feasibility Report, pages 8 and 32.


---
*Page 166*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 166 
 
 
independent TAP considers this an adequate means to increase people’s  connectivity to the 
sewer networks, thereby guaranteeing higher flow  rates to the plant  and less pollution.  
13. The funding proposal  recognizes that potable water losses in the distribution network of 
Barbados (lost to bursts and leakage) have been reported as approximately 20.0 Mm3/year, or 
roughly 38 per cent  of production, and states that “ Even removing all losses from the 
distribution system, which is unrealistic, would not be sufficient to offset the projected impact 
of climate change on aquifer yields ”. However, the percentage of loss is still suffici ently high to 
be taken into account as a priority for Barbados water management.  
14. Questioned by the i ndependent TAP, the proponent clarified that 38  per cent  is the total 
non- revenue water (NRW) at the  national level, and that it corresponds to: u nbilled authori zed 
consumption  – 3,195,820  m³ (6  per cent ); unbilled unauthori zed consumption – 639,164  m³ (1  
per cent ); meter errors – 1,597,910  m³ (3  per cent ); and real losses – 14,548,218  m³ (28  per 
cent ). The proponent also included a brief description of recently completed, ongoing  and 
planned  actions to reduce NRW, which include :4 
(a) An ongoing BWA programme to install smart water meters to enable the identification 
and correction of meter reading errors, expected to be operational by  2023 ; 
(b) The BWA and the Government of Barbados have been investing in a mains replacement 
programme, with a total of 29.4 km of pipelines replaced in 2021;  
(c) “NRW equipment” was installed within  the NRW Unit of  the BWA , by the Water Supply 
Upgrade Network Project (WATSNUP ); 
(d) The Water Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project is replacing 16  km of pipeline,  expecting 
to finalize  this work  in 2024 ; 
(e) The Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability  project i s replacing 16  km of 
pipelines ; 
(f) The Production and District Metering Programme , funded by the Government of 
Barbados , is installing metering and NRW software , complemented by the SMART Meter 
Transformation project installing Automatic Infrastructure Metering , including smart 
meters, software, analytics, reporting and connectivity to Mana gement Information 
Systems ; and  
(g) Other planned projects include the Highway 7 Mains Replacement programme and the 
Major Cities Programme , which includes replacement of mains and upgrading o f the 
distribution networks.  
15. The water distribution network is currently equipped with water meters at the user 
level, which are being gradually replaced by smart water meters. Residential and commercial tariffs are based on increasing block tariffs, which  penali ze excess water use.  
16. The two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment 
demonstration systems to be installed under activity 1.4.1 are not described in the proposal. 
Questioned by the i ndependent TAP, the proponent pointed  out that this activity is fully funded 
by the Government of Barbados and that it is currently under implementation, at the  detailed 
design  stage, and submitted a schedule of institutional actions taken up to now. 
17. Given that the primary use of reclaimed water would be for agricultural purposes, and 
that the reclaimed water would be used to recharge the aquifer only when the demand for 
irrigation decreases ,5 and that the estimated demand for reclaimed water for agricultural 
irrigation is approximately ten times the volume that would be made available by this project ,6 
 
4 The independent TAP Qs CCCCC Water Reuse BWA_CCCCC Responses 25_08_2022_Rev1, answer to question 4.  
5 Funding proposal, page 63.  
6 Funding proposal, page 57.


---
*Page 167*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 167 
 
 
it was not clear why the proposal includ ed the construction of six injection wells.  Questio ned by 
the i ndependent TAP, the proponent clarified that the injection wells would be used during the 
rainy season, when the water requirement for irrigation is at its minimum.  Thus, in the 
independent TAP’s opinion, the construction of six injection wells makes sense.  
18. The project expects to achieve a greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emission reduction of 40,875 
tCO 2e over 25 years , or 1,635 tCO 2e/year. This reduction comes from the installation of the PV 
system.  The project scenario used for calculations does not cons ider the emissions related to the 
upgrade of the BSTP  (additional reactors, secondary decanters, tertiary filters and reverse 
osmosis) , nor the emissions related to treatment of a higher wastewater flow  rate (energy for 
pumping, blowers, filtration, aquifer recharge system, irrigation distribution system, methane 
emitted by additional sludge generated, etc.). No doubt the proposed PV system would reduce  
energy requirements during the operation of the proposed upgrade , but the independent TAP  
question s the GHG emission reductions claimed in this funding proposal . 
1.2 Para digm shift potential                       Scale:  High  
1.2.1.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
19. Concerning knowledge and learning, activity 4.3 is focused on nation wide  public 
educati on and awareness , which would include  school programmes, community consultations, 
and workshops for key stakeholders such as farmers and the private sector. Knowledge 
product s include videos  and documentary  films, press releases of outputs of town hall mee tings 
within communities, case studies, digital flyers, posters , 40 “water Wednesdays ” (8 per year), 20 
newsletters (4 per year) and over 5 ,000 combined posts on social media accounts.  The project 
would  also have a dedicated web  page  (activity 4.3.3) for reporting and sharing lessons  learned  
and best practices.  
20. Project m onitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements are clearly described in the 
funding proposal . 
1.2.2.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
21. In order to enhance post -project sustainability, the project would include monitoring 
systems and promote preventive maintenance through: (i) the development of a Computerized 
Real- time Management System (CMMS) to establish a core electronic data collection, operation 
and maintenance prog ramme; (ii) the implementation of a sewer flow monitoring programme  
to mitigate flow and load variations that could occur as a result of major storm events; and (iii) 
the establishment of an on -site laboratory  at the BSTP to generate influent and effluent water 
quality data . 
22. The main revenue generation for the financial sustainability of the upgraded BSTP 
would come from the Garbage and Sewage Collection Levy  and the sale of the reclaimed treated 
wastewater to farmers for irrigation . Other potential income would be  the sale of dewatered 
sludge to be used as fertilizer.  
23. The private sector engagement in the adoption of wastewater management technologies  
and use of reclaimed water and other by -products would promote the emergence of new 
markets related to the w astewater sector.  
1.2.3.  Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
24. Component 4 is mainly focused on providing support to improve the regulatory 
framework and governance. Under this component, the project would carry out  a legislative 
review of the P lanning and Development Act, the Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related


---
*Page 168*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 168 
 
 
legislation including the Planning and Development Regulations, the Physical Development 
Plan, the Water Order Bill, the Guidelines and Protocols for Potable Water Storage and 
Rainwater Harvesting, the Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan, the Guidelines and 
Protocols for the Operation of Solid Waste Management Facilities, and the Integrated Blue 
Economy Policy Framework and Strategic Action Plan for Barbados.  
1.2.4.  Scalability and  replicability  
25. To promote replication efforts, output 3.2 involves investigating  and develop ing a 
strategic plan for the installation of reverse osmosis water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor , to collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable water standards to 
supplement drinking water resources . 
26. The e xpan sion  and promot ion of the RAFF would  provide resources for the adoption of 
decentralized on -site wastewater systems . The RAFF, currently being established by the BWA,  
aims  to mobili ze funds for  adaptation and mitigation initiatives  in the water sector,  including 
those identified as a priority in the Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan  of Barbados . 
27. As described in the funding proposal , the estimated demand for reclai med water for 
agricultural irrigation is approximately ten times the volume that would be made available by 
this project , demonstrating the high potential for scalability and replicability of this project . 
28. Institutional and technical strengthening would al so support replication and scalability.  
29. The independent TAP fully recognize s the urgency and importance o f this funding 
proposal for Barbados . However, i t would like to express concern regarding the business -as-
usual  approach  applied  in the waste water  treatment process, not considering methane capture 
and utilization as a renewable energy source or flaring at  the site . Therefore, the paradigm shift 
criteri on is assessed as medium.   
1.3 Sustainable development potential            Scale:  High  
1.3.1.  Environmental  co-benefits  
30. Environmental co -benefits include:  
(a)  GHG emission reduction from reduced sludge transportation (which is not calculated in 
the funding proposal and for this reason is considered  as a co -benefit) ; 
(b) Improved environmental conditions, including reduced groundwater pollution, on  the 
land where the sludge is currently being sprayed, which is reportedly presenting “clogging problems ” (saturated land);  
(c) Reduced odour problems in the proximity of the BSTP  from the enhanced sludge 
management s ystem;  
(d) Reduced groundwater contamination at the sites benefiting from decentralized 
wastewater treatment systems ; and  
(e) The improvement of the operation of the BSTP that would ensure higher effluent quality, and the reduced discharge flow to the ocean, could  potentially enhance water 
quality at the coast near the discharge point.  
1.3.2.  Social co-benefits  
31. The reduction in the consumption of irrigation water from natural sources  would 
increase water availability for domestic uses, thus potentially enhancing the healt h standard of 
the population.


---
*Page 169*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 169 
 
 
1.3.3.  Econ omic co -benefits  
32. The increased availability of water for irrigation and of treated sludge for use as soil 
amendment has the potential to increase agricultural productivity , and consequently the income 
of the people who depend on agriculture.  
33. It is estimated that the construction works included under this project at the BSTP and 
the 9 km pipeline would create 100 temporary jobs and new opportunities for local business, 
which could have positive impacts on local income.  Consu ltancies related to baseline studies 
and strategic plans would also create additional jobs.  
34. The private sector  engagement in the adoption of wastewater management technologies 
and the use of reclaimed water and other by -products  would  generate green jobs and have 
positive impacts on the economy.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development impact  
35. Gender equality would be considered in the project activities as follows:  
(a) Stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project would  aim to engag e 
women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings ; 
(b) Community infrastructure improvements would include  social and gender safeguards to 
ensure  the protection of  women, children and the vulnerable ; 
(c) Community engagement would ensure that the needs of both femal e- and male -headed 
households are incorporated when installing decentralized wastewater treatment 
systems;  
(d) All training activities would aim to achieve a 50/50 balance in the participation of men 
and women ; 
(e) The BWA staff would undergo a gender sensitivity training programme ; 
(f) The u pdate of the standard operating procedures ( SOPs ) and operational manual would  
include gender and social inclusion considerations ; 
(g) The legislative review would consider gender equality;  
(h)  The water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private 
sector would  promote women ’s empowerment;  
(i) The management of the expanded RAFF would ensure that gender equality is promoted 
as a requirement;  
(j) The public education and awareness campai gn w ould  be designed to be gender  
sensitive ; and  
(k) When possible, project results would be disaggregated by gender.  
1.4 Need s of the recipient         Scale:  High  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country  and  vulnerable groups  
36. The proposal includes a climate historical data analysis, based on data for the period 
1991 –2020, from four weather stations located on the island, one of them having data on daily 
observations (station of the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology ) (CIMH), and 
the other three with only monthly averages. 7 
 
7 C1 Climate and Climate Change in Barbados, page 2.


---
*Page 170*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add.02 
Page 170 
 
 
37. The historica l trend analysis, based on the CIMH data , was carried out using the 
Climpact software, and arrived at the following conclusions:  
(a) The minimum daily temperature has increased during the last three decades, at a pace 
of 0.19  °C per decade ; 
(b) The maximum daily t emperature has increased at a rate of 0.29  °C per decade ; 
(c) There is no significant change in the number of small to medium precipitation events; 
(d) The total precipitation over consecutive days is increasing, especially during September to November; and  
(e) There were no significant changes in monthly precipitation during the period 1991 –
2020.  
38. Additionally, the evaluation includes a visual trend analysis of temperature and 
precipitation time  series, which is evaluated in the following paragraphs.  
39. The temperature chart shows the increase in the lowest daily minimum temperature 
and the monthly average of the daily minimum. However, the trend is not gradual throughout the 30 years of historical data: it presents no visible trends for 1991 –2010, and presen ts a 
somehow higher median for the period 2010 –2020.  
40. The monthly maximum temperatures show an increase in peak temperatures for 2006 –
2020 as compared to 1991 –2005. However, rather than a trend, this is based on only three 
hotter summers during the period 2 006 –2020. If those three events are disregarded, there is no 
significant visual trend in maximum temperatures.  
 
 
41. The proposal argues that the incidence of dry periods is increasing, with the two most 
severe dry periods ( Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI)  < -2) occurring in 2017 and 2019 –
2020 . However, it can be seen that even though the se two dry periods did occur in 2017 and 
2019 –2020, if one look s at the chart disregarding the last five years, a clear positive trend of the 
SPI can be observed for the period 1991 –2015. This suggests that even if there is a change in 
precipitation, the SPI time series does not demonstrate a clear relation ship  between these 
changes and anthropogenic climate change. These t wo severe dry periods  can be regarded as 
anecdot ic.


---
*Page 171*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 171 
 
 
 
 
42. There is a weak statistical signal of an increase in the incidence of days with heavy 
rainfall (>100  mm per day). However, this trend appears to be statistically insignificant.8 
43. For climate projections, the climate rationale makes use of the model ensemble  of phase 
six of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project ( CMIP6 ), and specifies which models where 
used. However, the validation process for the applied models is not described  in the proposal, 
and thus it can be assumed that the models were  not validated against historical data. In 
response to  the questioning  of the independent TAP , the proponent presented an analysis of the 
correlation between CIMH historical data and CMIP6 results for monthly and seasonal 
precipitation, for the period 2015 –2020. The chosen period is very short for validation 
purposes. In addition, far from validating the results of the model ensemble, the charts show 
poor correlations (high dispersion), and de monstrate that projections significantly 
underestimate monthly and seasonal rainfall.9 
44. Also regarding projections, although the proposal states that historical data show that 
the average daily maximum temperature has remained relatively constant during th e period 
1991 –2020, the models predict that it would increase by approximately 1  °C in average for the 
period 2041 –2060.10 
45. The m odels also predict that average annual precipitation will decrease by 18 per cent  
for the period 2041 –2060. However, climate trends show that there have  been  no significant 
changes in  average precipitation during the period 1991 –2020. This can be observed in the SPI 
chart that includes past records (1991 –2020) and future projections (2021 –2060) .11 This fact 
reveals the lack of validation of the models used to make forecasts.  
46. The following charts, taken from the submitted document “C1 Climate and climate 
change in Barbados”, show the SPI index for 1991 –2020 d erived from monthly averaged daily 
observations of  precipitation from a  weather station  in Barbados (up) and the SPI index for 
1991 –2060 as projected by an ensemble of CMIP6 models with the SSP2 -4.5 scenario  (down).  
The date axes are aligned to allow visual comparison. In the chart for 1991 –2060 projected  SPI, 
the data in the period 1991 –2013 is a hindcast; CMIP6 forecasts start in 2014 . In this case, it can 
 
8 C1 Climate and Climate Change in Barbados, f igure 7.  
9 The independent TAP Qs CCCCC Water Reuse BWA_CCCCC Responses 25_08_2022_Rev1.  
10 C1 Climate and climate change in Barbados, f igure 9.  
11 C1 Climate and climate change in Barbados, f igure 11.


---
*Page 172*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 172 
 
 
be seen that there is a poor correlation between the SPI based in observations and the SPI based 
in CMIP6 results.  
 
 
47. Despite the funding proposal not having a clear data analysis (probably due to lack of 
local information and funding to perform additional analyses), the water availability in 
Barbados  (estimated at approximately 305 –310 m 3 per person per year ) makes Barbados  a 
highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Water stress is likely to increase over 
time due to climate change. Thus , the independent TAP considers that this is a climate -driven 
funding proposal.  
1.4.2.  Economic and social development  
48. According to an Inter -American Development Bank  survey, 17  per cent  of the population 
of Barbados is poor, and a further 11 per cent  is considered vulnerable. The overall 
unemployment rate is estimated to be around 10  per cent . 
49. The significant decline in tourism  due to  the COVID -19 pandemic  impacted the economy 
as a whole, increasing the account deficit to 6.2  per cent , and contracting the real economy  by 
approximately  18 per cent  during 2020 and 3  per cent  in the first quarter of 2021 . 
50. During 2020 and 2021, Barbados faced other two crises: th e eruption of the volcano La 
Soufrière in  Saint  Vincent and the Grenadines in early 2021, which severely affected  the 
agricultural sector  of Barbados , and the passage of Category 1 Hurricane Elsa , which caused  
widespread housing stock damage and loss of key utilities such as power, I nternet and water , 
further reducing  the productivity of key sectors . 
1.4.3.  Absence of alternative sources of financing  
51. Barbados’ s public debt -to-GDP ratio increased consistently from 55  per cent  in 2008 to 
144  per cent  by the end of 2020.  
1.4.4.  Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
52. The need for institutional and technical strengthening is recognized in the proposal and 
address through a set of activities, which include providing training to all BWA staff concerning


---
*Page 173*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 173 
 
 
the operation of the upgraded BSTP, implementing decision support systems such as the CMMS, 
a sewer monitoring programme, automated controls for improved energy efficiency, an on -site 
laboratory, a risk manage ment framework , updating the SOPs and o perational manual,  and 
training to ensure there is institutional knowledge and understanding of the operational 
procedures . 
53. The project would also s trengthen BWA’s partnerships with the private sector, civil 
society a nd the general public through a private sector engagement strategy and action plan, a 
public education and awareness programme, the expansion of the RAFF and a designated 
project website . 
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  High  
1.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
54. The proposal is fully aligned with the 2021 Physical Developm ent Plan and the Roofs to 
Reefs Programme (R2RP), which  provide the relevant framework for Barbados to achieve its 
climate resilience goal and are, in turn, based on the Barbados National Climate Change Policy . 
55. The National Water Reuse Policy states that the traditional interpretation of the term 
“water ” must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to  include, among others , 
reclaimed water and  rain water , as pa rt of the total water resources . 
56. The installation of the PV systems is aligned with the  National Energy Policy and 
Implementation Plan , which set the goal to achieve a fossil fuel -free economy by 2030 . 
57. The funding proposal  also presents a list of other relevant legislation and policies  with 
which the present project is aligned.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
58. The project would be co -executed by the  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre 
(CCCCC ) and the BWA, under the supervision of the national designated authority ( NDA ). The 
accredited entity is the CCCCC , a direct access entity . 
59. The CCCCC  is a regional non-profit organization among m ember States of the Caribbean 
Community (CARICOM) , which  provides climate change related policy advice and guidelines to 
the CARICOM  member States  and to the United Kingdom Caribbean Overseas Territories, and it 
is recogni zed by th e United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United 
Nations Environment Programme as the focal point for climate change issues in the Caribbean , 
and by the  United Nations Institute for Training and Research as a Centre of Excellence.  
60. The NDA would assist with the implementation of project activities and provide in -kind 
support , in particular  for those activities that require coordination among ministries and 
engagement with GCF on reporting and verification . 
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
61. The stakeholder engagement plan presents a list of key stakeholders consulted during 
the inception phase, which include several government and private agencies and non-
governmental organizations . 
62. Key stakeholders to be engaged during the implementation pha se include a gricultural  
associations and f armers , and the Association of Women in Agriculture.  
1.6 Efficienc y and effectiveness             Scale:  Medium to high


---
*Page 174*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 174 
 
 
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
63. The economic and financial analysis assumes a sale price for wa ter for irrigation reuse 
of USD 1.22 /m3 (BBD 2.48/m 3). There is no willingness -to-pay study regarding agricultural 
use. The feasibility study for the Provision of Reclaimed Water for Irrigation in the South, states 
that the current rate for irrigation water is USD 0.60/m3. The uncertainty on willingness -to-pay 
could potentially reduce the long -term sustainability and economic efficiency of the project.  
64. The proponent further clarified that discussions were held with the agricultural 
community through the Barbados Agricultura l Society and by approaching individual and 
commercial farmers. Some farmers are currently using reclaimed water and are paying the 
commercial rate that  is higher than the rate being considered by the project. Farmers are more 
concerned with the consistenc y and quality of the supply than with the rate. Taking this into 
consideration, the uncertainty on willingness -to-pay for reuse water for irrigation is eliminated 
or, at least, considerably reduced.  
65. The estimation of operation and maintenance costs for the  PV system at USD  10,000 per 
year is based on literature review, being in the lower end of the range. This assumption is 
applied for 29 consecutive years (2022 –2050), which seems excessive considering that the 
calculations do not include replacement costs.  Although good quality solar panels can last up to 
30 years, the inverters, which make up a significant part of the total capital cost, have a lifespan 
of 10 –15 years. This should have been taken into account in the  operation and maintenance 
costs.  
1.6.2.  Amount of co-financing  
66. Considering the activities expressly included in the funding proposal , the co -financing 
ratio is quite low: ~0.2. GCF would be financing USD 39.4  million , out of a total of USD  50 
million . However, when the ongoing investments for the South  Coast Sewage Treatment Pla nt 
and the expansion of the sewer collection systems, which are not expressly part of the funding 
proposal , are taken into account, the total investment adds up to approximately USD 250  
million , and the co -financing ratio becomes significantly larger ( ~6.4).  
1.6.3.  Financial viability  
67. The capital expenditure , operational expenditure and revenues from the South Coast 
Sewage Treatment Plant are included in the economic and financial analyses presented as  annex 
3a. However, the upgrade and expansion costs of the plant are not taken into account in the 
funding proposal ’s main document (i.e. not part of the present proposal), nor in the detailed 
budget. An adequate cost –benefit analysis should have been carr ied out considering only the 
costs and revenues from the activities included in the funding proposal . 
68. Questioned by the i ndependent TAP, the proponent answered that “ …It was important 
to demonstrate that the 3R- CReWS is nested in a much larger programme be ing implemented 
by the Government of Barbados and the BWA. The 3R -CReWS, SCSTP and other development 
phases are complementary as such ignoring the other development phases would not allow the 
author to paint to full picture of why grant funding, which is 2 0% of total planned medium 
investment, is being requested from the GCF. See Annex 28 for more information on the SCSTP. It is important to note the Government of Barbados is taking a loan to complete the proposed 
actions for the SCSTP. The grant, which is needed given the fiscal constraints of the country, is 
being requested from the GCF is complementary to those loans being taken for other 
development phases. Annex 3a covers the financial model for the programme but is dynamic 
enough to allow the user to s witch off different development phases to observe the NPV…”.  
1.6.4.  Best practices


---
*Page 175*
---

 
GCF/B. 34/02/Add. 02 
Page 175 
 
 
69. The selection of the BSTP upgrade option was based  on efficiency and effectiveness: 
land area requirement, operator skill level requirement, technology adaptability, capital cost, 
operating labour cost, energy requirement, process robustness, water quality achieved and 
water reuse applications.  
70. The selection of the  construction  site of the two small decentralized t reatment plants 
and sewage collection was based on  the vulnerability of groundwater resources and  on the 
potential to  positively  impact groundwater resources . 
71. The PV systems to be installed will withstand at least C ategory 3 hurricanes , thereby 
promoting both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
72. Water availability in Barbados  (estimated at approximately 305 –310 m3 per person per 
year ), makes Barbados  a highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Water stress is 
likely to inc rease over time due to climate change. The proposed wastewater reuse project 
represents a sustainable measure to adapt to climate change and its impact on water resources. 
Also, being part of a larger initiative that includes another wastewater treatment facility, this 
project represents a paradigm shift for Barbados. This initiative has the potential to be 
replicable in other Caribbean countries.  
73. Thus , the independent TAP endorses  this funding proposal with the following 
recommendations:  
(a) To continue and , if needed , increase the effort in characterizing the influent wastewater 
(both flow  rates and concentrations of pollutants), thereby reducing the risk of 
inefficient design and plant failure ; 
(b) To keep monitoring influent, effluent and operatio nal conditions once the plant is 
commissioned. This information will be very valuable for future upgrades ; 
(c) To estimate  the amount of emissions related to the proposed  increase in wastewater 
treatment, for example  additional energy for blowers, pumping  (within and outside the 
sewage treatment plant ), sludge treatment, etc .; methane emitted from increased 
amounts of sludge ; emissions of nitrous oxide inherent to the nitrification -
denitrification within the Bardenpho  process ; and to r eport these emissions and 
compare them to GHG emission reductions claimed for the PV generation ; 
(d) To monitor emissions of GHG in the upgraded sewage treatment plant ; 
(e) To look for private sector parties interested in installation of methane capture and 
cogeneration  of energy within the facility (which would reduce GHG emissions both at 
Scope 1 and Scope 2) ; and  
(f) To re -evaluate and make more realistic estimations of the operation and maintenance 
costs for the PV system.


---
*Page 176*
---

G
CF/B. 34/02/Add .02 
Page 176 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment  (FP19 2) 
Proposal name:  The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R -CReWS)  
Accredited entity:  Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)  
Country/(ies):  Barbados 
Project/programme size:  Small 
Impact potential  
The AE is thankful for the iTAPs  overall rating of this criterion as medium to high for the impact 
potential. Specifically on the adaptation impact, the AE also thanks the iTAP for its consideration 
and recommendations that can be taken onboard immediately  with the current Project ’s design 
during implementation . In addition, the AE also wishes to express thanks for the encouragement from 
the iTAP to continue with the ongoing (through the co -executing entity, the BWA)  implementation of 
augmented influent characterization, which will be characterized more intensely,  to inform the 
detailed design of the proposed wastewater facility upgrades. These have  been identified based on 
the best available  local and international technical  knowledge and from regional experience  to be 
the four-stage Bardenpho configuration , understanding the limitations of the historical data. It is 
encouraging that the iTAP views the Project design as a step in the right direction towards the 
increased monitoring of the influent characteristics that will b e incorporated to determine the final 
detailed design  of the proposed interventions. Through the iTAPs comments  on characterization, this 
recommendation is fully supported in  the Project design  and the AE is appreciative of the iTAPs 
recognition of the cla rifications provided. 
The AE thanks the iTAP for the recognition of the positive  potential impacts on Barbados’ water 
security through the increased people’s connectivity to the sewer networks, thereby guaranteeing 
higher flow rates to the plant and less pollution. The current NRW strategy being implemented by 
the BWA is multifaceted and takes a multi -step approach towards the reduction of its NRW, and the 
AE thanks the iTAP for the positive encouragement and recognition of the works completed by the 
Government of Barbados through the BWA to reduce its NRW. With the Project design they are 
various cross- sectoral issues that are to be addressed, which f ocus mainly on w astewater 
management: sewer network; wastewater treatment onsite, off -site, and decentralised wastewater; 
water re- use; water recycling , which are all analogous with the GCF’s water security sectoral 
approaches. 
The AE further thanks the iT AP for the recommendations provided through this process and 
highlights the responses from the iTAP on the clarifications provided. The various Project 
components are all interconnected to provide solutions to the impact of climate change on the 
available potable water in Barbados. In addition, the AE  thanks the iTAP for the support of the re-
use of the treated water for cross -sectoral use in agriculture. A critical element of the Project design 
made provision for the potential uptake with the increase in demand for the reused water, thus 
reducing the uptake (thus increasing the availability, of the already scarce potable water sources.  
Paradigm shift potential


---
*Page 177*
---

  
       GCF/B. 34/02/Add .02 
Page 177 
 
 
 The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Paradigm Shift Potential of the proposed 
Project. The AE is also thankful for the comments received on the (a) Potential for knowledge and 
learning criterion, which articulates the major aims of the criterion Project -wide and provides a 
roadmap to the interconnections of the various Project sub- activities across the Components. From 
the experience of the AE, the dissemination of lessons learnt through public  consultation, 
contribution and engagement has been vital to any successful paradigm shift campaign and this also 
provides a direct interest to the general population, which assists with the public ease of 
implementation as the various knowledge products are shared. Through the  various mediums, such 
as videos and documentary films, press releases of outputs of town hall meetings within communities, 
case studies, digital flyers, posters, 40 “water Wednesdays” (8 per year)  educational and current 
news programme , 20 newsletters (4 per year) and over 5,000 combined posts on social media 
accounts , serve as the various platforms to engage and to promote media literacy within the general 
Populus.  
With the Project considered holistically, the aims demonstrate , and carryout , the willingness  of its 
management to promote  public accountability through public monitoring, which therefore 
compliments the Project ’s monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements . The AE also thanks 
the iTAP for the recognition of the measures tha t the Project seek to put in place in an effort to assist 
in the provision or capacity for transformational interventions  to be developed to meet the paradigm 
shift in water security, as identified in (b ) Contribution to the creation of an enabling environ ment . 
Moreover , as also identified in sub -criterion (c) Contribution to the regulatory framework and 
policies , there is an emphasis on the preservation of existing water resources, “new” water supply 
sources, both with a major focus to catalyse Barbados’ action on protection  (implemented 
mechanisms)  from water related hazards and enhanced resilient water supply and sanitation 
services. It is in this manner that the AE is thankful to the iTAP for the recognition of the vital 
importance of Component 4 to addr ess the water governance and management approach to assist in 
the development of frameworks to promote new water initiatives and water infrastructure systems.  
Taking into account the sub -criterion (d)   Scalability and replicability , the AE recognizes that as a 
Caribbean SIDS, Barbados can share its Project innovation and development pillars that can be 
utilized in both the scaling -up and replication of this Project, both globally and regionally where 
similar water scarcity condition s exist, based on the negative impacts of climate change. Thus, the 
Project, promotes a national public RAFF to provide opportunities at the grassroots to SMSE to 
become engaged. It is critical that the implementation and importance of this Project be cons idered 
to be much more than a business -as-usual and thus with the various Project components for the 
various monitoring of potential resources, the Project design allows for the capturing of any 
additional resources, through resource recovery, to maximize on the renewable energy (chemical) 
that can be utilized. Once more, the AE is thankful to the iTAP for their recognition of how the 
proposed Project intends to c atalyse its impact beyond a one -off project or programme investment.  
Sustainable development potential  
The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Sustainable Development Potential of 
the proposed Project. The Project considered the results area for the enhancement of water 
conservation and water efficiency and water  re-use – in alignment with the GCF investment criteria. 
As the iTAP articulated in the (a) Environmental co -benefits, the GHG emissions reduction, reduced 
groundwater pollution, reduced odours, reduced groundwater contamination and reduced  discharge 
flow to the ocean (reduced nutrient loading in the nearshore environment) were all considered. The 
value -added environmental benefits and co -benefits could in the future also provide a preliminary 
pathway towards the overall number of sustainabl e water -food-energy security nexus solutions that 
can now be considered with the aforementioned -benefits. Moreover, with the (b) social co -benefit 
being linked to potentially have a positive impact to enhance the health standard of the population.  
Followi ng these co- benefits, it is therefore worthy to also comment on the (c) Economic co -benefits 
which were incorporated to provide opportunities through the increased availability of water for


---
*Page 178*
---

  
       GCF/B. 34/02/Add .02 
Page 178 
 
 
 irrigation and of treated sludge for use , as soil amendment has th e potential to increase agricultural 
productivity . The iTAP’s assessment provided a clear indication of the importance  and relevance of 
these interconnected activities of the Project and thus,  their meaningful contribution and engagement 
are both critical and necessary i n the adoption of wastewater management technologies and the use 
of reclaimed water and other by -products . Thus, aiming to generate green jobs and have positive 
impacts on the  local  economy . 
The AE has always considered the (d) Gender -sensit ive development impact to be very vital, 
especially with Projects that have a direct positive impact on the households, which in Barbados, are 
mainly managed by the Females, especially with the raring of children. As such, there was a focused 
approach in t he design to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings . In addition, 
through the engagement of these groups, it is also important that the Project considered the GCF’s 
social and gender safeguards  (as standards)  to ensure the protection of women, children and the 
vulnerable  in implementing gender -inclusive clim ate and disaster resilience capacity development 
initiatives . The AE thanks the iTAP for the comments on the innovativeness of incorporating these 
social and gender elements in the various aspects of the Project proposal that include Project specific 
activ ities such as the standard operating procedures (SOPs) and operational manual, legislative 
review, water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private sector would 
promote women’s empowerment, the expanded RAFF, public education, and awareness campaign, 
inter alia.  
Needs of the recipient  
The AE is thankful for high rating given to this investment criterion and the recognition that 
Barbados is a highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Despite limited climate data 
availability, the AE was able to demonstrate that this is a climate driven funding proposal. Further, 
AE is grateful for acknowledgement given to how the pr oject responds to needs related to economic 
and social development, financing, institutional capacity.    
Paragraph 35 indicated that if the three temperature records that breach 35 Degrees Celsius in the 
summers between 2006 -2020 are disregarded then ther e is no significant visual trend in maximum 
temperatures. This is not entirely accurate as pre -2005 temperature rare surpassed 32.5 Degrees 
Celsius; however, post 2005 there are several time s 32.5 Degrees Celsius was surpassed.    
 
The AE knowledge that there is limited climate data for building the climate rationale, which is 
challenge faced by many Caribbean SIDs, not just Barbados; However, the AE welcome the GCF’s 
board approval/ endorsement  at B.33 of “Steps to enhance the climat e rationale of GCF -supported


---
*Page 179*
---

  
       GCF/B. 34/02/Add .02 
Page 179 
 
 
 activities  [GCF/B.33/05]”, which is  intended to strengthen the ability of AEs to clearly demonstrate 
the climate impact potential of proposals.  
Country ownership  
The AE thanks the iTAP for it s review and comments on this criterion . 
This project is country owned and led and is an integral part of the Government of Barbados R oofs 
to Reefs Programme (R2RP).  
Stakeholder dialogue is corner stone of the development of the proposal and will continue to be for 
the rest of project cycle. In fact, stakeholders at the community level are critical for the realisation 
of the intended paradigm shift and hence the success of this project.    
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The AE thanks the iTAP for its review and comments on this criterion.  
Nested in the US$2 billion R2RP, this project is one aspect of a larger programme to transform 
wastewater into a resource. The US$50 million for 3R -CReWS represents 20% of the already 
identified medium term investment s in the wastewater sector  of Barbados. This investment has the 
potential to impact 136,220 (66,748 males and 69,472 females) direct beneficiaries  and 141,601 
(69,384 males and 72,217 females) indirect beneficiaries  and mitigation co- benefit of 40,875 tCO2e 
avoided over 25 years.  
The Government of Barbados must be applauded for being a shining example and playing her part 
to combat climate change for people, even when face d with COVID- 19 recovery efforts and  high 
public debt -to-GDP ratio  that has  increased consistently from 55 per cent in 2008 to 144 per cent by 
the end of 2020.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The AE thanks the iTAP of its endorsement and recommendations.  
The recommendations presented are being taken on board and some will form part of the Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOP) for the upgrade Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP). Further, 
the AE will develop an Operations Manual which, among others, shall include: (i) methods for 
characterizing the influent wastewater (both flow rates and concentrations of pollutants); (ii) 
definitions of the monitoring influent, effluent and operational condi tions; (iii) methods to estimate 
the amount of emissions related to the proposed increase in wastewater treatment and how it will be 
conducted; and (iv) a framework and method to monitor emissions of GHG in the upgraded sewage 
treatment p lant. 
Further, eff orts are on the way to assess the feasibility for implementing a waste to energy  
technologies (centralised and/or decentralised) .     
As note by the iTAP, this initiative has the potential to be replicated in other Caribbean countries.  
AE [CCCCC]as mandate d by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) heads of government intends 
to continue to coordinate the region’s response to climate change, which includes developing and 
implement transformative and impactful projects and programmes for addressing climate change .


---
*Page 180*
---

Gender documentation for FP19 2


---
*Page 181*
---

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Copyright © 2022  by Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre  
Published by Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, Belmopan, Belize  
 
Digital Edition ( September 2022 ) 
Printed Edition (September 2022)  
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution -NonCommercial -NoDerivatives 
4.0 International (CC BY -NC-ND 4.0)  and may be downloaded  and shared as long as the Centre 
is credit ed. No use of this publication may be made for res ale or for any other commercial 
purpose whatsoever. The Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) would appreciate a copy of any publication that uses this report as a source. The views and interpretations in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the CCCCC, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent . 
Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, Ring Road, P.O. Box 563, Belmopan, Belize  
 
Visit our website at http://www.caribbeanclimate.bz  
 
ISBN -13 978 -976-8317 -16-2 (paperback)  
ISBN -13 978-976-8317 -17-9 (pdf)


---
*Page 182*
---

 
 
August 19, 2022 | 
Page iv  
  
  
 Docu ment Revision History    
Re
v 
  
Rev Description  
Author  
Reviewer   
Appr over  
Rev Date 
 
A  
Issued as a Draft  
   
Mar.  7, 2021 
Dr. Virginia Albert 
Poyotte Nick St-
Georges  Stuart Torr 
 
0  
Issued as Final     
Sept. 20. 2021  
Dr. Virginia Albert 
Poyotte Nick St-
Georges  Stuart Torr 
 
1  
Issued as a 
Revised Final     
Oct. 18, 2021 
Dr. Virginia Albert 
Poyotte Nick St-
Georges  Stuart Torr 
   
 
This Document was further revised following its October 18th, 2021 Submission to the 
CCCCC in August 2022, by Elishah St. Luce. The August 2022 revision was done to 
reflect changes made to the Project Proposal  following October 2021. This revision builds 
on existing body of work presented in October 2021 and where necessary, augmented 
information is presented following further research conducted for the purpose of this 
revision.  
 
 
Rev No.  
Rev Description  
Author  
Revision Date  
2 Issued as Draft Final  Elishah St. Luce  Aug 19th, 2022


---
*Page 183*
---

 
 
Aug.  19, 2022  | Page v  
 Contents  
ACRONYMS  AND ABBREVIATIONS  .............................................................................................. 7 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................................................................................................... 10 
INTRODUCTI ON............................................................................................................................... 15 
2.1 Objectives  and Associated  Outcomes  ................................................................................. 15 
2.2 Project Background  ............................................................................................................... 16 
2.3 Methodology  ...................................................................................................................... 18 
GENDER  ANALYSIS  ........................................................................................................................ 22 
2.4 Legislative, Regulatory and Institutional  Frameworks  ........................................... 22 
2.4.1  International Framework ....................................................................................... 22 
2.4.2  Regional Framework  .............................................................................................. 27 
2.4.3  National Framework  ............................................................................................... 29 
3.1 Contextual Analysis  ......................................................................................................... 38 
3.2 Stakeholder  Mapping  .................................................................................................... 51 
3.2.1  Internal Stakeho lders ............................................................................................. 51 
3.2.2  External Stakeholders ............................................................................................ 52 
3.2.3  Stakeholder Feedback  .................................................................................................. 53 
FINDINGS ......................................................................................................................................... 60 
4.1 Gender Context  ................................................................................................................. 60 
4.2 Gender Roles  ....................................................................................................................... 62 
4.3 Resources  .............................................................................................................................. 64 
4.4 Decision Making  ................................................................................................................. 66 
4.5 Beneficiaries  ......................................................................................................................... 67 
MAINSTREAM ING GENDER  INTO  THE  PROJECT  CYCLE  ......................................................... 69 
5.1 Project  Initiation  Stage  ..................................................................................................... 69 
5.2 Implementation Stage  ................................................................................................... 69 
5.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Stage  ............................................................................. 82 
5.4 Project Accountability Stage  ...................................................................................... 82 
5.5 Project Closure Stage  ..................................................................................................... 82 
5.6 Project Organizational Structure  ............................................................................... 82 
5.7 Project Plans, Budgets, Reports  .................................................................................. 83 
5.8 Project Data Management  ......................................................................................... 83 
5.9 Building Gender Sensitivity Capacity  ...................................................................... 84 
CLOSURE  .......................................................................................................................................... 85 
REFERENCES  ..................................................................................................................................... 86


---
*Page 184*
---

 
 
Aug.  19, 2022  | Page vi  
 Appendi x 1 - Results of Stakeh older Surveys and Interv iews .......................................................... 88 
Appendi x 2 -Interview  with Mrs.  Shelley  Parris,  Senior  Engineer,  BWA (Feb  19, 2021)  .. 90 
Appendix 3 - 3R-CReWS Project Gender Risk Matrix  ................................................................. 91 
Appendi x 4 - Gender  Action  Plan  ............................................................................................ 93


---
*Page 185*
---

 
 
Aug 19 , 2022| Page vii  
 ACRONYMS  AND ABBREVIATIONS  
   
Acronym/Abbreviation   
Definition  
 
BCRW SP  
Barbado s Climate  Resilience Wastewater Systems Project  
 
BGIS   
Barbado s Government Informati on Service 
 
BSTP  
Bridget own Sewage  Treatment Plant 
 
BWA  
Barbado s Water  Authority 
 
BPfA   
Beijing Platf orm for Action  
 
CARICOM  
Caribbean  Communi ty 
 
CARIWN  
Caribbean  Water Institu te 
 
CBD   
Convention on Biological Diversity  
 
CCCC C  
Caribbean Communi ty Climate Change  Centre 
 
CDB   
Caribbean Developme nt Bank 
 
CEDAW  
Convention on the elimination of all forms of Discrimination 
against Women   
CERMES   
Centre f or Resource Man agemen t and Environment Studies 
 
CGA   
Country  Gender  Assessment 
 
CRF  
Caribbean  Resilience Facility 
 
CRWSP  
Climate- Resilient Water Safety  Planning 
 
DPR   
Direct Potable  Reuse  
 
DRM   
Disaster Response Man ageme nt 
 
DRR   
Disaster  Risk Reduction  
 
ECLAC  
Economic Commission for Latin  America and the Caribbean  
 
EIA  
Environmental  Impact Assess ment 
 
EPD   
Environmental  Protection Departme nt 
 
ESIA   
Environmental  and Social Impact Assessmen t 
 
GAF   
Gend er Analysis Frame work 
 
GAP   
Gender  Action Plan


---
*Page 186*
---

Aug  19, 2021 | Page viii  
  
 
  
Acronym/Abbreviation   
Definition  
 
GCF   
Green Climate  Fund  
 
GEF   
Global Environmental  Fund 
 
GEF-CReW   
Global Environment Facility Caribbean  Regi onal 
Fund for Wastewater  Managem ent  
GEI  
Gender  Equality Indicators 
 
GFDRR  
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 
 
GHG   
Green  House Gases 
 
GOB  
Governm ent of Barbados  
 
GWP   
Global Water Partnership 
 
GW21  
Global Water 21 
 
IDB  
International Development Bank 
 
IGDS   
Institute of Gender Developme nt Studies 
 
ILO  
Internatio nal Labour Organization 
 
IPR  
Indirect Potable Reuse 
 
IUCN  
Internatio nal Union for Conservat ion of Nature 
 
KII  
Key Informant  Interview 
 
LWPG   
Lima  Work Programme  on Gend er 
 
LGBTQ IA  
Lesbian, Gay,  Bisexual, Transge nder, Queer and/or 
Questio ning, Intersex, and Asexual and/or Ally  
MCO   
Multi-Country Office  
 
MHH   
Men  Headed  Households 
 
MOU  
Memo randum of Understandi ng 
 
NGO   
Non-Government Organ izations 
 
PSC  
Project Steeri ng Commit tee 
 
SAMOA  
SIDS Accelerated  Modalities of Action 
 
SDG  
Sustai nable Developme nt Goal 
 
SIA  
Social Impact  Assessment


---
*Page 187*
---

Aug 19,  2022  | Page ix  
  
 
 
SGBV  Sexual and Gender Based Violence  
 
SIDS  
Small  Island Developing States  
 
TOR  
Terms  of Reference  
 
UN  
United Nations 
 
UNDP  
United Nations Development Programme  
 
UNEP  
United Nations Environmental Programme  
 
UNFCCC   
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
 
UN-MCO  
United Nations Managed  Care Orga nization  
 
UN-WM CO  
United Nations Women Multiple Country Office 
 
UN-SDG  
United Nations Sustainable Developme nt Goal 
 
UWI  
Univers ity of the West Indies 
UWI -IGDS  University of the West Indies - Institute of Gender and Development 
Studies  
WHH   
Women  Headed Household 
UNEP  United Nations Environmental Programme  
 3R-CReWS  Reduce, Reuse and Recycle for Climate Resilience 
Wastewater Systems in Barbados


---
*Page 188*
---

 
10 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
The object ives of this report are to provide an assessment of the potential gender sensitivity 
issues associated with this Project and to provide the GOB  with informati on that would  
influence the adoption of policies necessary to ensure men,  women  and LGBTQIA persons 
have equal opportunity to partic ipate in the process of wastewater  system development in 
Barbado s. The issue of gende r equality continues  to be high on the development agen da 
in Barbado s becau se gender  indicators show  that although more women attain  higher 
levels of educati on there are still more women  than men in the lower socio-economic 
bracket. Barbados has achieved significant human development gains, and while there have  
been advancements to achieve gender equality, there are still areas of pervasive inequality.  
The introduction covers object ives and associ ated outcomes of the project and provides 
a background which exam ines the international, regional, national and wast ewater sector 
framew orks.  
Next  the report clarifies issues of gender and gender analysis, by focusing on target ed areas 
of investigation with relevance for the conceptualized 3R -CReWs Project . In undertaking 
this analysis, components of the  Gender Anal ysis Process Model were  used  to conduct the 
gende r equality a ssessment of the project. The model  comprises  of four main parts, namel y 
Gend er Scre ening, Gender-Related Data Collection, Gender  Impact  Assessment and 
Mainstreami ng Gender  in the Project Cycle in conformity  with  the GCF  standards . 
  
Barbados has made recognizable Human Development gains and has made improvements in 
legislation that promote  gender equality. However,  societally, and institutionally,  there remain 
recognized inequities. Linked to those, is the unequal power relationships that are often 
detrimental to the promotion and protection of women and girls.  
Mapping of the internal stakeholders revealed that out of the ten -member BWA Board; 
seventy percent of directors  are men and thirty percent are women. This indicates the 
Board decisions relating to project policy, oversight, and approval of project plans, budgets and reports are influenced more by men. At the BWA, more men are employed in 
technical and engineering f ields. Conversely more women are employed in clerical 
professions. This is reflective of wider underrepresentation of women in Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields across Barbados. Given the 
technical nature of the wastewater proj ect, it is likely to attract more men than women. 
There is however,  a need to address the gender gap that exist within the BWA, at the level 
of the Board of Directors, and the professional and technical support staff of the Authority: There is also a need to address the gender gap that exist with aspects related to more men 
than women are involved in the technical work of the Wastewater Sector Infrastructure 
and Services while more women serve in administrative capacities.  Of note is that KII at 
the BWA rev ealed that there are no discriminatory policies in terms of recruitment and 
pay. A Labour union equally represents the needs of male and female employees. The


---
*Page 189*
---

 
11 
 BWA’s gender sensitivity training for its employees in collaboration with the  
UWI -IDGS is ongoin g and is seen as a way to  reduce the existing high percentage gender 
imbalance among employees. Training however, should be made  mandatory for certain 
categories of staff , including Project staff. The project also, therefore proposes as a low 
hanging fruit , a STEM Internship programme over its five years of implementation at the 
BWA. The Project also proposes a gender balanced Project Streeting Committee, PSC, to 
the extent possible, and the representation of the Bureau of Gender Affairs on the PSC.  
Mapping of the external stakeholders also revealed that there is also a 60 % gender gap among the 30 parliamentarians, a 14% gender gap among the 21 senators, and a 60 % gender gap among the 30 Cabinet Ministers. Consequently, decisions taken at levels of the 
political directorate, the Cabinet of Ministers, and the BWA Board are influenced by more 
men.  
This report includes primary data collected from sources such as a stakeholder survey and 
two key informant interviews as well as secondary data collection. Brief abbreviated 
details of the findings follow. Stakeholder responses to a survey on climate change and 
wastewater collection and treatment indicated that generally, there are many issues  where 
both men and women share similar views on wastewater collect ion and treatment among 
the stakeholders in Barbados. There are, however, instances where the views of men and women differ especially when it  comes to discharging untreated wastewater to the ground. 
Men appear to differ from women on willingness to pay for wastewater improvement, in 
the sense that men are seemingly more concerned with paying for wastewater 
improvement. Women typically need more water during their daily activities and might 
be willing to pay more to satisfy their needs. Note, a limited “Wil lingness to Pay” survey 
was conducted but the survey was cancelled early, due to unfavourable conditions in the 
country.  Limited trends were examined from this data and analysed in this report. 
Importantly is that  Barbados experiences a feminization of poverty where more female 
headed households are represented in poverty brackets tha n male headed households. 
Therefore, despite  the results from limited stakeholder survey which are not statistically 
significant, the ability of women to pay for services give n socio- economic challenges 
needs to be actively considered in project incentivisation activities as well as in  
rearticulating  the RAFF.  
As indicated in a case study on Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the 
Caribbean (Bobb, 2019), on average me n spend longer hours a week doing paid work away 
from the home while women spend longer hours doing unpaid domestic work including 
cooking, gardening, collecting, and storing water for domestic use, caring for children and 
the elderly and the animals. Even  when women spend the same number of hours a week 
doing paid work away from the home, they still are expected to do most of the unpaid 
domestic work. Stakeholder  consultative processes must reflect the challenges on time 
availability of women to respond to surveys and to participate in community level 
meetings. Therefore,  unique approaches including door to door consultations or carefully


---
*Page 190*
---

 
12 
 selected time periods for  stakeholder consultations need to be reflective of the realities of 
women in Project communities.  
Women in the Eastern Caribbean region experience various gaps in access to health, social 
protection, vocational and technical education, productive resourc es, economic 
opportunities, as well as voice and agency. All of  these are associated with their increased 
vulnerability to disasters and climate change hazards.  The Analysis found that climate 
change impacts on the wastewater sector is a serious challenge to the national development 
in Barbados, including wastewater management. Drought conditions resulting from 
climate change are likely to cause serious water shortages in Barbados which can pose 
great challenges for women who are primarily care givers for c hildren and the elderly. 
Women are very vulnerable in the time of disaster. However, any effort to reduce exposure 
to climate risk to allow speedy recovery by victims.  
The review of non -potable water re -use found that while reclaimed water is not safe for 
drinking it can be recycled for specific non- potable purposes such as irrigation and aquifer 
recharge. The review also found that as the 15th most water -stressed country in the world 
per-capita, Barbados should consider the reuse of treated stormwater, greywater, and 
blackwater to tackle the issue of water scarcity. The review of Wastewater and its 
Relevance to Sanitation and the Environment (Witmer, 2017), found that women are more 
likely to be affected by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse, and poor management than 
men because they are more in direct contact with food, faeces, childcare, and healthcare. 
They are also more likely to suffer from the amount of pesticide, hormones, medication, chemicals in wastewater. This is compounded by the fact that that there is a low percentage 
of Barbadians currently able to access the BWA wastewater collection and treatment 
facilities. The Legislative and Policy environment is  also absent to ensure smooth 
implementation of the wastewater priorities. Some of the legal i nstruments governing the 
wastewater sector are outdated because they have been in force for over forty years and as 
such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade its systems and operations 
and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector and the Project at this 
time. The project will provide the avenue to update the legislation, including gender 
responsive considerations.  
The GOB has the option of offering subsidies to deprived and vulnerable groups of the 
society, or promoting collaboration between public and private sectors to develop 
innovative models for the generation of water. Vulnerable groups, which comprise of a 
larger percentage of women and girls, stand to  benefit from opportunities that facilitate 
stronger and less biased decision -making.  
This Gender  Analysis highlights an absence of mechanisms to foster greater stakeholder 
participation in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of project 
activities. Additionally, the BWA appears to lack the human resource, institutional and 
information capacity to identify the causes of vulnerability among women and other 
vulnerable groups. The project presents an opportunity to strengthen legislative framework


---
*Page 191*
---

 
13 
 by also including gender equality considerations. The Project through the support of a 
Social and Gender Specialist will improve stakeholder engagement and provide a resource 
to ensure that the Project actively responds to the needs of vulnerable populations, 
including female headed households that are in poverty. Given the importance of water 
for human survival, the BWA should make every effort to secure adequate financial and 
human resources to provide high quality service in the water and wastewater sector.   
The prevalence of SGBV, though higher in intimate partner relationships is still present 
outside of the private sphere in Barbados. Therefore, projects such as these need to promote a preventative approach to SGBV. This includes zero tolerance policy to SGBV  and code of 
conduct for project staff and all personnel  interacting with communities. In addition,  there has 
to be gender responsive complaint mechanisms that prove useful for victims of SGBV, if prevention is not achieved. Gender sensitivity training is useful as well in addressing SGBV 
risks, however these are to be made mandatory  to staff based on roles and functions.  
A review of this project’s Stakeholder Engagement Report found that it is  necessary to 
educate the public on the positive social impacts of the project. The project’s public education 
campaign, like the stakeholder engagement efforts needs to be carefully crafted to effectively 
target diverse groups  on their relevant needs, reservations and expectations.  Project personnel 
should equally ensure gender issues are mainstreamed in the implementation process. 
Therefore, Stakeholder Engagement processes carried out by the BWA needs to be gender responsive to adequately respond to the needs of male and female headed households.  
Successful implementation of this project will be beneficial to sev eral stakeholders, if not the 
entire country, including the marine environment. The Project across all its components directly targets 136,220 people in Barbados. 66,748 (49%) men and 69,472 (51%) women are 
likely to be direct beneficiaries from the implem entation . There is a similar distribution of 
indirect beneficiaries Important to note is that this is reflective of the overall population of 
Barbados. A more detailed look at the beneficiaries of the Project by component suggest that 
the project is taking  an approach of leave no one behind. More specifically, the Project 
positions that 100% of female headed households and 100% of male headed householder 
respectively will benefit from the installation of decentralized wastewater management 
systems in zone A . It is however important to identify the recurrent costs that are associated 
with the connection to improved wastewater services. Given that women do most of the 
domestic and care work, they are greater users of water and wastewater services and will 
bene fit more than men from the implementation of the project at the Domestic Level. On the 
other hand, a key beneficiary group identified by the Project are farmers, in this regard, there 
will be higher numbers of male beneficiaries than male beneficiaries giv en the share 
participation of male to female in Agriculture. The Tariff structure for water used for irrigation 
should be mindful of the often- small scale agricultural activities performed by women vis- a 
vis larger commercialised agriculture often headed by men. Important is that the p roject works 
along with the Association of Women in Agriculture to ensure that women farmers (including for subsistence) receive information on the benefits of using reclaimed water and are also


---
*Page 192*
---

 
14 
 supported with access to reclaimed water services and other by -products of treated waste 
water.  
This rep ort summarises the gender issues and draws specific conclusions pertaining to key 
areas of the project activities that require attention. It also recommends actions required to 
align with Project goals and stakeholder gendered needs of the project. Finally , the actions 
recommend to mainstream gender within all stages of the project cycle have been used to 
compile a Gender Action Plan. A copy of the GAP  is listed as Appendix 3  to this report.


---
*Page 193*
---

 
15 
  
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
The purpose of this report is to present a Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan 
related to this “Consultancy to Produce Requisite Design, Studies and Plans for the 
Green Climate Fund Proposal” that examines “The 3R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) 
for Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados” (the “Project”). This 
introduction commences with a brief background and justification to the gender analysis and action plan.  
Conceptually, gende r refers to the economic, social, political, and cultural 
attributes and
 opportunities associated  with not only the fema le and male gender but 
also LGBTQIA persons. The social definitions of what it mean s to be a woman, or a 
man  vary  among cultures and has changed over time. Gender  is a socio-cultu ral 
expres sion of character istics and roles that are associated  with  certain  groups of people 
with reference to their sex and sexuality. 
“Gender  analysis/ass essment refers  to methods used to understan d 
relat ionships  between  men and women, their acce ss to resources, their activities, 
and the constraints they  face relative to each other.  A compre hensive gende r 
analysis/assessment entails the examinati on of the different roles, rights, needs, 
and oppo rtunities of wom en and men, boys, and girls in a given project/p rogram  
context.  It is a tool t hat helps to promote gender  – relevan t entry points, policies 
and identify opportunities for enhancing gende r equality in a particular 
project/program.  In the case of climate change projects/programs, a well-done 
gender  analysis/as sessment helps to identify multiple causes of vulnerab ility, 
including gender inequality. It also helps to identify and build on the diverse 
knowledge and capaci ties within communities/households that can be used  to 
make them  more resilient to climate related sh ocks and risks.”11 
A gender analysis is a useful tool to identify points of intervention in a project cycle at 
which existing or potential disparities in gender impacts can be compensated for or eliminated. Gender analysis is a methodology that describes the existing gender re lations 
in a particular environment, ranging from within households, or firms, to a larger scale of 
community, ethnic group, or nation. It involves collecting and analysing sex -disaggregated 
data and other qualitative and quantitative information. The anal ysis involves the process 
of organizing and interpreting, in a systematic way, information about gender relations to 
make clear the importance of gender differences for achieving development objectives.
 
 
 
2.1 Objectives  and Associated Outcomes


---
*Page 194*
---

 
16 
 The main objectives of this report are to provide an assessmen t of the gender  sensitivity 
issues associated  with this Project. Another objective is to provide the GOB with 
informati on that woul d influenc e the adoption of policies necess ary to ensure men, 
women  and vulnerable groups (including the poor,  elderly, people with disabilities,  
LGBTQIA people  etc) have equal opportunity to partic ipate in the process of wastewater  
deve lopme nt in Barbados.  
2.2 Project Background 
The goal of 3R -CReWS project is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, 
and productivity of Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient 
water and energy management technologies and strategies that ensures water is pro tected, 
managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.  
The goal of 3R -CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and 
productivity of Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient water 
and energy management technologi es and strategies that ensures water is protected, 
managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.  
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical component to 
help mitigate impacts on groundwater levels, tightly linked to overall island water 
resources. Tertiary treatment of wastewater will allow for the reuse of water for non -
potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf maintenance, and recharging the 
aquifer. The Project proposes that s econdary treated sludge can be used as fertilizer for 
the agricultural community and activated sludge can be used in landscaping, t urf 
maintenance of lawns, reclamation, soil erosion, and dump covering.  
To this end, the main objectives of the 3R -CReWS project are to:  
 
1. increase knowledge of wastewater generation including sources of wastewater and 
the quantity and quality impacts, as well as optimize treatment and minimize 
energy consumption and associated GHG emissions;  
2. build resilience into Barbados' wastewater management systems, which results in increased water availability, production, distribution, and access thereby 
improving t he community’s resilience, health and wellbeing, and water and food 
security;   
3.
 produce a treated wastewater effluent quality so that it can be reused for 
agricultural purposes, reducing stress on diminishing groundwater resources and 
potable water supplies  as a result of climate change;  
4. enable the use of reclaimed water for aquifer recharge thereby reducing saline 
intrusion and contamination of ground water resources while enhancing water 
security, particularly during period of droughts for Barbados;  
5. reduc e GHG emissions, increase self -sufficiency, contribute to the electricity grid


---
*Page 195*
---

 
17 
 and to contribute to the frequency stabilisation of the electricity grid and act as a 
power shortfall filler;  
6. Increase supply of locally sourced renewable energy that allows fo r a long- term 
source of revenue through a feed- in tariffs program;  
7. provide a standard and formal guidance to regulate and promote the use of reclaimed water and obtain greater by -in from stakeholders;  
8.
 build capacity and re -train BWA staff, including the private sector, to conduct 
preventive maintenance and adopt climate -risk related adaptation strategies to 
increase the wastewater collection and treatment systems resiliency; and  
9. promote and demonstrate actions that encourage all water users in Barbados, 
including tourists, to conserve and efficiently use water resources.   
  
For achieving the goal and specific objectives, the 3R -CReWS is organised into four (4) 
key components. These 4 components are synonymous with the following 4 outcomes of 
the project:  
 
1. Enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change  
2.
 Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP  
3. Enhanced capacity and capability to support a preventative mai ntenance (PM) and 
climate resiliency programme  
4. An enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of 
reclaimed water  
Collectively, these four outcomes/components are designed in consideration of the 
barriers that exist in achieving a paradigm shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse options in Barbados. These barriers include the limited fiscal space 
that exist in a highly indebted country, limited technical capacities in the public and 
private s ectors to fully maintain and advance the adoption of wastewater technologies, 
limited knowledge and awareness about the usefulness of reclaimed water as a resource, and the absence of comprehensively developed and mainstreamed policy and regulatory 
framewo rks that promote the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse 
options, particularly at the household level.  
 
This report assesses the gender eq uality challenges facing the GOB, that includes the 
BWA, as it pursues the development and implem entati on of this Project. It also examines 
gende r sensitivity issues of a social, economic, political, and cultural nature that policy 
analysts and policy makers should take into considerati on when  plann ing, prepar ing the


---
*Page 196*
---

 
18 
 following phases of this Project, including the Detailed Design and implement ing the 
Construction of this Project. The report also descr ibes the appl ication of a gender 
responsive  appr oach, adopted by the GCF , to assess the processes and operati ons of 
the Project. The GCF  has a clear mandate to enhance a gende r responsive appr oach 
in its process and operati ons as it seeks to maximize the impact of its funding for 
adaptati on and mitigation in promoting environmental, social, economic deve lopme nt 
co- bene fits globally. The GCF also seek s to engage  with in-country driven projects 
that promote involvement of relevan t stakeholders including vulnerable groups  and 
addr essing gender aspects.  
Climate  change  is posing challenges  to the national  deve lopme nt of Barbado s, and 
therefore should be considered  in all aspects  of deve lopm ent, especially in water and 
wastewater management.  However, when considering climate  change  initiatives,  it is 
imperative  that we focus on issues that will result in projects being more sustainable and 
equitable. Gender  equality plays  a role in resolving problems associated  with climate 
change  in our societies. Governme nts and agenc ies should ensure that they effectiv ely 
engage  the broade r society, including all gende rs, in discussi ons and decisions that 
affect  them and ensure that their policies are aligned to the UN SDGs, especi ally SDG-
5 that relates to gender  equality that cuts across all the other SDGs. An objective of a 
government plan should be to enhance gender  equality in its governing structures and 
opera tions and to foster greater stakeholder involvement in the design, 
impleme ntatio n, and evaluation of their projects. The GOB also seek s to provide a 
working environment that facilitates balance and  offers  a safe working environment f or 
all. 
 
2.3 Methodology  
The Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan related to this “Consultancy to Produce 
Requisite Design, Studies and Plans for the Green Climate Fund Proposal” that examines 
“The 3R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience Wastewater Sy stems in 
Barbados” (the “Project”) seeks to provide a baseline for gender responsive action and 
inclusion within the Water Sector of Barbados. The Assessment and analysis will be used 
to inform the scale up and/or enhancement of gender -responsive interventions that seeks 
to address the identified gaps for achieving gender equality both from the perspective of 
the service provider and consumers.  
The assessment included a desk review of available secondary data from B arbados and 
the wider Caribbean; assess the gender perceptions of wastewater stakeholders through 
stakeholder consultations, questionnaires and key informant interviews; and the analysis of data to determine gendered indicators baseline.  
i. Desk Review  
 
• Literature Review: This stage included literature review including existing


---
*Page 197*
---

 
19 
 international, regional and national frameworks for gender equality and the extent 
to which national water management legislation, policies and procedures included 
these agreed international and regional gender equality considerations and 
commitments. During this stage, the review sought to identify relatable regiona l 
and international gender indicators that the project can contribute to, including the 
indicators aligned with SDG s 5 and 6.  
• Secondary data review: Data collected from secondary sources include several 
reports, on the findings of case studies related to gender and research papers on 
various aspects of gender relations, wastewater management and climate change. 
These include  but are not limited to : 
o GOB Records on Social, Political and Economic and Climate Change Issues  
o Understanding Unequal Relations of Ge nder in the Caribbean 
o Barbados Agriculture Sector on Gender, Climate Change and Water  
o Barbados Fisheries Sector on Gender, Climate Change and Water  
o Country Gender Assessment,  Barbados (2017)  
 
Additionally, the secondary data review analysed  data as it relates to regional and 
national response to climate change, including:  
• Gender Responsive Disaster Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean  
• Non -Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re -use 
• WSRN Gender Assessment - water use and women  
• Impacts of Climate Change on Women and Men in the Caribbean  
• UN SDG’s Related to Human Rights of Gender, Water and Sanitation  
The review of secondary data provided an opportunity for a deeper situational analysis of how gender is reflected in the water sector as a comparison of the Country Gender 
Assessment, which has articulated some barriers and gaps to the participation of women 
in technical employment as well as issues of access to essential services, including  water 
for the most vulnerable groups which includes women, children, LGBTQIA and persons with disabilities.  
ii. Exploring Perceptions  
The collection of qualitative data was done through stakeholder consultations, questionnaires and key informant interviews t o help the consultant to understand the 
extent of awareness and impact of gender inequalities on the water sector, including the extent of inclusivity within the BWA and the responsiveness of the delivery of water 
services for men and women. It is importan t to note that data collection for this Gender 
Study was done in tandem with the Stakeholder Engagement Report.


---
*Page 198*
---

 
20 
 iii. Stakeholder Consultations:  
Two ( 2) stakeholder workshops were held to disseminate information on baseline 
information identified and concep tual design of project. Stakeholders include key water 
and climate change agencies, private sector actors, community leaders, and 
representatives from CCCCC.  
iv. Stakeholder Surveys :  
Following a stakeholder mapping a questionnaire was designed and administered to 49 key stakeholders in Government Ministries, the private sector, community  
associations, the University of the West Indies Gender Studies Department and NGOs. 
It resulted in 24 respondents completing the questionnaire (either partially or fully).  
To further substantiate the gendered perceptions as it relates to wastewater collection and management, the consultant reviewed and included data from the Willingness to 
Pay Survey (administered in 2020). The survey was administered to 75 respondents (19 
females, 56 males) across the country representing heads of household. While all 75 
respondents did not answer each question, the analysis utilized a ratio of 8:4.75 
male/female to assess each question.  These responses, presented a rich primary source 
of perceptions of males and females on key wastewater issues in Barbados.  
Key Informant  Interviews (KII): Interviews were conducted with representative from 
University of the West Indies Institute for Gender and Development Studies (UWI 
IGDS) to evaluate the gender perception of BWA staff. Another KII was a Senior Engineer from the BWA to ca pture views on progress and barriers for women within 
the wastewater sector.  
v. Analysis  
This stage of the assessment process took into consideration both primary and secondary 
quantitative and qualitative data to determine perceptions, trends  and attitudes of the 
sector towards gender equality. It included a review of statistical data from the Barbados 
Country Gender Assessment 2016.  To carry  out this gender analysis, and in keep ing 
with the GCF  template,  the assessment used components of the Gender  Anal ysis 
Process Model which is comprised  of four main elemen ts namely: Screen ing, Data 
Collection, Gender Impact Assessmen t and Gender Mainstream ing of the Project cycle. 
Each  element  involve s carry ing out several  gende r-related activities in a one-step or two-
step exerci se. The model helped to examine the differe nt roles, rights,  needs  and 
oppo rtunities of women, men, and LBGTQIA persons who are key stakeholders of the 
project. Table A prov ides a descr iption of each  component of the Gender  Analysis 
Process Mode l and by activities to be carried out unde r each  step. 
 
Table A.          Descri ption of the Gender Analysis Proc ess Model    
No  
Com ponent   
Step  1  
Step  2


---
*Page 199*
---

 
21 
  
1  
Screen ing  
Categ orization of gender 
dimens ions of the Project goals 
to identify areas for in-dept h 
analysis.   
Mappi ng the key internal  
and/ or institutional and 
exter nal Project 
stakeholders. 
 
2  
Data  Collection  
Collection of evide nce of 
gender  differenc es in 
stakeh older interaction with 
existi ng and planned water  
and wastewater  sector 
infrastructure and services.  
Review of existing national 
and water and wastewater 
sector policies, strat egies, 
and action plans for 
integration of gender  
considerat ions. 
 
3  
Gender 
Impact  
Assessment  
Anal ysis of data to 
determ ine gende red needs  
of the wastewater sector 
infrastructure and services.   
Assess impacts  (main/ 
ancillary), risk perceptio n, 
and equality of distribution 
of Project bene fits. 
4 Mainstreamin
g Gender in the Project 
Cycle  Recommend actions align with Project goals and 
stakeh older gende red needs.  
 
 
 
vi. Limitations  
The gender analysis process had several constraints that limited the extent of the data 
collection and analysis processes.  
• The review of secondary data was constrained from deeper gendered analysis as 
most data on usage collected was not disaggregated. Additionally, it was not 
possible to identify vulnerable groups including,  LGBTQIA  people  and persons 
with disabilities from t he data . 
• The assessment was carried out during the peak of the COVID -19 pandemic, as 
a result most consultations were conducted in the virtual space, including 
questionnaires which limited the opportunity to assess and adjust questions and 
contents for cla rity, especially with community representatives. It also affected 
the ability to adjust for greater inclusivity of vulnerable groups . 
•  The Willingness to Pay survey as a key data source to inform the analysis was 
cut short due to high level political decision making.  The information gathered 
is analysed in this report, however there cannot be statistical significance in the 
analysis of data collected.


---
*Page 200*
---

 
22 
 GENDER  ANALYSIS  
 
 
2.4  Legislative, Regulatory and Institutional  Frameworks  
 
2.4.1 International Framework  
This Gender analysis looks at the international framew orks and institutions in place  the 
adm inistration of conventions, protocols and agreemen ts related to ge nder equality and 
wast ewater which will have bearing on the implementation with this project.  A number of  
relevant gende r equality conventions and Protocols as highlighted in Table B, have 
been  ratified by the GOB and appl ied by the BWA Wastewater  Division.  
Table B GOB Ratified International Conventions and Protocols on Gender Equality 
and Wastewater    
No  
Convent ion  
Purpose   
Operating Practices  
 
1  
Convention on 
the Elimination of 
All Forms of 
Discrimination  
against Women  
19791  
Require signat ory governments to 
take action to promote and protect 
the rights of women by including the 
principle of equality in legislation 
and 
operati onalizing it in their country. 
Artic le 14, pays  speci al attention to 
discrimination against rural women, 
and to ensure their access to rural 
benefits.  BWA curre ntly 
promotes equity as it 
seeks to achieve   
gender sensitivity and 
balance  between 
male  and fema le 
staff.


---
*Page 201*
---

 
23 
  
2  
Beijing Platform for 
Action  19952  
The platform en cour ages 
governme nts to collect data on 
the impact  of environmental 
degradatio n on women, as well as 
develop gende r- sens itive 
databas es. The Declaration calls 
for ensuring that ‘women's 
priorities are included in public 
investment programmes for 
economic infrastructure, such as 
water and sanitation.   
BWA will collect use 
dis- aggrega ted to 
cater for gender  
differe nce in the 
wastewater sector. 
 
The project will 
undertake gender 
sensitive 
consultations to 
ensure that women 
and men’s needs are 
reflected in 
infrastructural 
development. 
Similarly, the 
adjustments to RAFF 
should ensure that 
women’s needs and 
those of the 
vulnerable  to inform 
rearticu lation of the 
RAFF.  
 
3  
Agenda  21, UN-
SDG -5 
2015 3  
Calls for sex-disaggrega ted data,  
and gende r-sens itive datab ases 
and promotes the emp owerment of 
women  and gender equality 
regarding land ownership, resource 
stewards hip, educatio n, and 
employm ent issues. BWA in collaboration 
with the UWI-IGS is 
curre ntly training staff 
on gender sensitivity 
issues to create greater   
aware ness  among 
employees in the work 
environment. 
 
4  
The CBD  19934  
CBD  has adopted a Gender 
Plan of Acti on and update it for 
the period 2015 -2020.  It requires 
countries to impleme nt 
integrated actions to 
enhanc e the monitoring framew ork 
and indicator system  for gend er 
mainstreami ng at national level.  
A GAP  (see Appe ndix 
5) in the Project is 
indicative  of 
commitment  to the 
convention.


---
*Page 202*
---

 
24 
  
 
There are also several internatio nal institutions involved in the design and implementation of 
wastewa ter projects in the Caribbean  that require gender equality issues be taken into 
consideratio n.  Among them include: 
1. The UN which has a mandate  to implemen t the SDG-5 agenda  which focuses on 
“Emp owering Women  and Promoting Gender Equality;”  
2. IFI’s,  such as the World Bank have  a mandate to assist with the protection of the 
global environment to promote environmental ly sound and sustainable economic 
development  in member  coun tries. The CDB has a mandate to promote economic 
growth and systematic reduction of poverty  through social and economic 
deve lopme nt; 
3. The GCF  and GEF which have a mandate  to support on international projects, provide 
new and addi tional grant  and concessi onal funding for appr oved projects, assist 
developing countries  by investing in projects to impleme nt climate  change  adap tation 
and mitigation measu res to stren gthen  national capaci ty to cope with the damagi ng 
effects of climate  change  while they overcome  the fiscal constrai nts of COVI D-19. It 
should also be noted that the  CCCCC,  suppo rting the GCF  by providing project 
manageme nt services to this (and other) Project, has a mandate to implement  
clima te change  projects requiring gende r- related analysis in the Caribbean;  and 
4. The UNEP  which has a mandate to coor dinate responses to envi ronmental issues 
within the UN system  by implemen ting programmes on sustainable developme nt, 
climate change, disasters and conflict, ecosystem managem ent and environmental  
governance. 
 
The Sustainable Development Goals  
 
SDG  6 Water and Sanitation  
SDG 6 speaks to achieving (by 2030) access to adequate and equitable sanitation and 
hygiene for all, paying special attention to the needs of women and those in vulnerable 
situations, including LGBTQIA persons.  
A safely managed central wastewater treatment facility is one where excreta is safely treated and disposed or treated on- site using soak away fields. Globally more than 80% of  
5  
The UN 
Convention to  
Combat  
Desert ificat ion 
19965  
Recognizes the important role and 
participation of women in 
combat ting deserti fication and 
mitigating the effects of drought. 
Monitors whether 
parties have  integra ted gende r into 
the implementation of the 
i   
This Project is designed 
to respond to  
conventions with 
Gender  Analysis and a 
GAP.


---
*Page 203*
---

 
25 
 wastewater, resulting from human activities, is discharged into rivers or the sea without any 
form of treatment, and therefore a target for this Project should be to improve the amount 
of wastewater that is treated and reused as reclaimed water.  
The issue of water availability for hygiene proved critical during the COVID -19 pandemic. 
The Barbados Today Newspaper published that some residents at Boscobelle, in St. Peters, 
experienced conditions that had them wondering how they are to effectively sanitize with poor water service, where days go by without water coming from their taps. Thi s further 
emphasizes the importance the residence attached to water in combating the spread of this pandemic. There is now a greater opportunity for Barbados to promote and implement SDG -
6 on water and sanitation and all the other SDGs by 2030.  
 
SDG- 5 Achi eve gender equality and empower all women and girls  
Gender equality promotes basic human rights and is therefore foundational for 
achieving the other SDGs
1. The principle of leaving no one behind requires gender -
transformative water and sanitation programmes. The 3R -CReWs project will benefit 
from mainstreaming SDG Targets into project activities. More particularly:  
5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life;  
5.b Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and 
communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women and;  
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion 
of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
 
Water and sanitation, like gender equality, are human right issues that the GOB has a 
responsibility to enforce for the advancement of the society. By enforcing th ese rights, 
communities, and vulnerable groups, which comprise a larger percentage of women and girls, will benefit from opportunities that facilitate stronger and less biased decision -
making.  
The UN standards, on access to clean water, indicated that lack  of access  to clean water, 
(at least 5 litres  
a day) represents one tenth  of the daily average  amo unt used by developed 
countries  to flush toilets. Also, lactati ng mothers  who  engage  in moderate physical activ ity 
use up to 7.5 litres of water  per day. Ensuring safe sanitation also requires substantial hygi ene 
educati on and promotion2. 
 
3 Oxfam, 2020 Achieving Sustainable Development Goals 5 and  6 
4 www.jamaicaobsever.com /latestnews/CARICOM_developing_regional_gender_equality strategy 
 
 
2 ibid


---
*Page 204*
---

 
26 
 “SDG 5 speaks to gender equality and empow erment  of women being a 
fundame ntal human  right and calls for legislation to promote gender  equality and 
empowerme nt of all women  and girls.” 
Therefo re, the importance  of water for human survival should drive the BWA to make every  
effort to secure adequate financial and human  resources to provi de high quality, gender 
responsive and socially inclusive  service in the water  and wastewat er sector.


---
*Page 205*
---

 
27 
   
2.4.2  Regional Framework   
At the regional level there are several institutions with policy and legal mandates to 
address  gender  equality issues relating to wastewater projects being implemented on 
behalf of Caribbean  member  states. Brief details of the current work of regional institutions 
that is relevant to this Project follow. 
The mandate of the CARICOM  Regional Secretariat is to implemen t regional plans, 
program s, and projects beneficial to  member states. In  March  2019, the Secretariat in 
collaborated w ith the UN- MCO, developed a Regional Gender Equality Strategy  to 
accelerate the effective impleme ntation  of key priority actions that member countries have 
signed on to, following the BPfA conference. The strategy  is designed to assist those 
countr ies which are yet to fully impleme nt the  Beijing declaration  that includes women's 
economic emp owerm ent and freedom  from violence.3 In 2015,  the CARICOM 
Secretariat,  also developed and supported the adopt ion by member  states of a Gende r 
Equality Indicators model, to measure the adv ancement of gender  equality, includi ng the 
status of women, men and LGBTQIA persons, as well as a strategy  for measuring these 
indicators at the regio nal and national level. Some of these relevant indicators were  used 
to addr ess gender equality issues related to this Project. 
As part of its mandate, the UN ECLAC has developed a model Gender Equality Plan  for 
use by member  coun tries in Latin America and the Caribbean.  Accord ing to ECLAC, the 
plan has been customized and adopted by most countries in the region, but Barbado s is not 
listed  as one of the countries  with such a plan  or policy.4 
GWP -Caribbean also has a mandate to implem ent gender-related projects in the 
Caribbean. The instit ution undertak es regional case studies and maintains project 
databas es which member states  are given full acce ss to. Barbados is a member  of the 
GWP-Caribbean,  and as such has acce ss to databas es and case studies of GWP projects 
in the water  and wastewater sector. This partnership represen ts another oppor tunity for 
the BWA to acce ss specific informati on that includes gende r main streaming 
reco mmendat ions related  to the wastewater sector. 
The CCCC C has a mandate to implement climate change  projects requiring gende r-
related  analysis in the Caribbean.  In keeping with  its mandate,  the CCC CC has adopted  
a Climate Change Framework , that includes a Gender Policy for the coordi nation of the 
Caribbean’s  response to climate change, which involves working on effective solutions and 
projects to combat e nvironmental  impacts and global warming. 
The CDB has a manda te to promote  economic growth and systematic  reduction of 
poverty  throu gh social and economic development. The GCF has accredited the bank to 
provide financing for regional  projects in various sectors on its behalf  and in this capaci ty, 
the CDB has funded several BWA infrastructure projects which requires that the


---
*Page 206*
---

 
28 
 Authority complies with  provisions of the bank’s gender  policy to ensure conside ration of 
projects submitted for financing (Isaacs,  2017) . In 2008,  the bank adopted a Gender 
Equality Policy and Operati onal and Project Strategy  to support its project financing 
strategy.  In January 2016,  the CDB commissioned a CGA, for Barbados  to inform the 
implem entation of gender equality strat egies of the bank and its partners in the country.5 
Accord ing to the CGA report, several persons interviewed  stated  that “law and policy in 
Barbado s facilitates equal opportunities and those institutions are gende r neutral in their 
treatment of women and men,” (Allen and Maughan,  2016).  
The CGA proposed certain strategies that are relevant to this Project, such as it requires  
Barbad os to engage  in research  that would generate disaggrega ted data to implement  
programmes  to enable men, women and LGBTQIA persons to overcome many social 
issues such  as poverty  alleviation, gende r stereotypes and on vulnerabi lity to and impact  
of environmental disasters. Barbad os is also expect ed to engage  in training stakeholders 
through workshops to increase the capaci ty of women in the leadersh ip of government 
department  and the wastewater sector. 
Finally, UWI  has a mandate  to spearhead  the training and research  efforts in the 
Caribbean region. To fulfil its mandate,  UWI established CER MES based  at UWI Cave Hill, 
Camp us in Barbado s with the capaci ty to undertake studies focusing on areas such as 
gender and climate change,  and on disaster  risk manageme nt in the Caribbean.  CERMES  
can also undertake studi es aimed  at integrati ng gender concerns in water and wastewater  
infrastructure projects  in Barba dos. Additiona lly, UWI has also establ ished the IGDS 
which conducts regular programs  on gende r, climate change  and disaster  risk reductio n. The 
UWI IGDS recruit students to pursue post-graduate research  in the fields of water and 
wastewa ter (Isaacs,  2017) , and has been  collaborating with the BWA, to implem ent gende r 
sensitivity a training for BWA employe es. 
Given that Barbados is a member of all six regional institutions, the BWA can have access 
to the CARICOM list of GEIs and the Gender Equality strategy as well as the UN ECLAC 
Model Gender Equality Plan. BWA should also be able to access case study reports and project data from the GWP -Caribbean and take advantage of support provided by C CCCC 
on climate change adaptation and mitigation. It is also noted that BWA is already collaborating with UWI - IGDS on training and research relating to the wastewater project 
and is seeking financing from GCF through the CDB for the implementation of this  project.


---
*Page 207*
---

 
29 
  
2.4.3  National Framework   
At the national level, there are institutions with policy and legal mandates to address gender 
equality. The GOB has taken several steps to improve the framework for wastewater policy, 
legislative instruments, and institutional arrangements. A description of the national 
initiatives relevant to this Project follows, but further discussion on proposed policy reform 
related to this project is also included in the Conceptual Design report.  
1. National Sustainable Development Policy  
In 2004,  the GOB  adopted a National Sustainable Developme nt Policy to guide decisions 
and actions at all levels in the country. 
2. Draft National Gender Equality Policy  
Although the GOB has a revised Draft National Gender Equality Policy, it is yet to be 
approved by the Cabinet of Ministers and tabled in parliament for discussion and 
endorsement (Isaac, 2017). While this Policy is not endorsed, Barbados has been recognize d 
as making steps to improve legislation that fosters increased equality.  
3. National Climate Change Policy  
The Government of Barbados approved a National Climate Change Policy in 2012. The 
country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (now known as NDC) as 
communicated to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in 2015, 
lists 6 national plans and strategies for which climate change adaptation would be 
incorporated3. These include:  
-          Medium Term Growth and Development Strat egy 2013 –  2020;  
-          Physical Development Plan;  
-       White Paper on the Development of Tourism in Barbados and National Adaptation 
Strategy to Address Climate Change in the Tourism Sector in Barbados;  
-          Coastal Zone Management Plan;  
-          Storm Water Management Plan;  
-          Other sectoral plans including for agriculture, fisheries, water and health.  
 While the Climate Change Policy makes mention of gender issues, there was limited 
presentation of strategies for mainstreaming gender in relevant sectoral climate change 
interventions.  The Policy however states that that vulnerable groups, including women and 
young men, should be targeted and participate in action to address environmental threats 
 
3 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender -assessment -fp060- water -sector -resilience -nexus -sustainability -
barbados -wsrn -s


---
*Page 208*
---

 
30 
 and damage4. 
4.  Wastewater Tariff Poli cy 
In July 2009,  BGIS reported that the GOB had approved a new tariff policy and structure 
for the BWA in which the minimum charge moving from $20.00BBD  (US$10)  to $32.00BBD 
(US$16)  for both domestic and commerc ial metered  customers. However, it is noted that 
there  was no change in the rate for the sewage  tariffs which remai ned at 1/3 of the water 
bill for domestic  customers and 2/3 of the water bill for commerc ial customers. 5Given that 
the tariff policy and structure has been  in place for twelve years, it is reco mmended that the 
GOB  consider  enga ging key stakeholders  with a view to exami ne cost reco very challenges 
and measures needed  to update  this policy. The GOB should update  the tariff policy to 
support a BWA cost recovery for its wastewater services taking into consideration gende r 
equality issues affect ing the poor and vulnerable.  Such a consideration  may  include 
reduced  rates for identified vulnerable persons. 
5. National Legal Instruments  
 
In October 1980, the GOB  enacted  the Barbado s Water Authority Act as the primary legal 
instrument to govern the opera tions of water  and wastewater services in Barba dos. The 
Act is accompani ed by the BWA (Sewerage Regulations), 1980, (S.I. No. 151 of 1980), to 
regulate sewage, effluent wa stewater, discharge,  water charge s, authorization, perm it, 
equipment, and inspection;  including the sewerage treat ment plants,  packaged  plants of 
hotels and businesses, or household’s scep tic tanks and suck-wells (Isaac,  p-100). In 1985,  
the GOB enacted  the Barbado s Authority Act, 274a, L.R.O., with  Part IV of the Act making 
provision for the establishm ent of a Water  and Sewage  Division to be responsible for 
wastewater managemen t. In 2009,  the GOB  also enacted  the BWA Act (Validat ion of 
Water and Sewerage Rates ), to validate the increas e in water and sewerage rates levied and 
collected  by the BWA from 1st January 2005  to the date of the BWA (Water  and Sewerage 
Rates) Regulations, 2009, (S.I. No. 69 of 2009) . 
The BWA Act of October 1980,  is the primary  legislat ion governing the provision of water 
and wastewater services in Barbad os. The Act is supported by the BWA (Sewerage  
Regulations), (S.I. No. 151 of 1980) , introduced to regulate  sewage,  effluent wastewater, 
discharge,  water charges, authorization, perm it, equipme nt, and inspect ion including the 
sewage treat ment plants,  packaged  plants of hotels and businesse s, and household septic 
systems and suck-wells (Isaacs,  2017).  6 This legal instrument should be placed high on the 
BWA agenda  for revision since it has been  implemented  for over forty ye ars and the BWA 
should improve  its efforts to lobby the GOB  to amen d the Act, as the curre nt instrume nt 
does not reflect  present day gender issues. 
In 2020, the Government of Barbados enacted the Employment (Prevention of 
 
4 ibid 
5 https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/new-watertariff 
6 https://www .ecolex.org/details/legislation/ barbados-water-authority-act-1980 -lex-faoc


---
*Page 209*
---

 
31 
 Discrimination) Act, 20207. This Act prevents discrimination in an employment context in 
over fifteen (15) areas8. Including sexual orientation, gender, family responsibility, age and 
physical features.  The Act  prevents discrimination in recruitment and selection; even where 
these functions are executed by recruitment agencies9. The Act identifies that an act  of 
discrimination can occur, “directly or indirectly, whether intentionally or not, makes a 
distinction, creates an exclusion or shows a preference, the intent or effect of which is to 
subject the other person to any disadvantage, restriction or other detriment. ” The Act also 
identifies an act of discrimination may occur where “t he person, directly or indirectly, whether 
intentionally or not, subjects the other person to any disadvantage, restriction or other detriment ” … in identified circumstances. This legislation has identified a tribunal where 
complaints of discrimination can be made.  
 
In 2017, The Government of Barbados enacted the 
Employment Sexual Harassment 
(Prevention) Act, 201710. The Act makes  provision for the protection of employees in both 
the public sector and private sector from sexual harassment at their workplace; provide s a 
framework for the reporting of sexual harassment cases by employees and a method of resolving such cases; establish es a procedure for the hearing and determination of matters 
related to sexual harassment; and provide for related matters.  
 
6. National Collaborating Institutions  
 
As indicated earlier, in 1985, the GOB  in keepi ng with Part IV of the of the Barbado s Authority 
Act, 274a,  establ ished the Water and Sewage  Division within the BWA to be responsible for 
wastew ater sector managem ent. Currently, in addi tion to the BWA Wastewater Division, 
Barbado s has several public institutions with  mandates  that have a direct impact  on gender  
equality issues relat ing to the wastewater  sector. They are as follows: 
1. The Barbados  Poverty Alleviation Bureau and t he Office of the Director  of Poverty  
establ ished in 1998 with  a responsibility to exami ne and report on the living conditions 
of the poor and vulnerab le11; 
2. The Bure au of Gender Affairs,  Ministry  of Youth, and Family and Sports responsible 
for monitoring and evaluating gende r equa lity policies, plans and programs of 
government. The Bureau is responsible for the integration of gender in all national 
development policies and programs to achieve gender equity and equality.;  and 
3. The Environmental Projection Department ( EPD ), has completed  a wastewater  reuse 
policy to facilitate the treat ment of wastewater for reuse in drip irrigation, toilet 
 
7 https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=110880   Accessed: September 5, 2022  
8 https://barbadostoday.bb/2021/03/18/btcolumn -discrimination -in-the-workplace- can-be-covert/  Accessed: September 5, 2022  
9 Ibid. 
10 chrome -
extension://e faidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://oig.cepal.org/sites/default/files/2017_brb_employmentsexualharassmentpreventionact.pd f 
Accessed: September 5, 2022  
11 https://www .gov.bb/State-Bodies/poverty-alleviation


---
*Page 210*
---

 
32 
 flushing, decentralized sanitation systems including septic tanks, sewage  packaged 
plants and suck-wells (Isaacs,  2017) . 
The above -mentioned institu tions collaborate with each  other to bring greater synergy  
between gender  equa lity and wastewater issues. 
Overall data collected from government records indicates that the GOB has made some 
progre ss on social, political , and economic  issues relat ing to gend er equal ity. However, 
during the impleme ntation  of the Project it is necessary  that the BWA ensures compliance 
with  provisions of relevant conventions, policies, agreemen ts, and laws.  Where there  are 
gaps  identified, BWA needs to lobby the government authorities to make the appr opriate  
improvemen ts. 
 
Gender Equality Indicators Adopted by Barbados   
Gender  Equality Indicators refer to sixteen  measures adopted by the United Nations to 
track  progress made  by member states towards achieving the goals of SDG 5. CARICOM 
has adopted a regional list comprising thirty-three GEIs. This gender analysis applied some 
of the  gender equality indicators adopted by the GOB from the CARICOM list of GEIs.  
 
 
 
Table C National  List of Gender Equality  Indicators Applied by Category    
No  
Category   
CAR ICOM  
CAR ICOM/National Indicator 
 
1  
Economic 
Activ ity  
Indicator 1  
Indicator 8  
Indicator 10  
Indicator 11  
 More of the persons in poverty are women  
 15.7%  of Barbados  population lives in poverty  
 Poor women 21%, Poor men 13,9 6% Extreme  
poor women:4.7%, Extreme poor men: 2.7% 
(Beuermann  2017)   
2  
Education   
Indicator 14  
Barbad os Population  statistics:  
 90.68%  completed tertiary education 
 93.4%  completed primary educatio n21 
 89.5%  and 87.6%  females and males 
respect ively with at least secondary 
education 
(Allen et al. 2016)  
More women , 40 years  and under  have  
university  educati on 
50%  of emigran ts as against 30%  of locals have 
university


---
*Page 211*
---

 
33 
 3 Public 
Participation  Indicator 28  
Indicator 29  
Parliament has 30 seats. Wo men including the 
Prime Minister, holding 6 seats or 20% compared to 
24 seats or 80%  held by men.12 
Indicator 30 Head of State: Governor General is a woman.  
Indicator 31 The Cabinet comprises  nineteen  (19) or (73%) men 
and seven (7) or 27% women13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4.4 BWA  Framework for Wastewater  Sector  Services  
The BWA is the primary entity, supported by the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water  
Resources,  with a mandate  to deliver satisfactory water and wastewa ter services to citize ns 
of Barba dos, and as such, is responsible for appl ying the gende r equality policy at the 
level of the wastewater sector. For the delivery of wastewater  services, BWA is required 
to maintain  an appr opriate  organi zational structure to exerc ise utility oversig ht, a system  
for data collection and analysis, and wastewater treatment facilities. Deta ils of the several 
gender  equalities issues to be addr essed for effect ive implementati on of the project. 
 
2.4.5  BWA Organizational Structure   
The configuration of the organizational structure of the BWA makes provision for several 
functional departments including Finance, Human Resource and Customer Service. The 
structure also includes a Wastewater Division which is specifically responsible for wastewater management. As of August 2022, the Barbados Water Authority had 753 
employees. 556 (73.8%) were men and 197 (26.2%) were women. This represents a 3% drop in total employees from 2016, when a Gender Analysis for the GCF Funded WSRN 
Project was un dertaken. Important to note, is female employment dropped from 28.1% of 
the BWA workforce to 26.2% .  In 2016, The  workforce age ranged from 20– 67 years with 
a mean age of 39 years. Approximately half of the BWA employees (61 %) are aged 40- 59 
years, with t he majority of men being 50- 59 years (23%) and women 40- 49 years (9.9%)
14. 
The BWA staff are almost equally employed in technical (48.5%) and non- technical roles 
(51.5%), with technical being defined as all job titles related to project management, 
 
22 12 https ://caribbeanelections.com  Barbados  Election Results  2018 
22 13 https://www .gov.bb Barbados  Current Cabinet of Ministers 
 
14 file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/BP20 -CCC- 01-00-RPT-Gender -Analysis -Report -Rev1.pdf


---
*Page 212*
---

 
34 
 enginee ring, science, vocational, heavy equipment operation and field work activities of the 
utility, and non- technical referring to all other capacities. “ Men and women are almost 
evenly represented in non- technical roles (26.8% and 24.6% respectively), while there is a 
significantly greater proportion of the BWA staff that are men (45%) versus women (3.5%) 
employed in technical roles ”15.  In the Legal and Compliance Unit, The Customer Service 
Unit, as well as the Human Resource Unit, there is an over representat ion of women (100%, 
89%, 72%) respectively.  On the other hand, the Engineering Unit (75%), the Distribution 
Unit (95%) and the Drawing Office (100%) has over representation of men.    
From interviews  conducted during this gender analysis , the perception is that the BWA has 
demonstrated that as an employer , it provides equal opportunities to men, women, and 
LGBTQIA persons in the recruitment of employees and this unwritten policy is maintained 
in staff training, deployment, compensation, and mobility. One  KII respondent stated that 
the BWA employees are unionised and as such, the BWA is committed to implementing provisions of the collective agreement which addresses the gender equality issues 
highlighted earlier. Import ant to note is that this is in keeping with the findings of the 
Country Gender Assessment (CGA) conducted in 2016 by the CDB. The CGA
16 
highlighted that …  
“A number of interviewees stated that law and policy in Barbados facilitate equal opportunities 
and that institutions are ‘gender neutral’ in their treatment of women and men. They saw 
differences in economic and social outcomes for men and women (if acknowledged to exist) as resulting from individual choice and tradition rather than systematic impedimen ts. A few 
interviewees were actively opposed to developing actions based on gender considerations. Others acknowledged gender -related constraints, but most said that gender was not something they 
generally took into account while  working ”. 
Despite outcomes  demonstrating gender imbalances in participation and representation, the 
views that BWA is an equal opportunity employer remains relatively constant. Important 
to address however are the institutional cultural biases that may perpetuate inequality. 
Gender  sensitivity training , encouraging more young women in STEM  and having more 
women in leadership roles  may help in shifting cultural nuances over time. While there are 
no recognized formal impediments to gender equality in the workplace,  culture and 
stereotypes may influence how policies and laws are implemented.  
 
2.4.6  BWA Board Governance   
The BWA ten-member Board of Directors is appointed  by the Ministry of Transport, Works, 
and Water Resources for a three-year period. At the commencement of this Gender 
Analysis, it was noted that the BWA Board of Directors comprised of two women one 
of whom was the chairperson of the Board, and eight men, an arrangement which reflects 
 
15 file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/BP20 -CCC- 01-00-RPT-Gender -Analysis -Report -Rev1.pdf  
16 Caribbean Development Bank Country Gender Assessment Barbados, 2016


---
*Page 213*
---

 
35 
 a gender -imbalanced in the gender make- up of the Board. Since the execution of this 
study, the Board changed leadership. The BWA Board is therefore male headed. 
Increase in women’s participation in prominent decision -making spaces provides an 
opportunity not only for equality of representation bur equality of decision -making 
outcomes. Women’s  participation in water governance is essential for achieving SDGs 
5 and 6 as is a target of both17.The Beijing Platform for Action calls for guaranteeing 
that ‘women's  priorities are included in public investment programmes for economic 
infrastructure, such as water and sanitation’. Women’s voices are increasingly strengthened when women have a seat at the decision -making table, and moreover, when 
women who fill those s eats: i.  have the technical competence to contribute meaningfully 
to decision making and, ii. are empowered to do so. As predominant water users within 
the household, and increasingly present users of water in private sector, it is imperative 
that female r epresentation on boards such as the BWA is prioritized.  
Table D: Composition - BWA Board of Directors  
Stakehol der Total Male Female  
BWA Board  of Directors 10 7 or (70%) 3 or (30%) 
 
2.4.7 BWA Wastewater Division   
The current wastewater management system, used by the BWA to provide wastewater 
services to the citizens of Barbados, comprises of two treatment plants that are the 
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) and the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant 
(SCSTP). Disaggregated dated obtained fro m a January 2021 staff survey of the BWA 
indicated that out of a total staff complement of fifty -eight that work at the treatment plants, 
forty -nine employees or 85% of them are men while only nine, or 15%, are women. The 
above data confirms the high level  of gender -imbalance among the technical staff of the 
Wastewater Division.  This situation is not unique to Barbados, The World Bank’s Water 
Global Practice published a report highlighting that “ women make up less than 1 in 5 of the 
water workforces  (in water utilities) and constitute only 23% of engineers and managers in 
the sector ”.1819  
In an assessment of the gender segmentation of labour within the BWA, Issacs and Trotz 
(2017) identified that  of technical fields within the BWA, the greatest disparity in 
employment was in the vocational area, 26.8% men to 0.8% women. This category 
comprised artisan electricians, fitters, masons, plumbers, welders, heavy equipment 
operators, sewage inspectors an d workshop employees. Acc ording to disaggre gated staff  
data of January 2021,  there is a 68% gende r imbala nce in favour of men on the staff 
of the BWA Wastewater  Division confirm ing that more men are emp loyed do ing paid  
 
17 Ibid 
18 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32319  
19 Oxfam, 2020 Achieving Sustainable Development Goals 5 and  6


---
*Page 214*
---

 
36 
 work in the wastewater sector.  T herefore, in  addition to the gende r sensitivity which it has 
already  initiated,  BWA needs to creat e greater  opportunities to attract  more women to the 
sector. This imbalance in representation at the wastewater division is reflective of: i . the 
nature of work performed at treatment plants; and ii . the entry level requirements for the 
jobs available at the division. More men are drawn to vocational and engineeri ng 
educational and training programmes than women. Work undertaken at the treatment plans 
are viewed as heavily laborious and physical and may therefore draw more men than women 
to apply and take up vacant positions. There is however also the room for expe ctation that 
cultural norms may deter women with an interest in  performing in this sector to take on 
open positions.  
Data from The Barbados Vocational Training Board (BVTB) (2013) revealed the male -
female ratio of graduates as 62.7 to 37.3, very similar to 2003 ratios20. A review of 2019 -
2022 Graduates suggests a similar pattern. Training areas such as plumbing, electricals, 
machinery operators were male dominated, while programmes such as sewing, cosmetology 
and international cooking had greater female gra duates21. Similarly, The University of the 
West Indies Vice Chancellor’s report 2020 -2021, demonstrated overall a higher enrolment 
rate of females (68.7%) to males (31.3%)22. However, the report identified the male 
dominated faculties to be Engineering (65.67%) and Sports (65.7%). Employees with the 
requisite technical skills will be the most eligible, and first to benefit from potential jobs 
created by projects of this nature23. There is therefore a need for stronger affirmative action 
policies to increase women’s representation across the water sector .   
 
Table E.      Gender  Distribution and Gap of Wastewater Division Staff, 201   
Stakehol der Total Male Female  Gender Gap 
Division Staff by Location      
BSTP/SCSTP  6 4 or (67%) 2 or (33%) 34% 
BSTP 29 26 or (90%) 3 or (10%) 80% 
SCSTP 23 19 or (83%) 4 or (17%) 66% 
 58 49 or 84% 9 or 16% 86% 
 
 
2.4.8 BWA Gender Equality Strategy 
The BWA does not have a written Gender Equality Strategy. The organization has unwritten 
practices of non -discrimination, and equal pay for equal work as was cited by one KI. 
Unionization has helped in this regard. However, a well -defined Gender Equality S trategy 
is not elaborated. The Project provides the space to document policies of non- discrimination 
 
20 Ibid. 
21 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YPdpiMj4WD4 
22 https://uwi.edu/vcreport/ 
23 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender -assessment -fp060- water -sector -resilience -nexus -sustainability -
barbados -wsrn -s


---
*Page 215*
---

 
37 
 through upgrades of SOPs. Important is that the Employment (Prevention) of 
Discrimination Act of 2020 applies to the BWA , including as it relates to recrui tment and 
provides an avenue for complaints to a tribunal where the BWA violates the law . 
2.4.9 BWA Gender Sensitivity Training  
 
With Support from the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados 
(WSRN) Project, The BWA is undertaking Gender Sensitivity Training which stated in 
October 2020, and was facilitated by UWI -Gender Studies Department (UWI -IGDS). The 
program me was designed to train 500 BWA employees to help them develop a better 
understanding of gender sensitivity issues within the Authority. The programme contains  
several modules of video presentations and three case studies which include gender 
components on water and wastewater issues, fish processing and farming topics. It also 
includes a component on the water and energy nexus and covered areas like drought management, rainwater harvesting and increased water storage. In an interview with UWI -
IGDS, it was  confirmed that t he training involved six workshops with up to 22 participants 
in each session and was delivered over five days. The training  uses videos, case studies, 
handouts, small group activities and fac ilitator-led plenary presentations and discussions. 
The programme was designed to redress the personal and urgent relations of gender.  Table 
F shows the disaggregated data on BWA employees who participated in the gender 
sensitivity training.  
 
 
Table F: Disaggregated Data on Staff Attendance in the BWA/UWI-IGS Gender  
Sensitivity training  
Session Date  
2020  Total Male Female  
8th  October 
 23 14 or 61% 09 or 39% 
9th October 
 24 10 or 42% 14 or 58% 
15th  October 
 21 8 or 38% 13 or 62% 
16th  October 
 23 13 or 57% 10 or 43% 
22nd October 
 16 9 or 56% 7 or 44% 
23rd October 
 19 11 or 58% 8 or 42% 
29th October 
 18 12 or 67% 6 or 33% 
30th October 
 17 8 or 47% 9 or 53% 
Total 161 85 or 53% 76 or 47%  
At the end of the programme  all successful empl oyees will receive  a Cert ificate  in Gender  
Equality Issues. Participation in trainings is encouraged, but not made mandatory for staff. 
Trainings have had varying degrees of success in terms of participation. Incentives for 
attending training often results in increased attendance.  
An interview with a  female Senior Manager at the BWA revealed that the training  is a 
necessary  initiative  to expose BWA  emp loyees to gender  sensitiv ity and to encourage 
gender equality relati ng to co-workers, customers, and clients. The gender sensitivity 
programme, is ongoing within the framework of the WSRN Project. Training for gender


---
*Page 216*
---

 
38 
 equality can be a transformative process that provide knowledge, techniques and tools to 
develop skills and changes in attitudes and behaviours. However, the effectiveness of these 
progr ammes is often a result of a continuous and long- term process that requires 
commitment of all parties24. Similarly, as posited by the European Institute for Gender 
Equality, if implemented systematically gender training facilitates more efficient actions 
and a positive change in attitudes25. Likewise,  there are certain categories of employee, 
depending on job functions, who should be mandatorily trained in relevant areas of gender 
sensitivity.  
 
 
3.1 Contextual Analysis  
 
3.1.1 Gender  Equality  and Diversity   
This report exami nes gender equality from  a broad perspective  which embraces the human  
rights  of all citize ns in Barbad os, in relation to how climate change is impact ing the 
wast ewater systems in the country. It is worthy to note that this contextual analysis centre on key 
equality pillars that are considered relevant to this 3R -CReWS Project.  
It addresses equality among men, women  and the LGBTQIA community,  to avoid 
discrimination in the society regardl ess of gender identity. It is important to address 
gender equality from this perspective  to bring parity between  genders  and persons of 
LGBTQIA orientati on thereby, respecting their rights  as humans. The ILO has taken 
initiatives  to addr ess issues relating to women and LGBTQIA on the sex-based  
discrimination by advancing the rights of low-waged  women and families of the LGBTQIA 
community. Much has been  achieved in terms of human rights of women  and pe ople of 
LGBTQ IA commu nity. Also, a case can be made f or the inclusion of women  and social 
minorities in the gender equality debate (Johnson 2019). Johnson argues: 
“…that gender equality, gende r manageme nt and gende r mainstreaming 
appr oaches overlook most problems faced  by people from LGBTQIA community 
and from women of colo ur. Gender  equality is done in a fram ework which 
includes vulnerable groups  like LGBTQI A integra ted in the project  with no 
discrimination.1” 
A large  perc entage  of gay and lesbian adults face some form of discrimination especially 
on the job although it is argue d that there  has been pr ogress over the last two decades legal ly. 
However, the LGBTQIA commu nity still experie nce gender bias in Barbad os. For example, 
LGBTQIA persons curre ntly do not have  the same rights as non-LGBTQIA people. 
Intimate acts performed  by LGBTQ IA persons in Barbado s are still considered  to be illegal 
and there  is a penalty where  the max imum sentence is life impr isonment although it is 
 
24 https://www.unwomen.org/en/how -we-work/capacity -development -and-
training#:~:text=It%20helps%20women%20and%20men,equal%20human%20r ights%20for%20all.  
25 https://eige.europa.eu/gender -mainstreaming/toolkits/gender -equality -training/why -invest -gender -equality -training


---
*Page 217*
---

 
39 
 not enforced. The (Barbad os Today  News paper,  Dec.  2014)  reported that; 
“… stigma  and discrimination, forms a property damage,  ostracism and verbal 
abuse from strange rs and family alike, unjustifiable denial of employ ment, denial 
of housing, reflection and abandonm ent by family, friends and society at large .2” 
Every effort is made  to adva nce the cause of all vulnerable groups of all genders, to avoid 
any form of discrimination and ensur e that ever yone’s needs are adequately  addr essed in 
the Project cycle. 
 
3.1.2 Gender  Equality  and Climate  Change   
The Project’s Proposal put s forward in its climate rationale that “t he climate change risk 
profile of Barbados is dominated by coastal and weather effects, especially sea level rise, 
storm surge, increased tropical storm and hurricane intensity and frequency; and other more 
slow -onset environmental impacts, such as flooding and drought, which is a very important 
and specifically Barbadian nuanced issue, as the country already suffers from water scarcity, 
and changes in rainfall patterns exacerbate this considerably ”26. Climate models  show  that 
conditions will be warmer and dr ier in the Caribbean, resulting in water availability issues.  
As Cited in the Project’s Proposal, i t has been reported by the BWA that Barbados has been 
experiencing less rainfall recently than the mean rainfall amount of 1,270 mm/year measured at the GAIA
27.  Barbados experienced an annual rainfall of 736.5 mm  in 201928.   
 
…Shifting climatic conditions are leading to increasing 
interruptions in potable water availability. Water scarcity can cause 
a vari ety of health problems by reducing the amount of water 
available to practice basic hygiene which increases the risk of chemical and microbial contamination (Halcrow, 2011); these can 
lead to gastrointestinal diseases and other health risks. Studies in 
the Caribbean show an association between climate variability and 
increasing incidence of dengue fever. Rainwater storage is being promoted as an adaptation option to increase availability of 
freshwater;  however, environmental health officers report an 
increas e in the Aedes aegypti (mosquito that carries yellow fever) 
index due to mosquito breeding in domestic rainwater storage tanks. 
These health issues often affect women as primary caregivers and 
homemakers; children and elderly are also at greater risk. Men in 
formal work tend to have greater access to clean water and therefore 
 
26 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal - 3R-CReWs Project, 2021  
27 Barbados Weather Climate Data:  http://www.barbadosweather.org/barbados -weather -climate -data.php  
28 Barbados Weather:  http://www.barbadosweather.org/index.php


---
*Page 218*
---

 
40 
 at lesser risk for vector borne diseases29. 
Many studies have highlighted that w omen  are more vulnerable to the effects of climate  
change than men . In coun tries such  as Barbad os, women and men in rural areas are 
vulnerable when they are highly depende nt on local natural resources for their livelihood.  
It is therefore important to identify gende r-sensitive strategies  to respond to environmental 
and hum anitarian  crises caused by climate change as women are not only vulnerable to 
climate change,  but they are also effective actors or agents of change  in relation to both 
mitigati on and adapta tion. 
There are many researchers30 who support the idea that gende r inequity is making the 
impacts of  climate change worse. They suggest that by bringing the voices of more 
women/LGBTQIA persons into responses to climate change will help all countries. Gender 
inequalities affect the abilities of men and women to adapt to climate change particular ly in 
areas of services, decision -making and access to and control of assets. Women are further 
limited by gender norms, roles and biases across the ecology of Caribbean countries. For 
women, their role as caregivers and homemakers can be challenged by eff ects of climate 
change on availability of food and water and fuel scarcity. These may force women to spend more time trying to access these resources and thereby affects their expected roles as homemakers  and breadwinners . Such challenges increase stress and tension within the home 
and can subsequently lead to manifestations of gender -based violence. Men are also 
susceptible to negative impacts of climate change. High levels of stress due to unavailability 
of resources, co mpromised land and assets, and loss of income can lead to anger which can 
further encourage self -harm and substance abuse. Loss of income and resources due to 
climatic events may also lead to sexual and domestic violence against partners or children.  
Clim atic events inflict deep and lasting impacts on the poor and vulnerable who are least 
able to withstand their onslaught31The Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean (ECLAC) has published technical reports on the environmental vulnerability of 
Caribbean SIDS and Barbados in particular32. The position of ECLAC is that “ vulnerability 
is, in part, a function of gender ”.  Barbadian strategies to address climate change identifies 
the need to support the poor and disadvantaged who have fewer resour ces or buffers against 
climate change or other shocks”33 .These strategies do not explicitly present strategies to 
advance gender equality in addressing issues of climate change sectorally, nor 
systematically . Poverty data in Barbados reveals that,  a larger percentage of women are 
represented  and affected in the poor and vulnerable groups because more women find 
themselves in poverty brackets.  As stated in the CDB Gender Assessment Report, “In 
 
29 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal - 3R-CReWs Project, 2021  
30 https://www .weforum.org/agenda/2020 /07/g ender 
 
31 Government of Barbados (2012), Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013 –2020, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Affairs, Bridgetown, p. 2. ; as cited in CDB CGA (2017)  
32 Ibid, Pg 73 
33 Ibid, Pg 73


---
*Page 219*
---

 
41 
 Barbados there is a high rate of poverty among female -headed households . 19.4%, of 
female -headed households are poor, compared to 11.5% of male headed households, and 
15% of all households” (Baksh & Associates, 2016B)34.   
 
Figure 1 Gendered Impact of Climate Change in the Caribbean35 
 
The IUCN believes that it is possible to strengthen climate action by promoting gender 
equality and that since women  and men exper ience climate change  differentl y, gender 
inequalities will persist  around the world, affecti ng the ability of individuals  and 
commu nities to adap t. They posit the view that by recognizing the impor tant contributions 
of women, as decision makers, stakeholders,  educators, carers,  and experts  across sectors 
and at all levels, can lead to successful, long-term  solutions to climate change.  Women  
have also prov en to be leading the way towards more equitable and sustainable  solutions 
to climate  change.36 
 
3.1.3 Gender  Respons ive Disaster  Preparedn ess and Recovery in the Caribbean  
The World Bank’s Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery GFDRR and the 
Caribbean Resilience Facility (CRF), published a desk review on Gender Responsive Disaster 
Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean (as cited in footnote)37. The main findings of 
the desk review are:  
 
34 Ibid, Pg 73  
35 Study of the Impacts of Climate Change on the Women and Men of the Caribbean. Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience Countrie s (Informed by 
FAO 2017b)  
36 https://www .iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/gender-and-climate-change 
 
37  https://openknowledge -worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35215/Gender -Responsive -Disaster -Preparedness and 
Recovery in the Caribbean


---
*Page 220*
---

 
42 
 • Women  in the CRF  countries experie nce various gaps  in acce ss to health, 
social protection, vocational and technical  educat ion, productive resources, 
economic opportunities, and voice and agenc y, all of which are as sociated 
with their increased  vulnerabi lity to d isasters and climate change  hazards;  
• Alth ough indicators for educatio nal attainment—meas ured as the number 
of years of educatio n—are almost the same  for men  and women  in the CRF 
countries, a significant  gender  gap persis ts at the level of technical and 
vocational programs that might prevent women from  improving their 
acce ss to income-earn ing opportunities, particu larly in the recovery and 
reconstruction programs  in post-disaster  settings; 
• Strong evidence shows that in resourc e-poor  nations,  disasters make women 
more vulnerable  to reproductive and sexual health  prob lems,  suggesting the 
necessity to include women’s health as a critical comp onent of disaster relief 
programs;  
• An analysis of social indicators in the CRF  countries demonstrates various 
gender gaps  in social protection, all of which make women  more vulnerab le to 
disaster impacts due to their lower safety nets compared to men; 
• Women’s domestic burdens and their primary  responsibility for the well-being 
of their fami lies limit their economic opportunities and increase burdens 
impos ed on them in disaster situations; 
• Higher unemploym ent rates, access to fewer economic opportunities, lower 
wage s, vulnerable  emp loyment, and insufficient social suppo rt syste ms for 
domestic workers result in women’s limited access to safety nets compa red to 
men, making them  more  vulnerab le in disaster  situations; 
• Alth ough there are no exact statistics about the number  of women in DRM  
and climate change  related  decision-making positions, a gene ral trend, based  
on the number  of women  in national parliamen ts, and ministerial  and 
managerial  positions, points to significant dec ision- making gende r gaps . 
• Country reports from the CRF countries provi de evidence of persistent 
violence due to inadeq uate protecti on meas ures for GBV victims, limited 
responsive care, treat ment, psychosocial and other supportive services, and 
sub-culturally institutionalized violent practi ces. Importantly, the trend 
exacerbates during disasters and in post-disas ter settings; and 
• A lack of focus prevails with men  and boys’ vulnerabi lity and capacity  
analyses, compoun ded by limited  efforts to engage  men  and boys adequately  
as allies to achieve gender  equa lity in disaster prepared ness and recovery 38 
 
38 https://openknowledge-worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35215/Gender-Respons ive-Disaster-Preparedness    and 
Reco very in the Caribbean


---
*Page 221*
---

 
43 
  
3.1.4 Unpaid Work   
A case study undertaken (Bobb, 2019),  desc ribes the challenges faced by persons of 
different gender  when it comes to their access to clean water.  Based on its findings,  the 
study concludes that access to water is critical to one’s quality of life and affects men and 
women  differentl y. The case highlights the challenges of Wendy, a 34- year-old married 
mother of two children who resides in St. John, Barbados. For half of the year, Wendy’s 
household comprises of herself and her two children: a single parent due to her husband, 
Bernard, who works overseas on the farm labour program and contributes financially to the 
household.  
In summar y, this case study (Bobb,  2019)  indicates that the woman  spends at least thirty-
two hours  a week  doing paid work, and twice that time  doing unpaid dome stic work at 
home including, cooking, washing, garde ning, caring for her children and the animals 
and fetching and storing water  for domestic use. Men, on  the other hand, spend  
appr oximately  forty hours a week doing paid  work but very little time doing unpaid 
domestic chores. Although this case study does not necess arily represen t the situation 
throughout all of Barbados  it does highlight,  what appears to be, a common trend in the 
country. The CGA (2016), similarly identified that studies in Barbados have shown that 
women, in part because many are single parents, participate in income -generating activities 
in both the formal and informal economies as well as carrying out the majority of  unpaid 
care activities.  
 
3.1.5 Sexual and Gender Based Violence  
The CGA identified that “patriarchal gender norms are often used to justify violence 
against women who do not ‘know their place’ with regard to remaining within the private, 
domestic sphere. These norms also support male control over the bodies of women and 
girls and entitle ment to sexual pleasure, justifying sexual violence”39. These findings 
were advanced as a result of studies conducted by the Bureau of Gender Affairs/ 
Caribbean Development Research Services in 2009 which found a prevalence of violence of 27% among adult w omen over the previous year. Correspondingly, A study on 
interpersonal violence in three Caribbean countries: Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and 
Tobago, revealed that violent acts are most commonly perpetrated by a partner within a 
relationship (59.0% on male victims and 66.7% on female victims)
40. Important to note 
is that the study found that the levels of any violence decreased as the victim’s ages increased —falling from 72.4% among the 15– 18-year -olds to 67.3% among the 27– 30-
year -olds (p = 0.03). Reported physical violence fell from 66.2% among the 15– 18-year -
olds to 49.0% among the 27– 30-year -olds (p < 0.001). Reported sexual coercion fell from 
 
39 Ibid. 
40 Le Franc E, Samms -Vaughan M, Hambleton I, Fox K, Brown D. Interpersonal violence in three Caribbean countries: 
Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2008;24(6): 409– 21.


---
*Page 222*
---

 
44 
 60.3% among the 15– 18-year -olds to 50.1% among the 27 –30-year -olds (p < 0.001) 41. 
For Barbados, of survey re spondents 50.0% of women compared to 44.7% of men 
revealed experience of physical aggression within an intimate partner relationship. 
Similarly, 52.8% of women and 39.6% of men reported sexual coercion in Barbados .   
Reports of Domestic Violence across the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States 
increased during the COVID -19 lockdown. The UN Women identifies that Barbados, in 
particular, experienced an approximately 38 per cent increase in reported cases of 
domestic violence, many of which were intimate pa rtner violence.”  42  
While Gender Based violence is found to be more prevalent in intimate partner settings, 
it is also recognizably present in public spaces as well. There is however, limited 
information and no comprehensive study on Sexual and Gender Based Violence in the 
workplace in the Caribbean and specifically, in Barbados. The IFC identifies though, that 
30% -50% of women in Latin America and the Caribbean have experienced sexual 
harassment at work43.  Positively, Barbados is one of three Caribbean Countries, also 
includ ing Belize and the Bahamas with specific legislation which addresses sexual 
harassment44.  
In addition to CEDAW, Barbados has ratified key international and regional human rights instruments related to gender equality, namely the Inter -American Convention on 
the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women. It has also ratified the eight core International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions. In 2016, 
there were amendments to the domestic violence laws providing for more powers to the 
police as well as changes to the definitions of forms of domestic violence, including 
physical, emotional and financial abuse and harassment and the expanded scope to use 
of electronic means to perpetuate violence. The Employment Sexual Harassment 
(Prevention) Act was passed 2017
45 and provides an avenue for complaints where 
harassment occurs in the workplace.  
The prevalence of violence against women, and in particular young women and girls, 
warrants a cautio us approach to implementing community- based intervention under the 
3R-CReWS Project. Importantly, is that the BWA recognizes the risks that may arise 
from infrastructure works within communities. Projects like the 3R -CReWs bring people 
and social transformat ion to the communities in which they operate. They may therefore 
invariably exacerbate existing risks of Sexual and Gender Based Violence. Addressing 
gender -based violence, including exploitation and harassment, in infrastructure projects 
 
41 Ibid 
42 https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/domestic -violence -increased -with-covid-
19/#:~:text=In%20the%20first%20two%20quarters,reported%20incide nts%20of%20domestic%20violence . Accessed: 
August 15 2022  
43 www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/42b50ce3- 3867 -48b2- 9818 -acfbc4080ea2/202007- IFC-GBV -
COVID+D.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=ndOei13  
 
44 https://www.world -psi.org/en/barbados -pilot- study- gender -based -violence -public -sector  acces sed August 15th, 2022  
45 ibid


---
*Page 223*
---

 
45 
 is important beca use construction sites can become spaces where female workers, people 
with diverse gender identities and those who live or work in the vicinity are 
victimized46. SGBV must be prevented to ensure wellbeing of vulnerable groups in 
project vicinity.  Similarly , if not intentionally addressed, sexual and gender -based 
violence can easily be ignored47. Women working in traditionally male -dominated 
contexts, in isolated workspaces, or in occupations or shifts in which they constitute a 
small minority may be at incr eased risk of SGBV48.  
The Project’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment puts forward that  
“Section 154 of Barbados law is implicit about Sexual Exploitation, 
Abuse, and Harassment (SEAH) but covers all aspects. By interpretation, 
it articulates that the government will not tolerate SEAH in any form. This 
is also the commitment CCCCC and GCF. Therefore, stringent policies 
and safeguards are instituted at all levels of projects funded by CCCCC 
and the GCF. In instances where it has been  determined that a person has 
been a victim of SEAH the AE/IE/IA will consult and work with the 
relevant government ministry, department, or NGO to ensure that the victim is place at a safe location and protected from further SEAH”.   
The project must also be cognizant that while prevention of SGBV is the most effective 
strategy,  it must also  provide an avenue for victims of SGBV to complain and to receive 
redress for their victimization. Therefore, the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism must 
be sufficien tly responsive to allow for internal and external filing of SGBV and SEAH 
related complaints.  
3.1.6 Barbados Agriculture Sector -Gender, Climate Change and Water 
      
The 3R -CReWs Project identifies that agriculture continues to compete with other sectors  
for scarce resources such as water, land, labour and capital49.  With the GOB’s increased 
call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of farming 
as a response to climate change, there is identified need for greater water ava ilability, for 
irrigation purposes. The Project conceptualizes that this should lead to improved food 
security and health and well -being of the population. The outputs of Component four ( 4) 
are critical to social acceptance and  to spur demand. The component target s farmers and 
communities. In particular, the development of incentive programme and public 
awareness. During consultations with farmers, including with the Association of Women 
in Agriculture, there was overwhelming conse nsus that Farmers are supportive of the use 
of treated wastewater.  According to the Baseline study for the project, farmers have been 
experiencing the impact of prolonged dry periods. This has resulted in loss of income.  
 
46 https://atalayar.com/en/blog/infrastructure -works -without- gender -based -violence  access August 15th, 2022  
47 https://blogs.iadb.org/sostenibilidad/en/the -many -faces -of-sexual -and-gender -based -violence -in-development -projects/ 
48 https://blogs.iadb.org/sostenibilidad/en/the -many -faces -of-sexual -and-gender -based -violence -in-development -projects/ 
49 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal - 3R-CReWs Project, 2021


---
*Page 224*
---

 
46 
 Farmers were equally cited as see ing benefits of nutrients in the water for the crop.  
Farmers, particularly small farmers, are significantly impacted by both increased 
production costs and lacking rainfall for rainfed crops50. Further to this point, an article 
was published recently in t he Barbados Advocate (2020), pleading with the government 
to give farmers financial support for their water bills. Specifically, Mr. James Paul, the Chief Executive Officer of the Barbados Agricultural Society, expressed concern for farmers, explaining tha t the garbage and sewage contribution, imposed through BWA 
utility bill, has resulted in a spike in agriculture operational costs (Barbados Advocate 2020). This, in combination with the increase in cost for irrigation, profit decrease from 
lost crops, plac es farmers and the agricultural industry at a heightened risk.  
Agriculture is more than a job for many women in the Caribbean. Women  engage in 
subsistence agriculture to support their families, while men are more likely to engage in cash crop production
51. The CGA puts forward that “although much of subsistence 
agriculture is not captured in employment or GDP statistics and is carried out by the so-
called ‘economically inactive’ population, it is nevertheless a critical contributor to the 
livelihoods of poorer people and is also important for food security”. Many of the small 
subsistence plots and smallest farms in Barbados are female owned. Larger farms tend to 
be owned by males. Close to 80% of all farms in Barbados are owned by men (79.7%)52.  
The UNWOME N’s 2017 gender analysis of employment in six (6) CARICOM countries 
provided data on share of women’s employment in a number of standardized occupations 
in Barbados. The Analysis utilised the ILO’s International Standard Classification of 
Occupations (ISCO ) definition “a set of tasks and duties performed, or meant to be 
performed, by one person, including for an employer or in self -employment”, in the 
classification and computation of the share of women’s participation in occupational categories. Correspondingly, the  analysis found that men are more likely than women to 
be employed in agriculture in Countries like Barbados, although this disparity is not as glaring as in other CARICOM countries like Jamaica and Guyana.  
    Figure 2: Share of women and Men by Occupation in Six Caribbean Countries  
 
 
50 https://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/  
51 CGA Barbados, 2016  
52 Ibid.


---
*Page 225*
---

 
47 
  
     Source: Taken from Status of Women and Men Report: A Gender Analysis of Labour 
Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six Caribbean Countries, UNwomen, 2017  
 
Women’s non- ownership of resources, like land and proof of formal work, that could be 
used for collat eral constrains their access to credit for agriculture and also for productive 
work in other sectors. For some women, they rely on a male relative with collateral to 
apply on their behalf, others, like unmarried women, are not able to do so53.  Facilities that 
allow for farmers to access credit to improve irrigation or access to reclaimed water should 
therefore be aware of barriers that women often face to formally access finance for 
upgrade to their agricultural production.  
 
The Association of Women in Agr iculture in Barbados was consulted as part of larger 
stakeholder engagement process during the development of this 3R -CReWS Project. This 
representative group is seen as a critical stakeholder for the project in soliciting further 
acceptance of women farme rs of use and reuse of wastewater and by -products . Similarly, 
this group is identified as a conduit for sharing information and opportunities with women 
farmers so that they can benefit from access to information on use of reclaimed water, but 
also access to reclaimed water for irrigation.   
           
3.1.7 Ba rbados Fi sheries Sector - Gen der, Climate  Cha nge and Water  
A case study undertaken  by the Gend er in Fisheries Team and UWI Centre for Resource 
Management  and Environmental Studies as part of the 2014 Barbados Green Economy 
Scoping Study for the GOB  argued that the fishing sector is an important water user. The 
 
53 Ibid.


---
*Page 226*
---

 
48 
 activities of the fisheries sector along with  the value change  would be significantly 
affected  by any changes in water  quantity and qual ity. The main findings of the study were: 
 
3.1.2.1  In Barbado s, fisheries  have been  an important  part of the national economy 
and cultu re from the earliest recorded times; 
3.1.2.2  Men  typically dominate t he harvest sector in Caribbean  smal l-scale fisheries 
while women play a critical role in the post-harvest sector in fish processing and 
trade, and in ancillary activities, such  as financing;  
3.1.2.3  Post-harvest processing activities consume  and waste large  quantities of water;  
and 
 
3.1.2.4  The fisheries sector provides vital benefits  to society and is also an important  water 
user. 
 
Climate change presents key challenges for small -scale fisheries and mariculture and is 
projected to have significant impacts on the lives of people dependent on these activities. 
Changes in ocean temperature and chemistry are already affecting the distribution and 
abundance of marine organisms. The precise magnitude of future impacts of climate change 
on fisheries, in particular small- scale fisheries, are still poorly understood, since they involve  
numerous interactions with fragile and complex ecosystems that are often already affected by 
other stressors such as overfishing or pollution54. Assessing and managing risks to increase 
resilience and decrease poverty, inequality, and food insecurity are thus a priority of 
international cooperation55.  
 
3.1.8 Non -Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re -use 
 
The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer 
yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050. Approximately 57 Mm3/yr is extracted from 
groundwater resources for domestic potable water distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/yr 
is extracted for agricultural irrigation n56. The exact amount of water extracted by agriculture 
is much higher as most points  of extraction are un -metered private wells. A study on Non-
Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re -use: Analysis of Alternatives, which was 
published in May 2021. The study identified that   wastewater that is not safe for drinking 
but can be r ecycled or reclaimed for specific non -potable purposes. The study examined 
three forms of non - potable water namely; a) stormwater which is water from precipitation 
such as rain; b) greywater which is wastewater generated in households or office buildings from sinks, showers, baths, washing machines or dishwashers. It is easy to treat and reuse 
 
54 Climate change and small -scale fisheries: A climate risk management perspective for the Caribbean 17 December 2021 -  
https://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/climate -change -and-small -scale -fisheries -climate -risk-management -perspective -caribbean  
55 Ibid 
56 Integrated Sustainability (2021). Feasibility Study See Section 1.1.2


---
*Page 227*
---

 
49 
 greywater for the purposes of flushing toilets, landscaping, crop irrigation and other non-
potable uses; and c) blackwater which is wastewater generated from toilets  and contains 
pathogens such as faeces, urine water and toilet paper from flushed toilets. The paper 
identified at least three ways to tackle the issue of water scarcity such as; a) increase water 
rates, to encourage less water wastage; b) offer subsidies to deprived and vulnerable groups 
of the society; and c) promote collaboration between public and private sectors to develop 
innovative public -private partnership project models for the generation of water.  
It is under stood that approximately  8% of the properties in Barbado s are connected  
to a wastewater collecti on system that directs their sewage to a wast ewater  treatmen t 
plant. This mean s that appr oximately 92% of the population, that are not connected, use 
some form of on-site wastewat er disposal and treatmen t system. Most of these  low-
income persons compr ise of women  and vulnerable groups.  
It is recognized that the BWA, and the GOB, are curre ntly initiating a project to develop 
more wastewater collection and treatment systems,  especially in Zone A areas that are 
located  over  sensitive aquifer and groun dwater well abstract ion locat ions. This initiative will 
most likely positively impact so me of the vulnerable com munities, including low-income  
households and women in particular .  
Reuse of wastewater produced by the Project should increase the water supply and 
consequently minimize the negative impact of climate change on women and vulnerable 
groups with respect to social and economic issues. Therefore, Women and other vulnerable 
groups stand to benefit from the recycling and reuse of reclaimed water because this wi ll be 
contr ibuting to a reduction in w ater scarci ty and make  more  quantit ies of water available to 
women  as the larger  consumers of water domestically .  
While the potential benefit to women and vulnerable groups is noted, it is also important to 
note the financial , informational, and unpaid work barriers that may impede women heads 
of households and women led enterprises, including those  in agriculture from benefiti ng 
equally from access to  reclaimed water. The  3R-CReWS Project cannot work on the 
assumption that increased connections automatically translate to increased access. Barriers 
that impede payment for wastewater services at the domestic level and connection to 
services that allow for use of reclaimed water for small business, including small farmers is 
an important consideration in costing wastewater service provision and also in determining 
the parameters for the RAFF support. Wastewater Strategies, Operatio nal plans and policies 
must equally consider these barriers to sustained access to services by vulnerable groups.  
 
Alth ough wastewater  is not always  at the top of the agenda when discussing gender 
issues, women are more likely to be affected  by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse, and 
poor management  than  men becau se they are more in direct contact with food, faeces, 
childcare, and healthcare.  
There are concerns about the amoun t of pesticide, hormones, med ication, and chemicals 
in wastewater which could seriously affect the health of all gende rs (Witme r, 2017) .


---
*Page 228*
---

 
50 
 3.1.9  Disaggregated Data for Wastewater  
Other gender related issues associated with the wastewater sector are the absence of 
adequate sex disaggregated data.  At both the national and international levels, there is a 
lack of sex -disaggregated data on water and sanitation. “ As early as 1995, the Beijing 
Declaration called on international organizations, NGOs and the private sector to 
develop ‘gender -sensitive databases, information and monitoring systems’ on ‘the 
impact on women of environmental and natural resource degradation, deriving from, 
inter alia, unsustainable production and consumption patterns, drought, poor quality 
water, global warming, desertification, sea -level rise […] ”.57 This absence of data 
results in a gap in service delivery and in ensuring equitable access to water and 
sanitation services.  This gap was demonstrable during the development of this Gender 
Assessment. Based on roles performed by men and women, and resources accessible to 
them, the analysis has hypothesized that in the d omestic sphere, the availability of 
affordable reclaimed wastewater can be beneficial for women in their performance of care roles and may lessen the load of their double duty as breadwinners and as carers. 
The dearth of research and data on  the wastewater sector, and more specifically, the 
absence of sex -disaggregated data, makes it difficult to present strong evidence- based  
actions. 
 
3.1.10 Social Impact of Upgrading Wastewater Systems  
It is recognized that a full ESIA was developed for this Project. As such, this section is meant 
to highlight some of the high-level issues related to how this Project may  impact  the publ ic, 
but further details should be drawn from the full ESIA  and ESMP. 
SIDS generally lack the capaci ty to establish and utilize legal  and adm inistrative  framew orks 
that de fine the responsibilities for the various government departments  with  a mandate to 
design and execute projects having a need  for environmental impact  and social asses sment. 
The discharge  of primary  treated  wastewater  into the ocean has the potential to cause 
marine envi ronment and health problems  resulting in a negative  impact  on citizens, tourism,  
and the economy in Barbado s. 
Upgradi ng the wastewater systems also has several positive impacts,  such as 
improved wastewater collectio n, while higher treat ment should result in impr oved health 
conditions for the people especially women and other vulnerab le groups. Reducing the 
amount of wastewat er discharged into the ocean should also have a positive effect on 
the marine environment  that relates to tourism as the main  economic sector. “An increase 
in potable water security by eliminating potable water demands for applications that can use 
non- potable reclaimed water, as well as the increased use of reclaimed water would also 
allow the agricultural industry to be more resilient to the impac ts of climate  change”58. 
 
57 United Nations. (1995). Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Op. cit. As cited in 3 Oxfam, 2020 Achieving 
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 6  
58 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal - 3R-CReWs Project, 2021


---
*Page 229*
---

 
51 
 If energy can be generated from the waste, this helps the country’s 2030 renewable 
energy goals, that should lead to a better quality of life for all citizens of Barbados. Also, 
if farmers benefit from using reclaimed water, that contains nutrients as fertilizer, for 
irrigation, then farmers, of all genders, could lower operating costs. Finally, if reclaimed 
water (from the treatment plants) is used to recharge the aquifer, then this provides more 
water reliability to all the people in this country - which helps businesses, and residents 
and tourists. This would provide farmers with a more reliable water source, as the level 
of water in the wells are often negatively impacted during droughts.  
There are many social bene fits to be derived  from the implem entation of this Project 
including short-term  employment  during the prepara tory and construction phases of the 
project  as part of efforts to upgra de the wastewater systems in Barba dos. It will also allow 
for the integra tion of gender  across all adaptat ion and mitigation initiatives,  build  lo ng-
term  partnersh ips among stakeh olders and impr ove capaci ty building and research  for 
informed climate  action and training for BWA employ ees (Tortz et al., 2018). In this regard  
women stand  a great  opportunity to be included in the impl ementati on of the project to 
addr ess issues of concern  to them because  there are many more men emp loyed in the 
wastewater  sector. 
Educat ing the publ ic on the positive social impacts of this Project is recommended by 
inviting the public, like schools, to visit the Project and gain first-hand know ledge of the 
positive activities.  Every effort should be made to avoid discrimination on the Project as 
noted by (Husbands and Dey, 2002) . A lack of commu nication and negative  media 
coverage could affect the outcomes of the project (Husbands  and Dey, 2002) . One of the 
prereq uisites for the Project success are good  apprais al processes in conjunction with 
man ageme nt and/ or Contractors who possess the necess ary motivation. 
 
 
3.2 Stakeholder  Mapping   
The BWA Wastewater Division, is the primary  authority with  the responsibility to provide 
potable  water  and manage  the collection, treatment, and disposal process of wastewater in 
Barbados (Isaacs, 2017). The Gender mapping identified individuals  or orga nizations  with  
an interest  or concern about the Project.  These individuals or organizations, as outlined 
within the Projects’  Stakeholder Engagement  report, are  categ orized  as internal and 
exter nal stakeholders of the Project. 
3.2.1 Internal Stakeho lders  
The internal stakeholders include all persons operating within the BWA, who have a vested  
interest in the outcome of the Project. They contribute to the internal functions of the 
authority and affect its overall performanc e. The key internal stakeholders include the 
Board of Directors which is responsible for appr oving the strategic and operatio nal pla ns, 
programs,  projects along with  their budget s, monitor implementati on, evaluate, and


---
*Page 230*
---

 
52 
 appr ove reports. Other internal stakeholders  include the management  and suppo rt staff of 
the BWA Wastewater Division which is responsible for developing the annual work plans 
and budget s, impleme nt appr oved activities and reporting on progress.  The BWA also reports 
directly to the Ministry  of Transport, Works, and Water Resources. 
Mappi ng of the internal stakeholders revealed that there is a gender imbala nce in the 
ten- member  Board  with  eighty  perc ent of directors being men and twenty  percent women. 
Therefore,  the Board  decisions relating to policy, oversight, and appr oval of Project plans, 
budgets  and reports are influenc ed by men  more than  woman. Similarly, as highlighted 
in Section 2, there  is a gender gap of more men  and women  performing technical  
functions at the BWA management  level.  
 
3.2.2 External  Stakeholders  
In Accordance with the Project’s Stakeholder Engagement  Plan, t he 3R-CReWS Project’s  
external stakeholders include all persons or organizations  with  a vested interest  in the 
outc ome of the project but operate outside of the BWA. On the one hand,  they express 
opinions on the operati ons of the BWA and in this way can influence its performance 
while on the other  hand, they can be influenced by the work and the performance of the 
Authority. 
At the national level, decisions  relating to wast ewater  policy and legislation  are made  
by the Parliamen t and the Executive. Therefo re, the mappi ng of key exter nal 
stakeholders covered parliamentary repre sentatives,  senators, and ministers. Mappi ng of 
the exter nal stakeholders reveal ed that at the national level, there  is a 60% gender gap 
among the 30 parliamentarians, a 14%  gend er gap among the 21 senat ors, and a 60% 
gender gap amon g the 30 Cabinet M inisters. Alth ough it  should be stated that not all 
ministries  have direct influence or involvement over this Project. To see the full list of 
parliamentarian s that are involved in this project (including a measure of their involvement 
in this Project), refer to Table B in the Stakeholder Engageme nt report. Consequently, 
decisions taken by the political  directorate and the Cabi net of Ministers  involved in this 
Project are influenced by men. 
Table G: below,  shows the gender distribut ion of the members of the Legislature and 
Executive  branc hes of the Government  of Barba dos. 59 
 
Table G.        Gender  Distribution and Gap of the Barbados Legislature and Executive  
Institution Total Male Female  
House of Assembly     
Government Parliamentarian  29 23 or 77% 6 or 20% 
Opposition Parliamentarian 01 1 or 3% - 
Total 30 24 or 80% 6 or 20% 
 
59 htpps:// www.barbadosparliament.com


---
*Page 231*
---

 
53 
 The Sena te    
Government Senator 12 7 or 58% 5 or 46% 
Indepe ndent Senator 7 4 or 57% 3 or 33% 
Opposition Senator 2 1 or 5% 1 or 11% 
Total 21 12 or 57% 9 or 43% 
The Cabinet    
Cabi net Minister* 30 24 or 80% 6 or 20% 
*It is noted that Barbados appointed its first female Prime Minister to head  the Government in 2018 and was re -
elected in 2022.   
There are several other important external  stakeholder organizations in the publ ic sector, 
the private  sector, and the civil society sector. The country first female Prime Minister  was 
elected to a second term in 2022.  Additionally, the country has  its second female Governor 
General. In addition to social assistance, the Government places strong emphasis on 
facilitating and supporting women entrepreneurship and business development as one way 
of responding to rising levels of unemployment, retrenchm ent and to assist with the 
economy’s recovery. Included are incentives for micro and small businesses such as grants, 
loans, technical assistance.60 
 
3.2.3 Stakeholder  Feedback   
As part of Stakeholder Engagement process, a questionnaire was administered to key 
stakeholders in Government Ministries, the private sector, community associations, the University of the West Indies Gender Studies Department and NGOs. In total, the 
survey was sent by email to 49 key stakeholders. W ith only 24 responding. Table  H 
presents the disaggregated data on a survey among stakeholders to obtain their views 
on the questions relating to climate change and wastewater collection and treatment in 
Barbados. A comparison is made regarding the views e xpressed by men and women to 
identify similarities or differences between the genders. T he acronyms used are shown 
at the bottom of this table for quick reference.  
Table H  Results from key Stakeholder Surveys  
 
No. Questions  Women’s  Response % Men’s Respo nse % 
Q1 Is your home or business  connected  to a sewer 
and waste/water treatment plant? Y:43 N:57 Y:43  N: 57 
Q2 Do the current  wastewa ter collection systems 
and treatmen t plants adequately  protect the 
environment?  Y:43 N:57 Y:43  N:  57 
Q3 Does the general pract ice of discharging 
untreat ed wastewater to the ground protect 
the island  ground water quality?  Y:29 N:71 Y: 71 N: 29 
 
60 2021 Barbados NDC Update – July 2021


---
*Page 232*
---

 
54 
 Q4 All homes,  offices, businesses and industries  
should be connected  to a sewer  and 
wastewater treat ment plant?  Ag:43 D:57  Ag: 86 D:14  
Q5 How concerned are you that climate  change  
could reduce the quantity of drinking water  
available?  VC:85 MC: 15 VC:58 MC:  42 
Q6 How concerned are you that climate  change  
could reduce the quality of drinking water?  MC: 57 NC: 43 VC:57 MC:43 
Q7 How concerned are you that climate  change  
could increase  the cost of drinking water?  VC: 42 SC:57  VC:86 SC:14 
Q8 How concerned are you that climate  change  
could increase  the cost of wastewater  
collection and treatmen t? VC: 71 NC:29  VC:43  NC:57 
Q9 How concerned are you that decreased  
drinking water availability could affect 
Barbad os’ economy? MC: 86 SC:14  MC:71 SC:29  
Q10 How concerned are you that lack of sewa ge 
collection and treatment could  affect 
Barbad os’ economy? MC: 57 SC:43  MC:  71 SC:29 
Q11 Do you think wastewater treatment benefits the 
environment?  AL: 86 MoC:1 
4 AL:71 MOC :29 
Q12 How important do you think it is for the 
governme nt to invest more money to increase 
water  supply?  VI: 85 Y:29  VI:71  Y:29  
Q13 How important do you think it is for the 
governme nt to invest more money to provide 
wastewater collection and treatme nt? VI: 71 Y: 29 VI:71 Y:29 
Q14 How concerned are you about using reclaimed 
treated  wastewater to satisfy non potable  (eg. 
Irrigati on) water deman ds? MC: 14 NC:71 MC: 29 NC:71 
Q15 How concerned are you about using highly 
treated  reclaimed  water to rech arge 
groundwater? HC: 14 NC: 86 HC:14  NC:86  
Q16 There are inadeq uate government standards 
and regulations in place to safely  enable  
reclaimed water to be used to satisfy  non- 
potable water demands.  Ag: 29 D:  71 Ag:  14 D:   86 
Q17 How much in favor are you of implementing 
treatment technologies  to recover water, 
energy  and nutrients for wastewa ter? Ag: 71 D: 29 Ag:  1
4


---
*Page 233*
---

 
55 
 Q18 For the following statem ent please  indicate 
how strongly  you agree or disagree  with  it? 
(Only BWA custome rs connected  to the 
sewer  should pay for the cost of wastewater 
collection and treatmen t) Ag: 57 D: 43 Ag:  7
1 
 
*Acronyms  
 
Y: Yes/ N: No VC: Very 
Concerned SC: 
Somewhat 
 NC: Not 
Concerne
 VI: Very 
Impor tan
 Ag. Agree 
D: Disagree MC: Much 
Concerne
 MoC: 
Moderately 
 HC: 
Highly 
 AL: A lot 
 
The survey demonstrated that the  opinions of men and women stakeholders who responded 
varied  on the effects of climate change  related to the wast ewater  managemen t system 
in Barbad os. Men and women shared similar views on the numbers and adequacy of sewer 
connection to treatment plants as a protection to the environment, reduction of quality of 
water through climate change, economic impact, benefits of wastewater to the 
environment, government greater investment to increase water supply and treatment, use 
of reclaimed treated wastewater for irrigation, inadequate government standards and 
regulations to enable reclaimed water to be used for non- portable water and agreed to 
recover water, energy and nutrients from wastewater.  These views reflect a lack of 
understanding of the extent of the wastewater problem in the country. This calls for greater 
public education in this regard.  
All respondents expressed concern that climate change would affect the quantity of 
drinking water with 85% of women and 58% of men rated as very concerned.  This is 
reflective of the statistical data showing that in general, women engage i n more water 
related tasks within the household, such as cooking, cleaning, and washing, and therefore 
tend to report greater amounts of water usage (Suchorski, 2009). 78.5% of respondents 
expressed concern that climate change could reduce the quality of d rinking water, 
although the responses show that women are on the two extremes of this response with 57% of women very concerned, while the remaining 43% are not concerned about 
drinking water quality. At the community level, households are concerned with t he impact 
of water scarcity, including availability of quantity and quality water to households, 
interruptions in water supply, costs associated with improved wastewater collection 
systems, and environmental impacts of using wastewater. With the high numbe r of female -
led households, and given that women, children and elders are primary users of water, a concerted effort to address these concerns from a gendered and rights -based approach is 
paramount. Strengthened capacities of BWA technical and administrati ve staff on 
application of gender -sensitive/responsive approach to implementation would seek to 
mitigate the concerns of the primary water users, including other vulnerable groups.       
All respondents felt that the impacts of climate change would affect the cost of drinking


---
*Page 234*
---

 
56 
 water in Barbados with 64% expressing they are very concerned (33% females, 67% 
males). It is important to note, that of the survey respondent s, 43% of females and males 
respectively, indicated that they are connected to a sewer and/or wastewater collection 
plant. These, respondents felt that the current system adequately protects the environment 
and felt that all homes should be connected to a sewer and/or wastewater col lection plant.  
More men than women agreed all homes, offices and businesses should be connected to a 
sewer treatment plant. However, more women are of the view that only BWA customers 
connected to sewer should pay for the cost of wastewater collection treatment plant.  
Neither men nor women appear to be concerned about using highly treated reclaimed 
water/wastewater to satisfy non portable water demands like irrigation. The reaction is 
positive and project strategies can capitalize on this general acceptance to increase 
connection to waste water treatment systems and eventual  non- potable  use of reclaimed 
water . 
In summary, there are many issues where both men and women share similar views on 
wastewater collection and treatment among the stakeholders in Barbad os. There are, 
however, instances where there are differences in the views of men and women, especially 
in the area of discharging untreated wastewater to the ground. Another area where men 
appear to differ from women is in the area of willingness to pay f or wastewater 
improvement. Men are seemingly more concerned with paying for wastewater 
improvement. Women typically need more water during their daily activities and might 
be willing to pay more to satisfy their needs.  
  Willingness to Pay  
A Limited Willingness to Pay Survey was initiated in 2021 where 75 individuals (19 
females, 56 males) participated. All respondents indicated that they were representing 
households (there were  no business responses). The administration of this survey was 
halted as GOB requested a hold on the process  due to unfavourable economic conditions . 
Trends  were examined from this data and are included in the 3R -CReWs Project 
Feasibility Study. From the information gleaned, the data  collected can provide some  
perspectiv e on the impact of cost and willingness to pay for upgrades to the current system 
to address gaps in wastewater collection and treatment.  45% of respondents (8:4.75 male 
to female) provided responses  regarding increasing the monthly costs for upgrading th e 
wastewater management system in Barbados including for planning, construction, 
operation and maintenance. The average cost respondents were willing to pay was BDS 
$15.94 monthly. The data showed no glaring differences in women’s and men’s 
willingness to pay. A gendered analysis of cost must take account for the wage gap 
between males and females, especially considering the 8:4.75 male/female ratio in the 
willingness to pay survey. Similarly, it is important to emphasize that the findings of the willingnes s to pay survey does not bare statistical significance given its limited number of 
respondents relative to the population of  Barbados . Therefore, strategies to expand 
connectivity to treatment systems must ensure prior, gender responsive consultations with  
male and female headed households and must document their views whether divergent or


---
*Page 235*
---

 
57 
 similar. The UWI IGDS put forward in a KII that the Welfare  Departmen t periodically 
makes provisions to supply water to those who can’t afford to pay their water bills. The bills 
have  doubled recently as a levy for wastewater was added now.  Managemen t is now 
included on the water  and wast ewater bill. It was confirmed  that the minimum charge  is now 
($37.5)  United States dollars per month which includes  solid waste.  
Consistent with survey issued to key stakeholders, 75% of respondents agreed that 
Barbados was experiencing a shortage of clean water. While 93% felt that Barbados would 
benefit from improved wastewater management. UWI -IGDS identified that t here are 
several house holds that do not have  flushable toilets and some people  are squatters making 
sanitatio n a big issue. There are still several people who use pit latrines.  
The UWI -IGDS opined in a KII that using reclaimed water may be difficult for people 
to accept. It might be a hard sell for many. Recently several blue pipes were replaced 
by black pipes. Although the use factor was identical a lot of people resisted becaus e 
they thought the black pipes were giving dirtier water. Interestingly the limited 
Willingness to Pay survey revealed that 82.8% of respondents agreed that if wastewater 
was treated to the highest level, it could be distributed in a pipe system for uses other than 
drinking, including watering household gardens (91%) and household toilet flushing 
(95%). Of note is that only 46% agreed that this type of water is useful for laundry.  There 
was no noticeable divergence in views of men and women. It remain s important however 
that the project utilized gender sensitive communication campaign to address reservations 
that men and women may have regarding the use of wastewater for non- potable purposes.


---
*Page 236*
---

 
58 
  
Table I  Survey Responses  on Awareness of Wastewater  System  Improvement  
Needs  and Cost  
No. Questio ns Responses  Participants  
% Gender 
Repon se
 1 Where does wastewater  
go when it leaves your 
hom e? -Into a septic tank or 
hole/well (that does not 
connect to a soak- away 
field)  
-Into a septic tank or 
hole/well that connects to a soak -away field 
(that soaks into the ground)  
- Other
 37%  of 62 =23 
  
 
 
21%  of 62=13
 
 
 
42%  of 62=26 M=13, 
F=10   
 
 
 
 
M=7, F=6  
 
M=14, F=12  
2 How often is water supply  
interr upted?  -Rarely once or twice 
for the year 
-Only a few times per 
year 
-Other 38%o f60=23 
 
35%  of 60=21 
27%  of 60=16 M=13, 
F=10   
 
M=12, 
F=09  
 
 3 How satisfied are you with 
the water flow? -Satisfied 
-Neutral/Unsure  
-Dissatisfied  53%  of 58=31 
29%  of 58=16 
18%  of 60=11 M=17, 
F=14  M=09 
F=07  M=06 
 4 Aware  of Water 
conditions Aware  
Not aware 66%  of 60=38 
34%  of 60=20 M=21, 
F=17  
 
 5 Water  aspects  that are 
very important -Very  important  
-Not important 93%  of 57=53 
7% of 57=4 M=29, 
F=24  
M02  
 6 Average  amount  
from respondents Willingness to pay $15.94 
Bds monthly 
Willingness to pay below 
$15.94  Bds monthly 100%  of 34=34 
 
67%  of 34=23 M=19, 
F=15   
 
M=13, 
 7 Maximum  in 
additional amount Willingness to pay above 
$15.94  Bds monthly 33%  of 34=11 M=06 =05 
8 Do you 
agree/ disagree  with 
these statemen ts: 
-Barba dos has a 
shortage of avail able 
clean Water 
-Discharging 
wastewater  into sea 
  
    
 
   
    
  
 
Average agreed  84% 
of total responses 
Average Neutral 14%, 
of total responses 
Average Disagree 2%, 
of total responses  
 
84%  of 56=47 
 14%  of 56=8
 
 2% of 56=2
  
 
M=26, 
F=21   
 
M=04F=0 
M=01, 
F=01


---
*Page 237*
---

 
59 
 9 Use of treated 
wast ewater for non-
drinking purpo ses Use of 
wastewa ter for crops Appr ove 82%, of
 total 
responses 
Neutral  11%, of total 
responses 
Disappr ove 7%, of total  
responses 82%  of 56=46 
11%  of 56=6 
7% of 56=4 M=25, 
F=21  
M=03, 
F=03  
M=02, 
F=02  
 
 
Ability to Pay  
 
Labour force participation is lower among women than men, but similar percentages are 
classified as unemployed (8%). The difference in labour force participation is accounted for 
by the consistently higher participation of men in formal employment and of w omen in the 
so-called ‘economically inactive’ population61. The CGA identified the stratification of 
labour based on sex. Men and women are mostly economically active in distinct work areas, 
albeit having some areas of congruence.  This  may account for gen der wage gap identified 
to be 18.9% (average male wage 18.9% higher than average female wage). Men are mostly 
employed in the areas of construction, mining and quarrying; wholesale and retail; 
transportation and storage; and public administration and defence. The largest numbers of 
female employees are in wholesale and retail; accommodation and food services (tourism); 
health and social work; education; and public administration and defence.   
 
A UN women study (2017) in six Caribbean countries, including Barbados found that in all 
countries, the rate of employment increases with increasing education. The differences in 
employment vis a vis educational level was largest for women in St. Lucia and Barbados, 
where fewer than a fifth of w omen with primary education are employed as against 
approximately seven in every ten women with tertiary education. In Barbados only 19% of women and 33% of  men respectively with a primary education were employed compared to 
69% of women and 72% of men wit h a tertiary education being employed
62. The 2017 study 
revealed a constant pattern across countries is that the employment rate is lower for women 
than men at each of the three levels of education. The study put forward that “The gender 
difference in this respect tends to be smaller for those with tertiary education than for those 
with only primary education. Given that women tend to be more highly educated than men 
in these six countries, the lower employment rates for women suggest the economy is not 
taking full advantage of the available human resources. Conversely, many women are not 
reaping the full potential".  
 
In addition, studies have identified that poverty is concentrated among households headed by women, which account for 47.5% of all households. The rate of poverty in female -headed 
households is 19.4%, compared with 11.5% in male -headed households and 15% in all 
 
61   Country Gender Assessment (CGA) Barbados – Caribbean Development Bank, January 2016  
62 A Gender Analysis of Labour Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six CARICOM Member States - 
STATUS OF WOMEN AND MEN  REPORT -PRODUcTive EMPlOyMENT AND DEcENT WORk FOR All, UNWomen, 2017


---
*Page 238*
---

 
60 
 households. Poor female -headed households also have the highest dependency ratio, with 
74.8% non- earners per household compared with 68.6% in poor male -headed households 
and 49.9% in the total population63. The UWI -IGDS confirms  that single women  head 57% 
of house holds in Barbados.  Among the households, t hese include migrant  women caring for 
critically ill relat ives or those with  disabil ities64. 
To this end, strategies for expanding access to sewage treatment systems and associated 
cost, need not only take into account male and female headed household differences but 
should also consider the educational level of household heads  in determining the ability 
to pay for services . Consideration of Gender intersectionality in this regard is important 
and may serve to inform the articulation of national wastewater strategies, legislation and 
RAFF.  
   
 
FINDINGS   
 
The Gender  Impact Assessmen t is the third part of the gender analysis process model 
which involved determining the gendered needs  of the wastewater sector and services 
as well  as an assessment of the impacts (main/ancillary), risk perc eption,  and equality 
of distribution of the Project benefits.  Using the GCF ’s Gender  Assessment templ ate, the 
results of the gender  analysis have been  orga nized in a man ner to respond to five key 
questions; What is the context? Who does what? Who has what?  Who decides? and Who 
bene fits? Details of responses received  are presented  unde r separat e headings in the sub-
sections that follow. 
4.1 Gender Context  
The GOB seeks to develop and implem ent this climate resilience wastewater systems 
Project to address  several national development challenges facing the country. Some of 
the factors that are regarded as relevant to the Project include: 
 
 Citizens of Barbado s generally experi ence limited access to the wastewater collection 
and treatment  facilities of the BWA; 
 The absen ce of an appr oved national  gender policy and lack of provisions in 
wastewater legisl ation current ly in force makes it imperative  for the GOB  to intensify 
efforts to create a more enabl ing legal  environment  for implementati on of the project. 
Moreover, the project provides an opportunity for update of the wastewater legislation 
and masterplan in a gender responsive manner that includes meaningful  consultation 
with women and women’s representative groups ; 
 The Project presents an opportunity to expand the availability of sex- disaggregated 
data for water and sanitation services. The increased availability of data may help 
 
63 Country Gender Assessment (CGA) Barbados –  Caribbean Development Bank,  January 2016  
64 KII- UWI IGDS


---
*Page 239*
---

 
61 
 close policy and practice ga ps in providing equitable access to water services;  
 The BWA and other public agenc ies with mandates to provide wastewater  services 
to citizens are expe cted to give  due consideration to addre ss the social, political, and 
economic problems that citizens face and to collaborate with each  other to resolve 
them; 
 Authorities operating in the wastewater  sector, such as the BWA, have a 
responsibility to consult citizens, as key stakeholders, on issues that affect  them to 
ensure that national wastewater policies are aligned to the UN-SDGs. More, 
specifically, these institutions are also expect ed to highlight SDG-5 by adopting 
appr opriate strategi es and plans which promotes gender  equa lity in the wastewat er 
sector; 
 Given  that climate  change impacts  on the wastewater sector is a serious challenge  
to national development  in Barbado s, it is imperative  that efforts to improve 
wastew ater management  focus on initiatives to achieve more sustainable and 
equitable services. It is also important  for the Project to identify the various causes of 
vulnerabi lity and take steps to build on the diverse knowledge  and capaci ties within 
the communities/households that can be used to make wastewater services more 
resilient to climate-related shocks and risks.; 
 Citizens would apprec iate if the Project wou ld include governing structures and 
operating mech anisms  to foster  gender sensitive s takeh older participation in 
the design, implementation, and evalua tion of the Project. The project should refrain 
from operating under the assumption that initial connection to wastewater services 
immediately translates to benefits for more women than men. It is important to 
consider sustainability of access by reviewing wastewater costing  structure and 
incentive programmes.  
 Stakeholders should also be offered opportunities to better understanding the gender 
roles and power relations among different men and women involved the Project. An 
examination of the different roles, rights, needs, a nd opportunities of men and women, 
boys, and girls will help provide guidance on measures required to promote the gender 
equality using relevant gender entry points, policies, and identify opportunities for 
enhancing gender equality within the project  
 Barbados has made recognizable Human Development gains and has made 
improvements in legislation that tend to gender equality. However, there remains 
inequities. Linked to those, is the unequal power relationships often detrimental to the 
promotion and prot ection of women and girls. The prevalence of SGBV, though 
higher in intimate partner relationships is still present outside of the private sphere. Therefore, projects such as these need to promote a preventative approach to SGBV. 
This includes zero toleran ce policy and code of conduct for project staff and staff 
interacting with communities. I n addition,  there has to be gender responsive complaint


---
*Page 240*
---

 
62 
 mechanisms that prove useful for victims of SGBV, if prevention is not achieved. 
Gender sensitivity training is  useful as well in addressing SGBV risks, however these 
are to be made mandatory to staff based on roles and functions.  
 As an emp loyer, the BWA should also seek  to provide a non-discriminatory 
working environment that facilitates  gende r-balance in appo intments and gender 
sensitivity in the decisions  and actio ns of the project staff.  The BWA also seeks to 
offer a safe working environment for its manageri al, technical , and adm inistrative  
staff and those assigned to the Project; and 
 The project provides key stakeholders with a unique opportunity to undertake a 
stakeholder review of the existing policy and legal instruments as well as the main 
institutions making up the operating environment. It also allows the opportunity to 
strengthen policies related to gender equality and update and enact wastewater 
legislation and introduce regulations to guide the decisions and actions of staff within 
the BWA, the Wastewater Division, and the Project.  
 During the Project implementation, it recommended that the GOB take steps to create 
an enabling legal environment by providing appropriate policy, legislative and 
institutional support where needed. The primary legislation that governs the 
operations of the BWA, is the BWA Act, of October 1980, Cap. 274a  LRO, 1985. The 
Act is supported by the BWA (Sewerage Regulations), 1980, (S.I. No. 151 of 1980), 
and the BWA (Validation of Water and Sewerage Rates) Act, 2009.  
 It is noted that some of these legal instruments are outdated because they have been in force 
for over forty years and as such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade 
its systems and operations and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector 
and the Project at this time. Efforts by the relevant Ministries and B ureau of Gender Affairs 
of the GOB to advance gender equity and equality are commendable but more is still needed to be done.  
 The BWA, and the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources, should encourage the GOB, through the Ministry of Legal Affairs , the Bureau of Gender Affairs and the 
Department of Labour, to undertake a comprehensive review of the legal instruments and take steps to strengthen provisions for gender equity and equality. These Ministers should 
table an updated wastewater legislation  that is gender sensitive in Parliament for enactment  
and should introduce updated supporting regulations as required.  
4.2 Gender Roles    
 With regards  to the division of labour betw een men, women,  there are more men than  
women  employed in the technical professions (Allen et.al., 2016) . In the case  of the 
technical professions, this pattern is also reflected in the wastewa ter sector as a 
January 2021 staff  survey indicates that the staff complement of the Wastewater 
Division is curre ntly made up of 83% men and 17 % women.


---
*Page 241*
---

 
63 
  Currently, the BWA has more men  involved in the technical aspects of the 
Wastewater  Division management  role, while women  serve in more adm inistrative  
capaci ties. It is therefore impo rtant for the BWA to conduct a gender needs 
assessment of its wastewater services team  and adopt an employment promotion 
strat egy to bring about a more gende r balan ce among BWA wastewater  employe es; 
 General ly, there appears to be more women emp loyed in the informal  economy as 
vendors, speculators, janitors, baby- sitters, shop operat ors and in the service industry 
and professions such as nursing and teach ing.  In the labour force, there are more 
men employed in the formal economy while conversely more women are in the 
‘economically inactive’ population which is classified as the informal economy. 
Women are typically selected to care for children and the elderly . Among the 
elderly, men are more likely to live alone than women.65. 
 In genera l, more men are empl oyed in the formal economy as informat ion 
technologists, technicians, professionals such as engi neers and occupy top managers 
or chief executive . Most of these jobs require long hours of speci alized training, they 
are also more competitive, require high level of knowledge and skills and they are 
generally more secured and are high paying jobs. Given the technical nature of this wastewater Project, it is expected that it will attract more men than women. While th e 
BWA’s  gende r sensitivity training for its employees in collaboration with the UWI-
IDGS is commendable , there are more steps required to increase participation of 
underrepresented groups in technical fields and in leadership positions at the BWA . 
Trainings are volunta ry and may not be as impact ful in ensuring transformational 
change  if intended recipients do not participate . The BWA m aking trainings mandatory 
for certain staff, such as those in HR and even for members of Management, will go 
further to ensuring that cultural challenges to gender equality are addressed. 
Additionally, if the BWA acts as a champion for women in STEM, this may influence female youth, who have not selected career paths, to view STEM as a viable career 
option for them.
 
 There are more  men involved in providing wastewater  servi ces and importantly in 
waste water decision making.  On the other hand,  women are the dominant users of 
water  in the Domestic Sphere . Impr oved wastewater  services, resulting from this 
Project, shou ld result in more women having acce ss to water to carry  out dai ly chores 
efficiently and effectivel y. However, how provision of services is rolled  out and the 
cost of services may be impacted by who makes decisions. Therefore,  it is important 
for the BWA to ensure that women are consulted and provided opportunities for 
sustained access to water. Also important is that at the Project Board level, women and 
women’s representatives should have equal participation in determining how the 
benefits of the project are ascribed.  
 
65 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016). Gender  Situation in Barbad os CDB  
Country Assessment (CGA)


---
*Page 242*
---

 
64 
  With respect  to household managemen t, most poor house holds are headed by 
women, and therefore women stand to bene fit from any treatme nt in wastewater  
and increase in the quantities of non-potable water , if it is within their ability to pay 
for it.  Women  are usually the ones who spend longer hours doing unpaid domestic 
work such as cooking, garde ning, collecting , and storing water  for domestic use, 
caring for children and the elderly, and the animals. 66 
4.3 Resources   
 Despite the general acceptance of the principle of comparable worth, more men than 
women are likely to be employed in positions related to finance, technology, 
information services, and the legislature, management, and technical professions67. 
Consequently, more men than women are likely to have greater control over and benefit from resources. There are some women whose economic status also improve 
because they gain access to resources  through marriage, common law relationships 
and inheritance .  
 
 The CGA  identifies that  the majority of self -employed persons, employers and 
owners/managers of businesses are men. Research from the University of the West 
Indies (UWI)  as cited by the CGA , reveal ed the following difficulties for women’s 
entrepreneurs hip and ownership:  
1. Lack of access to credit, especially because of lack of collateral to secure 
loans;  
2. Weaker professional networks than men;  
3. Lack of knowledge about procedures for incorporation, registration and 
the taxation system;  
4. Care roles  
 The inability to produce job letter s is also a greater barrier to access to finance for 
women than for me n as women have lower levels of employment in the formal sector. 
The CGA posits that the formality  of credit institutions and a history of discriminati on 
may make women, specifically socio -economically deprived women feel  
uncomfortable  to access services68. Risk taking aversion may compound vulnerable 
women’s comfort in accessing services that are necessary to acquire resources such as 
land or for enterp rise start up or expansion.  
 Barbados has universal access to primary and secondary education such that 90.6% 
 
66 Bobb, D., (2019), Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the Caribbean, Wendy Water Woes: A 
Barbados Case Study, UWI -IGDS, BWA, GCF, CCCCC.  
67 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016). Gender  Situation in Barbad os CDB  
Country Assessment (CGA) 
68 CGA Barbados, 2016


---
*Page 243*
---

 
65 
 of attendees’ complete tertiary education while 93.4% complete primary education. 
As well, more young women 40 years and below, have completed university 
education and 50% of immigrants as against 30% locals have university education 
(Beuermann, 2017). While education is accessible to both women and men, in recent 
years, more women tend to pursue higher education continuously for a longer period 
through distance learning to help them secure better paying jobs.  The UN Women’s 
gender analysis on employment trends in six Caribbean countries identified that 
women need to have higher educational levels than men if they want earnings at the 
same level as th ose of men. Students who stay longer in the education system are 
likely to begin doing economic work later, however, once employed the nature of the jobs secured ensures increased earning potential.   
 Conversely, data shows that more men than women enrol for technical program mes 
than women.  Trotz and Issacs (2017) posits that low enrolment of women in technical 
programmes  can be linked to gender norms, roles and perceptions that act as a barrier 
for women’s greater participation in these fields. “ Water and wastewater treatment 
usually fall under the field of Civil and Environmental Engineering. In the 
Caribbean, the main training institutions with this program are the University of the 
West Indies St. Augustine Campus in Trinidad and Tobago, the Unive rsity of 
Technology in Jamaica, and the University of Guyana. The percentages of females 
have  remained constant over nearly a decade with ~30% and ~45% enrollment 
between 2006 and 2014 for undergraduate and graduate engineering programs. This 
is significan tly different from the overall UWI enrollment which showed the 
proportion of females to males was 68.5% to 31.5% for total University enrolment, 
with the St Augustine campus having 63% female enrolment for 2013/2014”69. 
 There are P olicies and laws that provide  for equal access for women and men to land 
holdings and tenure in Barbados. These have been in place since 196870. “The Town 
and Country Planning Act (1968) (Amended 2003) provides for land and water rights 
and legal security of tenure for all individuals irrespective of gender ”71. However , 
available evidence according the Country Gender Assessment suggests that men own 
the bulk of land and other productive resources.   
 The fact that men predominantly own land is much linked to the fact that the  majority 
of large agricultural land holdings are male owned and therefore men are 
predominantly large -scale  farmers, while women farm at a smaller scale and for 
subsistence. Mechanisms used to target farmers for information sharing about the use 
of reclai med water needs to take this into consideration. Similarly, efforts at engaging 
the private sector as partners and as potential beneficiaries of RAFF resources similarly need to consider the needs of small -scale farmers.  This has baring of livelihood and 
 
69  https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender -assessment -fp060- water -sector -resilience -nexus -sustainability -
barbados -wsrn -s 
70 CGA Barbados, 2016  
71 ibid


---
*Page 244*
---

 
66 
 food security for vulnerable populations.  
 Access to monetized resources has impact on this project since the persons with more 
financial resources are better able to pay for wastewater services72. Therefore, it is 
reasonable to advance that  more men  than women  will be able to afford water  and 
wastewater  services73. Men  also tend to have greater  acce ss to techn ical knowledge  
and skills upgra ding in wastewat er becau se there are fewer women  emp loyed in the 
sector. Incentives for development of domestic reuse and reclaimed waster 
systems may benefit more men as a result.  
4.4 Deci sion Making  
There are several  levels of decision making associated with  the impleme ntation of this 3R-
CReWS Project. Brief discussions on the different categories of decision makers and the 
type of project deci sions  they are required to make follows. 
 Parliamentarians as policymakers decide on the laws that influence gender equality 
practices in Barbados. At present, parliament has 20% female and 80% male 
representation with a first woman Prime Minister and a first woman Senate President. 
In the twenty- six members Cabinet of Ministers, 73% of them are men and 27% are 
women including the Prime Minister. Since there are more men than women in Parliament, most of the decisions taken are likely to reflect the thinking of men. In 
the absence of gender sensiti vity training, male parliamentarians are slow to 
recognize the need and urgency of making provisions for gender equality in 
legislation;  
 Cabinet ministers make public policy decisions to address issues relating to gender 
equality and wastewater infrastructure and services. They may encourage men and 
women as key stakeholders in the wastewater sector to participate in formulating 
wastewater or gender policies in so far as these will affect them;  
 The current ten member  BWA Board, which was appo inted in 2018 for a three-year 
term,  comprise 7 men  or directors and 3 women  directors. With  the current gender 
imba lance, the Board  decisions will be influenced by the male directors. Women and 
girls are key water and sanitation stakeholders, but this has not translated to practice within the sector in Barbados. Of  the fifty-eight staff  attache d
 to the Wastewater 
Division 49 (or 84%) of them are men  while only 9 (or 16%) are women. Similarly, 
with  the gender imba lance, support level decisions will also be i nfluenced by  the male 
staff;  
 In the households, men  normally make most  of the decisions as the bigger  contributor 
to the household income. Although women  have made  strides through education and 
in gaining paid emp loyment in managemen t and supervi sory levels in the publ ic and 
 
72 Ibid. 
73 Ibid


---
*Page 245*
---

 
67 
 private  sector, they are relied upon in doing most of the domestic work and making 
decisions in the household. However, like much of the English- Speaking Caribbean, 
there is a substantial number of single female heads of households . Therefore,  
consultation processes need to be mindful that stakeholder engagement activities reach 
and document needs and decisions of these households.   
4.5 Beneficiaries   
 The Project across all its components targets 136,220 people in Barbados. Appendix 
22b of the Funding proposal breaks down the project beneficiaries and identifies that 
66,748 (49%) men and 69,472 (51%) women are likely to be direct beneficiaries from 
the implementation of this Project because those who stand to benefit directly include 
users of water wastewater services, which include the entire country. There is a similar 
distribution of indirect beneficiaries Im portant to note is that this is reflective of the 
overall population of Barbados. A more detailed look at the beneficiaries of the Project 
by component suggest that the project is taking an approach of leave no one behind. 
More specifically, the Project po sitions that 100% of female headed households and 
100% of male headed householder respectively will benefit from the installation of 
decentralized wastewater management systems in zone A. It is however important to 
identify the recurrent costs that are associated with the connection to improved 
wastewater services. Given  that wo men do most of the domestic  and care w ork, they 
are grea ter users of water and  wastewater  services and will benefit more than men  from 
the implementati on of the project at the domestic level.  On the other hand, a key 
beneficiary group identified by the Project are farmers, in this regard, there will be higher numbers of male beneficiaries than male beneficiaries given the share 
participation of male to female in Agriculture. The Tariff structure for water used for 
irrigation should be mindful of the often- small scale agricultural activities performed 
by women vis -a vis larger commercialised agriculture often headed by men. Important 
is that the Project works along with the Associa tion of Women in Agriculture to ensure 
that women farmers (including for subsistence) receive information on the benefits of 
the used of reclaimed water and are also supported with access to reclaimed water 
services and other by- products of treated waste w ater.  
 The GOB  will also benefit directly from the project becau se it will bring about long-
term  savings in energy cost (th rough the implemen tation of a possible related 
biogas facility) and would be able to take credit for improving the lives of citize ns. 
Though not a direct benefit, savings may translate to improvement of services for 
customers of the BWA.  
 As the people/customers connected to the BWA wastewater collection system benefit 
from the improved quality of wastewater services delivered to  them, so should the 
BWA, considering they will have a more satisfied customer base. This should also 
lead to more customers paying their utility bills consistently. The BWA Wastewater 
Division should also handle fewer breakdowns in the infrastructure (if the


---
*Page 246*
---

 
68 
 recommendations for an improved operation and maintenance programme that 
involves a more proactive approach is initiated, as outlined in the Conceptual Design 
report) and should receive fewer complaints from customers.  
 Several institutions from public,  private, and civil society sectors, such as the Bureau 
of Gender Affairs, the Office of Poverty Alleviation, the UWI -IGDS, the Barbados 
Union of Teachers Union, and the Barbados National Women’s Organization, with 
mandates to address gender -equality issue s should benefit indirectly from 
implementation of this Project. These institutions will benefit from participation in stakeholder consultations, information sharing, improved wastewater services and greater organizational productivity. Conversely the Proj ect should facilitate the 
advancement of the mandates of these institutions by ensuring their input into project 
activities for the benefit of vulnerable groups, including women.


---
*Page 247*
---

 
69 
  
MAINSTREAMING  GENDER  INTO  THE PROJECT  CYCLE  
 
In keeping with the requirements of the Gender Analysis Process Model, part four will 
focus on mainstreaming gender into this Project cycle and giving a gender perspective 
to the activities highlighted at the initiation, formulation, implementation, monito ring 
and evaluation and closure stages of the project. This exercise entails clarifying the Project goals and activities planned to be implemented at the different stages of the 
project, examining the level of access/ control that  women, men and LGBTQIA 
persons have over Project resources, examining the distribution of  Project benefits to 
ensure that is equity and equality among women, men and LGBTQIA persons, and 
their level of participation in making important Project decisions.  
5.1 Project  Initiation  Stage   
 At the initiation stage, the focus of mainstreaming gender in this Project cycle Is to 
clarify the main goals, assumptions, priorities, roles and responsibilities, schedule, 
deadlines, and risks of the Project. This should make sure that the Project team h as 
made every effort to review and revise where necessary, the stakeholder engagement 
plan for the project to ensure that key stakeholders, including representative groups of 
vulnerable people, and women are engaged  on wastewater  services and gender 
equali ty issues.  
 In terms of priorities, it is noted that the Project comprises of several components, as 
outlined in the Logical  Frame work . With respect to the Project governance function, 
the BWA should pay attention to the establishment of a PSC that is gende r-balanced 
and the appointment of members to it who are gender sensitive. Similarly, the BWA 
should apply the principles of gender -balance and gender sensit ivity when  
considering appo intments  to the positions of Project Manager  and 
technical/adm inistrative  support staff. 
 
5.2 Implementation Stage   
Project manage ment should entail  executi ng activities in accordan ce with the Project 
Planning Frameworks. The implementation of the actions in the Gender Actions of the projects are to be systematically mainstreamed into project activities to ensure meaningful 
implementation.  This stage also requires the Project Manager to hold status review meetings 
to ensure that the Project is on schedule, and to document  all changes to the
 Project plan. 
It is also significant to underta ke Project research  to gather empir ical data for the purpose 
of maki ng evidence-based  decisions on matters  relating to planning, budget ing, staffing, and 
coordinating the implemen tation of Project activ ities. Additionally, empir ical data also  
provides the basis to evaluate the gender sensitivity pract ices of Project officials and 
advocat ing for changes  in gender equality policies and laws.


---
*Page 248*
---

 
70 
 The 3R -CReWS Project has by design set the foundation for implementation of gender 
responsive actions and ultimately gender mainstreaming. Gender Considerations are 
mainstreamed across all four components of the project, but are more strongly visible in 
Components 1, 3 and 4. These considerations have informed the Gender Action Plan 
(Appendix 3).  
The Project’s proposal puts forward that “t he intended impact of the gender mainstreaming 
action plan is to (i ) increase the participation of women and LGBTQIA persons in decision 
making and raise the awareness of men, women and vulnerable LGBTQIA communities  
on gender issues to minimize discrimination against vulnerable groups including LBTQIA; 
and (ii) improve t he quality of life for vulnerable residents, especially women, and c hildren 
of Barbados in the areas of health, agriculture, and employment ”.   
  
The following outputs and activities have been included in the project to advance these 
gender mainstreaming g oals74:  
 Output 1.4:    Decentralized treatment plants or cluster treatment facilities installed   
Activity 1.4.1:   Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and 
treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for 
domestic/commercial non -potable water applications. This activity will ensure that  
consultative processes capture the views of both male and female headed households in a 
manner that informs the roll out and connection of services to these two communities. 
Mixed methods of engagement will be employed, including focused conversations wit h 
women’s groups and female farmers.   Additionally, in the implementation of this activity 
the project will ensure that communities are protected from sexual and gender -based 
violence and gender -based discrimination. The Project will therefore set up mechanisms to 
capture community concerns in a gender sensitive manner and that will prohibit exploitative, abusive and harassing conduct by workers of the BWA, contractors and subcontractors.   Under this activity, the project will ensure that a code of conduct that 
includes prohibitions for SEAH and SGBV is developed. This will apply to design 
consultants’ staff, BWA staff, as well as contractors and their staff. Under this activity, 
there is opportunity to open spac es for female employment in traditionally 
unde rrepresented areas. The Project should e nsure  therefore,  that hiring practices in 
decentralized treatment facilities include non -discriminatory actions and promotes female 
employment.   
Output 3.1:   Improved capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain 
and monitor and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for 
wastewater management   
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the 
 
74 Sourced Directly from Project Funding Proposal


---
*Page 249*
---

 
71 
 operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including 
photovoltaic equipment. This activity will include gender sensitivity and climate change 
training for BWA employees and private sector   
Activity 3.1.2:   Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that 
addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and 
environmental monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion considerations.   
Output 4.1:   Governance and planning  roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed 
water in a controlled and regulated manner.  
Activity 4.1.1:   Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development 
Act, Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for enhancing waste water 
effluent quality, treatment options and re -use requirements and applications. The review 
will also include recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public -
private partnerships, building codes, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities and access to males and females.   
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an optimal 
combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse 
applications, with the centralized rec laimed water being transmitted and used for 
agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower cost of reclaimed water 
transmission). This strategy will also take into consideration the social, gender -related and 
climate risks in the design and p rioritization of water reuse strategies.   
Output 4.2:   Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of 
wastewater treatment and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.   
Activity 4.2.1:   Develop a strategy and action plan to eng age the private sector in the 
provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of 
wastewater by -products such as activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment 
to identify opportunities for public -private partnership in the water and wastewater sector, 
especially for the expansion of the decentralized onsite cluster wastewater systems. The strategy will also promote gender equality and women empowerment   
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations f or a gender sensitive 
and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re -use.  
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide 
resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater syst ems. The management of 
the expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality and social inclusion as a 
requirement .  
Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.   
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensit ive Public Awareness Campaign


---
*Page 250*
---

 
72 
 for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall 
meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant technology and by -product reuse) and 
consultations. Consultations will include, but will not  be limited to representative groups 
of vulnerable communities, including with the Association of Women in Agriculture.  
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which 
is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting,  knowledge products, identify/host a link 
to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. 
This page will include, to the best extent possible, functions such as audio, sub -titles and/or 
sign language to encourage social inclusion from disabled population. The project’s 
webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where possible.   
 The Project’s Implementation arrangements will promote gender mainstreaming  in the 
management and governa nce structures.   
In addition to the gender sensitive results and activities flagged above, the following 
implementation strategies will be utilized by the project implementation unit to further 
strengthen gender considerations in the day -to-day operations of the project:   
1. There will be gender sensitive stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that will aim to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings 
(all Components)    
2.
 CCCCC Procurement policies, which promote a dherence to the Centre’ Gender 
Policy and Action Plan  
3. Monitoring of indicators will disaggregate information by sex, where possible   
4. The AE’s gender specialist will be available to provide technical advice and quality 
control for the mainstreaming of gender in the results and activities identified above, 
as well as to support the analysis of the sex disaggregated monitoring and evaluation 
information collected routinely to inform planning and decision making on gender 
mainstreaming, in cluding the early identification of possible unplanned negative 
gender issues emerging because of the project’s activities.   
5. The Project PSC will strive to ensure gender balance and will include a 
representative from the Barbados Bureau of Gender Affairs.  The Project Manager 
will present to the PSC a report on the Project’s Gender Action Plan annually.   
6. All members of the Project Management Team will receive gender sensitivity training  at the inception of the project and thereafter man datorily participate in 
Gender Sensitivity training sessions.


---
*Page 251*
---

 
73 
 Table J   Gender Implications of Project Component Activities  
 
Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse  
 
Outcome 1: To enhance availability, management and use of tertiary 
level reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to 
climate change.  The BSTP will be upgraded from a CAS to a CAS - 
4Stage Bardenpho system and 2 onsite decentralized treatment  plants 
(cluster) will be installed in 2 communities in Zone A locations to 
produce a high- quality effluent that is biologically and chemically safe. 
The effluent from the upgraded plants will be utilized for non- potable 
water applications including irriga tion and aquifer recharge. This is 
expected to reduce the extraction of groundwater leading to reduced 
aquifer saltwater intrusion, and increased availability of groundwater 
during dry periods.  - This will enhance the capacity of persons who are the greatest  
victims of climate change. Many more women stand to benefit from 
any increased resilience of infrastructure in the wastewater sector.  
Output 1.1: The 
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant is 
upgraded to treat 
wastewater to a tertiary 
water -quality standard.  Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and 
convert/upgrade the existing conventional 
activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment 
process at the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment 
Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for 
achieving national reclaimed water -qualit y 
standards.  - Efforts to reduce energy cost and conserve wastewater treatment 
capacity for sanitary sewage will enhance the conditions of 
vulnerable persons particularly households headed by women and 
those in poverty. This is best done by ensuring that the se persons 
are engaged and that costing structure allows for continued access 
to services by vulnerable people.  
- Ensure that a code of conduct that includes prohibitions for SEAH 
and SGBV is developed. This will apply to design consultants’ staff, BWA staf f, as well as contractors and their staff.  
- Ensure that hiring practices in decentralized treatment facilities include non- discriminatory actions and promotes female 
employment.  
- Ensure that small farmers and female farmers have equitable access 
to water f or irrigation and are informed of opportunities for access.  
- Ensure that 2 communities in zone A are consulted appropriately 
and that they are aware of redress options if affected by the project. 
This includes redress options for victims of SGBV. Output 1.2:  Tertiary 
treated reclaimed water 
is available t o 
supplement non- potable 
use Activity 1.2.1:  Install reverse osmosis (RO) 
membrane filtration systems to reduce the total dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed 
water produced at the BSTP   
 
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 
aquifer re charge wells (injection wells) going 
from the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer 
recharge.  
Output 1.3: Decision -
support tools and Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring 
programme that will include the installation of


---
*Page 252*
---

 
74 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
infrastructure 
implemented to 
mitigate potential 
climate change risks to 
the wastewater 
collection and treatment 
systems  flow measurement and rain -gauging 
equipment at the BSTP to identify and address 
sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer. 
Mechanisms that identify and reduce or 
mitigate vulnerabilities in the wastewater 
collection systems will also be investigated.  
 
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on -site laboratory 
facilities and personnel at the BSTP to 
generate influent and effluent water quality 
data to inform operations cont rol strategies 
that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions.  
 
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized 
Real-time Management System (CMMS) at 
the BSTP to inform decision making and 
climate resilient building  - Vulnerabl e women and girls in communities where decentralization 
plants are to be installed should be protected from exploitation and 
violence.  
- The low -income sector of the population stands to benefit from the 
major outcomes of the project, and this will improve t heir quality of 
live and bridging the gap between high and low -income earners. 
Many women living in poverty will benefit the most. This is done 
where costs are kept minimal to ensure continued access to service.  
- This will contribute to improvements in the quality of life for 
women and other vulnerable persons.  
- Women play a critical role in climate activities and additional knowledge and skills in this area will minimize risks in response to 
adverse effects of climate change.  
- A reduction in energy requirements will be of great benefit to 
women who form the larger percentage of persons living in 
poverty.  
- A saving for men who are heads of their households.  
- Any increase in the water supply will enhance the quality of life for more women in their domestic and care roles.  
- Women spend a great deal of their time fetching water for domestic use and use large quantities in the field of work.  
- Ensure increased parti cipation of women in the production and use 
of reclaimed water, Women should benefit from any improvement in the efforts by BWA to collect and measure wastewater influent 
and effluent water samples to implement control strategies as these 
efforts could imp rove the quality of wastewater service 
- Women have been experiencing great challenges to maintain a clean environment in the home and the workplace. An 
improvement in the quality of life and reduce time lost to collect 
and store water for use.  
- Drought condi tions resulting from climate change are likely to 
cause serious water shortages in Barbados which can pose great Output 1.4: 
Decent ralized treatment 
systems or cluster 
treatment systems 
installed  Activity 1.4.1:  Construct two small (cluster) 
decentralized wastewater collection and treatment demonstration systems in Zone A 
locations to produce reuse quality water for 
domestic/commerci al non- potable water 
applications.


---
*Page 253*
---

 
75 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
challenges for women who are primarily care givers for children 
and the elderly.  
 
Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Wastewater 
Treatment  
 
Outcome 2: Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at 
BSTP.  This will be realized by: 1)installing grid -tied Photovoltaic (PV) 
Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased power consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using 
Category 3 hurricane resistant solar panels; 2) implementing automated 
controls and energy efficiency measured within the upgraded centralized 
treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce 
GHG emissions; and 3) installing  sludge dewatering equipment to 
improve energy efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 
emissions associated with the biosolids.  - Wome n are very vulnerable in the time of disaster. However, any 
effort to reduce exposure to climate risk to allow speedier adaptation by victims.  
- Regular power outages could disrupt water supplies at critical 
moments which could negatively affect the quality of life for 
women consumers who rely on the service for sanitation and consumption.  
- Potential lowered energy requirements, that could result in lower 
customer fees, will be of great benefits to persons who have 
challenges with paying utility bills. Even if  utility fees are not 
lowered for most customers, considerations should be made to 
lower utility costs to vulnerable communities. Lower operational 
costs for the BWA, through means such as biogas and more solar, 
will certainly provide service to accelerate recovery from these 
disasters.  
Output 2.1: Energy 
efficiency and renewable energy 
technologies are 
implemented  Activity 2.1.1:  Install a grid -tied Photovoltaic 
(PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset 
increased power consumption associated with 
the centralized treatment plant process 
upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant 
solar panels  
 
Activity 2.1.2:  Implement automated controls 
and energy efficiency measures within the 
upgraded centralized treatment processes to 
reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce 
GHG emissions.  
 
Activity 2.1.3:  Install sludge dewatering 
equipment to improve energy efficiency and - An increase in water supply will improve productivity in 
agricu lture by having access to adequate water for irrigation.  
- Preventing the contamination of ground water will make it possible 
to increase the supply of water and generate economic activities 
among the more vulnerable persons like women headed poor 
households . 
- Energy efficiency if translated to cost savings may have positive impacts on the cost of wastewater and water service provision, 
therefore having positive benefits for poor households (the majority 
of which are female headed)


---
*Page 254*
---

 
76 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions 
associated with the biosolids.  
Component 3: Capabilities  to operate, maintain, expand and monitor 
wastewater and related renewable energy technologies  
 
Outcome 3: Enhanced capacity and capability to support the 
preventative maintenance and climate resiliency programmes.  - Increases in women’s participation in the sector at technical levels 
and managerial levels may help advance policy options that are 
more favorable to vulnerable households and small enterprises  
 
Output 3.1:  Improved 
capabilities of 
wastewater technical 
personnel to operate, 
maintain and monitor 
and implement climate 
change adaptation 
planning strategies for 
wastewater 
management  Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide 
specialized and customized training to support the operations and maintenance of wastewater 
collection and treatment facilities including 
photovoltaic equipment  
 
Activity 3.1.2:  Update Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) and Ope rational Manual that 
addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and 
environmental monitoring, including risks 
posed by climate change and gender and social 
inclusion considerations.  
 Activity 3.1.3: Develop and i mplement a risk 
management framework to support the 
sustainable management of BWA’s operations.  - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme 
relative to the 3R -CReWS Project.  
- SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable 
people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the 
BWA.  
- Strategic engagement with community groups, including women’s 
groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and 
Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable 
groups a gender -responsive approach and that there is community -
wide buy- in. 
- The low energy requirements will be of great benefits to persons who have challenges with paying utility bills.  
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of 
gender -based violence, as well as other social and gender related 
risks.  
- Women should be exposed to the benefits to be derived by the initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness 
and appreciation of this project.  
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help 
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.  
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of 
individuals trained, nevert heless, women will be strongly 
encouraged to participate in the technical training programs thereby 
addressing the decision -making gap for women in technical 
thematic areas.


---
*Page 255*
---

 
77 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity 
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which 
should be given priority.  
- The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender 
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the 
progress of the project.  
- those directly affected.  
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity 
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and application of the policies and legislation.  
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource 
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of 
technical professionals in combating climate change.  
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in 
ongoing works in the project.  
Output 3.2:  A strategic 
plan is developed to 
guide  the replication of 
water treatment 
facilities along the west 
coast  Activity 3.2.1:  Investigate and develop a 
strategic plan for the installation of water 
treatment facilities along the west coast 
corridor for augmenting water supply and 
protecting the we st coast ecosystem.  - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme 
relative to the 3R -CReWS Project.  
- SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable 
people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the 
BWA.  
- Strategic e ngagement with community groups, including women’s 
groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and 
Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable 
groups a gender -responsive approach and that there is community -
wide buy- in. 
- The low ener gy requirements will be of great benefits to persons 
who have challenges with paying utility bills.  
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of 
gender -based violence, as well as other social and gender related 
risks.


---
*Page 256*
---

 
78 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
- Women should be expos ed to the benefits to be derived by the 
initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness 
and appreciation of this project.  
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the 
wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help 
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.  
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of 
individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly encouraged to participate in the technical trainin g programs thereby 
addressing the decision -making gap for women in technical 
thematic areas.  
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity 
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which 
should be given priority.  
- The staf f in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender 
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the 
progress of the project.  
- those directly affected.  
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity 
training to ens ure that there is gender balance in the content and 
application of the policies and legislation.  
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource 
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of 
technical professionals in combating climate change.  
Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in 
ongoing works in the project.  
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy -in and 
ownership within the private and public sectors are improved  for climate 
resilient development planning for the water sector.  
 
Outcome 4: An enabling environment is created for wastewater 
technologies and use of reclaimed water.  The enabling environment 
speaks to the legislation, organizational structures and compe tency and Enabling Environment:  
- The absence of legislation that make provision for standards to 
regulate the discharge of effluent in marine water poses a health 
risk for women who are the ones most li kely to care for the sick.


---
*Page 257*
---

 
79 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving this outcome will 
significantly change the culture of the water sector in Barbados, building 
a level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to continually 
innovate and adapt to climate  change, which in turn promotes 
sustainability for this project.  - It also creates a unique opportunity for the GOB to introduce 
appropriate water reuse policies and to enact legislation that make 
provision for gender equality in their contents.  
- Mechanisms should be put in place to improve regulatory systems 
to respond to climate change in a timely manner. These 
mechanisms must have gender balance in its composition. Public 
education must play a central role in the awareness building across 
sectors and government agencies.  
 Awareness Raising and Capacity Development  
- BWA should design and implement an ongoing public education 
program to create awareness of wastewater issues. The unique 
issues for men and women should be highlighted. The BWA should 
continue with presentations by partici pants in Gender Sensitivity 
training.  
- Communication campaign should include varied strategies that 
appeal to demographic differences of the population.  
Output 4.1:  
Governance and 
planning roadmaps 
enhanced to enable use 
of reclaimed water in a 
controlle d and regulated 
manner.  Activity 4.1.1:  Undertake a legislative review 
to promote the Planning and Development Act, 
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related 
legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent 
quality, treatment options and re -use 
requirements a nd applications  
 
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation 
master plan  - A strategic awareness campaign on climate change and its impact 
on vulnerable persons is critical. Policies which will empower persons in authority in the sector to take the necessary actions to 
promote gender equality in the wastewater sector and climate 
change issues.  
- Ensure that campaign to gather acceptance on use of treated 
wastewater for non -potable purposes will need gender sensitive 
messages and targeting approaches.  
- The government Ministers need to be sensitized to be made aware 
of the importance of the legislation and how the project could 
positively impact the lives of women and the vulnerable in the 
society.  
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivi ty 
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which should be given priority.  Output 4.2:  
Mechanisms developed/expanded to 
encourage the adoption 
of wastewater treatment 
and reuse applications 
by private individuals Activity 4.2.1:  Develop a strategy and action 
plan to engage the private sector in the 
provision and adoption of wastewater 
treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by -products such as activated 
sludge.


---
*Page 258*
---

 
80 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
and businesses.  Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and 
identify recommendations for a gender 
sensitive and socially inclusive incentive 
programme to encou rage conservation, 
recycle, re- use. 
 
Activity 4.2.3: Expand and promote the 
Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to 
provide resources for the adoption of 
decentralized onsite wastewater systems.  - The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender 
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the progress of the project.  
- Policy m akers need to be made aware of the importance of the 
project and this should be driven from community- based groups 
and those directly affected.  
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity 
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and application of the policies and legislation.  
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in ongoing works in the project.  
- Ensure that the update of the governing instruments of the RAFF is 
done through a gender inf ormed consultative process.  
-  Ensure that updates to the governing instrument continue to 
promote the needs of vulnerable groups including persons living in 
poverty. the adjustments to RAFF should ensure that women’s 
needs and those of the vulnerable to inf orm rearticulation of the 
RAFF.  
- Efforts at engaging the private sector as partners and as potential 
beneficiaries of RAFF resources need to consider the needs of 
small -scale farmers.  
Output 4.3: Gender 
Sensitive Public Education and 
Awar eness Campaign 
Implemented.  Activity 4.3.1: Re -educate communities, 
teachers, students, farmers and businesses 
about the impact of climate change on water 
resources and their impact on water quality 
and quantity (availability as well as the 
importance of w ater reuse activities and 
indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate resilience in the Water Sector.  
 
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign 
for community and visitors (tourists)  - Greater awareness of climate threats and risk reduction will impact 
positively on women who carry the bulk of the burdens of the 
negative effects of natural disasters.  
- Raising awareness among co nsumers should contribute in bridging 
the gender divide and equality in the society. Women are very 
sensitive to the issues of wastewater reuse and careful consideration 
should be given on the advantages to national development and 
advancement.  
- The re -educ ation program should target all sectors in the society 
especially those who are not in the traditional line of


---
*Page 259*
---

 
81 
 Components and 
Outputs  Activities  Gender Considerations  
 
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R -CReWS Project 
Web Page and social media accounts  communication. Those with lower levels of literacy, limited access 
to ICT and low income and classified as poor will benefit the most.  
- The materi als prepared must be gender sensitive and cater for 
inclusion of a cross section of the society also aiming at visitors.  
- All mediums should be used especially electronic, social and print. 
Persons who are differently able need to be catered for and this wi ll 
ensure that the vulnerable persons are considered. The emphasis on 
educating the youthful population for futuristic development and 
the older population to break from tradition is critical in the re -
education campaign.  
- Ensure focus on unique gender issu es on webpage.  
- Ensure results presented on webpage are disaggregated by sex.


---
*Page 260*
---

 
82 
  
5.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Stage   
At this stage of the Project, the focus of mainstreaming gende r equality should be to 
involve stakeh olders on observing and docume nting the status of Project  proc ureme nt 
services and control quality activ ities as they  are being carri ed out and provi ding 
feedback  to maintain  the desired standards and to ensure that gender  equality issues are 
not compromised. Stakeholders are expected  to comment on the outcome of milestone 
reviews conduct periodically on the Project. Monitoring should ensure that Project 
deliverables bear demonstration of gender mainstreaming and that all relevant data 
produced by the project is gender sensitive.  
5.4 Project Accountability Stage   
Duri ng the mult i-year  life of the Project, it is expected  that at the end of each  Project 
year, stakeh olders provide feedback on the Draft Annual Progress  and Financ ial Report 
which gives  an update  on the status of the Project activities as they are being carried out. 
The stakeh older team  should focus on disaggr egated data on the gend er categ ories, an 
assessment  of the distribution of resources relative to men,  women  and LGBTQIA  
persons and any actions req uired to improve gender  equality and equity. Such feedback  
should be incor porated in the final Annual Report bef ore it is submitted to the PSC for 
initial endorsement and then to the BWA  for consideration and appr oval. 
5.5 Project Closure Stage   
At the Project closure stage, the Project Management te am is also expe cted to provide 
feedback  on the Draft Project Complet ion Report on whet her the Project achieved  its 
and confirm  whether the activities were carri ed out in accordance with the requirements 
of the Gender Action Plan, in addition to the Log frame . Results presented should show  
disaggregat ed data,  assessment  of the distribution of resources relative to men, women 
and LGBTQIA persons and any actions taken to improve gende r equality and equity 
encou ntered . 
5.6 Project Organizational Structure   
The Project shoul d have an organizational structure that incorporates  both the project 
gove rnance, and the project manag ement functions.  
The PSC should be trained in gender sensitivity issues at the project initiation stage. 
It is important to ensure that the board has equitable representation of male and 
female members. The aim is to have representatives who are empowered make 
decisions fo r the benefit of all. The PSC should have specific representation from 
the Barbados Bureau of Gender Affairs. This representative is important to ensure that the needs of vulnerable populations, including women are fore fronted for 
consideration.


---
*Page 261*
---

 
83 
 A suitable  structure for project manageme nt should include and Social and Gender 
Specialist to champion the Project’s gender sensitive stakeholder engagement exercises 
and to ensure that identified activities of the project is meaningfully mainstreaming 
gender i n the implementation. The Specialist will also support in gender -based budgeting, 
monitoring and evaluation and reporting. T his approach will assist the PSC in ensuring 
gende r equality in the compo sition of each  of these mechanisms and in demonstrati ng 
gender  sensitivity when  handl ing compl aints lodged against the Project team.  The Project 
Management Team should all mandatorily be trained in Gender mainstreaming at the 
initiation stage of the Project. The team should also participate in gender sensitivity 
trainings for BWA employees throughout the life of the Project.  
5.7 Project P lans, Budgets , Reports   
A prerequisite for ensuring effective gender mainstreaming in this Project cycle is the 
preparation of a Gender  Action Plan (GAP). The act ions recommend ed to mainstream  
gender equality are outlined in the (GAP) annexed to this Analysis . Complementarily , 
the Project should include provisions for clear identification of gender actions in the 
preparation of annual project plans and budgets to support t he executi on of approve d 
gender-related activities each  year. Additionally, the Project Manager should ensure 
budgetary allocations to support the execution of approved gender -related 
activities are in keeping with the GAP.  
The Project’s PSC should set guidelines for the Project Manager to prepare Annual 
reports on the progress of implementation of the Gender Action Plan in keeping 
with the approved scope, goals, specific objectives, and deliverables. They should 
include statements on gender sensitivity issues and provide dis -aggregated data on 
changes in project per sonnel,  wastewater  service users and external stakeh older 
participation.  
5.8 Project Data Management   
Members  of the PSC the Project Manager  and other project personnel  require 
technical and general data on a continuous basis to make evidence-based  decisions. 
The Project officials should therefore collect, store, and retrieve the data for analysis 
and manage data througho ut the Project lifecycle. They should ensure that key 
stakeholders have the right data at the right time and are able to gain  access to accurate  
and reliable  Project information on a timely and consistent basis. With respect to 
Project personnel, it is necessary for the data to be disaggregated  or broken down into 
gender categories relati ve to men, and women.  Such data helps to ensure that project 
resources are used where  they  are needed  most and to measure issues of gender 
equality and equity. 
Limited disaggregated data, related to gender and wastewater currently available in 
Barbados hindered the process of conducting a comprehensive gender sensitivity


---
*Page 262*
---

 
84 
 analysis for this Project.  There is need for the BWA, and other relevan t governm ent 
agencies like the Barbados Statisti cs Departme nt and Bureau  of Gender Affairs,  to put 
syste ms in place to collect, store and retrieve disaggrega ted data for use in planning 
and decision making throughout the Project cycle. 
5.9 Building Gender Sensitivity Capacity   
In recen t years, the BWA has collaborated  with the UWI IGDS on gender sensitivity training 
for its staff.  There are also opportunities for the two institu tions to work together on 
capacity  building activities to addr ess climate  change  adaptat ion and mitigation in the 
future. Specific tasks and activities that the UWI IGDS  should  undertak e to build capacity  
to address  climate change adaptat ion and mitigation are as follows: 
 Engage  regio nal climate change  experts  to undertak e research  with  a focus 
on the impact  of climate change  on gender and wastewater;  
 Collaborate with the BWA to assist  with  the collection of disaggr egated  data on 
climate  change  and wastewater manageme nt and publish online annual  
reports for wider circulation;  
 Continue to collaborate with  the BWA to deliver an expanded gender training, 
including on sexual and gender -based  violence  for employe es of the Authority; 
 Collaborate with  the BWA to engage  in outrea ch and advocacy  activ ities using 
multi- med ia appr oach to reach a wide cross secti on of individuals at the 
national level. 
 Collaborate with the BWA to engage in gender responsive stakeholder 
consultations.  
Given  the nature of this Project, the BWA Board and staff, particularly those from the 
Wastewater  Division, shoul d be made  aware  of how gende r plays a role in the way 
they treat Project personnel and beneficiaries throughout  the life of the Project. Gender 
relations are present in partici pating public, priva te and civil society institutions that 
are involved in this Project. Members  of the BWA Board, and BWA staff, require 
cont inued train ing and awareness  of gender sensitivity especially so that they can 
recognize privileges  and discrimination around gender.  
The BWA should continue to collaborate with  the UWI IGDS to train and educate  
persons serving on the PSC, in project managemen t and as suppo rt personnel to 
become more aware  of and sensitive to gender issues arisi ng from Project activities. 
Training for Project Staff and for identified staff of the BWA should be mandatory.


---
*Page 263*
---

 
85 
  
CLOSURE  
 
Integrated  Sustainability would like to thank the Caribbean Commun ity Climate Change  
Centre for your suppo rt in developing this document. We trust that this report meets 
your  needs and expectat ions.  If you have any questions, please contact the undersi gned 
at any time. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Dr. Virginia Albert  Poyotte


---
*Page 264*
---

 
86 
  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES   
 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016) . Gender  Situation 
in Barbad os CDB  Country Assessment (CGA). 
 
 Baksh & Assoc iates, R. (2016) . Country Gender  Assessment Synthesis Report, CDB. 
 
 Beuerman n, D., (2017). Methodological Report on the consumption Aggre gate and  
Poverty Lines based  on the Barbados Survey of Living Conditions 
 
 Bobb,  D., (2019) , Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the Caribbean, Wendy 
Water Woes: A Barbados  Case Study, UWI-IGDS, BWA, GCF, CCCCC.  
 
 CARICOM  Gender  Equality  Indicators  https://caribbean.un women.org/en/materials 
 
 Consultat ions on CARICOM Gender  Equality Strategy Begins in Antigua & Barbuda 
retrieved  from   https://www.today.caricom.org/201 9/02/07   consultat ion on CARICOM 
Gender Equal ity 
 
 Henry, A., (Jan 27, 2021). Barbado stoday.bb Boscobelle Resid ents want  BWA to 
addre ss long standing water woes 
 
 Husbands,  C & K. Dey, P. (2002). Impact assessment of a sewerage  project in 
Barbado s https://dol.org/10.3152/14715460 2781766708.  
 
 Isaacs,  W. (2017) . Opportunities to Mainstream Gender in water and wastewater  
Infrastructure Project: A Case Study in Barbad os: University  of South Florida, pg. 
26 
 
 Johnson, C.P.G, (2019). Better Together: A Model for Women & LGBTQIA Equality. 
 
 Schuhmann, et al, (2019) Visit ors’ Willingness  to Pay Conservat ion Fee in Barbad os, 
tourism Management,  71,315 -326 
 
 Suchorski, A., (2009). Socio-economic and Physical Deve lopment Influence  on water use 
in Barbad os, Caribbean Water Initiative  (CARWIN) McGill University  Document CARWIN, 
retrieved from https://w ww.mcgill/carwi n/saw  09 Scuchorski pdf. 
 
 Tortz, M. et al, (2018). Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbado s 
WSRN- Barbad os environmental  and Social Assessment. 
 
 UN-ECL AC& Cooperaci on Espaniola (March  2017) Report. Gend er Equality Plans in 
Latin  America & the Caribbean:  Road Map  to Development


---
*Page 265*
---

 
87 
  
 UN Partners hips for SDGs platform 
https://www.sustainablede velopment.un.org/ partnerships. 
 
 UN-water Joint State ment https://www. womenforwater. org unwater-
joint_statemen t_covid- 19.pdf.  
 
 Witmer,  L. (2017). Women of water Partne rship 
https://www. womenforwater.org/ waste- water -is-a  she  waste-water.


---
*Page 266*
---

 
88 
 Append ix 1 - Results of Stake holder Surveys and Interv iews 
 
Outcome  of Zoom  Interview  with UWI  Institute  of Gender  and Developme nt Studies,  Dr. 
Tonya  Haynes,  October  25th, 2020    
Question   
Respons e 
 
Q-1: What is the nature of the 
joint training underta ken by the 
UWI Institute of Gend er 
Development  Studies and the 
  
It is a training program me customized for the BWA in October 
2020  to help 500 employees to obtain a certificate  in Gend er 
sensitization and infrastructure. 
 
Q-2: Who are the 
parti cipants  enrolled in the 
  
All five hundred (500)  employees of the BWA are 
expected  participate in the training.  
Q-3: What is the duration of 
the training?  
The training is for 1-5 contact days over 6 worksho ps with  
16-22 participants in each  cohort.  
Q-4: Who organi zed the training?  
The BWA HR Department is responsible for organi zing and 
scheduling the workers to undertake the training. 
 
Question  5: What are the contents 
of the course?  
The course contains several modules of video presentati ons 
and three case  studies.  
Question  6: What will be the 
bene fits to the BWA emp loyees?  
Each successful employee will receive  a Certificate  in 
Gender Anal ysis.  
Q-7: What has happe ned to 
the training since the COVID -
19 Pande mic?  
With the advent of COVID-19 the training sessi ons 
have been  suspende d. 
 
Q-8: What has been the 
partici pants’  response or attitude 
to the training?  
Employees have responded positively to the training although 
initially there was some resistan ce by men who later  realized 
the gender  equity meant equalization for women and men.  
Q-9: Do you think the parti cipants  
would want  to continue the 
training?  
There is great  demand for future training by the partic ipants  
many of whom have requested follow up workshops including 
the month-long program  offered  by UWI which reflects  a high 
level of motivatio n on the part of the emp loyees.  
 
Q-10: Are there women 
partic ipating in other gender-
sensitivity training?  
The UWI Centre for Rese arch and Management  (CERMES)  
offers a six- month course on gender studies. Several women 
graduate from this programme  and enter into the water and 
   
Q-11: What are the challenges 
women exper ience in the 
wastewater sector?  
There was one case study which reveals the challenges of a 
woman  whose entire  day revolve s around water. She lives in a 
community that does not have taps water  and has no personal 
storage  tank. She has property which is not accessible to a 
water truck so she has to walk  to meet the truck. She has a 
small  farmi ng income  but had to abandon it due to lack of 
t  
Q-12: What is the economic 
status  of women in  Barbad os?  
The department  confirms  that single women  head 57% of 
house holds of which 20%  of the women are categ orized as 
poor. These include migrant  women caring for critically ill


---
*Page 267*
---

 
89 
  
Question  13: What has been the 
exper ience of participants with 
water  supply?   
They revealed that due to a combination of drought and very, 
very old infrastructure, many people have water shortages  fairly 
constantly especi ally during the dry season. This of course 
affects the poor the most. Some of the highest poverty areas are 
in Saint Joseph  and St John but Saint Thomas and the north of 
Barbado s also experie nce problems which make it worse for 
wast ewater.  It is not just a case of having a water conn ection, 
but it is beyond the connection 
ill  bd’ i  b d ff di 
   
Q-14: What are the challenges 
people experience is the 
water /wastewa ter  sector?  
People cope by storing water  in whatever containers they  have 
such as bottles and saucepans. Some may  have a tank, but it is 
often not adeq uate or safe.  The dry season is now longer, and 
the days  are hotter which exacerbat es the water  shortages  and 
limits capacity  to dispose of wastew ater where health  and 
sanitation becomes  a huge problem  for the vulnerab le. 
 
Q-15: What are the current 
water /wastewat er treat ment 
issues refere nced by the 
partic ipants?   
There are several house holds that do not have  flushable toilets 
and some people  are squatters where sanitation becomes a big 
issue. There are still several people who use pit latrines. The 
welfare  departme nt periodically makes provisions to supply 
water to those who can’t afford to pay their water bills. The bills 
have  doubled recently as a Levy for wastewater.  Manageme nt 
is now included on the water and wastewater bill. It was 
confirmed  that the minimum charge  is now ($37.5)  United 
S  dll  h hih ild  lid   
Q-16: What was the level of 
acce ptance of the use of 
wastewater?  
The response to the level of acce ptance if wastewater 
becomes available for reuse for irrigation  it was felt that this has 
been a difficult  issue for the people to accept.  It might be a hard 
sell for many. Recently seve ral blue pipes were replaced  by 
black pipes.  Alth ough the use facto r was identical a lot of 
people resiste d becau se they thought  the black pipes  were  
giving dirtier water.  There is evidence that there has been  poor 
communicatio n with the general public. 
 
Question  17: What suggestions 
do you have to improve t he 
quality of water?   
The curriculum and content of the training involves video 
presentations  in 3 different case studies. One of the main 
outcomes of the training is that it will have a positive impact 
on the future work of BWA.


---
*Page 268*
---

 
90 
  
Append ix 2 -Interview  with Mrs.  Shelley  Parris,  Senior  Engineer,  BWA (Feb  
19, 2021)  
 
 
Questio ns Responses 
Q-1: How many men, women and 
LGBTQ IA persons are at the 
management  level in the BWA 
Wastewater  Departmen t? There is an equal number  of men and woman  
managers at the BWA, although the women 
that are managers tend to have more  
administrative  roles, while men have more 
technical roles. The Chairpers on of the Board 
of Manag ement BWA is a woman. The 
presence of the trade union represent ing the 
emp loyees of BWA there is no possibility to 
       
 Q-2: Is the level of pay for men 
and women equal in BWA 
wastewa ter departme nt? There is equal pay for employees as agreed  in 
the collective agreeme nt between BWA and 
the union as the bargai ning body for the 
workers  Q-3: What legislat ions in Barbad os 
are used by BWA to protect 
women  and their emp loyment? Women have equal opportunities to participate 
in any activity of their choice. For example, 
there are woman in parliament including a 
woman as the first  Prime Minister.  
Q-4: Has BWA developed spec ific 
strategies  in its programme 
impleme ntation  to  address  the  
needs of men, women and 
LGBTQIA persons in  the  
wastewater  department? There are no specific strategies developed as 
all the emp loyees are treated equal ly. There 
are some heavy - duty work to be done which 
could be stren uous for women. They are not 
assigned these responsibilities. A first-time 
woman plumber is curre ntly working with  BWA. 
Q-5: What challenges are the 
BWA facing in implem enting 
any gender sensi tive 
programmes in the wastewater   
departmen t? No major challenges  are being experie nced, 
aside from current challenges  being faced  
becau se of this pandemic.  However, the BWA 
has taken the initiative to introduce its 
employees to gender  sensi tivity training, from 
the UWI, to encourage gender  equa lity relati ng 
to co-workers, customers, and clients.  
COVI D19  has posed new challenges, 
      
      Q-6: Are there clear policies for 
the recruitment of women, men 
and LGBTQ IA persons and 
mentoring programs  for recruits 
in BWA? There are general  documented  policies but 
none relating speci fically to women  and 
LGBTQIA  persons. However,  the BWA has 
taken the initiative to introduce  its employees to 
gender sensitivity training to encourage  gender 
equality relat ing to co workers customers and 
 Q-7: What are  the specific 
focused areas in the BWA gender 
training for emp loyees at UWI? Gender  sensitivity issues and the infrastructural 
needs  of the BWA. There attendees  of this 
course will be awar ded with a certificate at th e 
end of the training programm e.


---
*Page 269*
---

 
91 
 Appendix 3 - 3R-CReWS Project Gender Risk Matrix  
 
Gender Risk  Probability75 
From 1 
(Low)-  5 
(High)  Impact76 
From 1 (Low)-  5 
(High)  Mitigating Action  
1. Limited will at the 
Project Governance 
and Management 
level to mainstream 
gender into project 
activities.  3 5 i. Ensure Gender Sensitivity training 
for Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) and Project Management 
(PM) team.  
ii. CCCCC Project Development and 
Management Unit as AE closely 
monitor Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
and provide guidance and 
instruction to PM team on 
mainstreaming, where activities are 
implemented using a gender -blind 
approach.  
iii. Ensure annual reporting on GAP to 
the PSC.  
iv. Ensure annual budgetary process 
cost GAP actions to be undertaken 
annually. 
 
2. Increased 
connections to 
decentralized 
systems lead to 
increased financial 
burdens, on 
vulnerable people, 
including Female 
Headed Households 
to cover sewage cost s 
treatment . 2 3 v. Ensure that the review of Water and 
Sanitation Master Plan consider 
cost implications/price structure 
that does not create economic 
hardship for vulnerable groups.  
3. Incentive 
programme does not 
benefit small  female 
owned business, 
including female 
farmers who may not 
have infrastructural 
or financial inputs 
compared to large 
businesses, who are 
predominantly male 
owned.  3 4 i. Develop recommendations for 
incentive programme  that identifies 
opportunities that will benefit 
female headed households and 
socio -economically deprived 
households.  
 
4. Small female owned 
business, including 
female farmers and 3 3 i. Ensure gender inclusive 
consultations in reformulating 
RAFF and provide windows, where 
 
75 Probability (how likely the risk is to occur)  
76 Impact (if the risk takes place, how seriously will it impact your project)


---
*Page 270*
---

 
92 
 female headed 
households are 
excluded from 
benefiting from the 
Revolving 
Adap tation Fund 
Facility (RAFF ) 
Charter after its 
update.  possible, for access to support for to 
small business owners, (including 
those that are female led), small 
scaled farmers and female heads of 
households.  
5. Discrimination 
against women and 
LGBTQI+ 
populations who 
work , or are 
interested in working 
in the wastewater 
sector.  3 3 i. Ensure development of Project 
Code of Conduct that applies to 
project Staff, Consultants, 
Contractors, BWA employees who 
are interacting with communities 
under the framework of this project. 
 
ii. Ensure continuous training and 
reminders on Discrimination and its 
impacts.  
 
iii. Ensure relevant staff participate in 
Gender Sensitivity Training . 
 
iv. Ensure frequent check in with 
Interns (Women in STEM) with 
BWA Human Resource Department 
and Project Social and Gender 
Specialist.  
 
6. Gender Base 
Violence (GBV) and 
Sexual Exploitation 
and Harassment  
(SEAH) against 
workers , interns,  and 
community members under the framework of this project.   3 4 i. Ensure development of Project 
Code of Conduct that applies to 
project Staff, Consultants, 
Contractors, BWA employees who 
are interacting with communities 
under the framework of this project.  
ii. Ensure that the GRMs designated to 
receive complaints for this project 
are able to effectively receive 
complaints and provide redress to 
victims.  
iii. Ensure frequent check in with 
Interns (Women in STEM) with 
BWA Human Resource Department and Project 
Social and Gender 
Specialist.  
iv. Ensure Procurement Documents 
and contracts explicitly prohibit 
practices of GBV and SEAH 
consistent with AE’s Policies, 
including Gender Policy 2021-2026.


---
*Page 271*
---

 
93 
  
Appendi x 4 - Gender Action  Plan  
 
Impact:   
 Improved resilience of male and female headed households , small farmers, small  business owners  and vulnerable populations  to the 
impacts of climate change on water supply.  
Outcome:  
 Waste Water  sector improves it capacity to respond to gender issues by implementing at least four (4) gender -responsive interventions by 
the end of the Project (Outputs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7)  
 50% increase in the use of reclaimed  water for non -potable uses by male and female heads of households, small farmers and small business 
owners in two low -income communities (Belle Tenantry , and Bellevue Gap) by end of Project. (Outputs 4 & 6)  
 
Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
Output 1: Gender specific gaps  and requirements are  identified and incorporated in legislative and planning frameworks for wastewater 
management . 
 
1.1 Hire a Gender Expert to 
conduct a Gender Gap 
Assessment, including 
consultations with key 
stakeholders as part of the 
Review of Wastewater Reuse Bill, Planning and 
Development Act, and other 
related legislations for 
enhancing wastewater effluent quality, treatment 
options and re -use 
requirements and 
applications   
1.2 Ensure findings of gap 
assessment are captured in 
overarching legislative 
review.    
 
 Legislative review notes 
include gender specific gaps 
and recommendations. 
(Yes/No)  
 
 Complete by year 3  
 
 -the BWA Board  
-3R-CReWS PSC 
-Project Manager  
- Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  $6,000.00 (Gender Expert 
as part of legal review team  
 
77 Targets are reflected in Brackets.


---
*Page 272*
---

 
94 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
1.3 Ensure that water and 
sanitation master plan promote 
gender sensitive actions as it 
relates to the water and 
wastewater sector.  Number of specific  actions 
targeting gender equality and inclusion of v ulnerable 
people in Water and Sanitation Master Plan ( 3) 
 Number of Women’s Groups, 
consulted in development of Water and Sanitation Action 
Plan ( 10) 
 
Number of groups 
representing vulnerable 
populations consulted in development of Water and 
Sanitation Action Plan ( 10) Complete by year 2  
 -The BWA Board  
-3R- CReWS PSC 
- Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  $5,000.00 (Gender Expert 
to review and provide 
recommenda tions as 
well as participate in consultations)  
1.4 Ensure u pdate  to Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOP) and 
Operational Manuals of the BWA 
address the requirements of 
gender and SGBV . Number of BWA SOPS and 
manuals developed to 
include gender needs of 
wastewater section ( 3  
 (1 updated set of SOPs  
1 updated O&M manual  
1 risk management 
fram ework )) Completed by year 3   -3R- CReWS PSC 
- Project Manager  
- Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
-BWA Wastewater 
Manager  $10,000.00 (Gender 
Expert as part of Team 
updating Documents)  
     
Output 2: I mproved  capacity of BWA staff to integrate gender considerations into  their provision of  wastewater services  
2.1 Roll out UWI/BWA Gender 
Sensitivity Training programme  
#2 for existing BWA employees.  
  
2.2 Develop online self -paced 
mandatory SGBV training for all 
BWA employees  
 
 
 
 
  Number (disaggregated by 
sex) of BWA  staff members 
participating  in the UWI/BWA 
Gender Sensitiv ity Training 
program (300) (150 M, 150F)  
 
# Of SGBV Trainings 
Developed ( 2) 
% of BWA employees by sex 
who have taken SGBV training (80%M, 80%F ) Completed by end of 
project  
 BWA Human 
Resource 
Department  
- Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
-Project Manager  $45,000.00  (Trainers , 
developers for online training and  Logistics)


---
*Page 273*
---

 
95 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
2.3 Conduct training for BWA 
staff on the updated SOPs and 
OM that include gender 
considerations.  
 
  
# Of operators 
(disaggregated by sex) 
exposed to the training on the 
SOPs and OM ( 70)  
Output 3:  Increased participation 
of women performing technical 
roles in waste water sector      
3.1 Develop  in collaboration with 
relevant training institutions Women in STEM Internship 
Programme s at Wastewater 
division.  
 3.2 Implement in collaboration 
with relevant training institutions 
a Women in STEM Internship 
Programme at Wastewater 
division , including the 
recommendations from interns 
on potential measures to 
increase participation of women 
in STEM and to increase equality 
for women in waste water 
management.  # of Women in STEM Internship 
Programme developed (1)  
 
# of female interns 
participating in Women in 
STEM internship programme 
(8) 
 
 # of reports including 
recommendations for 
improvement of gender 
equality within wastewater 
sector ( 8) 
# of recommendations 
implemented ( 4 ) End of Project  -Project Manager  
-BWA HR 
Department  
-BWA Wastewater 
Department  
- Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
 $ 10,000 (stipend co -
financing)  
3.3 Ensure equal  participation of 
men and women in Ratio of 
Males and females participating 
in Caribbean Vocational 
Qualification (CVQ)/ National 
Vocational Qualification (NVQ ) 
courses offered under the 
Project .  Ratio of Males and females 
participating in CVQ/NVQ 
programmes offered from 3R -
CREWS (1:1)  Throughout the 
Project  -Project Manager  
-BWA HR 
Department  
-BWA Wastewater 
Department  
Project Social and Gender Specialist  
 
 Cost subsumed under 
technical training line.  
 
3.4 BWA female staff to  
participate in public education 
campaigns encouraging girls  
# Of targeted outreach by 
BWA female Managers, 
Technicians and Engineers to Throughout the 
project  -BWA Publi c 
Relations 
Department  
-Project Social and $5,000.00 ($1,000.00 per 
outreach session)


---
*Page 274*
---

 
96 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
and young women to aspire to 
leadership and technical roles in 
the waste water sector  
 spaces with girls and young 
women, including schools ( 5). Gender Specialist  
-Project Manager  
Output 4: Gender sensitive stakeholder consultations and awareness  programmes instituted to ensure public knowledge and buy -in on the 
use of wastewater services and potential impacts.  
 
4.1 Convene  gender informed  
stakeholder consultations to 
inform and solicit input from 
community members ( heads of 
households, small farmers, small business own ers and vulnerable 
populations)  into the design, 
implementation and monitoring 
phases of the Project,   
 
 
 
 
    # of consultations held with 
community members ( heads 
of households, small farmers, 
small business owners and 
vulnerable populations)  who 
offer inputs and receive 
information on the project 
from design to M&E  
4-8 community consultations 
(Town halls, outreach, walk 
through etc) per year = 8 -16 
communities over 2 years x 75 
persons per community = 600 -
1200 community persons (50% 
males and 50% females . 
 
 At least quarterly until 
end of P roject  BWA Public Relations 
Department  
Project Manager  
Social and Gender Specialist  
PSC 
BWA Wastewater 
Division  Cost subsumed under 
stakeholder 
engagement lines  
4.2 Develop communication 
strategy that is informed by 
Gender sensitive KAP Survey. 
KAP Survey must therefore 
ensure that results are easily 
disaggregated by sex and that 
analysis of knowledge, attitudes 
and practice is gender responsive.   
 % of women and  men 
administered KAP instruments 
(51%, 49% respectively ) 
 KAP Study reveals gender 
differences in analysis 
(Yes/No)  
Communication strategy 
tailors messaging and 
channels to men and women 
based on feedback from KAP 
surveys ( Yes/No)   
 Year 1 of the Project  
 
 
 
 Project Manager  
Project Social and Gender Specialist  
BWA Public Relations Department  
3R-CReWs PSC  No Additional Cost (SGS 
salary to review KAP T OR 
and documents for 
gender analysis)


---
*Page 275*
---

 
97 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
# Of persons benefitting from 
education activities 
(Disaggregated by 
sex) (10000 (4,900M, 5,100F )) 
     
4.2 3R-CReWS Project webpage 
will report on project results 
disaggregated by sex  where 
possible. Webpage will include communication messaging 
including of  gendered impacts  
of climate change  on water 
supply and  messaging 
encouraging use of reclaimed 
water targeting female farmers , 
heads of households, small 
business owners  and small 
business owners.    
% of applicable project results based on Project Log frame 
disaggregated by sex on 
Project website ( 100%)  
 
Number of stories 
communicating gender ed 
impact of climate change  on 
water supply and access  (4) 
 
Number of Communication 
messages 
messaging 
encouraging use of 
reclaimed water targeting 
female farmers, heads of households, small business 
owners and small business 
owners  (4) Throughout the 
project  -BWA Public 
Relations 
Department  
-Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
-Project Manager  $50,000.00 ( webpage 
consultancy design and establishment  as well as 
communication messages) ) 
Output 5. Increased capacity of BWA to respond to SEAH complaints from community and staff members  
5.1 Update the  Wastewater 
Division  Complaints 
Management S ystem to ensure 
complaints system is capable of 
capturing SGBV complaints, 
publicized  (including on Project 
webpage), accessible for 
directly impacted communities 
and has mechanism  s for 
external referral , including the 
CCCCC GRM . 
 
 
 Existence of mechanism for 
reporting on SGBV as part of 
Wastewater Management 
Division Complaints Management System 
(Yes/No)  
 
% of stakeholder engagement 
community events that 
publicises   the SEAH /SGBV complaints process ( 100% ) 
 
Complaints systems accessible Within 6 months of 
project inception  BWA Human 
Resource 
Department .  
Project Social and Gender Specialist  $6,,000.00 (update and 
publicity of Complaints system)


---
*Page 276*
---

 
98 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
on Project webpage ( Yes/no) 
 
CCCCC GRM Publicized as 
source for receiving SGBV 
related complaints ( Yes/No)  
5.2 Develop and implement 
complaints procedure for addressing SEAH/SGBV 
complaints in waste water sector  # of SEAH/SGBV complaints 
procedures developed (1)  
 
# of SEAH/SGBV complaints 
procedures developed (1)  
 
 Within 6 months of 
project inception  BWA Huma n 
Resource 
Department .  
Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  $7,000.00 ( Part of the 
consultancy  to develop  
and support 
implementation 
complaints procedure )  
Output 6: Male and female heads of households, small farmers, small business owners and vulnerable populations  have increased 
opportunities to connect to wastewater treatment systems . 
 
6.1 Update RAFF  charter to 
include  wastewater treatment 
and reuse options to promote 
gender equality . 
 
6.2Develop recommendations 
for incentive programme 
provide opportunities that  will 
benefit female headed 
households and socio -
economically deprived 
households.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3Undertake re- education 
programs targeting farmers Review of charter includes 
assessment of needs of male 
and female business and 
households ( Yes/No)  
 
Existence of report providing 
recommendations for a 
gender sensitive incentive 
programm e to benefit FFH 
and socio -economically 
disadvantaged households (Yes/No ) 
  # of recommendations for 
incentive programme 
implemented that benefit 
female headed households 
and socio -economically 
deprived households.  (4) 
 
 
Number of  sessions 
(workshops, meetings, 6.1- 4.3- By end of 
year 3 
 
6.4- 6.7 By end of 
year 4 Project Manager,  
Project Social and 
Gender Specialist,  
3R-CReWS PSC  
BWA Board of 
Directors  
 6.1-$5,000.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2- $5,000.00 (consultant 
to develop 
recommendations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
6.3 No additional costs 
outside of BWA Co -


---
*Page 277*
---

 
99 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
particularly women, to enhance 
capabilities and leadership for 
the adoption of wastewater 
treatment technologies and 
reuse options in two communities  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
6.4 Small scale female farmers 
who partic ipate in re -education 
[propgrammes receive subsidies 
to adopt waste water treatment 
technologies and reuse options in two communities  
 6.5 M ale and Female headed 
households in Two communities in Zone A provided with 
connections to decentralized 
waste water treatment systems.  
   
 
 
 
 
 training ) targeting  farmers , 
especially female small 
farmers ( 8) 
Ratio of Female to Male 
Farmers participating in re -
education programme (2:3)  
% of small scale female farmers 
participating in the re -
education programs that 
adopt wastewater treatment 
tec 
 
% of small scale female farmers 
who participate in re -
education programs receiving 
subsidies to adopt waste 
water treatment technologies 
and reuse o ptions in two 
communities ( 50%) 
 
# Of Households with 
connections to waste water 
treatment system 
(Disaggregated by sex of 
head of households). (225) 
(115 FHH, 110 MHH) 
 
 
Volume of reclaimed water is 
available for non -potable use 
disaggregated by male/female HH.   (2.25 million 
m3) (1.114 m3 FHH) (1.113m3 
MHH).  
 
 
 finance and stakeholder 
engagement.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
6.4Subsumed under 
existing Project costs


---
*Page 278*
---

 
100 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
 
 
 
 
6.5 Workshop held to encourage 
small and women owned 
businesses to l everage the 
mechanisms available 
(incentives and RAFF)  for access 
to wastewater services.  
   
 
 
% of small and women owned 
businesses participating in   
workshop on leveraging the 
mechanisms available 
(incentives and RAFF)  for 
access to wastewater 
services. ( 30%)  
 
 % of small and women owned 
businesses attending workshop that use information 
to access incentives/ RAFF in 
order to access waste water 
services ( 30%) 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
6.5 subsumed under existing Project costs for 
stakeholder 
engagement  
Output 7: Enabling a gender responsive project management and governance environment for the duration of the Project  
7.1Ensure contractors, BWA Staff 
and project staff interacting with community signs Code of 
Conduct to be developed 
under this project.  
 Existence of COC that 
prohibits SEAH/ SGBV ( Yes/No)  
 
% Of Staff, consultants 
working in communities who 
have signed COC ( 100% ) Throughout the life 
cycle of the project  BWA  HR Department  
BWA Procurement 
Department  
Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
3R-CReWS PSC  No additional cost (staff 
time)  
7.2 Select a gender balance 
Project Team  Ratio of Male to Female 
Project Team ( 1:1) 
 
% of men on project team in 
female dominated roles ( 20%) 
 
% of women on project team 
in male dominated roles 
(20%) Throughout the life 
cycle of the P roject . BWA  HR Department 
CCCCC  Advertise &Interview 
applicants Applicant Orientation. No 
standalone costs 
identified.


---
*Page 279*
---

 
101 
 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
7.3Develop a gender balance 
PSC.  
 
7.4Ensure representation of 
Bureau of Gender Affairs on PSC.    Ratio of Male to Female on 
PSC (1:1)  
 
Existence of representative 
from Bureau of Gender Affairs 
on PSC ( yes/No)  Throughout the life 
cycle of the P roject . CCCCC  
BWA Board of 
Directors  
  No Standalo ne cost 
identified (Staff time)  
7.5 Recruit and retain Social and 
Gender Specialist for the Project. 
The specialist will be responsible 
for stakeholder related activities 
to ensure gender 
mainstreaming, update of the complaints system, gender 
mainstreaming in all 
components of the project and 
reporting on gender progress.    # Of qualified Gender 
Specialist working on the project. ( 1) Throughout the 
Project  -BWA Human 
Resource Department  
- CCCCC  $192,000.00  
 
7.6Present annually to PSC, 
report on Progress of 
implementation of GAP.  
 
7.7Table annually, a discussion 
on the Progress of GAP 
Implementation as an agenda 
item of the PSC.  # Of Reports on Gender 
Progress of Project presented to PSC ( 5) 
# Of discussion on Gender report held at Project PSC ( 5) Annually  -Project Manager  
-CCCCC  
-Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  No Standalone cost 
identified (Staff time)  
7.8Ensure mandatory 
participation of Project staff in Gender Sensitivity and 
SEAH/SGBV Training sessions  % Project staff participating in 
gender sensitivity training disaggregated by sex ( 100% ) 
% of Project staff participating 
in SEAH/SGBV training 
(disaggregated sex) ( 100% ) 
 Annually  BWA Human 
Resource 
Department  
Project Manager  
-CCCCC  
-Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  No Standalone cost 
identified (Staff time)  
7.9 Collect, store, and retrieve 
data disaggregated by sex and other vulnerability indicators for 
planning and decision making 
throughout the Project cycle, 
including during stakeholder 
engagement.  % of applicable data 
collected, stored and is disaggregated by sex and 
other vulnerability (indicators 
(100% ). 
 
                           First six 
months of project  BWA Wastewater 
Division  
Project  Manager  
Project Social and 
Gender Specialist  
PSC No Standalone cost 
identified (Staff time)


---
*Page 280*
---

102 Focus Area/Activity  Indicators/Targets77 Timeline  Responsibilities  Estimated Cost (in USD)  
# of baseline report on sex 
disaggregated data 
produced (1)  
__________