=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20220624112713+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 22 for Word
/ModDate: D:20220624112713+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 22.1.149
/Subject: 
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
17 – 20 July 2022  
Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 9  GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
24 June  2022  
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package f or FP 188 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s even  parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood 
Improvement in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia) "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessm ent;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.33/02 /Add.02  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  105 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  106  
Secretariat’s assessment  109 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   125  
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  138  
Gender documentation  141


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement 
in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia) . 
Country(ies):  Republic of the Gambia . 
Accredited Entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) .  
Date of first submission:  2021/06/07   
Date of current submission  2022/ 05/18  
Version number  V.11


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE b  
 
Contents 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
servi ce standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill ou t information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name]- [Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3  
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate  which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low -emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Forestry and land use  10 % 10 % 
Adaptation total  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  40 % 10 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  15 % 10 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  20 % 60 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  15 % 10 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced,  avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  -238,519 tCO2eq over the 
20-year lifetime of the 
investment2 A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  417,643 direct and indirect 
beneficiaries  (218,845 women)  
167,643 direct 
beneficiaries  
(52.4% women)  250,000 indirect 
beneficiaries  
(52.4% women)  
direct 
beneficiaries are 
6.9% of total 
population3 indirect 
beneficiaries are 
10.3% of total 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance4)  25,000,000 USDUSD   
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  17,200,000 U SDUSD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF 
financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the investment are expected to be 
effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period. 
3 Based on the estimated population of 2,416,664 individuals (World Bank, 2020) .  
4 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4  
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8 .  
☒  Grant  17,200,000   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years.  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.  
 
5/7/2021  
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF  
support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g.  GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
The Government of the Gambia acti ng through the  
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)  and  
Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National Assembly Matters (MoFWRNAM)  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
1. As a poor, low -lying coastal nation, and with the whole of the country situated within 30 km from and 
heavily dependent on the Gambia river basin, The Gambia is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change.  In the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND -GAIN) Index, Gambia is the 33rd most vulnerable country 
and the 53rd least ready country in the world, reflecting its high vulnerabilit y score and low readiness score. 
Furthermore, The Gambia’s is recognized as a Fragile and Conflict -affected Situations country , with limit ed resources 
that could be re- directed to climate adaptation.  
2. As detailed in Annex 2, climate change will negatively affect The Gambia ’s marine, coastal and riverine  
fisheries , through damage to fisheries infrastructure and through the knock -on effects of increased temperature, salinity 
and acidity – among others – on many important (shell)fish species. Overall, climate change will threaten the livelihoods 
of poor fisherfolk and decrease the availability of fish from capture fisheries, which at the moment is the main source of protein for the Gambian population and a pillar of sustainable diets and food and nutrition security  (including access 
to protein) for the most poor and vulnerable people. The climate change induced increase in the frequency of extreme 
events, in combination with SLR, is expected to cause damage to fish landing infrastructure, resulting in higher wastage 
and losses in the fish value chain.  The climate change vulnerability  assessment of the 2 8 most important (shell) fish 
species in the Gambia, concludes that  a significant number of species, representing a majority of the catches in the 
Gambia, is likely to be negatively impacted by one or multiple climate change stressors.  Mangrove forests, which are


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 5 
 essential spawning grounds and nurser ies for many fish and shellfish species, are also expected to be degraded as a 
result of accelerating sea level rise (SLR) and increased salinity.5  
3. In fact, w ithout sufficient climate- proofing of the fisheries value chain, there is high risk of damage to existing 
coastal fisheries infrastructure and the inland aquaculture facilities, with fish losses increasing as a result of ineffective 
storage/processing and climate impacts on transportation to markets. Climate impact  assessment s performed at each 
major  landing site targeted by the project indicate that sea level rise, a rise in extreme winds  and waves  and likely 
changes in extreme precipitation events will contribute to the degradation of the existing coastal fisheries infrastructure. 
The latter , in tur n, will negatively affect the livelihoods of fisher folk, who will be at increased risk both at sea and on 
shore and who will experience further losses to their economic activities (fish landing and handling and fish processing). 
Climate change impacts on the Gambian fisheries must be addressed in a holistic and multifaceted manner to ensure 
climate resilience across all stages of the agri -food value chain.  
4. To reduce the climate risk affecting the fisheries sector, the adaptation responses can be three -fold: first, 
by reducing the very high exposure and vulnerability of the current artisanal fisheries infrastructure and equipment, 
resulting in fish losses in the value chain. Second, by supporting the development of aquaculture production to compensate for climate -induced decreases in capture fisheries. Third, by restoring degraded mangrove forests that 
play a key role as breeding grounds and nurseries for many fisheries. A  number of barriers hinder the climate adaptat ion 
of the Gambian fisher folk and prevent the Government from providing the necessary support. T he proposed GCF 
project will address these barriers , as well as cross -cutting gender constraints,  to make the Gambian artisanal fisheries 
sector more climate -resilient . 
5. The project aims to assist Gambian fisherfolk to build their resilience against climate change and 
improve their livelihoods.  The project will scale up  adaptation measures that have been proven in a number of 
countries in West Africa , and in similar contexts, with a particular focus on climate -proofing fisheries infrastructure and 
on value chain segment s dominated by women (fish handling and processing). The project will promote the adoption 
of aquaculture technologies that provide organic fer tilizers for farming as well as produce fish. In order to ensure the 
sustainability of its results, PROREFISH will also support the strengthening of the enabling environment for Gambian fisheries and promote a stronger engagement of the private sector, whi ch is currently extremely limited. The objectives 
of the project will be realized through three inter -linked components : 
• Component 1: Strengthening restoration capacity and community management of artisanal fisheries 
habitats , designed to reverse the degradation of mangrove ecosystems  (which play a key role as breeding 
grounds and nurseries for fish and shellfish) by investing in restoration through replanting and assisted natural 
regeneration, coupled with support to sustainable ecosystem management.  
• Component 2: Climate resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture development , aiming  to increase 
overall fish availability and enhance the incomes of poor  fisher folk and farmers, by improving the artisanal  
fisheries infrastructure  (thus reducing fish wastage)  and by promoting aquaculture production through different 
technologies , including oyster cultivation and rice- fish farming, among others . 
• Component 3: Improved climate change adaptive capacities, providing  the support necessary for the 
successful implementation, scaling up  and sustainability of the mangrove restoration, infrastructure climate 
proofing and aquaculture results of the project , as well as paving the way for other climate adaptation projects 
and initiatives  and enabling stronger private sector involvement in the sector.  
• Through this mix of interventions, the project will directly support 167,643 vulnerable Gambian s 
dependent on the fisher ies value chain, 52.4 % of whom are women, to adapt to the impact of climate 
change and improve their livelihoods  through the adoption of climate resilient  aquaculture, through climate 
proofing of small -scale fisheries infrastructure and through fisheries habitat restoration. Thr ough increasing fish 
availability, these interventions will build the resilience of beneficiaries and will improve their incomes and their 
nutrition, as well as unlocking opportunities to expand and diversify their livelihoods.   
6. The project responds to the  priorities identified in the Gambia’s National Climate Change Strategy and sectoral 
policy objectives and it contributes to GCF’s Adaptation Results Areas (ARA) 1, 2, 3, and 4, to GCF’s Mitigation 
 
5 As detailed in Annex 2 (feasibility study, part II), man- made changes of freshwater flow into mangrove ecosystems have been fairly localized, and are not a 
major cause of mangrove degradation.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 6 
 Results Area (MRA) 4 , and includes co -environmental and socio economic co -benefits from mangrove restoration and 
development of fisheries value chains . Gambia’s NDC proposes investments to achieve annual emissions 
reductions (ER) of 3.29 million tCO2e by 2030 , or 49.7% of the BAU scenario, with most investments conditional 
on the availability of concessionary climate finance. The main NDC investments that PROREFISH will contribute 
to are: (i) regreening degraded landscapes (output 1.2, mangrove restoration); (ii) upscaling depl oyment of fuel -efficient 
biomass combustion stoves (output 2.1, improved fish smoking ovens ); and (iii) climate -smart agriculture (output 1.1, 
integrating aquaculture with horticulture and agriculture). While the project presents mitigation benefits of 238,519 
tCO2e over its 20- year lifespan, PROREFISH is primarily a climate change adaptation projects designed to help poor 
fisherfolk adapt to the impacts of climate change on artisanal fisheries.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7  
 
  
6 Per capita GHG emissions in The Gambia is 1.11 Mt CO 2e, compared to the global average of 6.76 Mt CO 2e (source: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg -
emissions?breakBy=regions -PER_CAPITA&chartType=line&gases=all -ghg&regions=WORLD%2CGMB&sectors=total -including -lucf accessed 3/8/2020).  
7 Note that the watershed reflects those areas upstream of the maximal extend of permanent saltwater intrusion (KP 64) (Figure sources: the shape file for the 
Gambia Watershed was obtained from the HydroSHEDS database ( https://hydrosheds.org/page/overview ); The Gambian Economic Exclusion Zone from the 
Marine Regions Gazet teer ( https://www.marineregions.org/gazetteer.php?p=details&id=8370 ); Base map, Google Earth Pro.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
The climate change context  
7. Risk of climate- related impacts results from the interaction of climate- related hazards with exposure and 
vulnerability of human and natural systems (IPCC, 2014). In The Gambia, the high exposure to climate- related hazards 
combined with high vulnerability and low readiness results in high climate risk for the population and natural systems 
supporting their livelihoods. As a low -lying coastal nation that is completely dependent on a single river basin , 
and as a small, Least Developed Country (LDC), The Gambia is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change.  The country’s physical location renders it highly exposed to climate change threats both on land and at sea 
and, due to the small size of the economy, the country possesses limited capacity to autonomously undertake extensive adaptation efforts in response to threats for which it contributed little in creating.
6 In the Notre Dame Global Adaptation 
Initiative (ND -GAIN) Index, Gambia is the 33rd most vulnerable country and the 53rd least ready country in the world, 
reflecting its high vulnerability score and low readiness score.  
8. The story of climate change is largely one of water, as no other country has perhaps as close a relationship 
with a river’s course than The Gambia. A majority of the national boundaries were drawn tracing lines 10 km north and 
south of the respective riverbanks of the Gambia River to the furthest navigable point upstream (see Figure B -1).  As 
such, the Gambia has both a narrow oceanic economic exclusion zone extending 200 nautical miles into the Atlantic Ocean, and an associated watershed situated predominantly in neighboring countries, Senegal and Guinea. The water 
passing through the river originates as seasonal rainfall in the upland areas of the river’s watershed, which aggregate 
and drain through the length of the country on the way to the sea. Along its path the growing volume of fresh water enters an increasingly saline estuarine environment, impacted by the daily tidal movements of the Atlantic Ocean, before emptying into the sea. This continuous, dynamic hydrologic system of fresh to saltwater bodies, and the habitats and species that it supports is subject to and responds differently to the major climate change forces encountered along 
its transect.  
Figure B-1 The Gambia, Gambia River watershed (in green) and economic exclusion zone7 
 
9. To address the range of climate change dynamics within the Gambian fisheries, a comprehensive climate 
analysis has been prepared as part of the project formulation process (see Annex 2 for full details).  This analysis presents a multi -dimensional pathway through which climate change will impact the full range of the Gambian fisheries, 
which in turn will generate biological impacts on various fish species, resulting in reduced resource availability for the 
Gambian populations.  The Gambian fisheries can be separated into five ecological segments: 1) the open ocean, 2) 
the coastal zone, 3) the estuary, 4) the brackish water segment of the river, and 5) the freshwater segment of the river (kilometer points (KP) are indicated in Figure B-2 below). Climate change affects each segment in different ways and 
by different magnitudes. Given the very limited information and studies available on the topic of climate change impact on Gambian fisheries, new research was conducted for the present assessment.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8  
 
  
8 The five models selected are: GFDL- ESM2M; MIROC -ESM; IPSL -CM5a -MR; NORESM; and  the HadGEM2- ES.  All of these models are part of the Coupled 
Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5), used in conducting the analysis for the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). For more detail see Annex 2, Chapter 
3, para 5 and further.  Figure B-2 Overview of the climate analysis  
 
10. The climate trend analysis and projections of climate change were conducted by downscaling global 
circulation models8 and projected change in temperature and precipitation (see Annex 2 chapter 3 for full 
details).  The entire watershed of the Gambia River was included in the geographical scope of the analysis, as deemed 
necessary for a complete understanding of future stream flow.  
Climate baseline  
11. Historical trends for air temperature and precipitation . Considering the whole of the Gambia River 
watershed over the period 1979- 2016, average annual precipitation has shown a non- significant increase of about 1 
mm per year, while temperatures have increased on average 0.02°C per year, or about 0.74°C in total over the period 
(statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence interval). Geographically, temperatures have increased uniformly 
over the entire watershed, while precipitation has declined slightly in the central watershed, with slight increases seen 
in the upper reaches of the watershed, and along the coast (see Figure B-3). 
Figure B-3 Average annual change in temperature and precipitation, 1979-2016 (the shape represents the Gambia River watershed and 
the grid cells with black dots indicate statistically significant trends ; source: FAO analysis of EWEMBI dataset )


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9  
 
  
9 The five models  selected are: GFDL- ESM2M; MIROC -ESM; IPSL -CM5a -MR; NORESM; and the HadGEM2- ES.  All of these models are part of the Coupled 
Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5), used in conducting the analysis for the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). For more detai l see Annex 2, Chapter 
3, para 5 and further.  12. Historical trends in sea surface temperature .  In the Canary Current Large Marine Ecosystem (CCLME), 
upper ocean temperatures (0- 200 m depth) have risen on average 0.28 C per decade over the 32- year period of 1982-
2013 (Vélez -Belchí et al., 2015), or 0.9 C of total warming, with some areas within this zone warming at more than 
double this rate, at 0.65 C per decade. The warming of surface waters within the CCLME exhibits a strong seasonal 
trend, with the highest values observed during periods of greater downwelling, especially in locations where this occurs during the summer months, leading to observed warming trends of over 0.90 C per decade during peak warming periods of the year. The areas off the Gambian coast are reported to have increased downwelling (Vélez -Belchí et al., 
2015), thus indicating the potential for higher warming trends, although in situ  measurements are lacking to substantiate 
this trend.  
13. Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL) rise.   The IPCC AR6 shows strengthened evidence for an increase in the 
rate of GMSL rise since the mid- 20th century, with an average rate of 2.3 [1.6 –3.1] mm yr -1 over the period 1971– 
2018 increasing to 3.7 [3.2– 4.2] mm yr -1 for the period 2006– 2018 (high confidence). GMSL is projected to rise between 
0.18 m (0.15– 0.23 m, likely range) (SSP1- 1.9) and 0.23 m (0.20– 0.30 m, 2 likely range) (SSP5- 8.5) by 2050. By 2100, 
the projected rise is between 0.38 m (0.28– 0.55 m, likely range) 3 (SSP1- 1.9) and 0.77 m (0.63– 1.02 m, likely range) 
(SSP5 -8.5). There is thus projected to be a clear acceleration in sea level rise (SLR) from 3.7 mm yr -1 at present, to 
6.7 mm yr -1 up to 2050, to 7.3 mm yr -1 thereafter.  
14. Salinity : It is virtually certain that since 1950 near -surface high- salinity regions have become more saline, while 
low salinity regions have become fresher, with medium confidence that this is linked to an intensification of the 25- year 
hydrological cycle (IPCC AR6).  
15. Future projections for air temperature and precipita tion:  Future projections were prepared using all five 
models9 with the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5. All models, across all time periods, show 
a sustained upward trend in mean temperatures, consistent with what is known about the future of global climate 
change, with mean minimum temperatures rising at roughly twice the rate of mean maximum temperatures. The output 
from all models is statistically significant at a 95 percent confidence interval. Figure B-4 Projected geographic trend in 
temperature for RCP 4.5 (top) and 8.5 (bottom) across three time periods (near (2011- 2040), medium (2041- 2070) and 
far (2071- 2099) future) for the MIROC -ESM model  presents the MIROC -ESM results for future te mperature changes 
across the watershed.  
 
16. On the other hand, future climate projections show generally mixed signals for precipitation, with variable 
results between the models at each time interval, and within each model across the three periods. This div ergence in 
model output is consistent with studies focusing on projected precipitation within the Sahelian zone, where models generally split between those predicting precipitation increases and decreases (Giannini, 2016). 
Figure B-4  Projected 
geographic trend in precipitation for RCP 4.5 (top) and 8.5 (bottom) across three time periods (near (2011- 2040), 
medium (2041- 2070) and far (2071- 2099) future) for the MIROC -ESM model presents the MIROC -ESM results for 
future precipitation changes across the watershed. This conclusion is also supported by ensemble data from the 
CORDEX Africa models ( https://dap.climateinformation.org). The analysis in the latter po rtal also finds variability 
between models, but 12 out of 18 models project a decrease in precipitation under RCP4.5 for the period 2041- 2070.  
 
17. Future projections for sea surface temperature:  Increases in air temperature must first warm surface waters 
before this heat can be transferred into the ocean body and impact fish species at varying depths. According to the IPPC AR6 Physical Science Basis, the ocean is currently warming faster than at any other time since at least the last 
deglacial transition (medium confidence), with warming extending to depths well below 2000 m (very high confidence). 
Ocean warming will continue over the 21st century (virtually certain), and will likely continue until at least 2300, even for low CO2 emissions scenarios.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate change impacts on the fisheries sector  
18. Climate change significantly affects the fisheries sector through a composite pathway, impacting fish life cycle 
and their productivity, as well as the fisher folk’s activities, infrastructure and livelihoods.   Ultimately, some of the 
greatest impacts of climate change on aquatic species are felt through the direct effects on fish habitat and 
food chains . Following an in- depth climate change impact analysis on the ocean environment  (see Annex 2 chapter 4 
for full details), FAO has concluded that PROREFISH should not target the open ocean for two reasons: (i) for some 
key expected climate change impacts in the ocean environment, such as changes in marine currents and upwellings, 
there are no credible adaptation options; and (ii) for those climate change impacts that are amenable to adaptation, such as changes in the relative abundance of different fish stocks, adaptive measures can only be realized at a much 
Figure B-5 Projected geographic trend in precipitation for RCP 4.5 (top) and 8.5 (bottom) across three time periods 
(near (2011 -2040), medium (2041 -2070) and far (2071- 2099) future) for the MIROC -ESM model  
 Figure B-4 Projected geographic trend in temperature for RCP 4.5 (top) and 8.5 (bottom) across three time periods 
(near (2011 -2040), medium (2041 -2070) and far (2071- 2099) future) for the MIROC -ESM model


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
 larger scale than a single country’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), especially for an EEZ as small as G ambia’s. 
Regional coordination and stock management mechanisms to increase the sustainability of fish stocks cannot be 
addressed in the context of a national project like PROREFISH. Therefore, the project will geographically target the 
coastal areas, the estuary and the river.   The impacts on women are considered much larger than on men (NDC, 2021), 
as their lack of literacy and numeracy skills make women inept at conceiving strategic actions, which will be required to effectively adapt to climate change. Limited decision- making power and access to productive resources among 
women do not give them the full range of adaptation options that would be available under gender parity, and thus 
negatively affecting the adaptation capacity of the entire society.  
 
Impact on mangroves  
19. The mangrove ecosystems in the estuary and middle river segments play a pivotal role in the lifecycle 
of major fish and shellfish species. They also capture and fix sediments and thus enhance coastal protection, an essential contribution to climate resilience. Annex 2, chapter 5, analyses  
the Gambia River and estuarine 
environments, including the mangrove ecosystems, showing how the climate change impacts (sea level rise, salinity 
changes, CO2 increase, pH decrease and soil acidification, d issolved oxygen (DO) and turbidity changes, and 
decreased stream flow and drought) would negatively affect mangroves. A 1 m rise in sea level would submerge about 8 percent of The Gambia’s land area, including 61 percent of the current mangroves, and 33 percent of swamps (Jaiteh 
and Sarr, 2011; Jallow et al., 1999).  The IPCC AR6 shows strengthened evidence for an increase in the rate of GMSL 
rise since the mid -20th century, with an average rate of 2.3 [1.6– 3.1] mm yr -1 over the period 1971– 2018 increasing  
to 3.7 [3.2– 4.2] mm yr -1 for the period 2006 –2018 (high confidence). GMSL is projected to rise between 0.18 m (0.15–
0.23 m, likely range) (SSP1 -1.9) and 0.23 m (0.20– 0.30 m, 2 likely range) (SSP5- 8.5) by 2050. By 2100, the projected 
rise is between 0.38 m (0.28– 0.55 m, likely range) 3 (SSP1- 1.9) and 0.77 m (0.63 –1.02 m, likely range) (SSP5- 8.5).  
20. Some of the mangrove species are also impacted by increased salinity.  Salinity intrusion in the Gambia 
River is a natural process expected to intensify because of climate change (see Annex 2 chapter 6 for full details). The current pattern of salt intrusion will be heavily influenced by changes in future precipitation, temperature, sea level rise and short -term anthropogenic alterations of river flow. The various mangrove species have different biophysiological 
adaptations and tolerance levels to salinity and flooding. Climate change will therefore have an impact on the 
proportions of different mangrove forest species, which may in turn impact the different fish and shellfish species associated with them. No quantitative data on this impact is available at present.  Therefore, the mangrove restoration 
efforts will focus on assisted natural regeneration using a mix of species with a range of different and more adapted salt tolerances. 
The Gambia river, however, has already undergone a major hypersaline event during the 1980’s 
drought, which led to livestock losses and localized mangrove die- off. Expected climate change impacts will increase 
the risk of such hypersaline events re- occurring.  Impacts on fish species availability 
21. The climate change impact assessment investigated the biological responses of the 28 most important 
(shel l)fish species in the Gambia (see Annex 2 chapter 7 for full details). Building on the rest of the climate 
analysis, the vulnerability assessment identified eight key climate stressors (temperature, salinity, oxygen, pH, ocean 
circulation and productivity,  sea level rise, extreme events and precipitation) and analyzed each species’ tolerance and 
response to the projected changes. A significant number of species, representing a majority of the catches in the 
Gambia,  is projected to be negatively impacted by one or multiple climate change stressors  (see the visual 
summary in Figure B -6). Given the uncertainty  in the future pace and extent of climate trends, the results of the 
vulnerability analysis should be considered conservative. In particular, climate induced changes in upwelling (ocean circulation) could trigger a disproportionate, point- of-no-return biological response in some of the key fish species.  
Salinity will also indirectly impact fish.
 This is due to both the direct impact of salinity intrusion on fish biology and 
distribution, and the negative effect on the mangrove ecosystems.  
22. As noted in Part 1 of the Prefeasibility study (figure 5- 9), remote sensing studies and National Forest 
Assessments have reached widely diverging conclusions about changes  in mangrove cover in The Gambia over the 
past decades. What is certain, however, is that mangrove ecosystems are relatively sensitive to changes in hydrology 
and salinity, and that the Gambia River watershed, as across the Sahel, has experienced tremendou s changes in the


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
  
10 See specific reference to Annex 2 (Part II).   rainfall regime over the past fifty years. The significant mangrove die -back that happened as a result of the 1970’s and 
1980’s drought, followed by recolonization of deforested areas by mangroves subsequently, is well -documented.  
23. Unlike many other tropical mangrove countries, The Gambia has not suffered from large- scale conversion of 
mangrove areas to shrimp pond aquaculture or other unsustainable land uses. Similarly, man- made changes of 
freshwater flow into mangrove ecosystems have been fairly localized, and are not a major cause of mangrove 
degradation.10 
24. More common causes of mangrove degradation include wood harvesting for poles and woodfuel, hence the 
importance of the proposed investment in obtaining secure community tenure over restored mangrove areas and 
building the communities’ capacity to manage mangroves and develop non- destructive income- generating activities 
based on mangrove ecosystem services (such as honey production) in order to strengthen economic incentives for 
conti nuing to manage restored mangrove areas after the end of the project.  
 
Figure B-6 Visual summary of the climate change vulnerability assessment for the main Gambian fish species  
 
 
 
Impact on fisheries infrastructure (coastal and inland) 
1. In addition to this impact pathway, it is important to note that climate change will also have other effects 
on the Gambian fisheries by damaging the existing coastal fisheries infrastructure and the inland aquaculture facilities.  Economic losses as a result of climate- related risks and impacts are observed at all stages of the agri -food 
value chain. Climate- risks and stressors result in losses when the value chain does not have climate- proofed 
infrastructure to ensure effective storage, processing, transportation and market access. In the case of The Gambia,


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
 the potential to develop climate resilience and reduce vulnerability by increasing climate resilience along the value 
chain is large.  
2. The climate vulnerability assessments (see Table B-5 below and Annex 2) at each major landing site targeted 
by the project indicate that sea level rise, rise in extreme winds, rise in extreme waves, changes in precipitation will 
contribute to the degradation of the existing coastal fisheries infrastructure. In turn, these impacts are estimated to 
reduce fish landing or to render more dangerous fishing activities, as well as to exacerbate the already very 
high post- harvest losses (estimated at 25- 30%). The available climate- proofing options have been integrated in this 
project’s intervention, where applicable, yet at least one landing site (Bakau) is beyond recovery, due to beach erosion.  
 
Impact on livelihoods and fisheries value chain  
3. Climate hazards and impacts are also expected to impact the whole fish value chain. Table B- 7 below presents 
the generic impacts of climate change on the agri- food value chain. PROREFISH will specifically address the ones 
related to the artisanal fisheries value chain by focusing on specific climate change events which are mostly impacting the targeted beneficiaries.  
Table B-7 Generic Climate Change Impacts on Agri- Food Value Chain Stages Beyond Food Production  
Climate 
hazard  Impacts at Agri -Food Value Chain Stages Beyond Food Production  
Harvest  Storage & Refrigeration  Processing & Packaging  Transportation  Markets & retail  
Extreme heat  Food spoilage, rapid 
degradation, heat 
stress to fish  Food spoilage, rapid 
degradation, facilitated 
bacterial and fungal 
spread.  Food spoilage,  
facilitated bacterial and 
fungal spread.  Unfavourable 
physical conditions 
for food carriers to 
drive, reduced food 
storage life  Food spoilage, 
impacts on access 
to safe, healthy 
food; changes in 
consumers 
requirements  
Drought  Stressed yields, food 
contamination,  
Drought -stress to 
animals,   
facilitated microbial 
growth.  Lower access to rainfed 
and ground water 
resources  Lower access to rainfed 
and ground water 
resources  Damage to road 
infrastructure  X 
Heavy Rains 
and Flooding Quick food 
deterioration, harvest 
delays,  
facilitated microbial 
growth.  Damage to 
infrastructures, loss of 
food loads;  
Water contamination;  
Food spoilage, rapid 
degradation, 
contamination, 
facilitated bacterial and 
fungal spread.  Damage to 
infrastructures and 
facilities, ineffectiveness 
of drying methods, 
increased costs;  
Food spoilage, rapid 
degradation, 
contamination, 
facilitated bacterial and 
fungal spread.  Impediment to pass 
through roads, 
damage to 
infrastructure, risks 
for perishable food  Damage to 
infrastructures  
Storms/ winds  Reduced safety at sea  Damage to 
infrastructures, loss of 
food loads  X Unfavourable 
conditions to drive  Impediments to 
access market 
infrastructures  
Sea level rise, 
increased sea 
water 
temperature,  
Salinization  Reduced suitable 
conditions for fishery 
and agriculture near 
coasts,  
Increased algal and 
marine biotoxin growth   Damage to 
infrastructure  X Erosion, 
deterioration of 
coastal 
infrastructure  X 
 
 
4. Overall, the climate change impacts on the Gambian fisheries will translate into a considerable 
reduction in fish availability for the local population, for whom this resource represents both a livelihood and food source (see section below as well as Annex 2 chapter 2 for more details). Reduced fish availability may also 
trigger a vicious circle of over -exploitation and mismanagement (by fishing outside the season, using smaller nets than 
required, etc.). Climate impacts will further exacerbate losses post -harvest without significant and ambitious efforts to 
climate proof the artisanal fisheries infrastructure and value chain. To enhance the adaptive capacity and resilience of fisher communities, it is imperative to 
invest in adaptation measures to proactively plan based on outlined


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
 impacts, reduce vulnerability and increase resilience of fishing infrastructure and preserve and improve the 
livelihoods of the Gambian fisher folk  and the general population, as summarized in Table B8.     
Table B-8 Project -specific climate change threats, associated impacts and adaptation measures needed  
Key climate change threats  Major climate change impacts Adaptation measures needed  
Increases in temperature, potential 
decreases in precipitation, impacting 
the Gambia River water flow  
 
Increased salinity (concentration and 
intrusion length)  
 
Changes in oceanic and river water 
parameters  
 
Sea level rise and increase in 
extreme coastal weather  Degradation of mangroves (key fish and 
shellfish habitat), particularly in areas relevant 
for the fish life cycle  Restoration of mangroves and sustainable 
management  
Reduction of fish productivity, resulting in less 
capture fish for the artisanal sector  Development of aquaculture production and 
sharp reduction in post -harvest losses  
Degradation of existing infrastructure and 
increased post -harvest losses  Climate proofing and improvement of small 
scale fisheries infrastructure  
 
5. Estimating the exact impact of climate change on the Gambian fisher folk livelihoods (in terms of income and 
food and nutrition security) is difficult, due to the long and complex chain of causality from major climate change 
stressors to the livelihood activities of the Gambian fishers (as described above at length). Yet, based on the available data, preliminary estimates have been prepared, starting from the business -as-
usual (BAU) situation as presently 
recorded and modelling the impact of climate change and of the project on the main outcomes of the fisheries and aquaculture sector.  
6. As such, today the artisanal capture fisheries land about 54,000 t of fish through the landing sites on the coast, 
estuary and river. Field mission evidence and the available literature indicate that between 20% and 30% of the catches 
are lost during the landing , handling and processing activities. The losses are higher for the small pelagic fish and lower 
for the larger, more commercially valuable fish, but most of the volumes are closer to 30%. These losses are due to insufficient landing capacity, as beaches are eroded due to sea level rise  (resulting from thermal expansion and more 
recently polar ice melting) , increased exposure to storm waves and run- off from more frequent  high rainfall events , and 
due to the inadequate storage and processing infrastructure and equipment. In this context, the net availability of fish 
for human consumption is about 40,500 t annually, resulting in 18.4 kg/capita and a proxy income of 1,080 
US$/household per year.  
 
Figure B-7 Estimated effects of climate change on fisheries: comparing baseline and with- project -investments scenarios  
 
Source : own calculations based on national statistics and estimated effects of climate change on fisheries value chain productivity


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
  
11 No short -term climate change impact is envisaged on capture fisheries.  
12 Based on 3.1% annual population growth estimates (UNFPA data for The Gambia).  
13 Latest 2015/16 Integrated Household Survey (IHS)  7. Over the medium term (20 years), climate change is estimated to reduce artisanal capture fisheries by at 
least 10%  (Table B -9), given the fish species vulnerability to climate stressors presented above. More immediately, 
climate change stressors have been shown to affect the infrastructure and equipment at the landing sites , further 
increasing the post -landing losses (see Table B -13 for details). Figure B -9 above charts the with and without -project 
scenarios over the duration of the project, 6 years11 and per capita12 fish availability.  
8. The project interventions aim to increase fish availability in light of the identified climate change impacts. With 
project support, aquaculture  is estimated to generate an additional 750 t per year. More importantly, the project 
investments at the landing sites  will significantly reduce the post -landing losses (which would increase to 30% due 
to climate change impacts in the without -project  scena rio) from the current 25% to 15%. Furthermore, mangrove 
restoration in key fisheries habitats will contribute to the resilience of fish stocks under climate change pressures. 
Overall, these interventions would offset the climate change impacts on overall fish availability, which would actually 
increase to some 46,500 t/year (about 23% more than BAU). In turn, this would also provide support for fisherfolk 
incomes and maintain per capita fish availability.  
 
Key role of the fisheries sector and vulnerabilitie s of fisher folk to climate change  
9. Agriculture, including fisheries, plays an important role in the Gambia’s development, employing 
nearly half —46 percent —of the labor force and representing the source of livelihood for 80 percent of the rural 
population.13 For about 72 percent of poor households and 91 percent of extremely poor rural households, agriculture 
is the main source of income. In 2019, the sector contributed 23.7 percent of GDP and a third of all foreign exchange 
earnings from exports. However, d espite the sectoral contribution to the Gambian economy, the agriculture and 
fisheries  sector presents the highest poverty rate among all other sectors  (according to the latest Integrated 
Household Survey), making employment in the sector an important determinant of poverty. Indeed, 79 percent of 
households engaged in agriculture and fisheries live on less than US$ 1.25 a day. This is also confirmed by looking 
at the distribution of the poor among sectors of employment: agriculture and fisheries exhibit the highest share (39.6 
percent) among the total poor population in the country.  
10. Fisheries- related activities represent the main source of income for coastal fishing communities and 
are an important complementary activity for rural communities along The Gambia River.  The 2016 Fishery Frame 
Survey reports that 72 percent of Gambian fishermen are fishing full time while the remaining 28 percent is fishing on 
a part -time basis. Full -time fishermen are mainly located on the Atlantic coast and the Lower Gambia River North Bank. 
Most of the inland fishing population also engage in other economic activities. In this respect, agriculture is the preferred  
secondary source of livelihood for part -time inland fishermen (about 88 percent).  In addition, accounting for about 40 
percent of total animal protein intake, fish is the predominant source of protein in the diets of more than 80 percent of 
Gambians due to its greater availability and lower price compared to meat.  
 
Profile of the fisheries value chain  
11. Gambian fish eries can be divided in two broad sub -sectors: artisanal fisheries, whose activities are 
dispersed across both marine and inland areas, labor intensive, and characterized by low capital investment, and industrial fisheries, characterized by high capital in vestment and limited to the marine areas. Overall, the 
two sub- sectors provide an average annual official landing of around 65,000 t, including both coastal, marine and inland 
fishing. PROREFISH will only focus on artisanal fisheries, in alignment with FAO
’s mandate to target the most 
vulnerable population and in order for the local fisherfolk of The Gambia to benefit from the project activities (instead 
of other countries through export).


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
  
14 Source: Avadí, A., Dème, M., Mbaye, A., Ndenn, J. 2020. Fisheries Value Chain Analysis in The Gambia. Report for the European Union, DG -DEVCO. Value 
Chain Analysis for Development Project (VCA4D CTR 2016/375-8 04). 12. Figure B-10 below outlines the flow of the fisheries value chain. Gambians consume about 32,000 t of fresh 
fish, smoked or dried fish per year for a total value of GMD 2,750 million (US$ 53.9 million). Nationally consumed fish 
is artisanally sourced and processed, and distributed by fishmongers, processed fish traders or market operators. The 
industrial sub -sector, which is not targeted by the project, is completely export -oriented. Foreign vessels land their 
catches abroad and industrial processors operating in The Gambia export their  products in full, although they source 
their raw material from artisanal fishers via fishmongers. Exported fish and fish products amount to around 19,000 t per year generating GMD 3,350 million (US$ 65.7 million).  
13. The Gambian artisanal fisheries – the target of this project – are a multipurpose activity associated with a host 
of ancillary socio- economic activities. These activities range from boatbuilding and net making, fishing operations, 
offloading of catch, onshore auctioning/marketing, processing (especially fish drying and fish smoking, both in- situ 
and/or at home) to distribution and marketing (national, regional and international). These processes involve inputs and outputs which are sourced and supplied accordingly, linking fisheries to other sectors’ value chains. The artisanal sub-
sector fully supplies the fresh and processed domestic fish market, as well as 42% of the official export market.  
 
Figure B-8 Over view of the fisheries and aquaculture value chains14 
 
14. The Gambian artisanal fisheries sub- sector fully supplies the fresh and processed domestic fish market.  
Indeed, the national annual per capita fish consumption has been estimated to be about 25 kg compared to the African 
average of 8.2 kg. However, it has been recently reported that the national fish consumption has declined due to the increasing fish scarcity and rising prices.  Indeed, in the past five years, the overexploitation of fisheries resources and the competition from the fishmeal factories producing for the export sector have pushed the prices of the raw material upward and so the resale price of the processed products, making fish products less accessible for local consumers. 
This trend has  also reduced artisanal processing, which often represents an important source of livelihood for fisheries 
communities, especially for women. In turn, this situation has resulted in an estimated increase of the proportion of 
people considered food insecure from 5 percent to 8 percent.   
 
Government’s commitment to address climate change in the fisheries sector  
15. The Government of the Gambia has recognized the importance of addressing the strongly interlinked  
issues of livelihood improvement and climate change mitigation and adaptation.  The Gambia has ratified the


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
  
15 Second Nationally Determined Contribution of The Gambia (2021) – available at this link .  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994, the Kyoto Protocol in 2002, and the 
Paris Agreement in 2016. In fulfilment of The Gambia’s obligations under the UNFCCC, The Gambia has submitted its 
National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in 2008 and its Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) 
in 2011, outlining appropriate measures to adapt to the negative impacts of climate change in the fisheries sector, and its first Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) in 2016 , reiterated in 2021 with the Second NDC
15.  According to 
Gambia’s second NDC (2021), the Business -as-Usual (BAU) emissions scenario for the year 2030 is 6.617 million 
tCO2eq. Gambia’s NDC proposes investments to achieve annual emissions reductions (ER) of 3.29 million tCO2e by 
2030, or 49.7% of the BAU scenario. Out of this proposed ER reduction of 49.7%, 2.6% are unconditional, to be funded 
by the national budget, whereas 47.2% are conditional, depending on concessionary climate finance for their 
implementation. The main NDC investments that PROREFISH will contribute to are: (i) regreening degraded 
landscapes (output 1.2); (ii) upscaling deployment  of fuel -efficient biomass combustion stoves (output 2.1); and (iii) 
Climate- smart agriculture (output 1.1). All of these investments are marked as “conditional”, i.e. depending on 
concessionary climate finance, in the 2021 NDC. The proposed PROREFISH project would contribute annual ER of 
11,926 tCO2e, accounting for 0.36% of the annual ER target. While the project presents mitigation benefits, 
PROREFISH is primarily a climate change adaptation project, designed to help poor fisherfolk adapt to the impacts of 
climate change on artisanal fisheries . The Government has also submitted three National Communications (the last 
one in 2020) which document the status of socio- economic and ecological conditions as they relate to greenhouse gas 
emissions and vulnerability to climate change, particularly for some key affected sectors such as fisheries.  
16. Within the broader agriculture sector, the fisheries sub- sector present both challenges and opportunities. The 
sub-sector has generally received significantly less attention and investment from public, private and international 
financing sources, when compared with crops and livestock. For example, the majority of recent donor funded projects have responded to the Government’s call to boost crop (particularly rice) production in order to reduce the country’s food import bill. In parallel, the fisheries sector’s productive base has continued to deteriorate absent investment, and is under pressure from resource over -exploitation by international vessels operating in the Gambian waters. On the 
other hand, in recent years the fisheries and aquaculture sub- sector  has grown steadily. For the moment, the fisheries 
represent the most significant segment within the primary sector of the Gambian economy, partly explained by the significant declines in recent years for crops and livestock, while fishing and aquaculture 
increased decidedly. In 
addition, fisheries present excellent opportunities for job creation, especially for youth and women, and for value 
addition in synergy with the tourism sector. In this context, the Government of the Gambia has decided to prioritize  
climate adaptation efforts for the fisheries sector and has requested FAO’s support for the development of the present 
proposal.  
17. As early as 2008, the Government of the Gambia has recognised the role that aquaculture production could 
play for livelihoods diversification and food and nutrition security. As part of its efforts to promote aquaculture, the 
Government requested assistance to construct a fish hatchery in Jahally, which was completed in 2008- 2009 whereas 
the project continued until 2013.  Subseque ntly, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Food and Agriculture Sector 
Development Project (FASDEP) constructed 15 fishponds in various parts of the country. In 2015 the Gambian 
Government requested FAO’s assistance in the form of a TCP project (Technical Cooperation Programme) to upgrade and revitalize the Jahally hatchery and to supply two fish feed manufacturing units. In collaboration with Ministry of Fisheries staff FAO rehabilitated the hatchery, whose inauguration took place in 2020.  
18. In order to improve the resilience of the fishers, processors and traders, the project aims to compensate the 
reduction in capture fisheries by means of aquaculture. The hatchery and feed plants provided the relevant Ministry with the means for fingerling production and feed manufacturing. The proposed project aims to produce sufficient quantities of fish to maintain the same level of consumption for the growing population and for that purpose, additional hatchery capacity may be required. In the light of climate change, the proposed project will provide assistance to integrate fish production in rice fields, to raise fish in small high- density tanks associated with horticulture , to climate 
proof existing fishponds and to improve oyster and cockle culture in mangrove forests and on tidal flats.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
  
16 Additional information on the GEF -funded CFI -WA are available on FAO’s website:  https://www.fao.org/in -action/coastal -fisheries -initiative . Specifically 
relevant to PROREFISH and to the context of The Gambia are the activities implemented in Sassandra (Côte d'Ivoire) and Saloum Delta (Senegal).  Key 
lessons include the involvement of the communities through a participatory and inclusive approach in mangroves restoration, assisted natural regeneration and 
safeguarding activities. This approach was proven able to reverse the trend of mangrove loss.  
17 The UNEP -GEF project 9772 is referenced in the project portal page link here , and its project document linked here . https://www.thegef.org/projects -
operations/projects/9772  Complementarities with related projects and interventions  
19. This project will build on past and current projects funded by various technical and financial partners. Two 
projects are particularly relevant for PROREFISH, in terms of synergies, co- financing, scaling- up and coordination.  
20. For the first two packages under the aquaculture development intervention, PROREFISH will receive co -
financing from the IFAD -financed Resilience of Organizations for Transformative Smallholder Agriculture Programme 
(ROOTS) project, under the Ministry of Agriculture. ROOTS is a six -year project (2021- 2027) focused on improving the 
food security, nutrition and  smallholder farmers’ resilience to climate change in The Gambia. With a total budget of 
US$ 80 million, the project is primarily financed by IFAD (US$ 24.3 million) and benefits from co- financing from GEF, 
OFID and AFD. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and access to markets 
for enhanced food security and nutrition, and resilience of family farms and farmer organizations. This objective is 
expected to be achieved through various interventions, including increasing agricultural productivity, adaptation to 
climate change, enhancing smallholder market access and multi -stakeholder policy dialogue. PROREFISH will 
collaborate with the ROOTS project on the integration of fish production (financed by PROREFISH) with rice cultivation and vegetable gardening financed by the IFAD ROOTS project . 
 
21. PROREFISH wil l coordinate with the ongoing GCF project ‘’Large- scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the 
Gambia River Basin: developing a climate resilient, natural resource based economy’’ (FP011), implemented by UNEP and the Government of the Gambia. This six -year (2017- 2023), US$ 25.5 million project aims to benefit up to 11,550 
Gambian households directly and 46,200 households indirectly, of which at least 50% will be women. 
 The overarching 
objective of the project is to build the climate- resilience of rural Gambian communities and to facilitate the development 
of a sustainable natural resource- based (green) economy through the large- scale implementation of the highly cost -
effective, low -risk Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) approach, within and adjacent to agricultural areas, community -
managed forest reserves and wildlife conservation areas of The Gambia. The project’s EbA interventions take place within and adjacent to 125 newly established Community Forestry Reserves (CFs) and Community Protected Areas (CPAs), acros s four regions along the Gambia River (Lower River, Central River South, Central River North, and Upper 
River Regions).  Component 1 focuses on restoring and building the Gambian natural resource base by transforming 
degraded agricultural landscapes and ecosystems (including deciduous and semi- deciduous forests, savannah  
woodlands, and mangroves) using climate-
resilient tree and shrub species across an area of at least 10,000 hectares.  
Based on the natural resources generated under the first component, Component 2 provides for the identification and 
promotion of climate- resilient livelihood options for rural communities to survive the economic hardships caused by 
climate change, through the establishment and strengthening of community -managed, natural resource -based 
businesses. To support the large- scale EbA implementation beyond the GCF project implementation period, 
Component 3 focuses on strengthening the Gambian institutional capacity for the implementation of existing policies for participatory management and benefit -sharing of a climate-
resilient natural resource base, and for the EbA 
integration into these policies.  
22. While targeting a different economic sector, PROREFISH is building on some of the lessons learnt during the 
implementation of the EbA – in terms of approach to mangrove restoration, of strengthening the limited capacity for 
climate adaptation in the Gambia and in engaging a wide range of national partners. In particular, the targeting of 
mangrove restoration sites under this project has been  carefully considered in order to avoid duplication and to ensure 
complementarity and synergies when possible. A relevant example of sustainable mangroves management linked with improved fisheries governance and value chains comes from the GEF -funded “Coastal Fisheries Initiative” in West 
Africa (CFI -WA),
16 implemented in Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal. Another relevant ongoing climate finance 
intervention is the GEF -UNEP17 “Landscape Planning and Restoration to Improve Ecosystem Services, and


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
  
18 https://www.thegef.org/projects -operations/projects/9194   
19 Sustainable development of fisheries and aquaculture value chains in Africa,  Caribbean and Pacific countries FISH4ACP project (reference available here ).  
20 The reported figures apply to the entire project, which can involve multiple countries.  
21 Excluded from PROREFISH t argeting.  Livelihoods, Expand and Effectively Manage Protected Areas” project , presenting substantial synergies on the 
contributions to an improved enabling environment and policy / regulatory framework for ecosystem management.  
23. The process of design of PROREFISH allowed to identify a selection of development projects operating in the 
areas of mangrove restoration and support to fisheries. Contrary to the majority of existing interventions, PROR EFISH 
activities  originated from the climate rationale presented above, and were designed as climate adaptive measures with 
a robust potential for mitigation, to ensure complementarity and avoid overlaps with existing interventions. The 
complementarities of PROREFISH with other on- going and pipeline projects is summarized in Table B -11. It is important 
to note that the large projects listed there have very small fisheries and aquaculture components  (IFAD, GCF UNEP) or small allocations for Gambia (EU) and that the proposed GCF PROREFISH project will be the largest investment in this sector for the foreseeable future.  In addition, PROREFISH presents potential synergies with the GEF -
UNIDO  ‘’Strengthening Adaptive Capacities to Climate Change through Capacity Building for Small Scale Enterprises 
and Communities Dependent on Coastal Fisheries in The Gambia’’
18, as both focus on small scale fisheries (not 
industrial) and on coastal communities (even if PROREFISH has a national coverage through its aquaculture 
development activities), and the timeline of implementation of the two projects is expected to overlap for two years.   
24. Potential s for parallel financi ng. Among others, the Sustainable development of fisheries and aquaculture 
value chains in Africa, Caribbean and Pacific countries  (FISH4ACP)19 project is considered the one with the highest 
synergies with PROREFISH and can be considered parallel financing. Such project, financed by EU, has a global 
coverage and is implemented under FAO Headquarters coordination. However, the activities in the Gambia will be 
implemented by the FAO Country Office, also Executing Entity of the PROREFISH, guaranteeing high coordination 
and synergies especially with regards to the development of oyster value chain. Specifically, Fish4ACP focusing on 
diagnostics and training and PROREFISH on promoting oyster and clam culture improvement, as well as on the 
enabling environment for artisanal fisheries’ adaptation to climate change. In addition, the FAO and UNIDO project 
teams are actively working to ensure there are synergies among the investments and to reduce any overlap in activities.   
 
Table B-1 Complementarities with on- going and pipeline projects  
Project Title (duration)  Total cost20 
(USD million)  Key interventions  Complementarities with PROREFISH  
IFAD: Resilience of 
Organizations for 
Transformative Smallholder 
Agriculture Programme “Roots” 
(2021- 2027)  80.3 Promotion of sustainable and climate -
resilient and nutrition- sensitive 
agricultural technologies and practices (e.g. development of rice production schemes ; upgrade of vegetable garden 
business); Promotion of value chain and 
market linkages  Co-financing project: ROOTS will finance 
the development of irrigated rice schemes and communal vegetable gardens, where 
PROREFISH aquaculture activities will be introduced  
In addition, coordination on mangrove restoration activities  
GEF-UNEP: Landscape 
Planning and Restoration to Improve Ecosystem Services, and Livelihoods, Expand and 
Effectively Manage Protected 
Areas  
(2020- 2026)  25.7 Building national capacity to lead the 
reform of land use and marine spatial planning policies and to implement land/seascape level management that 
conserves ecosystem services in 
product ive and protected 
land/seascapes. The project envisages also the support to
 Increase in the area 
occupied by key mangrove stands (in protected areas).
21  Synergies and complementarities will be 
created especially on policy dialogue and knowledge management  (PROREFISH 
component 3) on the enabling environment 
for ecosystem based adaptation and 
ecosystem restoration.  
GCF -UNEP: Large -scale 
Ecosystem -based Adaptation 
in the Gambia River Basin: 
developing a climate resilient, 25.5 Restoration and building of the Gambian 
natural resource base by transforming degraded agricultural landscapes and ecosystems; Establishment and strengthening of rural community -
managed, natural resource -based Knowledge sharing on previous mangrove 
restoration efforts and on capacity development for Depar tment of Forestry


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
  
22 Including the Coastal Fisheries Initiative in West Africa (CFI -WA), operating in neighbouring and similar contexts of Senegal and Ivory Coast.  
23 The reported figures apply to the entire project, which can involve multiple countries.  natural resource -based 
economy  
(2017- 2023)  businesses; Strengthening of the 
Gambian institutional capacity to 
implement existing policies for 
participatory management and benefit -
sharing of a climate- resilient natural 
resource base  Coordination on mangrove restoration 
activities, with distinct regions, but joint 
approach 
MAVA -SRFC: Support for the 
sustainable management of small pelagic populations in the SRFC area  
(2018- 2022)  1.5 
(average annual 
budget)  Improveme nt of data collection systems 
and scientific knowledge of stocks and critical sites of small pelagics; Capacity building for effective management of 
critical sites and sustainable exploitation 
of small pelagics; Advocacy and support 
for the implementation of small pelagic 
fisheries regulations  Data sharing on stocks to inform climate 
adaptation measures in The Gambia 
EU-FAO-OACPS -BMZ: 
Fish4ACP -Sustainable 
development of fisheries and 
aquaculture value chains in 
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific 
countries  
(2020 -2024)  48.8 
(1.0 for 
Gambia)*  Analysis of mangrove oyster value chain; 
Promotion of oyster aquaculture; Strengthening of the regulatory 
framework for food safety; Support to 
access to finance  (The Gambia’s allocation = US$ 1 million)  
Synergy regarding oyster value  chain , with 
Fish4ACP focusing on diagnostics and 
training and PROREFISH on promoting 
oyster and clam culture, and on the enabling environment for artisanal fisheries 
adaptation to climate change.  
GEF-UNIDO: Strengthening 
Adaptative Capacities to 
Climate Change through 
Capacity Building for Small 
Scale Enterprises and 
Communities Dependent on 
Coastal Fisheries in The Gambia (Concept approved in 
2017-  to be approved for 
implementation)  11.9 National capacity building to mainst ream 
climate change adaptation and gender 
equality in fisheries policies and national 
strategies; Promotion of climate- resilient 
innovative fish handling and processing 
technologies and strategies for small -
scale fisheries -dependent enterprises 
and coastal  communities; Strengthening 
of institutional and community capacities to utilize fisheries data and information 
management systems  Project concept in pipeline, to be 
developed fully in 2021- 2022 
Discussions are underway  among 
respective  project formulation  teams to 
avoid overlaps and duplications  
 
25. Previous interventions in the fisheries sector are summarized in Table B-12. While some of these interventions 
have provided a “proof of concept” and lessons learned, such as the small -scale fish feed mills (FAO) and mangrove 
restoration (GEF -FAO-UNEP),22 PROREFISH in vestment proposals remains unique in their transformational potential 
under the technological and institutional viewpoints.  
 
Table B-12 Past interventions in the fisheries sector  
Project Title (duration)  Total cost23 (USD 
million)  Key interventions  
FAO: Support to enhancing the capacity of 
youth and women for employment in 
aquaculture  
(2016- 2019)  0.4 Promotion of efficient, sustainable fish feed production and use; 
Establishment of two fish feed mills; Capacity building of institutions, farmers, and producers on aquaculture practices and aquaculture as a 
business  
GEF LDCF - UNDP: Enhancing Resilience 
of Vulnerable Coastal Areas and 
Communities to Climate Change in the 
Republic of Gambia 
(2013- 2018, technically completed-
financial closure in progress)  48.6 Policy and institutional development for climate risk management in 
coastal zones (Kotu, Tanji, Bintang, Darsilami, and Tendaba); Physical 
investments (e.g., mangroves, groynes, seawalls) in coastal prot ection 
against climate change risks; Introduction of coastal adaptation 
technologies and of economic diversification to strengthen rural 
livelihoods in the coastal zone  
EU-UNDP -WWF: Governance, Marine 
Resource Management Policies and  13.03  Support to The Gambia’s national sustainable fisheries management 
policy framework; setting up of instruments and initiatives for a


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
  
24 The Government of Gambia is engaged, however, in the FAO Committee on Eastern and Central Atlantic Fisheries (CECAF), which monitors regional fish 
stocks biennially, see also description of component 3 in section B.3.  
25 While the beneficiary selection criteria are final, most individual beneficiaries have not been selected yet, as this will be done during the inception phase.  Poverty Reduction in the West Africa 
Marine Eco- region (2012- 2017)  
 sustainable management of marine and costal resources (e.g., 
establishment of oyster farms)  
GEF-FAO-UNEP: Protection of the Canary 
Current Large Marine Ecosystem  
(2010- 2016)  26.2 Development of a regional mangrove conservation plan with pilot 
mangrove restoration actions; Promotion of transboundary co-
management of migratory coastal species of importance to artisanal 
fisheries; Strengthening of policies and management of marine living resources; Enhancement of multi -country understanding and 
agreement on transboundary issues 
USAID: Gambia -Senegal Su stainable 
Fisheries Project “Ba Nafaa” (2009- 2014)  
3.4 Promotion of strategies to increase social and economic benefits to 
artisanal fishing communities; Strengthening of institutional capacities to implement an ecosystem -based, co - management approach to 
sustainable fisheries; Protection of nursery and spawning areas for critical life stages of commercially important species  
JICA: Project for Construction of Brikama 
Fish Market  
(2008- 2009, completed)  5.4 Construction of market facilities; Provision of te chnical assistance for 
operation and management of facilities  
JICA: Project for Improvement of Artisanal 
Coastal Fisheries in the Kombo South District   Restructuring of community fisheries centers, ice -making and cold -
storage facilities, and fiberglass bo ats for training purposes in target 
fishing centers  
 
 
Prioritization of project areas and selection criteria of beneficiaries  
26. Given the country’s size and geography, the project interventions will cover the entire national territory, 
with the exception of the open ocean  (the Gambia’s EEZ).  Following an in- depth climate change impact analysis on 
the ocean environment performed in Annex (see Annex 2 chapter 4 for full details), FAO has concluded that 
PROREFISH  should not target the open ocean for two reasons: (i) for some key expected climate change impacts in 
the ocean environment, such as changes in marine currents and upwellings, there are no credible adaptation options; 
and (ii) for those climate change impacts that are amenable to adaptation, such as changes in the relative abundance of different fish stocks, adaptive measures can only be realized at a much larger scale than a single country’s Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ), especially for an EEZ as small as Gambia’s. Regional coordination and stock management mechanisms to increase the sustainability of fish stocks cannot be addressed in the context of a national project like 
PROREFISH.
24 Therefore, the project will geographically target the coastal areas, the estuary and the river – as well 
as the nearby farming areas, to integrate fish production with rice cultivation and vegetable gardening (co- financed by 
the above- mentioned IFAD ROOTS project).  
27. The prioritization of the project areas was driven by the following technical and beneficiary selection 
criteria, all of which are final 25:  
a. for climate -proofing of artisanal fisheries infrastructure on the coast, the Government has proposed the 
most important seven landing sites (based on the number of actors, volumes of catches, strengths and 
weaknesses, etc. – presented in Annex 2). At each of these landing sites, a climate change vulnerability 
assessment has been conducted, focusing on the most relevant climate stressors (sea level rise, 
increase of extreme winds, increase in extreme wave heights, and changes in precipitation). Based on 
the results (summarized in Table B-13 below and presented fully in Annex 2), six of the seven sites 
have been retained and the Banjul landing site has been included as an alternative landing site to 
accommodate fisher folk who will lose access to Bakau (no adaptation measures possible) and other 
nearby landing sites. The targeted landing sites account for 70% of the estimated catch volume of the artisanal sector and include a higher share of the total number of fisher folk.  The main strategy for 
reducing the climate change vulnerability of the fish landing sites is limiting their exposure (by shifting sites inland) and using more durable materials for the infrastructure and equipment. The individual


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
  
26 This is in order to avoid duplication with the UNEP GCF project, which supports mangroves in protected areas.   
27 As detailed in table B -14, some of these criteria are not exclusive (yes/no) but will be used to assign priority.  beneficiaries of the climate -proofing of the artisanal fish landing sites have been categorized and 
analyzed (see details in Annex 23) but not yet selected.  To be eligible for project support, individual 
beneficiaries will need to (i) be engaged in artisanal fisheries, whether in catching, processing or selling 
fish; and (ii) be users of one or more services provided by the Community Fisheries Centres (CFCs), 
such as landing, storage, improved drying and s moking facilities.   
b. for mangrove restoration, the areas were chosen based on current degradation level, on the relevance 
for fisheries (as spawning areas and nurseries) , on the climate vulnerability, and on non- protected 
area status26 in the estuary and mi ddle river zones (the summary is presented Section B3, under 
Component 1 and detailed in Annex 2).  The mangrove communities will be selected during the project 
inception phase on the basis of (i) poverty level; (ii) proximity to selected mangrove areas; and (iii) 
interest in mangrove restoration and management. Proximity to oyster cultivation sites will be 
considered an advantage (but not an obligatory criterion) for the selection of mangrove communities.  
c. for the development of aquaculture, the focus has been on the inland part of the Gambia, where fish availability is much lower and where the development of aquaculture is more relevant, in particular given the proximity to the Jahally Aquaculture Center (t he exception is the sustainable clam and oyster 
culture, which will be concentrated on the coast and in the estuary, as well as at the sites of mangrove 
restoration). 
 The exact sites and beneficiaries for the aquaculture activities have not been selected 
yet, this will be done during the inception phase. The selection of sites will be done on the basis of the 
technical and socio- economic criteria included in Table B -14. The selection of beneficiaries will be 
done on the basis of (i) poverty level (as documented by IFAD for those beneficiaries engaging in the 
integration of aquaculture in agriculture or horticulture); (ii) interest of producer/youth groups in the 
various aquaculture packages proposed; and (iii) technical feasibility in  particular sites. All of the 
selection criteria listed are final. The partnership with the ROOTS project (co- financing) will also play 
an important role in the site selection. Table B-14 presents the full technical and socio- economic 
selection criteria that will be considered for the site and beneficiaries selection.27 
d. for the capacity building activities (component 3), beneficiaries will be selected as follows. Civil servants 
will be selected on the basis of their work in the project area; for marketing activities, beneficiaries will 
be selected among community leaders and producer groups’ representatives (at least 30% women 
and 40% youth ). 
 
Table B-13 Prioritization of landing sites based on the CC vulnerability assessment  
  Bakau  Brufut  Tanji  Sanyang  Gunjur  Kartong  Bintang 
% of  avg. 
total 
artisanal 
catches  2% 15% 22% 5% 19% 7% N/A 
No. of actors  N/A 1,341  5,667  1,180  2,477  595 N/A 
Prioritization  Not selected, no 
adaptation 
measures possible 
and lower catches  Selected Selected Selected Selected Selected Selected 
Climate 
change 
factor  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  Expected Impact  
Rise in sea 
level  Loss of beach area, 
inundation/ 
deterioration of 
existing structures, 
increase in 
corrosion rates, loss 
of equi pment.  Loss of beach area.  Loss of beach area, 
inundation/ 
deterioration of 
existing structures, 
loss of equipment.  Loss of beach area.  Loss of beach area, 
inundation/ 
deterioration of 
existing structures, 
increase in 
corrosion rates, loss 
of equipment.  Loss of beach area 
along the river bank.  Loss of beach area 
along the river bank 
may not be so 
pronounced.  
CC risk 
rating  High  Low High  Low Low-to-nil High  Low 
Rise in 
extreme 
wind speeds  Damage to 
structures, roofs  
and equipment.  Damage to 
structures, roofs 
and traditional fish 
drying and smoking 
equipment.  Damage to 
structures, tin roofs 
and drying racks.  Damage to 
structures, roofs 
and fish drying and 
smoking equipment 
and loss of product.  Damage to 
structures, ro ofs 
and equipment.  Damage to 
structures, roofs 
and fish drying and 
smoking equipment 
and loss of product.  Damage to 
structures, roofs 
and fish drying and 
smoking equipment 
and loss of product.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
  
28 Detailed eligibility criteria are provided in Annex 23.  
29 No issue with water availability and treatment are envisaged.  PROREFISH will benefit from IFAD -funded investments in boreholes and solar pumping. NB 
tank water with fish excrement will be used for irrigating vegetable gardens, not discarded.  CC risk 
rating  High  High  High  High  Low-to-nil Low Low 
Rise in 
extreme 
wave 
heights  Erosion of coastline, 
damage to canoes,  May impact canoe 
mooring offshore.  Erosion of coastline, 
damage to buildings 
and fish drying 
racks at the 
waterline.  May impact canoe 
mooring offshore.  Erosion of coastline, 
damage to canoes,  May impact canoe 
mooring offshore.  May impact canoe 
mooring offshore.  
CC risk 
rating  High  Low High  Low Low-to-nil Low Low 
Rise in 
precipitation  No noticeable 
impact expected  Erosion along 
internal road, 
damage to 
traditional fish 
drying racks and 
loss of product.  No noticeable 
impact expected 
except potential loss 
of dry product.  Erosion along 
internal road, 
damage to fish 
drying equipment 
and loss of product.  No noticeable 
impact expected  Flooding and 
increased flow 
along river bank.  Flooding and 
increased flow 
along river bank.  
CC risk 
rating  Low-to-nil Medium  Low-to-nil Medium  Low-to-nil High  High  
Fall in 
precipitation  No noticeable 
impact expected  May impact water 
supply borewells.  No noticeable 
impact expected as 
site is on mains.  May impact water 
supply borewells.  May impact water 
supply borewells.  River bank may 
recede out into 
river. Rise in salinity 
may impact water 
supply borewells.  River bank may 
recede out into 
river. Rise in salinity 
may impact water 
supply borewells.  
CC risk 
rating  Low-to-nil Medium  Low-to-nil Medium  Medium  Medium  High  
 
Table B-14 Technical and socio-economic selection criteria28 for the aquaculture packages  
Aquaculture 
Packages  Technical Criteria Socio -Economic Criteria  
1. Integrated fish 
production in 
communal vegetable 
gardens) Communal vegetable garden sites from the ones 
supported by the ROOTS project (co- financing) 
Space availability for the installation of tanks  
Sufficient freshwater availability for tank operations29 Priority given to more inland sites, where fish availability is 
lower 
Priority given to sites with already organized producer 
groups/organizations/water users’ groups  
2. Integrated rice- fish 
culture  
(freshwater) Site selection determined by the set of irrigated 
schemes developed by the ROOTS project (co-
financing)  
Proximity to the Jahally Aquaculture Centre for ease of 
inputs  
Sub- site selection based on the required technical 
parameters for adjusting the scheme design to 
accommodate aquaculture Socioeconomic criterion for prioritization of beneficiaries is 
poverty level, with the poorest having preference.  
Support capped at 0.5 ha of integrated rice- fish scheme per 
beneficiary, with a preference for smaller plots (if 
technically feasible)  
Demonstrated interest in integrating aquaculture in the rice 
fields  
Gender parity and inclusion of at least 30% youth  
3. Fish culture in 
ponds (freshwater)  Rehabilitation and clustering of ponds based on 
previous investments  
Water and space availability  
Market access (available transport infrastructure)  
Proximity to the Jahally Aquaculture Centre for ease of 
inputs  Priority given to more inland sites, where fish availability is 
lower 
Socioeconomic criterion for prioritization of beneficiaries is 
poverty level, with the poorest having preference.   
Priority given to already organized groups  
Gender parity and inclusion of at least 50% youth  
4. Sustainable oyster 
and clam culture (in 
open, brackish water)  Part of beneficiaries group selection driven by the 
identified mangrove restoration sites in Component 1  
Remaining beneficiaries group selection in Tanbi 
Wetland areas and other coastal mangrove sites Priority given to already organized groups engaged in 
oyster and clam collection and processing, with 
demonstrated interest in shifting from collection to culture 
Socioeconomic criterion for prioritization of beneficiaries is 
poverty level, with the poorest having preference.  
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)  
28. The climate analysis demonstrated how the changes in multiple ecological segments of the Gambian fisheries 
would reduce the availability of capture fish and shellfish in the near future, severely impacting the livelihoods of the 
artisanal fisher folk. Coupled with current rate of resource over-exploitation by the industrial fisheries segment, the 
sector’s perspectives cannot assume further increases in fishing intensity by the project beneficiaries.


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
 29. Assuming reduced capture fisheries potential, the adaptation responses are three -fold: first, increasing fish 
availability by reducing the high post- harvest fish losses currently experienced by the artisanal sector, w hich 
will be exacerbated by the climate vulnerability of the current infrastructure and equipment, absent investment. 
The project is proposing to improve the present situation by investing in climate- proofing and improving landing site 
infrastructure and equipment (especially fish handling and processing). These interventions would allow fisherfolk to 
land the same amounts of fish in safer conditions, enabling them to preserve a higher percentage of the catch and its 
economic value. In addition, these investments would also support higher value addition in which women are heavily 
involved and better marketing to the tourism sector and exports.  
30. Second, by supporting the development of aquaculture production as an adaptation measure, to 
compensate for the climate -induced decreases in capture fisheries.  Aquaculture has been piloted by previous 
FAO projects in The Gambia, and will be scaled up as an adaptation measure through four innovative aquaculture 
packages suited to the local context: i ) rice-fish integrated production, ii) integration of fish tanks in communal vegetable 
gardens, iii) fish culture in earthen ponds, and iv) sustainable clam and oyster production. In particular, the aquaculture-agriculture integrated activities present excellent co- benefits by reducing fertilizer and pesticide use.  
31. T
hird, by restoring degraded mangrove forests that play a key role as fisheries habitats. As detailed in 
Annex 2, mangroves serve an important role in the protection, nutrition and reproduction of a large number of fish and shellfish species in the Gambia, which are harvested, processed and traded by women. Investing in the mangrove 
restoration will reinstate and protect the conditions necessary for maintaining fisheries’ productivity  and build the long-
term resilience of fisher folk to climate change.  
32. Yet, the proposed adaptation to the climate change impacts on the Gambian fisheries sector is hindered by 
several  issues:  
1) Information barriers  
• Very limited data and analysis on CC impacts on the sector and weak knowledge on adaptation 
measures.  National institutions have a good general understanding of climate change, but lack the 
capacity to collect additional data and conduct the necessary impact analysis. Similarly, the public 
sector’s ability to propose, implement and monitor adaptation measures is low and heavily dependent on donor -funded projects. There has been recent progress on improved weather and water resources 
data collection and the development of early warning systems, yet these outp
uts are not being 
translated into action.  
• Ambiguous separation between CC impacts and fisheries over -exploitation issues. While the 
two issues cannot be fully decoupled, Gambian decision- makers are lacking the necessary analytical 
tools to identify the root causes of main issues currently affecting the sector and to take appropriate action.  
• Lack of systematic information relay mechanisms to reach fisher folk. The MoFWRNAM has a 
network of fisheries extension officers, yet their outreach is limited. The avai lable information is 
conveyed in an ad hoc manner to landing site committees, which are responsible to further 
communicate with the local actors. Yet, there are no systems in place to reach out to fisher folk and disseminate information.  
• Widespread lack of  literacy and numeracy skills among women.  Women in the fishery sector have 
enough business acumen to generate more income than their husbands, but are forced to employ 
male treasurers for women’s professional organizations because of their incapacity to deal with written 
information. They do not venture into for mal business (e.g., with hotels, catering companies, 
supermarkets) as they see it a men’s sphere, a perception that is aggravated by their inability to deal with various kinds of documents.  
 
2) Techni cal barriers  
• Limited knowledge about technologies proven successful. Several international or regional good 
practices and proven technologies for fish production have not yet been introduced. Most notably, the rice-fish integrated production has not been tried at scale, despite notable successes in neighboring 
countries and similar contexts. As such, fisheries officers and rice producers do not yet have the


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
  
30 Annex 2 – part 2 includes reference to the various relevant interventions. Among the most relevant, the “Unlocking the potential of sustainable fisheries and 
aquaculture in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific” FISH4ACP project ( https://www.fao.org/3/cb3979en/cb3979en.pdf ) or previous experience with the FAO 
financed TCP “Support to enhancing the capacity of youth and women for employment in aquaculture (2016 -2019), and the FAO financed TCP “Development 
of the Artisanal Fisheries in The Gambia” (2015 -2017).  technical implementation capacity.  The geographical size of the country and its economy has hindered 
technology transfer because i) the Gambia’s coastline is rather small compared with its neighbors, ii) 
the number of fisher folk is much smaller compared with regional peers, iii) domestic public and private 
investments are very low or non- existent to contribute to technology transfer. For these reasons, the 
Gambia has not benefitted from the type of donor -funded projects targeting technology development 
and transfer like in Senegal or further south along the coast in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, etc. Nor have private enterprises invested in the sector, bringing along new technology.  
• Mixed past experience with improved fisheries and aquaculture technologies.  Previous donor -
financed initiatives have attempted to introduce aquaculture activities, but design and implementation 
issues have resulted in variable results. Particularly, different earthen pond development efforts have 
yielded both positive and unsatisfactory results. For example, the boreholes were not drilled deep 
enough and with increased salinity intrusion due to climate change, the ponds did not have the 
necessary freshwater. In addition, some ponds were developed without the necessary lining, lead ing 
to water losses. The lessons learnt from past projects, including FAO’s aquaculture projects in The 
Gambia have been incorporated in the design of the present project, in order to scale up the successful 
practices and address the weaknesses identified.30 
• Insufficient availability of quality inputs for aquaculture production. Recent investments in small -
scale fish feed production units and in the development of the Jahally hatchery are starting to provide locally produced inputs for aquaculture. Yet, domestic production of fingerlings and feed is insufficient to supply Gambian producers. Therefore, aquaculture imports from Senegal continue to be the main source, hindering access, increasing costs and not ensuring availability throughout the country.  Higher 
costs prevent more Gambians from engaging in aquaculture, given the alrea
dy important fixed 
investment costs. If both aquaculture and input production would be kick -started, as proposed in the 
project, increased demand and increased supply would be matched: producers would have better, cheaper access, while input producers would be sure to have a market for the products. FAO confirms that the inputs have been proven to be environmentally safe and sustainable.  
• Lack of extension services for women’s subsectors. As the society focuses on men’s activities and 
men are the ones who ar e formally responsible for cash crops, extension services for women’s 
productive activities are rare.  
• Infrastructure for women’s business receives less attention and finance. Infrast ructure used by 
women is of lower quality and the least maintained, which makes product quality control and running 
business  difficult. When their infrastructure receives investment, the associated activity tends to be 
taken over by men.  
• Widespread lack of literacy and numeracy skills among women.  Given illiteracy, sources of 
information for women are limited to their immediate social circles, which are comprised of women of 
similar circumstances. The lack of access to technical information is thus perpetuated.  
 
3) Financial barriers  
• No disposable income for investing and weak access to credit. Gambian fisher folk are amongst the poorest and most vulnerable groups, and as a result they cannot meet the high costs of upfront investments in aquaculture development and climate- proofing fis h landing and handling infrastructure. 
Women, in particular, while dominating the fish handling and processing segment, lack the necessary 
resources to invest in better equipment, even if profitability is demonstrated. The financial sector 
provides inadequate terms for agricultural financing, especially fisheries sub- sector, with high interest 
rates and very short duration. The portfolio for agriculture is limited, mostly for crop production and none for fisheries related activities, making the access to commercial financial products even more 
difficult for poor and vulnerable households lack ing the required  collateral .


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
 • Financial leeway for women is much smaller than for men.   There is a widespread lack of literacy 
and numeracy skills among women, causing d ifficult, if not impossible, access to formal finance. In 
addition, while women have complete autonomy over their incomes, they are the ones who pay for the 
everyday needs of the household, including school fees  (men’s contributions are on ad hoc bases ). 
 
4) Market barriers  
• Poor quality standards for fish products and insufficient linkages between fish value chain actors (producers) and buyers.  Current fish handling and processing practices result in products of 
inferior quality, which do not fully meet forma
l market specifications. Climate change, especially 
changes in precipitation, storms and increased temperature, are expected to further deteriorate the artisanal processing equipment and expose the fish products to the elements. In addition, the limited 
organization of the fisher folk into common interest groups/cooperatives prevents them from grouping 
their production and dealing with larger buyers, especially in the tourism and catering sectors.  
• Gender -based segregation of markets. Women serve the domesti c market with low profit margins, 
while export with higher margins are men’s domain. Export business is more formal than local 
business, and hence the market segregation stems from women’s lack of literacy and numeracy skills  
and lack of access to infrastr ucture required.  
 
5) Social barriers  
• Entre nched patriarchal norms among all in the society. Not only men, but also most women think 
men are justified in beating women when men are dissatisfied with how the household is run or their 
conjugal relationship. The household chores and caregiving are entirely on the shoulder of women and 
as are the financial responsibilities related to household. Boys are given priority in education, and it is 
accepted that men engage in the most prestigious type of  work and are given the most attractive 
productive assets. Such imparity in decision making, responsibilities sharing and social investment 
does not allow women to take up new activities, for example, mangrove restoration or aquaculture.  
Gender based violence is not uncommon.  
• Early marriages for girls borne by lack of  viable life alternatives in rural areas. As girls in the rural 
areas have very limited opportunities to study or earn a living, the only option left for them is usually early marriage, which perpetuates the vicious circle for women.  
 
6) Institutional barriers  
• Insufficient capacity for natural resource monitoring and management. The available public 
funding and technical capacity is often insufficient to meet the agreed upon mandates in the fisheries, 
water resources, environmental sector. Climate change is introducing an additional burden on the line 
ministries and agencies responsible for the governance and management of the complex fisheries 
sector. In particular, the line ministries lack capacity to act on their broad understanding of CC impacts 
on the fisheries sector and develop specific strategic and advisory actions. For ex ample: there is a 
broad understanding that climate change increases salinity intrusion in the river, and will continue to 
do so, affecting mangroves and fish, but due to a lack of monitoring capacity, the exact extent is not 
known, nor are the implications  for national planning and investment (for example, a mapping of 
brackish water zones where freshwater aquaculture would no longer be possible in the future).  
• Lack of systematic inter -sectoral coordination. As the climate rationale has emphasized, the 
Gambian fisheries sector is dependent on multiple factors, which are often under the jurisdiction of 
different ministries and agencies. To date, no systematic coordination mechanisms exist to bring 
together fisheries, agriculture, forestry, environment, trade and economy decision- makers and to 
introduce climate change considerations in planning and implementation of public policy and 
investments.  
• Target beneficiaries and formulators  of policies, plans and interventions. The entrenched  
patriarchal norms among a ll in the society translates into men being the target beneficiaries and 
formulators of various policies, plans and interventions. They tend to pay little attention to the needs


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
 and strength s of women, not only because of  the men-dominat ed culture, but als o because of lack of 
information about women, especially on their part . 
 
33. To ensure its impact and sustainability , the project will seek to address all these identified barriers, as 
summarized in Table B -15 below, and as presented in the rest of the Funding Proposal.  
Table B-2 Summary of the adaptation barriers and the project’s response interventions  
 Adaptation barriers  How the project will address the identified barriers  Information barriers  Very limited data and analysis on CC 
impacts and weak knowledge on 
adaptation measures  Under Output 3.1 , the project will disseminate the comprehensive climate 
analysis study done as part of the project preparation and will train public 
sector experts on climate change and adaptation and mitigation measures.  
Ambiguous separation between CC 
impacts and fisheries over -exploit ation 
issues  Under Output 3.1 , the project will also support the country’s capacity for 
monitoring fish stocks and landings, data collection on water parameters, 
mangrove cover and degradation to better document and separate human 
action effects and climat e change impacts.  
Lack of systematic information relay 
mechanisms to reach fisher folk  Under Output 3.1 , the project will introduce an e -extension for the fisheries 
sector, using automated text messaging. In addition, investments will be 
made in strengthening the linkages between the MoFWRNAM and the 
community fisheries committees in terms of information di ssemination and 
data collection.  In addition, fisherfolk, farmers and project beneficiaries will 
receive dedicated training, capacity development and knowledge transfer to 
ensure strengthening their capacities in relation to technology transfers and adapt ation to climate change (in Output 2.1  and Output 2.2 ). 
Widespread lack of literacy and 
numeracy skills among women Under Output 3.2, rural women in the fishery sector will be trained on literacy 
and numeracy skills.  Technical barriers  Limited knowledge about technologies 
proven successful  The range of investments in coastal infrastructure and equipment ( Output 
2.1) and in aquaculture ( Output 2.2 ) has been designed based on the best 
available practices and technologies in the West Africa region and beyond. Each investment is complemented by a series of trainings for producers (e.g. 
Fisheries/Aquaculture Field Schools (FFS) with technical, operation and 
maintenance, marketing modules).  
Under Output  2.2, public sector agents will be trained in thes e practices and 
technologies.  
Mixed past experience with improved 
fisheries and aquaculture technologies  Site selection of aquaculture activities under Output 2.2  will be done in 
consultation with the local communities and after a full technical assessment, 
in particular in terms of water access and quality.  
Insufficient availability of quality inputs 
for aquaculture production  Under Output 2.2 , the project will support the upgrading of the Jahally 
Aquaculture Centre’s fingerling production capacity and the scaling of fish feed production at four mills.  
Lack of extension services tailored to  
women’s needs and capacities  Under Output 3.1 , rural women in the fishery sector will be consulted on their 
needs and be provided with voice -over e -extension services  addressing 
these.  
Infrastructure for women’s business 
receives less attention and finance  Under Output s 1.1, 2.1 and 2.2 , infrastructure investments will be made for  
rural women in the fishery sector ; mangroves for both women and men 
(Output 1.1), landing sites improvement for both women and men (Output 
2.1), fish smoking and drying equipment for women (Output 1.1), aquacult ure 
related infrastructure for both women and men (Output 2.2).  
Under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2 , public service personnel and technicians will be 
sensitized on gender issues.  Under Output 3.2 , roundtable discussions on 
private investment will aim to discuss inve stment for women at least 40% of 
the time and rural  women in the fishery sector will be trained on literacy and 
numeracy skills.  Financi
al 
barrier
 No disposable income for investing and 
weak access to credit  Recognising the financial difficulties that a matching grant approach would 
impose on beneficiaries, the project will fully finance the adaptation packages 
under Output 2.2. The four aquaculture and fisheries packages have been 
carefully designed with a fo cus on ensuring sufficient working capital and


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
  
31 Benefic iaries selection will be done also in collaboration with co- financier ROOTS project (IFAD), which has a strong focus on the poorest and most 
vulnerable households.  profitability and most suitable and interested farmers31 will be engaged by the 
project. In addition, platforms to facilitate market access and linkages with 
subsequent segments of fisheries value chains will be facilitated in Output 3.2.  
Similarly, the investments under Output 2.1 , which mostly represent 
communal equipment, will also be financed fully by the project. Completing these investments, the group trainings will focus on strengthening the local committees’ capacity for fee collection and maintenance and replacement 
savings.  
Under Output 3.2  strengthening beneficiaries’ financial literacy for improved 
access to finance if suitable financial products and system will be made 
available. Moreover, Out put 3.2 will include dedicated public -private policy 
dialogue and capacity strengthening of public and private sector including 
financial institutions aimed at de -constraining the inclusive value chains 
development, thereby improving the availability of ap propriate financial 
services for smallholder producers and their organizations. Under Output 3.1  
policy dialogue will be active to stimulate policy and regulations reforms 
needed also to improve financial inclusion.  
Financial leeway for women is much 
smaller than for men  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and 
the roles they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as 
sensitization on the women’s responsibilities, needs and strength s and 
creates understanding of gender issues by men.  The youth members in the 
family will be encouraged to participate for their empowerment and strategic mapping of their lives.  Market barriers  Poor quality standards for fish products 
and insufficient linkages between fish 
value chain actors (producers) and 
buyers  Under Output 2.1 , the project will invest in improved fish processing 
equipment, designed to both reduce losses and to improve the quality of the products. Similarly, the improved water access will ensure that fresh fish is 
sold in more hygienic conditions. Fisher folk will also be trained in quality standards (including for export) under Output 2.1 and Output 3.2, as well as 
supported to organize themselves into common interest groups/cooperatives. 
In addition, linkages with the buyers (especially in the tourism and catering 
sectors) will be promoted under Output 3.2.  
Gender -based segregation of markets  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and 
the roles they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as 
sensitization on the women’s responsibilities, needs and strength and creates understanding of gender issues by men.   The youth in the family will be 
encouraged to take part for re -examining  their role in the family and life pl an. 
Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment will also be discussed.  As 
mentioned above, under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2 , public service personnel and 
technicians will be sensitized on gender issues, and roundtable discussions 
on private investment will aim to discuss investment for women 40% of the 
time.  
Entreched patriarchal norms among all 
in the society.  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and 
the roles they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as 
sensitization on the women’s responsibilities, needs and strength and creates understanding of gender issues by men.  Sexual exploitation, abuse and 
harassment will also be discussed.  The youth in the family will be encouraged 
to take part for reexamining t heir role in the family and life plan.  Sexual 
exploitation, abuse and harassment will also be discussed.  Early marriages for girls borne by lack of 
viable life alternatives in rural areas  Institutional barriers  Insufficient capacity for natural resource 
management  Under Output 3.1 , the project will finance the identified capacity development 
activities to boost the ability of the public sector to better manage Gambia’s 
natural resources, while integrating climate change in its policies and 
regula tions , including climate -resilient construction standards for fish landing 
sites and related infrastructure.  
In addition, under Output 1.2 , the communities involved in the mangrove 
(fisheries habitat) restoration will be equipped to engage in sustainable 
ecosystem management at local level, with support from national institutions.


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
  
32 Link available here: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/AR5_SYR_FINAL_Annexes.pdf .  Lack of systematic inter -sectoral 
coordination  As part of its coordination and implementation arrangements , the project 
will create a multi -stakeholder Project Steering Committee (PSC) and 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC). The meetings and activities of these 
two bodies will be financed by the Government’s in-kind contribution. The project will propose the gradual transformation of these two bodies into 
permanent inter -sectoral coordination mechanisms.  
Target beneficiaries and formulators of 
policies, plans and interventions  Under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2 , public service personnel and technicians will  be 
sensitized on gender issues, including sexual exploitation, abuse and 
harassment.  
Under Output 3.2 , roundtable discussions on private investment will aim to 
discuss investment for women at least 40% of the time.  
 
34. The theory of change builds on the concept or resilience , in this context applied to climate change.  In the 
context of the project, the concepts of adaptation, mitigation, vulnerability and resilience refer to the definitions utilized 
by IPCC.32 A specific adaptation to the project context is derived from FAO definition of livelihood resilience, as: "The  
ability to prevent disasters and crises as well as to anticipate , absorb , accommodate or recover  from them in a 
timely, efficient and sustainable manner. This includes protecting, restoring  and improving  livelihoods systems in 
the face of threats that impact agriculture, nutrition, food security and food safety."   
35. As such, the project seeks to contribute to all aspects of climate resilience of Gambian fisher folk, first by 
investing  in the restoration and protection of mangrove ecosystems  in order to maintain  fish and shellfish  habitats 
affected by climate change and in equipping women with the funda mental skills of literacy and numeracy, then 
by protecting small scale fisheries infrastructure  in order to reduce its climate vulnerability and reduce fish losses  
and improving smoking and drying processes  conducted by women followed by supporting the adaptation and 
improvement of livelihoods through aquaculture development in order to respond to the decrease in capture fish 
availability resulting from the composite impact of climate change. The se interventions are underpinned by support to 
the local actors to anticipate and plan for climate change, as well as having the necessary capacities to implement 
adaptation measures  and to accept gender equality  so that the adaptation activities  are effective.  PROREFISH will 
also create an enabling environment for  increased private sector engagement (by off -takers, financial procured parties ) 
to support the sustainability of the interventions  Figure B-16 below summarizes the proposed paradigm shift (see also 
slides in Annex 22).   
36. The intervention logic of the project will follow three main streams. On a first hand (summarized in the group of 
activities  under Component  1, the  project will provide support to restore mangrove forests as fisheries habitat in priority 
areas , coupled with activities aimed to strengthen local communities  capacity to manage natural resource base. This in 
turn will  allow to have those fisheries habitat in priority areas restored and will allow the targeted communities to 
sustainably manage these fisheries habitat ( outcome 1 ). In parallel, the forests will generate a positive net incremental 
carbon sequestration ( outcome 2 ). Jointly  with other interventions, this stream of activities under component 1 will 
result to be functional also to support the targeted communities’  livelihoods and making them more resilient to climate 
change challenges ( outcome 3 ).  
37. As second stream of activities (in component 2), the project will provide the fisheries communities with the 
required improvement to the small- scale fisheries infrastructure in a climate adaptive fashion and develop capacities to 
perform aquaculture as viable economic activity. As a result, fisheries communities will be equipped with and able to 
manage the climate- resilient equipment and infrastructure and adopt  aquaculture as diversified livelihood climate 
adaptation option , thus making fisheries communities more resilient ( outcome 3 ). The improved equipment – especially 
the improved and energy efficient ovens for fish smoking activities have proven to reduce significantly  the air pollution 
around the sites, reducing the risk of air borne diseases for the fisherfolks involved in the smoking activities (which 
represents one of the co- benefits of the project – co-benefit 1 ).  
The third stream of intervention (grouped in component 3) will target the enabling environment to ensure that artisanal 
fishefolks communities have stronger capacities to adopt climate change options, including higher participation in 
markets, and will target both public and private actors ( outcome 4 ). Sp ecifically, this will be supported by activities


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 aimed to strengthen institutions, policies and regulations to respond to climate risks, to ensure that public services 
(related to forestry and fisheries resources) are better equipped to support communities  in their climate change 
adaptation patterns, as well as by activities  specifically dedicated to strengthening local communities capacity to adopt 
climate change options and to increase their participation in the market  (co-benefit 3 ). This stream of activ ity will also 
specifically aim to improve gender equality, both intra- households and within the society, by promoting the household 
methodology. By addressing root causes of gender based discrimination, the Household Methodology (see Annex 8)  
envisages a process that supports  women – including young women to have a higher participation in economic life and 
activities ( co-benefit 2 ).  
 
   
Figure B-16 Theory of Change


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1- 4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1- 4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation and 
access  MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food and 
water security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
Component 1 .  Strengthening restoration capacity and community management of artisanal fisheries habitats 
Outcome 1 :  
Fisheries habitats 
(mangrove 
ecosystems) are 
sustainably 
restored and 
managed by the 
local communities  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2:  
Increased CO2e 
sequestration 
through improved 
management of 
mangrove forests  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Component 2 .  Climate resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture development  
Outcome 3 :   
Fisherfolks 
livelihoods 
become climate 
resilient by 
increased fish 
availability and 
additional income 
generation  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Component 3 .  Improved climate change adaptive capacities  
Outcome 4:  
Local  
communities , 
public and private 
actors  in the 
fisheries sector  
anticipate and 
plan for climate 
change adopting 
suitable and 
market -driven 
adaptation 
measures  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit 
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 :  Public 
health is increased 
around the fish 
landing sites from 
the reduced pollution 
from the improved 
ovens  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2  
Reduced intra -HH 
gender based ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
  
33 Thiis co -benefit is fruit of a thoroughly planned HH methodology (described in Annex 8). The methodology has the potential to generate enabling conditions 
for equitable socio -economic improvements of women within the households and outside. Three co- benefit areas might be relevant but as the economic area is 
also captured directly and I the third co- benefit it was decided not to mark it for this co- benefit.  
34 FWC/S2 Study based on remote and ground surveys in the Gambia (November 2020/January 2021).  discriminations in 
rural society33 
Co-benefit 3:  
Small -scale and 
vulnerable rural 
people have 
increased access to 
markets.  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Project objective  
38. The project aims to build the resilience of the Gambian artisanal fisher folk in the face of climate change 
and improve their livelihoods.  Throughout this proposal, fisher folk are defined as all the fisheries value chain actors, 
from fishermen, to traders, processors, providers of inputs, etc. – both existing and new to the business, e.g. 
aquaculture producers. The project will scale  up proven adaptation me asures  from the West Africa region and similar 
contexts, with a particular focus on value chain segments dominated by women (fish handling and processing). The 
project will also put particular emphasis on integration with the agriculture sector, particularly for  the development of 
aquaculture.  In order to build on the knowledge and experience  of the local beneficiaries, they will be consulted prior 
to and during detailed planning and execution of all activities.  Specific measures to involved women are found in the 
Gender Action Plan.   
Project components  
39. The objectives of the project will be realized through three inter -linked components, as detailed in the Theory 
of Change. Additional details of the activities  and sub- activities are available in Section E.6.  Except where explicitly 
indicated, all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by 
FAO.  Specific indication is provided against sub- activities fin anced and executed by the Government of the Gambia 
acting through MoA and MoFWRNAM , as well as indication is provided for activities that are co- financed by FAO’s 
Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP).    
 
Component 1:  Strengthening restoration capacity and community management of artisanal fisheries 
habitats  
40. Component 1  is designed to reverse the degradation of mangrove ecosystems in key fisheries areas by 
investing in restoration through replanting and assisted natural  regeneration of more salt tolerant species, coupled with 
support to sustainable ecosystem management. As detailed in the climate rationale, mangroves play a key role in the 
life cycle of at least 10 key fish species (in terms of reproduction, protection and nutrition). Climate and human induced 
degradation has continuously reduced the mangrove cover: over the last 15 years, at an average rate of 1.5% per year, 
for a total of 15,000 ha34. This component will have a positive impact on the sustainability of the fisheries sector by 
protecting essential fish habitat as well as generating a significant mitigation outcome: estimated annual reductions in 
emissions of 11,926 t CO2eq, for a total of - 238,519  t CO2eq over the 20- year lifetime of the projec t (where restoration 
of 2,350 ha of mangrove forests generate -261,068  t CO2eq – detailed calculations  are presented in Annex 24).  
41. Output 1.1 Mangrove ecosystems sustainably restored in fisheries priority areas Mangrove forests trap 
sediments and in so doing protect coasts and riverbanks against erosion. They are thus essential for reducing the impact of climate- change induced Sea Level Rise and increasingly frequent extreme weather events in the Gambia. 
While mangrove ecosystems as a whole are highly resilient to changes in salinity, many  individual mangrove tree 
species are not. As explained in detail in Annex 2, Chapter 5, salinity can have considerable impact on mangrove 
vegetation and associated fish and shellfish species. This also provides an important rationale for mangrove restoration 
with a mix of species,  including more salt -tolerant species, as envisaged by the project.  For each particular project site,


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
  
35 The aforementioned UNEP EbA project also supports reforestation, but less than 10% of its target area is in mangroves, and it  focuses on protected areas 
whereas PROREFISH will focus on community -managed areas without protected status.  those mangrove species most suit able to the current and expected conditions  will be selected .  Mangrove trees are 
unusual in that the seeds develop into s eedlings of up to 30 cm long, called propagules, while they are still attached to 
the parent. Therefore, for mangrove reforestation no nurseries are required – participating communities will collect the 
propagules from nearby mangroves, either directly fro m mature trees or from the water, if the propagules have already 
fallen. Propagules should preferably be planted the same day that they are collected, but if this is not possible, they 
can be stored in closed sacks, in the water. If there are no propagules  nearby, propagules will be collected from areas 
with similar ecological conditions and transported in sacks, by boat or by vehicle, depending on the location. Building 
on lessons learned from previous mangrove restoration activities in the Gambia, PROREFI SH will adopt a community -
driven restoration approach, working together with the local populations as detailed below, as well as invest in post -
restoration activities designed to support sustainable mangrove management. PROREFISH will liaise  with other on-
going mangrove- related initiatives to avoid duplication  of efforts.35 The project will invest in mangrove restoration of 
2,350 ha (1,100 ha of full reforestation and 1,250 ha of assisted natural regeneration) in 10 areas priorit ized during 
project preparat ion, as presented in Map 1 below.  
42. The prioritization of areas was conducted in several steps:  
a. Identification of mangrove areas most relevant to fisheries : While all mangroves in the Gambia can 
be considered as fish and shellfis h habitats, certain areas and species of mangroves are more critical to 
the fish and shellfish life cycle –  in particular in the estuary/river mouth  and the middle river  segments. 
These two river segments are also the zones with the highest original mangrove cover and with most of 
the identified degradation (mouth/estuary 30% of total degradation, middle river 60% of total degradation). 
In addition, these segments are considered as most exposed to climate- induced degradation (sea level 
rise and coastal eros ion especially in the estuary; increased sedimentation, salt intrusion and salinity 
increase in the middle river).  
b. Identification of mangrove degradation/fisheries habitat loss areas in the River Mouth and Middle 
River segments: in both segments, the prior ity was given to areas directly on the Gambia River (and not 
on its tributaries) and to waterfront/shore areas (and not to upland mangroves), given the focus on fisheries 
habitats.  
c. Identification of sites in non -protected mangrove areas. Given the community -led approach and the 
approach of tenure transfer proposed by the project, the priority was given to sites outside the existing protected areas (for reference, marked in different colors on Map 1). 
43. The project will follow  a community -led replanting approach, working with the respective local communities at 
the 10 identified priority areas .
  
44. Under Activity 1.1.1 Reforestation of 1,100 ha of degraded mangrove areas in key fisheries hotspots 
executed by FAO, the project will first support the selection of the exact planting sites in the targeted mangroves areas 
and the identification of locally appropriate reforestation measures . The selection of the sites will be done by FAO 
personnel in close consultation with the communities . With support of experts mobilized locally, the FAO will carry out 
a week -long consultation, identification of planting teams  (who will be volunteers chosen f rom within the respective 
communities)  and training with each of 10 identified communities, as well as a “refresher course” the subsequent year. 
Training will be done on a rolling basis, starting with 2 communities in year one, then 4 communities each in y ear two 
and year three, then 2 more communities in year four. The project will fund procurement, transport and installation of equipment and storage facilities for communities in each of the selected planting areas, on a rolling basis in years one to four,  aligned with the community training sub- activities under 1.1.1.2.  The project will fund the planting campaigns in 
close consultation with the MoA. Mangrove planting will be done through local unskilled community labour on a rolling basis following the community training and equipment, starting with 200 ha in year two, followed by 300 ha each in years three, four and five. FAO will oversee post -restoration seedling survival monitoring and replacement of dead 
seedlings as necessary (5 days per 100 ha).  The D epartments of Forestry and of Parks and Wildlife will be involved for 
consultations at all stages, but in particular for site selection, training and monitoring, with the possibility of being 
engaged as procured parties with the project. Women and female y outh will receive training enabling them to participate 
in site selection, mangrove propagule collection as well as planting campaigns and seedling survival monitoring efforts.


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 In order to avoid undoing of the project activities through illegal tree fellin g, sand mining, etc., monitoring will be 
conducted by the community members with strong involvement of local authorities.  By restoring the mangrove 
ecosystem that supports their livelihoods, this activity will benefit an estimated 750 households inhabiting the mangrove 
communities, for an estimated total of 6,225 people, 52.4% of whom are women. Several hundreds of these people will also benefit from being hired by the project as casual labourers, but these are not added to the beneficiary numbers, in order to avoid double- counting. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed  by the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFWRNAM , and FAO financed and executed), all sub- activities described in 
the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity will be implemented 
via the following sub- activities :  
- 1.1.1.1 Select planting sites within targeted mangrove areas .  
- 1.1.1.2 Supporting the sensitization and training of communities surrounding the mangrove reforestation  
sites on mangrove conservation and sustainable utilization of resources ( co-funded and executed by 
FAO ) 
- 1.1.1. 3 Mobilise local communities (identify and train planting teams) and determine planting plan  
- 1.1.1.4 Equip participating communities with restoration t oolkits in each reforestation are a  
- 1.1.1. 5 Community -led planting campaigns  
- 1.1.1.6 Seedling survival  monitoring and replac ing of dead plants as needed  
 
45. Under Activity 1.1.2 Support assisted natural regeneration (ANR) on 1,250 ha of moderately degraded 
mangroves in key fisheries hotspots  (executed by FAO and The Government of the Gambia acting through MoA ). 
The emphasis will be on the rehabilitation of moderately degraded mangroves rather than on outright reforestation of 
severely degraded or deforested areas as under Activity 1.1.1. ANR relies on the particular reproductive and dispersal characteristics o f mangrove trees. When the mangrove propagule (basically a seedling that develops from seed while 
still attached to the tree) matures, it drops into the water and remains dormant and horizontal while in the sea water. 
On reaching brackish water however, the propagules turn vertically, roots down and leaf buds up, making it easier for 
them to lodge in the mud at a suitable site. ANR consists of a number of different techniques varying from simple 
protection (“set -aside”) and propagule dispersal to allow mangroves to regenerate by themselves, to more intensive 
efforts such as enrichment planting in gaps in the mangrove vegetation. The approach will be similar to Activity 1.1.1, with the additional step of identification of specific ANR needs and measures (enri chment planting, seed dispersal, 
protective measures, etc.). FAO will first identify precise ANR sites and specific ANR measures required in each site 
(5 days per 100 ha) in consultation with the local communities.  With support of experts mobilized locall y, FAO will carry 
out a week -long consultation, identification of ANR teams and training with each of 10 identified communities, as well 
as a “refresher course” the subsequent year. Training will be done on a rolling basis, starting with 2 communities in year one, then 4 communities each in year two and year three, then 2 more communities in year four. The project will 
fund procurement, transport and installation of equipment and storage facilities for communities in each of the selected 
restoration areas, on a rolling basis in years one to four, aligned with the community training activities mentioned above. 
The unskilled labour required for mangrove restoration will be procured by the project (as casual labourers) and sourced 
from the related communities. In order to avoid undoing of the project activities through illegal tree felling, sand mining, 
etc., monitoring will be conducted by the community members with strong involvement of local authorities. Mangrove 
ANR will be done on a rolling basis following the community training and equipment, starting with 200 ha in year two, 
followed by 350 ha each in years three, four and five.   The project will fund a national consultant in years three to six 
of implementation to oversee post -restoration seedling surviva
l monitoring and replacement of dead seedlings as 
necessary (5 days per 100 ha). The project  will procure the services of women to carry out the mangrove propagule 
collection for the ANR campaigns.  Women and female youth will receive training enabling them to participate in site 
selection, propagule collection as well as the ANR campaigns and seedling survival monitoring efforts. MoA will cover staff cost and other inputs for joint planning, coordination, knowledge sharing, monitoring. MoA would rely in part on 
Departments of Forestry and Wildlife & Parks for technical expertise. The Departments of Forestry and of Parks and 
Wildlife will be involved at all stages, but in particular for site selection, training and monitoring, with the possibility of 
being e ngaged as procured parties by the project.  By restoring the mangrove ecosystem that supports their livelihoods, 
this activity will benefit an estimated 750 households inhabiting the mangrove communities, for an estimated total of 6,225 people, 52.4% of wh om are women. Several hundreds of these people will also benefit from being hired by the 
project as casual labourers, but these are not added to the beneficiary numbers, in order to avoid double -counting.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 35 
 
  
36 For further details, please see https://www.fao.org/3/CA0518EN/ca0518en.pdf  Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as finance d and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through the 
MoA or MoFWRNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub- activities described in the following paragraphs are 
intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This will comprise the following sub- activities :  
- 1.1.2.1 Identify ANR sites and site- specific ANR measures within targeted mangrove areas  
- 1.1.2.2 Support  the sensitization and training of communities surrounding the mangrove ANR sites on 
mangrove conservation and sustainable utilization of resources  (co-funded and executed by FAO ) 
- 1.1.2.3 Mobilise local communities (identify, train and equip work teams) and determine ANR work plan 
FAO 
- 1.1.2. 4 Equip participating communit ies with restoration toolkits  in each ANR  area 
- 1.1.2. 5 Community -led Assisted Natural Regeneration ( ANR ) campaigns  
- 1.1.2.6 Monitor , evaluate and replace dead plants  
- 1.1.2. 7 Joint planning and execution of mangrove restoration ( co-funded and executed by  the 
Government of the Gambia action through the  MoA ). 
 
Map 1 Targeted mangrove restoration sites (in red) in the estuary (left) and middle river (right) segments  
 
 
Output 1.2 Local communities equipped for sustainable ecosystem management  
46. Alongside restoration,  PROREFISH  will also invest in empowering  the local communities for sustainable 
ecosystem management, a key element of consolidating the mangrove restoration efforts implemented under output 
1.1 above, and therefore of the project’s exit strategy. The focus of this sub- component will be on raising awareness 
and incentivizing the local communities at the priority sites to participate in restoration activities and in the subsequent 
management of their natural resources, through the acquisition of formal rights and the development of income-generating activities . In this sub- component, PROREFISH builds on earlier successful experiences of FAO’s Forest 
and Farm Facility (FFF) in The Gambia, which helped communities to form Forest and Farm Producer Organizations 
that engaged in income- generating activities and to obtain tenure over community forests, thus providing communities 
with incentives to restore and manage forest resources.
36  
47. Under Activity 1.2.1 ,  Capacity development for local comm unities  executed by FAO, the project will 
provide community -wide trainings on mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use and will support 
the creation of community forest management committees (CFMCs) at each intervention site (10 communities) . In 
years one to four, aligned with the mangrove restoration activities highlighted under Activity 1.1.1 above, the project


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 36 
 
  
37 Forest and Farm Facility – Gambia country factsheet: https://www.fao.org/3/CA0518EN/ca0518en.pdf .  will fund a procured party to run training courses for each of the ten communities, as well as field visits to other 
successful mangrove restoration sites within the Gambia. In years two to five, following on from the trainings and field 
visit provided under sub- activity 1.2.1.1, the project will mobilize expertise to run shot term trainings, facilitate 
community organisation and deci sion- making (including cost of minor inputs such as stationery, ledgers, etc.) for the 
creation of CFMCs. The CFMCs will play a key role in ensuring the sustainable use of natural resources, but also in 
further developing the capacity of their communities  to engage in livelihood diversification from mangrove restoration. 
CFMC members will be provided with additional training and guidance, particularly in developing sustainable mangrove-
based businesses, and in accessing finance for these businesses from the local FIs and commercial banks  (particularly 
in relation to Activity 1.2.2). CFMCs per se cannot access financial services as they are a facilitation group, however, 
they will be strengthened to better facilitate the beneficiaries they support in accessing finance as part of the exit strategy of the project as sustainable business development provides incentives for forest management. Women and female youth will be trained on mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use and serve as fores t 
management committee members. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by the 
Government of the Gambia acting through the MoA  or MoFWRNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities 
described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . Activity 1.2.1 will 
comprise the following sub- activities :  
- 1.2.1.1 Provide trainings on mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use  
- 1.2.1.2 Establish community forest management committees (CFMCs) at each intervention site  
 
48. Subsequently, under Activity 1.2.2 Support the establishment of community forest status (where 
applicable) for the interventions sites and the transfer of tenure to the local communities  (executed by  FAO), 
the project will work with the national agencies and the communities to promote the establishment of community forest 
status (where applicable) for the intervention sites restored under output 1.1 above and the transfer of tenure to the 
local commun ities.  FAO will carry out a participatory forest status review with the 10 communities, covering both the 
legal aspects as well as the local forest uses (woodfuel, non- timber forest products, etc.) and the specific actors involved 
(indicatively 15 days/site). FAO will then mobilize NGOs/Community -based Organisations involved in mangrove 
restoration, such as the Department of Forestry and with the Department of Parks and Wildlife for preparing the forest 
tenure agreements with the 10 communities. FAO will then organize one- week long awareness raising events in the 
local communities on rights and obligations under the new tenure agreements.  
49. T he project  will scale -up previous efforts to empower communities to participate in restoration and 
subsequently assume tenure over the restored plots and organize themselves, with support from the Departments of 
Forestry and of Parks and Wildlife, to sustainably manage and extract resources from the mangroves. As an example, 
between 2015 and 2017 FAO implemented the Forest and Farm Facility,37 under which ownership of 116 community 
forests covering 9 408 hectares (representing 30 percent of all community forest tenure agreements in The Gambia) 
was transferred to local communities and 100 forest management plans and 35 associated enterprise development 
plans linked to community forests were developed.  Women and female youth will be involved in review of the forest 
situation, preparation and enactment of forest tenure agreements and participate in awareness raising workshops.  
Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through the 
MoA or MoFWRNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub- activities described in the following paragraphs are 
intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This will comprise the following sub- activities :  
- 1.2.2.1 Review forest status, determine boundaries  and establish community forest status  
- 1.2.2.2 Prepare and enact forest tenure agreements  
- 1.2.2.3 Conduct awareness raising workshops for communities on rights and obligations  
 
50. Activity 1.2.3 Provide  technical support to the execution of the mangrove restoration activities and 
ensuring environmental and social safeguards  (executed by FAO and MoFWRNAM) will provide technical support 
to the execution of the above- mentioned mangrove restoration activities and ensuring the correct application of 
environmental and social safeguards, as contained in the ESMF. Specifically, it will support the communities living


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 37 
 
  
38 CEAS is Centre Ecologique Albert Schweitzer.  close to the 10 mangrove forest sites to be restored and related stakeholders by mobilizing expertise dedicated to 
transfer of capacity on fisheries and associated natural resources management activities. Communities will get training 
on the use of artificial substrates for cultivating oysters, to avoid damage from oyster harvesting to mangrove tree roots, 
as the latter serve as a refuge for juvenile fish and crustaceans, which feed on the micro- organisms consuming the 
rotting plant materials (sunken leaves etc.). In addition, communities will be made aware of the importance of applying and enforcing regulations on minimum mesh size for fishing nets, to increase survival of fish and shellfish larvae and juvenile organisms as the basis for future  catches. Communities will also receive training to ensure respect of social 
and environmental safeguards.  MoFWRNAM will cover staff costs, logistics, use of facilities and other inputs for 
implementation of fisheries and associated natural resources management extension and supervision activities. .  
Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting  through 
MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are 
intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The activity will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 1.2.3.1 Supervision and extension for fisheries and related NRM activities ( co-funded and executed by  
the Government of the Gambia acting through  MoFWRNAM ) 
- 1.2.3.2 Provision of capacity development to local communities on NRM / Mangrove forestry  
- 1.2.3.3 Supervise and ensure the correct application of environment and social safeguards  (ESS)  
 
Component 2: Climate resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture development 
51. Component 2 aims to increase the fish availability and provide additional income to fisher folk by improving 
the small -scale fisheries infrastructure used by the artisanal sector and by promoting aquaculture production through 
different technologies. Please refer to the feasibility study part 2 for technical description of the infrastructures.  
Output 2.1  Fisheries communities are equipped  with climate- proofed and improved critical small scale 
fisheries infrastructure (artisanal fish landing sites) and with climate- smart fish proces sing equipment (solar 
dryers and improved ovens)  
52.  As described in the context and climate rationale section, the fish harvest in the Gambia is highly dependent 
on capture fisheries. Fish for domestic consumption is exclusively caught by artisanal fishermen. Their catches are 
landed at an estimated 132 sites across the country, yet the majority of the landed volumes are concentrated in 10 landing sites along the coast. Due to climate change induced sea level rise, beach erosion, increases in extreme wind and wave  intensity, and changes in high rainfall events and the resulting run- off, these landing sites are the ones most 
at risk of permanent damage. The destruction of these landing sites would hinder the artisanal fishing, would endanger fish landing operations and would increase post -landing fish losses. In this context, the Government of the Gambia 
originally proposed to focus on seven of the most important and vulnerable sites (which currently account for over 70% of the landed artisanal volumes). Subsequently, the project team assessed the climate change vulnerability of these 
fish landing sites and identified climate change and other challenges as well as, to the extent possible, detailed 
adaptation measures at each of the sites (see pages 47- 87 of Annex 2, Feasibility study, for details of identified 
investment needs).  Six of the seven sites assessed were retained for project investment, based on identified 
vulnerabilities and the possible adaptation measures: Bintang, Brufut, Gunjur, Kartong, Sanyang and Tanji.  Only one of the landing sites assessed,  Bakau, could not be included in the project as no adaptation measures could be identified, 
due to the beach loss. Therefore, the climate- proofing of the Banjul site has been added as an adaptation measure to 
accommodate the loss of landing capacities at Bakau and other nearby sites.  
53. The project will invest in climate adaptation measures (climate- proofing of landing sites) and in the introduction 
of new improved fish processing technologies with a reduced carbon footprint at six major coastal fish landing s ites and 
one river landing site (on the Bintang Bolong, a major tributary of the Gambia river) (see Map 2).  The existing climate 
exposed fish smoking and drying facilities and equipment will be replaced with improved, climate- resilient technologies 
(FAO Thiaroye Technique ( FTT) fish smoking  ovens and CEAS38 solar driers), as well as a solar -powered sea water 
fish rinsing lines. T he FTT oven is w ell-proven technology that reduces the level of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
(PAHs) and gives the final fish product a more uniform, premium quality , allowing the fish produced to meet international


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 38 
 
  
39 Capacity development for the fisheries communit ies will be provided in activity 2.1.6:  
40 This will be complemented by dedicated technical capacity provided to fisheries communities in Activity 2.1.6.  food safety requirements and access better markets  – as well as improving the health and safety conditions  by 
eliminat ing the smoke pollution; it is built with durable strong materials preventing replacement costs and fire damage; 
it functions regardless of the weather conditions and increases the shelf life of the final product reducing the post -
harvest losses and offering the chance to store fish f or a longer  period, providing producers with leverage against price 
fluctuations until optimal market conditions are met; it’s faster than the traditional techniques allowing processors to 
carry on other business or responsibilities’; also reduces the amount of firewood used by up to 80%, decreasing the 
pressure on the environment and the costs; and finally, it creates opportunities for generating additional revenue from 
processing by -products, e.g. fat gathered which can be used in soap, or as cooking or frying oil.  Women and female 
youth landing s ite users will be periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the construction 
process. Female landing site users will be consulted regarding installation of fish smoking units, dryers and rinsing 
lines. Women and female youth will participate in capacity development activities related to technical, O&M and 
marketing aspects of smoking units, dryers and rinsing lines.39   
 
Map 2 Targeted fish landing sites  
 
54. Overall, the interventions under this component will comprise seven major activities.  
55. Activity  2.1.1  Environmental  and Social Impact Assessment (E SIA), detailed design and supervision 
for all sites  executed by FAO covers the design and supervision work for all the construction activities at the seven 
fish landing sites included in activities 2.1.2 to 2.1.5 below.   A procured party will supervise construction works, planned 
from Q1 of year 2 to Q2 of  year 4. This activity will also fund a consultant to carry out an Environmental and Social  
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for all identified sites as required ( see Annex 6 for details). In addition,  this activity will 
mobilize a dedicated expert to train the artisanal fisherfolk on the respect of environmental and social safeguards, 
including their role in implementing the Environmental and Social Management Framework’s40. Except where explicitly 
indicated  (e.g., as financed and executed  by t he Government of the Gambia acting  through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and 
FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by 
GCF and executed by FAO . This activity will comprise the following sub-activities:  
- 2.1.1.1 Conduct Environmental and Social Impact Assessment ( ESIA)  for construction works at all fish 
landing  sites.  
- 2.1.1.2 Detailed design of all construction works .  
- 2.1.1.3 Supervision of construction works .


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 39 
 
  
41 Women and female youth will also participate in capacity development activities related to technical , O&M and marketing aspects of fish handling facilities, 
which are included under activity 2.1.6 : 
42 Women and female youth will also participate in related capacity development activities (technical, O&M and marketing aspects of smoking units , dryers and 
rinsing lines) under activity 2.1.6.  2.1.1.4 Provision of capacity development on environmental and social safeguards for artisanal fisherfolk, 
including on their role in implementing the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
56. Under Activity 2.1.2  Expand the Banjul landing site to accommodate loss of capacity at other climate 
impacted sites (Package 1) , executed by FAO, the project will invest in the expansion of the Banjul landing site  to 
accommodate loss of capacity at other climate- impacted sites nearby, such as Bakau. In particular, the investments 
will be focused on developing additional fish landing and handling capacity  by introducing four additional pontoons for 
artisanal fishers ’ canoes and the necessary shore facilities. Women and female youth landing site users will be 
periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the construction process. Female Banjul landing 
site users will be consulted regarding installation of shore facilities for fish handling. W omen and female youth will  also 
be invited to take part in dredging, to encourage women's crossing the task division line based on gender .41 
Investments at this site will benefit a total of 1,388 artisanal fisherfolk as follows: 1,113 fishermen; 50 fish smokers, 25 fish dryers and 200 small -scale fish traders.  Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed  by t he 
Government  of the Gambia acting  through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities 
described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . This activity will 
comprise the foll owing sub-activities : 
- 2.1.2.1 Mobilisation and dredging  
- 2.1.2.2 Piling works  
- 2.1.2.3 Installation of 4 new pontoons for fish landing  
- 2.1.2.4 Installation of shore facilities for fish handling  
 
57. Under  Activity 2.1.3
 Introduce climate -proofed equipment for fish sm oking and drying at the Brufut, 
Tanji, Gunjur and Sanyang landing sites (Package 2) executed by FAO , the project will Introduce climate- proofed 
equipment for fish smoking and drying at the Brufut, Tanji, Gunjur  and Sanyang  landing sites . As detailed in para 
73 above, the  project will support replacing climate exposed fish smoking and drying facilities and equipment with 
improved, climate- resilient technologies (FTT ovens and CEAS solar driers). In addition, water access for fish handling 
and processing operations will be improved with the installation of solar -powered sea water fish rinsing lines. Female 
landing site users will be consulted regarding installation of fish smoking units, dryers and rinsing lines.42 This 
investment will benefit a total of 11,260 artisanal fisherfolk, as follows: (i) Brufut , 825 fishermen, 85 fish smokers, 156 
fish dryers and 275 small -scale fish traders; (ii) Tanji, 4,500 fishermen, 592 fish smokers, 313 fish dryers and 262 small -
scale fish traders; (iii) Gunjur, 2,230 fishermen, 82 fish smokers, 90 fish dryers and 75 small -scale fish traders; (iv) 
Sanyang, 975 fishermen, 25 fish smokers, 30 fish driers and 150 small -scale fish traders. . Except where explicitly 
indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM , and 
FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by 
GCF and executed by FAO . The activity will be structured in the following sub-activities : 
- 2.1.3.1 Installation of improved fish smoking units  
- 2.1.3.2 Installation of improved solar fish driers  
- 2.1.3.3 Installation of solar -powered sea water fish rinsing lines  
 
58. Under Activity 2.1.4  Develop flood -proofing measures and introduce climate -proofed equipment for fish 
smoking and drying at the Kartong landing site (Package 3 ) executed by FAO, the project will finance the 
development of flood- proofing measures and the introduction of climate- proofed equipment for fish smoking and drying 
at the Kartong landing site . By raising the fish landing site and installing new floating pontoons, the Kartong fishing 
operations would be able to continue and would be capable of accommodating additional fis h landing and handling 
capacity to respond to over -crowding at other nearby landing sites (due to beach erosion). This investment will benefit 
a total of 595 artisanal fisherfolk, as follows: 400 fishermen, 20 fish smokers, 25 fish dryers, 50 oyster proces sors and 
100 small -scale fish traders.  Except where explicitly indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by the Government of


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 40 
 
  
43 Capacity development for the fisheries communities will be provided in activity 2.1.6:  the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed all sub -activities described in the 
following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO.  
59. This activity will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 2.1.4.1 Platform level raising works  
- 2.1.4.2 Piling works and installation of floating pontoons  
- 2.1.4.3 Installation of improved s olar fish driers  
- 2.1.4.4 Installation of improved fish smoking units  
- 2.1.4.5 Installation of solar -powered sea water fish rinsing lines   
 
60. Under Activity 2.1.5  Develop flood -proofing measures at the Bintang landing site (Package 4 ) executed 
by FAO,  flood- proofing measures will be developed at the Bintang landing site  with project support. In particular, new 
floating pontoons will be installed and road access to t he landing site will be improved.43  Except where explicitly 
indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM , and 
FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by 
GCF and executed by FAO . This activity will comprise the following sub- activities : 
- 2.1.5.1 Road level raising works  
- 2.1.5.2 Piling works and installation of floating pontoons  
 
61. Under Activity 2.1.6  Capacity development for the  Community Fisheries Centers (CFCs ) executed by 
FAO and MoFWRNAM, at each landing site, the project will provide capacity development through trainings for the 
local Community Fisheries Centers (CFCs) committees and members on the following topics: (i) operating and 
maintaining the fish landing and processing infrastructure and equipment, (ii) community organization, and (iii) improved 
marketing. CFCs have existed for several decades at each landing site (the first one was established in 1979). Initially 
an intensive “Training of trainers” programme would be conducted f or 20 trainers, who in turn will train 100 women and 
youth each (Total number of trainees 2,020).  The number of trainees would be ten persons per Community Fisheries 
Centres (CFC), including the members of the Centre’s Management Committee, for each of the seven CFCs at the 
landing sites supported by the project (total number of trainees 70).  
62. The members comprise representatives of the different fishing industry groups, a representative of the Village 
Development Committee, and the Village Head (Alikalo) as  Chairperson. The CFCs employ people from the community 
on a casual or permanent basis including a secretary, a watchman, a cleaner and a pump mechanic. Many CFC services are provided free of charge, but some facilities are rented to users and charges are levied against certain other 
services (e.g. water). These fees and service charges are collected and used for the upkeep, maintenance, and 
expansion of the facilities and part of the profits generated are used to support social development activities in the villages. Each Management Committee operates a bank account into which excess monies are deposited and from 
which sums are withdrawn for agreed expenditure. This model of operation will be strengthened with project support 
and will contribute to the sust
ainability of the interventions, in particular by ensuring the necessary resources for 
operation, maintenance and replacement of the climate- proofed infrastructure and newly installed equipment even after 
the end of the project (see section B6). In additio n, the CFCs will also be strengthened and supported to develop 
linkages with local financial institutions and promote access to finance for their members. Female and female youth 
landing site users will be periodically invited to the construction site to e xamine and learn about the construction 
process. Women and female youth will participate in capacity development related to organizational, O&M and 
marketing aspects. This investment will benefit a total of 12,648 artisanal fisherfolk at the fish landing s ites detailed 
above.  Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs 
are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity will be performed via the following sub- activities:  
- 2.1.6.1 Trainings on equipment and technologies use, on organisational arr angements for equitable use 
and for user fee collection, on maintenance and repairs


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 41 
 
  
44 These communuities comprise beneficiaries of mangrove restoration activities financed under component 1.  - 2.1.6. 2 Provision of capacity development for post harvest equipment management and maintenance  (co-
funded and executed by FAO ) 
- 2.1.6. 3 Capacity development for the CFCs - organisational, O&M and marketing including negotiation skil ls 
(co-funded and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM)  
 
63. Under Activity 2.1.7  Introduce energy efficient technologies for fish handling and processing in 10 
mangrove management communities44 executed by FAO, the project will support the mangrove communities 
supported under component 1 to introduce energy  efficient technologies for fish handling and processing, such as small 
solar powered equipment and improved fish smoking ovens (FTT ovens) to reduce the use of firewood and to improve 
fish processing operations. All communities involved in mangrove restoration will also benefit from the Aquaculture 
Package 4 (promotion of sustainable clam and oyster culture), which is part of Component 2’s Activity 2.2.6 and which 
will create additional incentives for sustainable mangrove management.  Women and female youth will be involved in 
identification of site -specific priority needs. Women and female youth site users will be consulted for location selection, 
design installation of equipment to be introduced and periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the construction process. Women and female youth will participate in capacity development activities related to 
technical, O&M and organizational aspects of equipment.  Except where explicitly indicated ( e.g., as financed and 
executed  by  The Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFWAENAM , and FAO financed and executed ), 
all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The 
activity will be implemented via the following sub- activities:  
- 2.1.7.1 Identify site specific priority needs of the mangrove communities to reduce firewood use and fish 
losses  
- 2.1.7.2 Provide and install the necessary equipment  
- 2.1.7.3 Install additional equipment  (co-funded  and executed by FAO ) 
- 2.1.7. 4 Capacity development for the artisanal fisherfolk in the mangrove communities (technical, O&M, 
and organizational including negotiation skills ) 
 
64. Overall, the climate- proofing and improvement of critical small- scale fisheries i nfrastructure at these landing 
sites and the provision of fish processing equipment with a lower carbon footprint in the mangrove communities will 
increase the resilience of both the infrastructure and the livelihoods of the artisanal fisher folk. For each of the fish 
landing sites supported by the project, specific climate vulnerabilities have been identified and the proposed 
investments respond specifically to these issues (see  Table B 13 “Prioritization of landing sites based on the CC 
vulnerability assessment” in section B1). For example, to build resilience against sea level rise and beach erosion, depending on site, the actions include the relocation of the vulnerable infrastructure and equipment further away from 
the shore, including raised platforms. Against increased extreme waves and winds, and changes in precipitation 
intensity and frequency, the new equipment for fish processing will be protected against these climate st ressors. All 
investments have been designed to be resilient to the projected climate change for a period of 20- 25 years. Lessons 
learned from the 2016 IFAD Country Portfolio Evaluation for The Gambia have been integrated in this activity, as follows. In co nstructing the new small -scale fisheries infrastructure, local materials will be used whenever possible. 
Salt-
tolerant cement will be used where necessary, and rust resistant steel rather than rust vulnerable iron. The 
estimated impact of these investments  is twofold: first, a significant decrease in post -harvest losses (at least 50% from 
current levels of 20- 30% PHL to 10- 15%) and an increase in the quality of the processed fish (smoked and dried) in 
better hygienic conditions and with lower toxicity. Based on recent fish landing statistics (2020), a 10% decrease in PHL would amount to 3,500 tons per year, with an approximate market value of US$ 3.5 million.  
Output 2.2  Aquaculture activities introduced as adaptation measures for livelihood improvement of 2 ,800 
smallholder rural households   
 
65. To counter the decrease in fish availability from capture fisheries due to climate change, the project will help 
smallholder producers to scale up aquaculture development through four types of interventions: i) catfish c ulture in fish


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 42 
 
  
45 As aquaculture investments are small -scale, environmental impacts are expected to be minor. Table 9 in ESMF (Annex 6) provides for mitigation measures to 
limit the residual risk of aquaculture investment. These provisions will work as exclusion list for sub project selection and approval. When provided for, the 
project will perform ESIA.  tanks integrated in communal vegetable gardens; ii) rice -fish culture; iii) fish culture in earthen ponds; and iv) 
sustainable clam and oyster culture (Activities 2.2.3 – 2.2.6) . The choice of the interventions was driven by the interest 
in creating synergies with the agriculture sector, as Gambian inland rural population has diversified livelihoods (a mix 
of agriculture, livestock, and fishing), by the availability of large, irr igated rice schemes and communal vegetable 
gardens, by previous experience with pond aquaculture developed by FAO in The Gambia and by the successful oyster 
and clam culture, promoted by the TRY Oyster association , a large women’s producer group active in coastal areas. It 
should be noted that integrating aquaculture with rice cultivation and vegetable gardening also has potential climate 
change mitigation benefits, as the fish excrement in the water used for irrigation reduces the need for industrial ferti lizer. 
Cage culture in the river or its tributaries was considered, yet not retained due to past unsuccessful experiences, the 
risk of introducing non- native species and the limited knowledge available.45 Activities will be put in place to ensure that 
operation and maintenance of the introduced infrastructure will sustainably continue even after the project closure (see 
section B6).  
66. The introduction and adoption of the four aquaculture packages mentioned above is contingent on the 
increased availability of domestically produced fingerlings (juvenile fish) and fish feed. Previous Government 
interventions, coupled with support from the technical and financial partners, have resulted in the creation of the Jahally 
hatchery and of two fish feed mills. Yet, the current output of these units is insufficient to meet the projected demand 
generated by project investments and in the short -term, the inputs will have to be imported from Senegal. Therefore, 
two cross -cutting activities have been added to support increased production of fingerlings and fish feed, Activities 2.2.1 
and 2.2.2.   
67. As such, the project will commence its support to aquacult ure development through supporting the expansion 
of the Jahally Aquaculture Center  under Activity 2.2.1  executed by FAO. The Jahally centre is run by the 
government, with the most recent investments (rehabilitation) provided by FAO, and recurrent costs coming from the 
Government (included in the budget of the Ministry of Fisheries). The centre’s location is very strategic, very close to a 
rice-producing area. The water supply of the centre originates from a borehole, installed by FAO, which is essential for 
a fish hatchery. FAO supported the Government by rehabilitating a hatchery. Over the years, the centre, which had 
ended up in a state of disrepair, was brought back to its original capacity. However, in the light of the positive experience  
with integrated rice- cum- fish culture elsewhere in West Africa, the hatchery and demonstration capacity have to be 
extended to cater for massive fingerling production for fish farmers and rice- fish farmers alike. To increase production 
capacity, the centre needs  additional ponds and start -up inputs (imported quality fingerlings and feed), as current public 
resources are not sufficient to expand capacity.  As such, the project will invest in improving the capacity of the Center 
to produce and deliver increased numbers of catfish and tilapia fingerlings to meet the demand generated by project investments in year 1 and 2 and to serve as an aquaculture training center  which will allow the Jahally aquaculture 
Center to play a much more active role in the scaling- up of s mallholder aquaculture investment in the Gambia, in year 
1.  Except where explicitly indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through 
MoA or MoFW RNAM , and FAO financed and executed), all sub- activities described in the following paragraphs are 
intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The activity will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 2.2.1.1 Upscale the fingerling production capacity (additional ponds, scale- up inputs –  feed, hormones)   
- 2.2.1.2 Develop a training centre and a demonstration pond   
 
68. In parallel, under Activity 2.2.2  Promote the increase of fish feed production through four manufacturing 
units  executed by FAO, the project will support the increase in capacity of fish feed pro duction through four small -
scale, private manufacturing units  (two existing units and two new ones).  The outputs of the Centre and of the feed 
production units will be procured by the aquaculture producers and will ensure the sustainability of these businesses. FAO, through its Technical Cooperation Programme, has supplied two small -scale manufacturing units to The Gambia 
for fish feed production, in view of the high costs of imported fish feed. One youth group in Kuluro as well as the Jahal ly 
hatchery had been provided with fish feed manufacturing units. As fish feed requires 30 to 35% fishmeal and fish oil for 
optimal growth performance, alternative sources of protein have been investigated. Studies revealed that meal made 
of leaves of Moringa oleifera  may be included in the diets of African Catfish, Clarias gariepinus , reducing fish meal


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 43 
 
 content to 20% and therefore reducing the cost of fish meal in fish feed by a third. There are indications that for Nile 
Tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus , the fish meal percentage could be reduced to 22%. Partial replacement of fish meal by 
Moringa leaves would result in a considerable savings, particularly when the most suitable protein resource in The 
Gambia, the small -pelagic fish species, would be affected by changes in seawater temperature, salinity and currents.  
69. It may be clear that the above description of fish feed production is of a small -scale operation. There is no 
industrial fish feed production as the target will be to satisfy the envisaged aquaculture sector.  Notwithstanding, three 
foreign fishmeal factories exist along the Atlantic coastline of The Gambia, targeting the small pelagic fish species, 
favored by the riparian population. The production of these fishmeal plants is destined for export and not for local 
fishmeal supplies. This industry is strongly polluting the coastal waters, consuming much electricity and causing 
massive CO 2 emissions. With the possible negative impact of climate change on the distribution and catchability of 
these species, it is of  paramount importance to produce fish feed with alternative protein sources. An alternative protein 
source is the Black Soldier Fly (BSF), Hermetia illucens . There has been substantial interest to use these flies in organic 
waste management, given that the ir larvae are voracious detritivores, eaters of organic waste. The ability of BSF to 
convert waste into high- quality nutrient compost has opened innovative prospects for organic waste management. The 
larvae of BSF are nutrient -rich consisting of an average of 42.1– 43.2% crude protein, 33% lipids and micronutrients, 
thus an excellent candidate for replacing fishmeal or soybean meal in fish feed. Simple techniques exist to separate 
the larvae from the compost as larvae leave the compost heap when preparing fo r the formation of pupae. It is worth 
mentioning that the compost produced in the BSF intervention can be used in other components of the project (e.g. women’s vegetable gardens). Slaughterhouse waste (particularly blood) is another excellent source of proteins. There are more waste products from the groundnut processing industry, breweries (JulBrew), fish processors (fish offal from filleting), etc. that could be used for protein extraction. In order to tailor the activities to women and female youth benef iciaries of aquaculture, they will be consulted on type of fish, location and dimensions of ponds, etc. well before 
the activities begin. Women and female youth oyster/fish harvesters/professors/sellers will be consulted on the effects 
of fish feed product ion on their livelihoods before and during the activities. Women and female youths will be involved 
in creation of new units for fish- feed production and trained on fish feed production.  Except where explicitly indicated 
(e.g., as financed and executed by  the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO 
financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF 
and executed by FAO.  The activity will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 2.2.2.1 Provide additional inputs for the full operationalisation of existing units  
- 2.2.2.2 Finance the creation of two additional, youth- led units  
- 2.2.2.3 Provide training and quality control for fish feed production, including business aspects  
 
70. Under Activity 2.2.3 Integrate catfish production in fish tanks in 30 communal vegetable gardens 
Aquaculture Package 1 executed by FAO and the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA, the project will 
finance the integration of catfish production in fish tanks in 30 communal gardens , with co -financing from MoA 
through the ROOTS project. The ROOTS project will provide the necessary investments in rehabilitating existing 
gardens and in creating new ones (including solar powered water acces s and network, fencing, agronomical training, 
etc.). PROREFISH will complement these investments at each garden by introducing 10 fish tanks, one improved fish 
smoking oven , and the necessary start -up kits (tools and inputs  especially fingerlings and fish feed) ) for catfish 
production and processing. In partnership with the Department of Fisheries and the Jahally Aquaculture Center, the project will also provide training and supervision for fish production and smoking, and use of water with fish excrement 
as an organic fertilizer in horticulture. This aquaculture package will increase fish availability, improve incomes and 
food security, while reducing fertilizer use and costs in vegetable production. Women, male youths and female youths 
will receive equipme nt and inputs in addition to training and instructions.  
71. The vegetable gardens’ water supply from boreholes used to water crops will be partly used to fill circular open 
water tanks of approximately 4,000 liters  volume, which will be filled with 3,000 liters  of water. A total of 500 catfish 
(Clarias gariepinus ) fingerlings weighing 9 to 10 grams will be stocked in each of the tanks. After a brief period of 
acclimatization, the feeding will start, three times per day and once per night. Each garden will be provided with ten 
tanks, 5000 fingerlings and an adequate quantity of fish feed. During the rearing period, the fish will grow in size and consume more feed, which results in increase in excrements. In order to avoid pollution of the fish tanks, the water with


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 44 
 
 the natural fertilizer will be used to water and fertilize the crops. This will reduce the use of (artificial) fertilizer to be 
purchased by the gardens considerably. Depending on the ambient temperature, the fish will grow to 600- 800 grams 
in six months’ time, after which they can be harvested and processed. Per year two production cycles are feasible, 
yielding 7,000 kg of fish per garden. Based on average feed consumption in the West -African region, a quant ity of 
8,400 kg of feed will be required in the first year of operation, which will gradually reduce with practice and experience to 7,000 kg per year. Negative impacts associated with boreholes will be avoided by using the results of FAO’s saline intrusion study for the targeting of borehole sites. Aquifer level and salinity will be monitored to avoid environmental 
problems. Boreholes for inland aquaculture (combined with vegetable gardening) will be established by the IFAD -
funded ROOTS project.  
72. FAO has introduced the smallholder cultivation of African catfish, Clarias gariepinus , in various countries, 
because of its ability to “breathe” atmospheric air at the water surface. As a result, the fish can be kept permanently in water that is low in dissolved oxygen. The behavior of this species allows for high fish densities, as are common in 
aquaculture situations. The feed offered to them when in fish tanks will be consumed completely, without any remains. 
Fish are fed to saturation to optimize growth performance. Obviously, the fish excrements (digested feed) will enter the water, but still  have a good nutritional value, especially for crops. Some of the tank water will have to be replaced from 
time to time and then the water can be used for irrigation purposes rather than discarded.  Unlike industrial -scale 
aquaculture, the effluent from these small tanks does not contain any harmful substances such as antibiotics.  This 
method has been successfully applied in arid countries like Northeast Nigeria and Ghana.  The women’s groups’ 
beneficiaries obtain a financial gain by reducing the use of artificial fertilizer for the crops in the vegetable gardens, while the environment benefits from the substitution of organic fertilizer (since fish feed consists of natural ingredients) for inorganic fertilizer and the absence of run- off and water pollution. This activity, which will have 900 beneficiaries (all 
female, 30 beneficiaries per horticulture garden), will be implemented in year 2 to year 5, to allow prior upscaling of 
fingerling and fish feed production (under Activities 2.2.1 and 2.2.2).  Except where explicitly indicated ( e.g., as financed 
and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), 
all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The 
activity will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 2.2.3.1 Construction and infrastructure works ( co-funded and executed by  the Government of the 
Gambia acting through MoA ) 
- 2.2.3.2  Provide fish tanks, smoking ovens, shelters and start -up aquaculture kits (tools and inputs ) 
- 2.2.3.3 Provide technical training and supervision for fish production and smoking,  use of water with fish 
excrements as fertilizer in horticulture, and negotiation skills.  
 
73. Under Activity 2.2.4 Introduce integrated rice -fish culture in 300 ha of new irrigated schemes 
(Aquaculture Package 2) executed by FAO and the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA, the project will 
introduce integrated rice- fish culture  in 300 ha of new irrigated schemes, co- financed by MoA through the ROOTS 
project. The development of irrigated rice production is the main intervention of the ROOTS project, which targets 2,800 
ha across several regions in the Gambia. PROREFISH will focus its intervention on those schemes in the proximity of the Jahally Centre, to ensure easy access to inputs and training for the beneficiaries.  
74. The rice plants will be planted in the fields and (partly) submerged. The fish will forage among the plants and 
eat the insects and other possible vermin that attack the rice plants. The excrements will  fertilize the paddy fields, 
benefiting the plants considerably . With time, the farmers will find a balance between the number of fish and the amount  
of fertilizers and pesticides. Experience from other parts in the world indicates that considerable cost savings on 
external inputs can be made by the combination of rice and fish. Eventually the fish and rice culture will not require any chemical inputs any longer. In case the water level fluctuates and drops to very low levels, the fish will withdraw into 
the refuge canals and pond. The pond will be dug deeper than the refuge canals to allow for easy fish collection, when 
the rice is harvested. Depending  on the size of the paddy fields and the fish density it may be desirable to supply 
supplementary fish feed to accelerate fish growth.  
75. The project will finance technical assistance for developing the adjusted design and technical specifications for 
integr ated rice- fish culture, will top -up the additional cost of the works, will provide start -up kits (tools and inputs  include 
spades, wheelbarrows, wellington boots, gloves and other protective clothing, scoopnets, seine nets, electronic balance


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 45 
 
 (up to 100 gr ), large weighing scales (up to 50 kg), buckets, knives, oximeter, and water testing kits, among others. 
Inputs include fingerlings and fish feed and will provide training and supervision. Based on established good practices 
in Asia and several African countries, this aquaculture package is expected to increase fish availability, while reducing 
pesticide use and increasing rice yields, despite a modest decrease in actual cultivated area. Women and female 
youths will be consulted on the specifications of irrigation schemes, involved in developing new irrigated schemes and receive start -up kits for rice-
fish culture as well as training and instructions. This investment will support 600 
beneficiaries (50% women), who will integrate fish cultivation in their 0.5 ha irrigated rice field.  Except where explicitly 
indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM , and 
FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by 
GCF and executed by FAO. This activity, which will be implemented in years 1 to 3, will be structured in the following sub-activities:  
- 2.2.4.1  Contribute to the works of developing new irrigated schemes (top- up for additional cost of works  
(co-funded and executed by  the Government of the Gambia acting through  MoA  ) 
- 2.2.4.2 Provide technical assistance for developing the adjusted design and technical specifications for the 
integration of fish cultivation in the irrigated rice schemes   
- 2.2.4.3 Provide start -up kits to the beneficiaries (tools and inputs) .  
- 2.2.4.4 Provide technical training to and supervision for the beneficiaries of integrated rice -fish production, 
and  negotiation skills  
 
76. Under Activity 2.2.5  Fund the development of fish culture in 60 earthen ponds  (Aquaculture Package 3) 
executed by FAO, the project will scale- up fish culture in earthen ponds , by investing in 50 new units of 400 sqm 
each and in the rehabilitation of 10 existing units. Ponds will be organized in clusters of 5 units each for joint water 
access and economies of scale in production and marketing.  
77. Several efforts have been made by different projects as well as private farmers to dig fishponds for fish culture. 
Yet, many fish ponds have been abandoned or were dug at inappropriate sites where saline groundwater  entered the 
ponds and negatively affected fish growth. The Jahally hatchery  provides access to a series of well- designed grow -out 
ponds, which serve as examples of how to construct fish ponds. The design will be shared with fish farmers after site 
selection. For the existing ponds, depending on circumstances, the project will improve water access and provide lining, as well as other corrective measures. New ponds will be located in priority alongside existing ponds, to benefit from already existing investments in water access and for creating clusters  to facilitate joint input acquisition and marketing. 
All ponds’ beneficiaries will benefit from start -up kits (tools and inputs, especially fingerlings and fish feed), and technical 
training (e.g. effective fish feeding methods, liming of ponds every second year, water -level management, controlled 
pond fertilization for increased algal growth (cow dung), fish sampling to monitor growth performance, etc.) and 
supervision. All 300 beneficiaries, including 50% women and female youth, will be consulted on selection of ponds, water access, etc., involved in pond improvement/creation work, receive fish culture start -up kits as well as training and 
instructions. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and  FAO financed and executed) all sub- activities described in the following paragraphs 
are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity, which will be implemented in years 1 to 5, will be supported via the following sub- activities :  
- 2.2.5.1 Improve water access and provide lining for 10 existing fish ponds and execute the works and 
provide equipment for 50 new ponds  
- 2.2.5.2 Provide start -up kits  to the beneficiaries  (tools and inputs ) 
- 2.2.5.3  Provide technical training and supervision for fish pond aquaculture, and negotiation skills  to the 
beneficiaries  
 
78. Under Activity 2.2.6  Promote  sustainable clam and oyster culture in 40 communities (aquaculture 
package 4)  executed by FAO the project will scale- up the established good practices of oyster culture in mangrove 
forests on artificial substrate and clam and cockle culture on mudflats. T he Gambia has a strong reputation with respect 
to managing oyster resources, as hundreds of women oyster collectors are organized in a large group called TRY, 
adhering to strict regulations regarding the closed season for oyster collection and their sizes.  However, the oyster


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 culture has a large potential as they are not exploited everywhere. The proposed project will introduce artificial 
substrates near the mangrove forests  to collect spat fall (the gonadal products of oysters after mass spawning) and to 
manipulate the density of oyster larvae to achieve an optimal oyster harvest. The advantage will be that in case the 
environmental conditions change the substrates can be placed in other areas, where the conditions are more conducive 
for oyster growth. This  low-input form of aquaculture (no feed required) is obviously an interesting form  of secondary 
production for food and nutrition security. The activities that will be undertaken will be in close collaboration with another FAO intervention (Fish4ACP) to strengthen the value chain of oysters. Furthermore, the project will improve the safety 
and security of the women involved in clam and cockle collection, as they currently collect these under dangerous 
circumstances in deep waters, without any safety gear li
ke life jackets. The project will undertake juvenile clam 
collection in shallow waters for “sowing” on mudflats in special clam or cockle beds. The beds will be submerged following tidal movements during which the cockles and clams feed and grow to a certain harvestable size, again without the need for any supplementary feed. Women collecting these organisms will be able to continue their activities 
under safer conditions, while harvesting only the adult animals. The activity leads to predictable harvests a
s the 
densities of the bivalves will be controlled. As the women’s groups have positive experiences with managing bivalve 
resources (oysters), the clam and cockle resources will likewise be managed rationally. The proposed project will target women’s producer groups in 40 communities in total, of which 30 in clam and cockle production and 10 in oyster production. Out of these 40 producer groups, 20 women’s groups will be supported in the communities participating in 
the mangrove restoration activities in Component 1, to further contribute to the sustainability of the mangrove habitat 
restoration efforts. Female youths will be participating in all trainings and receive materials for clam and oyster culture. 
 
Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by The Government of the Gambia acting through 
MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed ), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are 
intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity, which will benef it 1,000 women, will be structured 
in the following sub- activities:   
- 2.2.6.1 Train 30 women’s groups in clam and cockle culture on mudflats and train 10 women’s groups in 
oyster culture and negotiation skills.  
- 2.2.6.2 Provide necessary inputs for clam rearing on mudflats (cultivation beds) , canoes , necessary 
materials and motorized canoes .  
 
79. Under Activity 2.2.7  Provide technical support to the execution of the aquaculture activities and ensuring 
environmental and social safeguards executed by FAO and MoFWRNAM, the project will  support fisherfolk and 
other stakeholders involved in implementation of aquaculture activities by providing capacity development via dedicated 
relevant experts (FAO mobilized local specialists in collaboration with MoFWRNAM experts), and to ensure respect of 
social and environmental safeguards.  Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  and executed by the 
Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM , and FAO financed and executed), all s ub-activities 
described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The activity, which 
will support all the beneficiaries of the aquaculture investments under activities 2.2.3 to 2.2.6 above (i.e. 2,800 people, 
2,350 of whom are women), will comprise the following sub- activities:  
- 2.2.7.1 MoFWRNAM’s provision of supervision and extension expertise for aquaculture activities ( co-
funded and executed by  the Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM )  
- 2.2.7.2 Provision of technical assistance and guidance of aquaculture activities by a dedicated Specialist  
for the full implementation period of the project   
- 2.2.7.3 Supervise environment al and social safeguards  and monitor implementation of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework  
 
Component 3: Improved climate change adaptive capacities  
80. The third component will provide the crosscutting support necessary for the successful implementation, scaling 
up and sustainability of the interventions in mangrove restoration, infrastructure climate proofing and aquaculture, as 
well as paving the way for increased private sector engagement in the fisheries sector. As such, Component 3 will 
enhance the capacities of local actors to anticipate and plan for climate change and to implement adaptation measures.


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 47 
 
  
Output 3.1 Public services strengthened to  facilitate local communities capacity to prepare for and respond 
to climate change risks  
81. This sub- component will focus on enabling key public services to better support the fisheries’  sector adaptation 
to climate chang e, specifically the Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National Assembly Matters 
(MoFWRNAM, Departments of Fisheries and Water Resources) and the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and 
Natural Resources (MoECCNR, Departments of Forestry and Parks and Wildlife). It will develop institutional capacities 
and skills of  line ministries and agencies to better analyse  and include climate risks in national policy and decision 
making processes relevant for the fisheries and aquaculture sector; it will ensure that the key institutions in the country 
have capacities and implement monitoring of fisheries sector and the asso ciated ecosystems; and will support 
transmitting the required knowledge and capacities to the beneficiaries farmers, fisherfolks and communities via an  e-
extension system for fisheries and aquaculture.  
82. In particular, under Activity 3.1.1  Strengthen the sectoral institutions and policies and develop additional 
capacity to respond to climate risks executed by FAO, the project will  strengthen the sectoral institutions, including 
the MoFWRNAM (Departments of Fisheries and Water Resources), the  Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and 
Natural Resources (MoECCNR)  Departments of Forestry and Parks and Wildlife) to gather and analyze data to identify 
climate risks and provide adequate policy and regulatory framework responses and related actions. The project will 
finance short -term specialized trainings on climate risks, climate analysis and mainstreaming climate change in national 
policies and strategies . As a way to ensure evidence- based, effective decision making process on matters related to 
climate change and natural resources, the project will facilitate inclusive policy dialogues and facilitate collaborations 
and interactions between institutions responsible for monitoring the impact of climate change and the quantity and quality of forest cover, including through policy and knowledge sharing opportunities. The project will also collaborate 
with national training and education institutions on updating or developing the curricula on fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management, integrating climate change. The project will also mobilize expertise and organize week -long 
specialised training on climate change and fisheries topics f or key staff in the line ministries. In addition, the project will 
also contribute to climate related sectoral studies and subsequent revision of national policies and regulations, for 
example climate- resilient construction standards for fish landing sites  and related infrastructure. Women and female 
youth will participate in the trainings. A substantial amount of training time will be spent on women’s specific strengths 
and weaknesses, including sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment. Women and female y outh experts /practitioners 
will be consulted on the development of updated curricula on fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management and 
diploma/advanced diploma training for fisheries technicians. Climate related sectoral studies and subsequent revision of national policies  and strategies will include 
detailed analysis on and proposed strategies for women, including 
necessary data collection.  Except where explicitly indicated ( e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the 
Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed ), all sub- activities described in the 
following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity will comprise the following 
sub-activities:  
- 3.1.1.1 Short -term specialised trainings on climate risks, climate analysis and mainstreaming climate 
change in national policies and strategies  
- 3.1.1.2 Develop updated curricula on fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management, integrating 
climate change, in partnership w ith local education institutions  
- 3.1.1.3 Design climate change content for Diploma/Advanced Diploma training for fisheries technicians  
- 3.1.1.4 Support for climate related sectoral studies and subsequent revision of national policies and 
strategies  
- 3.1.1.5  Organize institutional collaborations and facilitate interaction and decision making through policy 
and knowledge sharing opportunities  
 
83. In parallel, under Activity 3.1.2  Improve public sector capacities to monitor the fisheries sector and its 
associated ecosystems and integrate climate risks  executed by FAO and  MoFWRNAM , the project will invest in 
improving the public sector capacities to monitor the fisheries sector and its associated ecosystems and integrate


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 48 
 
  
46 A Frame Survey is a stock- taking exercise to establish an inventory of the fishery in terms of numbers of fishers, canoes, different gears, fish processors, 
infrastructure.  climate risks. This will also incl ude the organization of a combined climate vulnerability assessment and Frame Survey46 
for the fisheries sector (executed by MoFWRNAM ), including data collection, analysis and vali dation of results. The 
surveys will also cover  women’s vulnerability to climate change. The project will organize trainings on improved  
monitoring of climate change impacts on fisheries and mangroves, including the monitor ing of  the Gambia river water 
parameters . This activity will also address beneficiaries’  capacities, in particular it will ensure s trengthening  major 
coastal CFCs capacities to monitor and report fishing efforts and catches, and regularly  updating the status of mangrove 
cover using remote sensing and field observation. Female and female youth citizens will be involved in the training and 
in the monitoring and reporting exercises . Moreover, the project will support the expansion of line Ministries’ capacities 
and will provide them with improved equipment and stations for georeferenced monitoring and ground truthing of 
fisheries habitat (mangrove forests)  as well as fisheries livelihoods.  These interventions will improve the capacity of 
MoFWRNAM to contribute to the ongoing biennial monitoring of key regional fish stocks carried out under the FAO 
Committee for East and Central Atlantic Fisheries.   Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  and executed  
by The Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM  , and FAO financed and executed ), all sub -
activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . This activity  
will be composed of the following sub- activities:  
- 3.1.2.1 Organise a Frame Survey  with a strong climate vulnerability assessment component ( co-funded 
and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
- 3.1.2.2 Support the expansion of monitoring capacities for Gambia river water parameters  
- 3.1.2.3 Strengthen major coastal CFCs capacities to monitor and report fishing efforts and catches ( co-
funded and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
- 3.1.2.4 Establish regular monitoring mechanism for mangrove forest cover and train relevant government 
staff 
- 3.1.2.5 Organize trainings and on the job learning opportunities for national institutions on georeferenced 
monitoring  
 
84. To facilitate the access to information and to support fisher folk and other value chain actors in their adapt ation 
efforts and sustainable fisheries resources management, the project will establish an e- extension/out- reach system 
for fisheries and aquaculture ( Activity 3.1.3) executed by FAO and  MoFWRNAM. The aim of the system is to 
produce and disseminate at scale and low -cost (using automated text messaging, for example) timely messages on 
weather, storms, tides, fishing seasonality, and market/price information. W omen and female youths will be consulted 
on the design of the e- extension system and involved in testing  the system. They will be registered as information 
recipients and a voice- over version will be made for illiterate users. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  
and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), 
all sub- activities described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This 
e-system extension activity, which will be rolled out nationally, will be supported via the following sub- activities:  
- 3.1.3.1 Prepare the feasibility study and technical parameters for the system  
- 3.1.3.2 Set -up and test the system 
- 3.1.3.3 Registration of fisher folk and other VC actors  
- 3.1.3.4 National roll -out 
- 3.1.3.5 Continuous operation and refinement of e- extension system ( co-funded and executed by  the 
Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM) 
 
Output 3.2  Local  communities, groups and HHs capacities to implement market- driven adaptation measures  
are strengthened  
85. This sub- component will focus on developing long- term capacities to introduce, sustainably implement and 
then scale up adaptation measures in the fisheries and aquaculture sector. Specifically, this sub- component will 
mobilize international and national expertise to develop the capacity of field fisheries and forestry officers to support 
fisheries, aquaculture and mangrove investment; via dedicated train ings on entrepreneurial skills, business


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 49 
 
  
47 Tablets/smartphones, fish dissecting equipment, water parameter measuring devices, sampling gear for aquaculture, FAO Fish species catalogue, motorized 
canoes, motorcycles, GPS, drones, etc.  
48 In Gambia, the limited organization of the fisher folk into common interest groups/cooperatives prevents them from grouping their production and dealing with 
larger buyers, especially in the tourism and catering sectors.  development and negotiation skills, and the organization of sub -sector dialogue (e.g., on fish processing, oyster value 
chain, fish feed…) between project beneficiaries and private sector entrepreneurs, thus improvi ng opportunities for 
stimuli to private sector interest in the fisheries sector; it will also provide support to gender empowerment through the 
application of the Household Methodology – aimed to reduce and overcome gender based discrimination and thus 
increase the participation of women and young women in economic and social activities; t o a similar end, the project 
will provide functional literacy and numeracy programme targeted to project female beneficiaries, and will train 
executing- agency personnel on gender in general, sexual exploitation and harassment (SEAH), and establish and 
operationalize referral pathways for gender -based violence (GBV).  
86. Under Activity 3.2.1 - Capacity development for field fisheries and forestry officers to support fisheries, 
aquaculture and mangrove investment executed by FAO and  MoFWRNAM , the focus of the project support will be 
on building the capacities of and equipping47 80 field fisheries and forestry officers for georeferenced monitoring and 
provide implementation support to the project activities and to accompany other private and public initiatives in the 
future. Female and female youth officers will participate in trainings. A substantial amount of training time will be spent 
on women’s specific strengths and weaknesses, including sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment. Female and female youth officers will be consulted on selection (accuracy, utility of data generated, operation, maintenance, budget, etc.) of equipment. Except where explicitly indicated (e .g., as financed  and executed by the Government of the Gambia 
acting through MoA or MoFWR NAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following 
paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . This activity will comprise  the following sub-
activities :  
- 3.2.1.1 Trainings on aquaculture production (facilities and logistics) ( co-funded and executed by  the 
Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM) 
- 3.2.1.2 Provision of expertise for trainings on fisheries and aquaculture  
- 3.2.1.3 Trainings on mangrove monitoring, restoration and sustainable management  
- 3.2.1.4 Provision of technical equipment for effective georeferenced monitoring of implementation  
 
87. Under Activity 3.2.2  Support to private investment, value addition and integration with other sectors  
executed by FAO and  MoFWRNAM , the project will aim to stimulate private investment in the sector, along with 
increased value addition and integration with other sectors (tourism and fish export s, in particular). The project will 
mobilize dedicated technical expertise, including local  specialists and ad hoc international expertise on business 
development of the fisheries sector, linking artisanal fisheries actors with the sub -sector entrepreneurs. The experts 
will facilitate regular “ Invest -in-Fisheries ” business roundtables (on yearly  basis, both at central level and at 
decentralized level) to showcase best practices and success stories and discuss bottlenecks in the sector . The 
roundtables and events will place particular focus on matchmaking between private sector and diaspora financ ing – on 
the one hand – and fisheries sector entrepreneurs on the other. A platform will be established to ensure continuous 
exchange and provide opportunity to establish productive alliances (i.e. marketing agreements between small -scale 
producers and ent repreneurs). In parallel, the project will provide specialized training to fisheries value chain actors on 
organizing themselves in economic interest groups, such as cooperatives48, and on higher value addition, especially 
for high- end local  consumption (tourism) and export (quality standards, improved marketing, export rules, etc.).  The 
current baseline as indicated in the barriers is quite low and capacity development is expected to generate high gains in productivity and in quality of production, ultimat
ely helping to connect artisanal fisherfolk with private sector 
entrepreneurs. In addition, based on rapid value chain and market assessments, the project will organize platforms for discussion (partnerships or alliances) between artisanal fisherfolk and private entrepreneurs (processors, market  
actor s, ...). The project will also provide training (technical and entrepreneurial) to youth groups in the production of fish 
feed to expand business opportunities and socio- economic inclusion. Considering the lack of suitable financial products 
and services, the activity will also facil itate the sensitization of financial institutions to the profitability of the sector, via 
showcasi
ng successful experiences and prospects of fisheries value chain development, as well as providing 
sensitization event to expose financial institutions to dedicated instruments to assess the profitability of fisheries and


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 50 
 
  
49 https://www.fao.org/in -action/rural -invest/background/en/   
50 See https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/40198517/Household+methodologie+ -+harnessing+the+family%27s+potential+for+change.pdf/cb0ab278-
bfb4- 4b4c -a237 -e7841bc9e9aa  
51 10 households per session, four sessions a month, five months a year for three years, for a total of 2,000 households.  the agriculture sector more broadl y speaking (e.g., RuralInvest49). Together with other knowledge management and 
capacity development interventions in component 3, this will support the process of establishing a suitable enabling 
environment for improved access to finance. Women and female youth will participate in roundtables. A substantial 
amount of training time will be spent on women’s specific strengths and weaknesses, including sexual exploitation, 
abuse and harassment. Women and female youth will be involved in formulation of their c ooperatives/producer 
organizations. Women and female youth engaged in artisanal fish processing will be trained on value addition. Women and female youth active in fisher ies and tourism sectors will participate in promotion of  
partnerships between the 
sectors.  
88. The successful adoption of the project’s adaptation measures as well as future interventions is contingent on 
long-term changes in gender empowerment and literacy. Women play the largest role in the post -harvest operations in 
the sector, yet they lac k the decision power and literacy and numeracy skills to fully adopt new practices and 
technologies and to enter into the formal  market. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed  and executed by  
the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities 
described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. This activity will be implemented via the following sub-activities:  
- 3.2.2.1 Organise yearly Invest in Fisheries roundtables with private and public participation ( co-funded and 
executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM) 
- 3.2.2.2 Support the organisation of fisheries actors into cooperatives/producer organisations ( co-funded 
and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM  ) 
- 3.2.2.3 Train artisanal fish processors on quality standards, marketing, export rules, etc. ( co-funded and 
executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM) 
- 3.2.2.4 Promote partnerships between fisheries actors and the tourism sector  
- 3.2.2.5 Organize platforms for discussion between artisanal fisherfolk and private entrepreneurs 
(processors, markets, ...)  including development of productive alliances  
- 3.2.2.6 Providing training (technical and entrepreneurial) to youth groups in production of fish feed  
- 3.2.2.7 Facilitating evidence- based dialogue and sensitization on financial inclusion (including RuralInvest 
or other tools to enhance capacity of financial institutions)  
- 3.2.2.8 Providing capacity development to artisanal fisheries actors on development of entrepreneurial and 
business opportunities within the value chain including negotiation skills  
- 3.2.2.9 Supervise and ensure environment and social safeguards  
 
89. Under Activity 3.2.3  Support to gender and youth empowerment through the application of the 
Household Methodology  executed by FAO, the project will introduce and use IFAD’s Household Methodology50 in 
order to promote more gender equality within the household. Empowering women fisherfolk will be essential to 
implement climate change adaptation measures in the artisanal fisheries sector in the Gambia. The Household 
Methodology recognizes that promoting gender equality cannot be done solely through working with women, therefore it works with the whole household, including men, to i
mprove gender equity and women’s active involvement in 
household decision- making.  The methodology will be rolled out through a “training of trainers” approach, first training 
the trainers who will then engage with project beneficiaries. The topics of discussion will include sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment, and community gatekeepers will also be sensitized by the Household Methodology trainers separately. This will also help to ensure that increased income from project activities  effectively contributes to improving 
food security of all household members, including women and children. Th e household methodology will target a total 
of 2,000 households
51, and 2 community gatekeepers per session, four sessions a month, five months a year for three 
years. Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by t he Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs 
are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . The activity wil l be structured in the following sub- activities :  
- 3.2.3.1 Household Methodology Training of trainers  
- 3.2.3.2 Household Methodology large scale training  (co-funded  and executed by FAO )


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 51 
 
  
52 A framework of collaboration between FAO -Gambia and UNFPA was developed and is awaiting to become operational.  - 3.2.3.3 Facilitation of Household Methodology meetings with the project beneficiaries, sensitization of 
community gatekeepers prior to Household Methodology facilitated meetings on gender and community -
led support measures against SEAH and GBV  
 
90. Under  Activity 3.2.4 , Implement a functional literacy and numeracy programme targeted to project 
female beneficiaries  executed by FAO the  project will implement a functional literacy and numeracy programme 
targeting female beneficiaries of the project. By mobilizing expertise and by ensuring transfer of capacity and knowledge 
and entrepreneurial and negotiation capacities to women, the activity will reduce the literacy  and numeracy barriers 
that hinder adoption of new practices and technologies, and entry into the formal market, by promoting an adult learning programme targeting the women beneficiaries.  Except where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by 
the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities 
described in the following paragraphs are intended to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO. The activity will be implemented via the following sub- activities:  
- 3.2.4.1 Identification of participants and definition of approach (including TRY women ’s group involved in 
oyster production) 
- 3.2.4.2 Training of trainers (younger, literate women in the community)  
- 3.2.4.3 Functional literacy and numeracy classes  
 
91. Activity 3.2.5  Train executing -agency personnel on gender in general, SEAH, and establish and 
operationalize referral pathways for GBV  executed by FAO  will be devoted to prevention of sexual exploitation, 
abuse and harassment and train PMIU, MoA and MoFWRNAM as well as actors along the Referral Pathway for the victims  of Gender -Based Violence.  The project will provide dedicated efforts to train executing- agency  personnel on 
gender in general, SEAH, establish and operationalize referral pathways for GBV and strengthen FAO GRM.  In this 
activity , the project will collaborate with UNFPA Gambia
52, especially for the establishment and operationalization of 
the Referral Pathway. Specifically, the project will ensure that 80% of male professionals at executing agencies involved 
in the project management directly or indirectly participate in SEAH training. It will also establish one referral pathway 
in each target district established and operationalized with trained professionals (more information in Annex 8).  Except 
where explicitly indicated (e.g., as financed and executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or 
MoFW RNAM, and FAO financed and executed), all sub -activities described in the following paragraphs are intended 
to be financed by GCF and executed by FAO . The activity will comprise the following sub-activi ties:  
- 3.2.5.1 Training of professionals from executing agencies, including strengthening of FAO GRM in handling 
SEAH and GBV incidents  
- 3.2.5.2 Training of professionals along referral pathways  3.2.5.2 Training of professionals along referral 
pathways  
- 3.2.5.3 Establishment and operationalization of referral pathways  
- 3.2.5.4 Communication of GBV and referral pathways to public . 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
92. The following implementation arrangements for project governance, coordination and management have been 
developed in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs (MoFEA, as National Designated 
Authority), the Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National Assembly Matters (MoFWRNAM, as lead technical ministry) and the other line ministries and agencies involved. The guiding principles used for preparing the governance and implementation architecture of the project, were the good practices of past p
rojects, the inclusion of all key 
stakeholders, the involvement of the private sector and maximizing operational efficiency.  
 
Governance and implementation arrangements


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 52 
 
 Accredited Entity (AE):  
93.  FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project. As such, FAO will be responsible for the overall 
management of the project, including: (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical 
oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will ensure these responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF.  
94. 
 The GCF and FAO will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA), under which FAO shall administer the 
relevant GCF proceeds to be used for financing the project, in accordance with the FAA and AMA. Accountability on the use of financial resources will be assured through the review of annual and bi -annual project reports, as wel l as 
through monitoring reports. These reports will include environmental and social performance.  
 
95. FAO role as AE will be attributed to the relevant offices and divisions in FAO Headquarters located in Rome, 
Italy (HQ), Sub -Regional Office for (West Africa- regional office) located in Dakar, Country, and the Country 
Representation Office for Project Country (FAO -The Gambia).   
 
96. In order to fulfil the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedicated Project Task Force (PTF) in line with FAO project 
cycle guidelines.  The PTF will be composed with the Budget Holder (BH), the Lead Technical Officer (LTO), Funding 
Liaison Officer (FLO), HQ Technical Officer and other officers, as appropriate. FAO -The Gambia will also assign a 
dedicated national climate finance specialist  and project assistant to ensure the AE function on the ground.  
 
97. A Lead Technical Officer (LTO) will be appointed in the regional office, and will be responsible for the technical 
supervision and oversight of project activities throughout project implementation. More specifically, the LTO will have overall technical responsibility for the implementation of the project. The role of the LTO is central to FAO’s comparative advantage for projects and to separate the functions of FAO in its role as AE and as Executing Entity (EE). The LTO will oversee and carry out technical backstopping to the project implementation. The LTO will support the Budget Holder (BH) of the project based in FAO -The Gambia in the implementation and monitoring of the Annual Work Plan and 
Budget (AWP/B), including work plan and budget revisions. The LTO is responsible and accountable for providing and/or obtaining technical cl earances of technical inputs and services procured by the EEs. In addition, the LTO, 
through supervision missions (she/he may call other experts to participate and advise) will provide technical 
backstopping to the project execution / management team to ensure the delivery of quality technical outputs. The LTO will coordinate the provision of appropriate technical support from the PTF to respond to requests from the Project 
Steering Committee (PSC).  
 
98. The PTF will remain independent of the Executing Entity f unctions also performed by FAO (see Project 
execution section below). In line with the GCF policy on fees adopted through GCF Board Decision B.19/09, the above-
mentioned segregation of responsibilities within FAO will ensure that the Organization can independently and effectively 
perform the types of AE functions listed in the GCF General principles and indicative list of eligible costs covered under 
GCF fees and project management costs.  
 
Project co -financing  
99. The Government of the Gambia acting through the Ministry of Agriculture  (MoA)  will provide co -financing as a 
form of a grant  to the project, through the IFAD funded ROOTS project.  The Government of the Gambia acting through 
MoA will be EE only for the acti vities it co -finances.  
100. The Government of the Gambia acting through the  Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National 
Assembly Matters (MoFWRNAM)  will provide in- kind cofinancing to the project. The Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoFWRNAM will be EE only for the activities it co- finances.


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 53 
 
 101. FAO will provide co -financing as a grant to the project and will be EE for the activities it co -finances.  
102.  The co-financier is responsible for the regular r eporting of  co-financing activities and their disbursed and 
allocated amounts to the AE in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the GCF policies as well as AMA 
and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between FAO and GCF.  
103.  The Accredited Entity shall enter into a project agreement with the  Government of the Gambia  , acting through 
the MoA and MoFWRNAM, which shall be legally binding and shall detail amongst other things the respective roles 
and responsibilities including:  
(i) the respective roles and responsibilities of the Accredited Entity and the Government of the Gambia , acting through 
the MoA and MoFWRNAM, with respect to the overall Project, in accordance with the requirements of the AMA and 
the FAA;  
(ii) applicabi lity of the UN Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies to the Accredited 
Entity for the purpose of the Project, including to the GCF Proceeds held by the Accredited Entity;   
(iii) the role of the  Government of the Gambia , acting through the MoA and MoFWRNAM, in the implementation of the 
Project, and  
 (iv) the provisions regarding relevant Co- financing to be provided by the  Government of the Gambia  , acting through 
the MoA and MoFWRNAM, for the implementation of the Projec t (the “Project Agreement”). For the avoidance of doubt, 
the Project Agreement will also serve as the Subsidiary Agreement.              
Executing Entities:  
 
104. The project will be executed by  the Government of the Gambia acting through MoA and MoFWRNAM and FAO 
in a co- execution modality to jointly deliver the project activities. FAO will act as co -EE and will support to ensure strong 
country -driven execution of project activities.  As Executing E ntity,  FAO will act through the FAO Representation in The 
Gambia, it will be responsible for the management of the GCF proceeds and it will bear the overall responsibility for 
fulfilling its relevant EE functions of this project. Technical assistance will be provided by mobilizing FAO experts, or 
FAO supervised consultants and procured parties. FAO’s mandate as a global stakeholder in the field of agriculture, 
water management, and climate change, and its related expertise represents a comparative advantage in providing 
technical assistance and quality assurance.  
105. FAO Gambia has a strong, demonstrated experience in supporting the Government of the Gambia, since the 
creation of the country office in 1978. FAO has provided vital support to the sustainable devel opment of the agriculture 
and natural resource sectors in the country, having implemented 130 projects. The Organization is currently supporting the country in policy formulation while implementing programmes and projects for improved food security and nut rition 
and resilience in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors. FAO assistance in the Gambia is shaped by the 2018-
2021 FAO Country Programming Framework (CPF), which is centred on four priority areas: 1) Enhance the enabling 
environment and capacity development for increased, sustainable and diversified agricultural and fisheries production 
and nutrition; 2) Sustainable natural resources management for climate change adaptation and mitigation; 3) 
Strengthened food, agriculture and natural resourc es value chains for income generation and employment creation; 
and 4) Strengthened resilience and capacities for disaster risk reduction and management, and climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. Jointly formulated with the Government and other partners , the CPF reflects relevant 
priorities in key national development policies, including the Gambia’s National Development Plan (2018- 2021). FAO 
Gambia’s support to the fisheries sector has been particularly important in recent years, with a number of Techni cal 
Cooperation Projects (TCPs) focusing on strengthening the capacity of MoFWRNAM in its vessel monitoring 
capabilities, on rehabilitating the Jahally hatchery, on investing in small -scale fish feed mills and fish smoking ovens, 
etc.  
  
106.  The Government of the Gambia (GoTG ) acting through MoA or MoFW RNAM, and FAO will cover all functions 
relevant to the execution of the envisaged activities.  The Government of the Gambia acting through MoA or 
MoFW RNAM will be responsible for executing respective co-financing activities. FAO will be in charge of the execution 
of selected activities funded by GCF based on its comparative advantages  as well as the activities  it cofinances .


---
*Page 56*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 54 
 
  
Table B17 Responsibilities of Executing Entities at project activity level  
Source of Funds   Executing Entity 
(EE) Responsible Sub- activities  
GCF  
FAO  Sub-activities 1.1.1.1; 1.1.1.3; 1.1.1.4;1.1.1.5;1.1.1.6 ; sub -
activities 1.1.2.1; 1.1.2.3; 1.1.2.4; 1.1.2.5; 1.1.2.6; activity 1.2.1; 
1.2.2; sub- activities 1.2.3.2; 1.2.3.3 of component 1; activity 
2.1.1; 2.1.2; 2.1.3;2.1.4; 2.1.5;  sub-activity 2.1.6.1; sub- activities 
2.1.7 .1; 2.1.7.2;2.1.7.4; activity 2.2.1; 2.2.2; sub- activities 
2.2.3.2; 2.2.3.3; 2.2.4.2; 2.2.4.3; 2.2.4.4; activities 2.2.5; 2.2.6; 
sub-activities 2.2.7.2; 2.2.7.3 of component 2; activit y 3.1.1; sub-
activity  3.1.2 .2; 3.1.2.4; 3.1.2.5 3.1.3.1; 3.1.3.2; 3.1.3.3; 
3.1.3.4; ;3..2.1.2; 3.2.1.3; 3. 2.1.4; 3.2.2.4; 3.2.2.5; 3.2.2.6; 
3.2.2.7; 3.2.2.8; 3.2.2.9; 3.2.3.1; 3.2.3.3 activities 3.2.4; 3.2.5 of 
component  3. 
GoTG -MoA GoTG  MoA  Sub-activity 1.1.2. 7 of component  1; sub -activities  2.2.3.1 and 
2.2.4.1 of component 2.  
GoTG  MoFWRNAM  
GoTG  MoFWRNAM  Sub-activities  1.2.3.1 of component 1; sub -activities 2.1.6. 3, 
2.2.7.1 of component 2; sub- activities 3.1.2.1; 3.1.2.3; 3.1.3.5; 
3.2.1.1; 3.2.2.1; 3.2.2.2; 3.2.2.3 of component 3  
FAO 
FAO Sub-activities 1.1.1.2; 1.1.2.2; of component 1; sub -activities 
2.1.6.2; 2.1.7.3;  of component 2; sub- activity 3.2.3.2 of 
component 3  
 
   
Table B18 Implementation arrangements  
 
  
 
Project Management and Implementation Unit ( PMIU )


---
*Page 57*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 55 
 
 107. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PM IU) will be established and hosted by the FAO Representation in 
Banjul, The Gambia, the PMIU  will be functional for the entire duration of the project.  
108. The PMIU will be responsible for providing support to the execution of day -to-day activities with participating 
regional and local governments and other stakeholders, monitoring project progress  as well as  reporting. The PMIU  
will be directed by a National Project Director (NPD) and headed by a project -recruited National Project Coordinator 
(NPC). The PMIU  will be working under the overall supervision of the NPD and managed by the NPC. NPC will be 
responsible for overall project management and coordination with all stakeholders. The NPD will be appointed indicated 
by indicate which co- EE NPD will be appointed and what kind of staff they will be (i.e. recruited, seconded) The PMIU  
will also include a finance officer, operation officer, Human resources & admin officer and procurement & contracting 
officer.  
109. The PMIU ’s team will be composed of a Project Coordinator, five Technical Lead Specialists (on aquaculture 
development, on fisheries infrastructure, on mangrove restoration/natural resource management, on capacity 
development, and on ESS and gender), one Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, one Financial and Administrative Officer, one Secretary, and two logistics and operational staff. Given the modest size of the country and for budgetary efficiency reasons, no field offices will be created.  
110.  The PMIU will coordinate directly with the TAC and the PSC. The PMIU will follow FAO´s operational, financial 
and procurement procedures and will implement all activities in accordance with the APWBs approved by the TAC. All 
operational and administrative aspects of the project (such as procurement plans, financial plans, periodic reporting, 
etc.) will be cleared with the TAC. Issues for special consideration beyond the mandate of the TAC will be brought to the PSC.  
 
Project Governance  
111. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic guidance for the project . The NPC 
of the PMIU  for this project and the PD will act as Rapporteur to the PSC. The PSC will be composed of high- level 
representatives (at Permanent Secretary level or equivalent) from MoFEA (NDA), MoFWRNAM, MoA, MoECCNR, GGCI (representing the private sector), and FAO. The MoFEA will chair the PSC, with MoFWRNAM and FAO as vice -
chairs. The PSC meetings will be organized once a year to review progress and address any imple mentation 
bottlenecks or policy/regulatory issues that require higher -level decision -making. FAO will also ensure the secretariat 
role for record keeping of the PSC’s activity and decisions. Through community mobilization and as part of the 
georeferenced participatory monitoring, FAO will inform the local communities of the results of the PSC discussions and will ensure their instances are reported. On ad hoc basis, representatives of local communities will be involved as observers.  
112. The role of the PSC will  be to:  
 (i) ensure the quality of results, and the sustainability and impacts of the Project in line with the policy 
direction;  
(ii) approve the Annual Work Plan and Budget (“AWPB”) to be sent to FAO;  
(iii) approve semi -annual Project progress reports to be sent to FAO;  
(iv) approve adjustments to the distribution of budget between items on the basis of information provided 
by the Project Management Unit;  
(v) approve proposals of adjustments to indicators and the targets of results and outputs, based on 
information provided by the PMIU;  
(vi) approve possible modifications to the Project implementation agreements;  
(vii) invite competent professionals to participate in PSC meetings, in accordance with the issues under 
consideration; and  
(viii) support Project’s activities by promoting results and approaches within the Government of the Gambia 
and ensuring mainstreaming among political decision makers.  
113. The Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) will be responsible for the continuous technical oversight and 
support to project implementation. The TAC’s core membership will include the Directors (or equivalent, or other


---
*Page 58*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 56 
 
 designated staff) from t he Departments of i) Fisheries, ii) Water Resources, iii) Forestry, iv) Parks and Wildlife, v) 
Agriculture, as well as from vi) National Environment Agency ( NEA), vii) National Agricultural Research Institute.( NARI ), 
viii) ROOTS PIU, and ix) FAO. The TAC will be chaired by the Department of Fisheries, with FAO as vice- chair and 
secretariat. In order to ensure gender mainstreaming, the TAC will include the representatives of the Ministries of 
Women’s Affairs, Youth and Sports and of female professional associations related to the project, such as oyster 
harvesters and lawyers.  The TAC will be organized twice a year and will be responsible for approving the Annual Work 
Plans and Budgets (AWPBs), reviewing progress, providing technical guidance and reporting to the PSC.  
114. A number of partner institutions, organizations and other stakeholders will be invited on an ad hoc basis to 
contribute to the PSC’s and TAC’s activities and meetings, in particular to share good practices, present emerging issues among the different constituencies of stakeholders and better understand the project’s interventions. These partners will not have decision- making power in the two bodies. Some of the pre- identified partners include: the Ministry 
of Youth and Sports, the Women’s Bureau, the Bureau of Standards, the National Association of Artisanal Fisheries 
Operators (NAAFO), NASCOM, TRY Oyster Women’s Association (TOWA), etc.), as well as representatives from other 
projects and from the private s ector.  
Flow of funds and legal arrangements  
115. In line with the project implementation arrangements outlined above, the funds that FAO receives from GCF in 
its capacity as Accredited Entity will then be transferred to the FAO Representation in The Gambia, who will hire technical expertise for the PMIU in charge of executing the Project.  
116. In- kind and grant  co-financing from the Government of the Gambia acting through MOA and MoFWRNAM will 
be directly executed by them to benefit project beneficiaries. 
 
117. FAO’s grant  co-financing will be used to fund project  personnel, equipment  and tools in order to execute the 
project activities which will benefit the beneficiaries.  
 
  
 
 
 
Table B19- Flow of funds


---
*Page 59*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 57 
 
  
53 World Bank Country and Lending Groups 2020 (https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519 -world -bank -country -and-lending -groups)     
  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
118. The country is classified as a least developed country (LDC) by the UN and as low income by the World Bank53, 
and it ranks 172nd in the 2020 Human Development Index. In addition, the Gambia is also now recognized as a Fragile 
and Conflict -affected Situations country, given its high institutional and social fragility. The average GDP growth of 2.9% 
over the last  decade has  proven insufficient to accelerate development, reduce poverty and improve food security. The 
Gambians, particularly the youth, continue to migrate from rural areas to the urbanized coastal zone, but more 
importantly to attempt to immigrate to developed countries. In addition, the economic shock induced by the Covid- 19 
pandemic on the tourism sector will erase some of the recent developmental gains.  
119. The GCF’s financial support in the form of a grant is crucial for the climate adaptation of the Gambian fisheries 
and for building resilient, improved livelihoods of the fisher folk. Given the country’s development and adaptation needs, 
there are limited r esources available that could be channelled or re -directed to the fisheries sector. Furthermore, the 
nature of the necessary  investments in adaptation have a very strong public good justification and the private sector 
cannot step in to close the financing gap. Investing in the proposed adaptation measures is also required in order to 
reverse the trend of unsustainable fisheries resource use, as climate change impacts are driving fisher folk to accelerate 
their fishing efforts, coupled with increased pressures on mangrove resources.  
Limited availability of public and private funding  
120. The rationale for climate financing needs to be contextualized in the difficult economic situation of the Gambia, 
where even resources for development are limited. In terms of public funding, the Government of the Gambia has 
very limited budgetary resources, which were further reduced by the economic deterioration due to the COVID -19 
pandemic. In this tight budgetary space, the fisheries and aquaculture sector has consistently been under -financed. In 
the latest approved Public Budgets, the Ministry of Fishe ries, Water Resources and National Assembly Matters 
(MoFWRNAM) was allocated roughly US$ 1 million per year (appropriations of US$ 1.05 million in 2021 (0.2% of the


---
*Page 60*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 58 
 
 total budget) and US$ 0.96 million in 2020 (0.2% of the total budget)). Only 30% of these a llocations were earmarked 
for development (capital expenditure) of the sector, with the majority of funds dedicated to recurrent costs. At this pace, 
it would take approximately 23 years of full utilization of the public development budget to finance the f oreseen climate-
proofing investments at targeted coastal sites (Output 2.1).  
121. In addition, the country is not in a position to increase its external borrowing : according to the IMF, the 
Gambia’s risk of external and public debt distress is ranked as “High”, a situation further at risk due to the economic 
slowdown due to the pandemic. As an example, the ROOTS project – which is a co -financing source for PROREFISH 
- is also financed by IFAD as a grant under its Debt Sustainability Framework (DSF).  
122. In terms of development financing , the Gambia’s traditional financial and technical partners have under -
supported the fisheries sector, instead having focused on crops, livestock and rural development within the broader agriculture sector. Indicative  analysis using the FAO AID Monitor dataset indicates that over the last decade of available 
data (2008- 2018), the fisheries sector received disbursements of just under US$ 20 million in total, which amounts to 
only 10% of total support.  
123. Private sector investment  in agric ulture is very limited: both domestic and foreign investors preferring placing 
their resources in the tourism sector and in other services sub- sector, which are perceived as safer. The private 
investment that is channe lled in agriculture is focused once again on crops (high value, oriented to export or to catering 
to the tourism sector ) and on livestock, very often in peri -urban areas. Access to finance from banks and other financial 
institutions presents the similar barriers: a preference for other sectors  than agriculture, limited knowledge of agricultural 
risks, no prior success stories, coupled with the lack of collateral from the fisher folk or entrepreneurs interested in aquaculture.  
The need for investment in public infrastructure and in common -pool resources  
124. The targeted fisheries landing sites vulnerable to climate change represent the project’s largest interventions. 
All these sites comprise of public infrastructure on public land , managed by local Community Fisheries Committees. 
As such, they represent quasi -public goods (non- excludable and non- rivalrous, with certain limitations) and require 
public investment. Attracting private investment into the climate- proofing and improvement of these infrastructures 
would likely exclude the local communities from using the sites and crowd- out the artisanal fisheries sector.  
125. Similarly, the project’s proposed intervention in mangrove restoration in fisheries hotspots requires public 
investment. Mangrove ecosystems can be considered as common -pool re sources (goods that are non- excludable, 
yet rivalrous): communities and local actors are  unwilling to invest in mangrove restoration, if access is open to 
everyone and risks reversing their efforts. Climate change plays and will continue to an important role in mangrove 
degradation, but human action in the form of unsustainable resource use has its role as well (clearing land for 
agriculture, cutting down for firewood, etc.).  
Lack of investment and vicious spiraling of unsustainable resource use  
126. In the absence of investment in the fisheries sector, the continuous decrease in fish availability will likely trigger 
a “race to the bottom” in terms of resource use : with less fish caught, with the same post -harvest losses and without 
aquaculture alternatives, fisher folk will accelerate the depletion of fish stocks. An example is already visible at many landing sites, where the net size has increasingly reduced: as a result of resource depletion, fishermen use illegal net mesh sizes that capture small, juvenile fish, which in turn further diminishes future stocks. The paradigm shift requires 
investment with the lowest possible concessionality to generate immediate adaptation alternatives.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
127. The exit strategy of the project is based on i) strong country and stakeholder ownership;  ii) investment  in 
durable, high- quality  artisanal fisheries infrastructure and equipment with robust local management arrangements – 
including stakeholder capacity building and women’s empowerment – and a user fee mechanism empowering  
Community Fisheries Centres to cover their Operations & Maintenance costs  after the project ends; iii) improved policy 
and regulatory framework and enhanced government  capacity to mainstream climate change in the artisanal fisheries 
sector ; iv) improved enabling environment for artisanal fisheries value chain development, including access to tailor -


---
*Page 61*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 59 
 
  
54 See Mindjimba, K. 2020. Study of the profitability of fish smoking with FTT ‐Thiaroye  kilns in Côte d'Ivoire. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Circular No. 1155. 
Rome, FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8220en , and FAO. 2020. Report of the Regional Capacity Building Workshop to Empower African Women and Youth on 
the Use of the FAO -Thiaroye Fish Processing Technique (FTT). Elmina, Ghana, 25– 27 September 2019/Rapport de l’atelier régional de renforcement des 
capacités des femmes et des jeunes africains sur la technique FAO -Thiaroye de transformation du poisson (FTT). Elmina, Ghana, 25 -27 septembre 2019. FAO 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Report No 1315/ FAO Rapport sur les pêches et l'aquaculture no.1315. Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb0906b .  made  financial se rvices . These considerations are underpinned by a strong economic and financial justification, as 
summarized in section D.6.  
Strong c ountry and stakeholder ownership  
128. The project has been developed at the request of the Government of the Gambia, in close alignment to its 
national and sector policies and strategies on climate change. In particular, the Government’s priorities (such as 
targeting of the most important coas tal sites and the support to aquaculture) have been fully included as core 
interventions in the project. National institutions and artisanal fisherfolk stakeholder  group s have been engaged 
throughout  the formulation process and will participate active ly in project implementation. The stakeholders of the 
Community Fisheries Centres have been extensively consulted during project preparation and see the climate- proofing 
of the fish landing sites – which are already suffering from climate change impacts – and t he introduction of more fuel-
efficient fish processing equipment as essential to their future. Despite its financial and capacity constraints, the 
Government has committed to in- kind co -financing through its Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National 
Assembly Matters, to support the implementation of the project activities.  
Durable infrastructure and equipment with  enhanced local stakeholder capacity to manage these  
129. The project design choices, in particular for landing site infrastructure and fish processing technologies, have 
focused on introducing the most durable solutions – even if it introduced implementation complexity. For example, 
some of the landing sites include floating pontoons with longer lifespans, raised concrete platforms to accommodate 
the post -landing operations, solar -powered seawater fish rinsing lines, etc. The FTT smoking  oven and the CEAS dryer 
designs have also been chosen among other alternatives because of their superior  durability when properly 
constructed, as demonstrated by successful pilot operations conducted by FAO in the sub- region.54 For several 
activities, local Gambian companies could only accommodate simpler solutions, so the project will initially rely on 
international procurement, particularly from Senegal, to ensure the best quality execution.  All physical investments will 
be complemented by repeated trainings in operation and maintenance, delivered to the local management committees 
or to the groups of individual beneficiaries.  
130. At local level, the project will work in close collaboration with the local communities: in place where such 
structures exist, the project will reinforce the capacity of local artisanal producer groups and management committees (such as the CFCs at landing sites and the TRY group of seven hundred women oyster producers in the mangroves). 
CFCs will charge fees to the users of the landing site infrastructure to cover  their operations and maintenance costs. 
Where necessary, the project will support the creation of local management structures (for example, at the mangrove restoration sites or at the fish pond clusters). In addition, the CFCs will own the climate- proofed infrastructure at the 
fish landing sites, while the beneficiaries’ producer groups in the mangrove communities will own the climate- smart 
fish-smoking and drying equipment transferred during implementation, allowing for more buy -in and more sustainability 
after project completion.  
131. Recognizing the critical role of women during and after implementation, the project has dedicated substantial 
resources to empower female beneficiaries in order to ensure full uptake of the climate adaptive technologies and practices. In particular, the project will require an equal representation of women in all local management committees at intervention sites (such as the CFCs for landing sites or the community forest management committees). In addition, 
the choice of two key technologies (the FTT smoking oven and the CEAS solar dryer) were done in consideration to 
the labor -saving potential for women, the main users. Under Output 3.2 , the project will also introduce the Household 
Methodology to facilitate discussions at household level between women and men on shared decision- making, 
balanced workloads and increased equity. In parallel, under the same output, the project will implement a literacy and numeracy program for women.  
Improved policy and regulatory framework and enhanced government capacity to mainstream cli mate change


---
*Page 62*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 60 
 
  
 
55 The project w ill also build the capacity of these apex bodies and their members to implement fisheries conservation measures, such as NASC OM’s one 
nautical mile exclusion zone and the temporary ban on night fishing.  132. The project will s trengthen national capacities to plan for and respond to climate change. As detailed in Section 
B.3, under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2, the project will implement a mix of measures to mainstream climate change and 
enhance public sector delivery in the fisheries  sector, followed by adapted outreach and support to fisher folk and other 
value chain actors (including the private sector). These interventions will ensure the Gambia will have the necessary 
enabling environment to continue its commitment to adaptation in t he fisheries sector after project completion.  The new 
e-extension system to be introduced by PROREFISH – using automated text messaging, with a voice -over option for 
illiterate users , among others  – will produce and disseminate at scale and low -cost timely  messages on weather, 
storms, tides, fishing seasonality, and market/price information  to artisanal fisherfolk and aquaculture smallholders.  
Enhanced enabling environment for p rivate sector involvement  in artisanal fisheries, including financial 
services  
133. The PROREFISH has also planned for an active involvement of the private sector, in particular to attract its 
investment and financial services provision after the project builds the necessary capacity and demonstrates the 
economic potential of aquaculture and improved fish processing. The project will also strengthen the capacities of professional apex bodies such as the National Association of Artisanal F isheries Operators (NAAFO), the National Sole 
Fishery Co- Management Committee (NASCOM) and the National Fisheries Platform, so that they can support their 
members in their relations with large private sector off -takers, in particular with the wholesale buy ers for inland, daily 
and weekly (LUIMO) markets at fish landing sites  and with the buyers from fish- processing industries.
55 Under Output 
3.2, the project will support for a yearly “match- making” engagement with the private sector off-takers and investors  
and will train fisher folk in better accessing formal markets, shifting from subsistence and artisanal  production to small-
scale commercial activity. Furthermore, the project will promote the local production of equipment and fish feed  
(involving youth gr oups)  to ensure the necessary availability for the expansion of the sector and to reduce the reliance 
on expensive imports. As part of the project governance, the Gambia Chamber of Commerce and Industry (GCCI) will 
participate as a regular member in the Pr oject Steering Committee.   In addition, the project will promote evidence-
based dialogue among public and private sector actors, including financial institutions, to improve access to financial products and services for the artisanal fisheries sector.  
134. Over all, these interventions will ensure that post -implementation, public and private stakeholders will 
collaborate to maintain and operate the newly climate- proofed infrastructure and will continue the aquaculture 
development, while local communities in the mangrove restoration areas will be in charge of local management of their communal forests.


---
*Page 63*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total f inancing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + 
vi + vii) Total amount Currency  
17.2 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  17.2     
(vii) Results -based 
payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co-financing 
information Total amount  Currency  
7.8 million USD ($)million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Ministry of 
Agriculture56 
(MoA)57) Grant  
 5.0 million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, 
Water Resources 
and National 
Assembly Matters58 In kind  
 2.0 million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO)  Grant  0.8 Million 
USD ($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
25.0 million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 
250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of 
guarantee (e.g.  sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions 
and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the 
co-financing policy) .  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrumen
t Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions 
 
56 The Government of the Gambia acting through MoA  
57 via IFAD funded project  
58 The Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM


---
*Page 64*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 Strengthenin
g restoration 
capacity and 
community 
management 
of artisanal 
fisheries 
habitats  Output 1.1  
Mangrove 
ecosystems sustainably 
restored in 
fisheries 
priority areas  2.373 700 2 022 
500 Grants  156 200 Grants         MoA 
195 000 Grants  FAO 
Output 1.2  
Local 
communities 
equipped for 
sustainable 
ecosystem 
management  813 650 313 650 Grants  500 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
Climate 
resilient 
fisheries 
infrastructure 
and 
aquaculture 
development  Output 2.1  
Fisheries 
communities 
are equipped  
with climate -
proofed and 
improved critical small 
scale 
fisheries 
infrastructure 
(artisanal 
fish landing 
sites) and 
with climate -
smart fish processing 
equipment 
(solar dryers 
and 
improved 
ovens)  8 414 900 7 619 
900 Grants  300 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
495 000 Grants  FAO 
Output 2.2  
Aquaculture 
activities 
introduced as 
adaptation 
measures for 
livelihood 
improvement  8 583 100 3 139 
300 Grants  4.843 800 Grants  MoA  
600 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
Improved 
climate change 
adaptive 
capacities  Output 3.1  
Public 
services 
strengthened 
to  facilitate 
local 
communities 
capacity to 
prepare for 
and respond to climate 
change risks  1 294 950 1 119 
950 Grants  175 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
Output 3.2  
Local communities
, groups and 
HHs 
capacities to 
implement 
market -
driven 2 361 500 2 190 
500 Grants  87 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
84 000 Grants  FAO


---
*Page 65*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 adaptation 
measures  
are 
strengthened  
Project 
management 
and implementati
on   1 158 200 794 200 Grants  338 000 In-kind MoFWRNAM  
26 000 Grants  FAO 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  25 000 000  17 200 000 7 800 000 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
135. Capacity building and technology transfer are key parts of the proposed adaptation interventions. 
Capacity building is included in each component and under each output, alongside the physical investments 
where applicable . Given the size of the Gambia and its developmental status, technology transfer is critically 
necessary in order to address some the barriers identified for fish processing and aquaculture development. The table below summarises the capacity building and technology transfer under each output.  
 
Component  Output  Capacity  building  
activities  Capacity building 
GCF resources  
(USD)  Technology 
transfer  activities  Technology 
transfer GCF 
resources  (USD ) 
Strengthening 
restoration 
capacity and 
community 
management 
of artisanal 
fisheries 
habitats   
Output 1.1  
Mangrove 
ecosystems 
sustainably restored 
in fisheries priority 
areas   
Trainings on mangrove 
replanting and ANR   
25,000  
  
 
Output 1.2  Local 
communities 
equipped for 
sustainable 
ecosystem 
management   
Trainings on mangrove 
monitoring, 
conservation and 
sustainable resource 
use 
 
Capacity development 
for new technologies 
(technical, O&M and 
organizational)   
100,000  
Energy efficient 
technologies for 
fish handling and 
processing   
500,000 
Climate 
resilient 
fisheries 
infrastructure 
and 
aquaculture 
development   
Output 2.1  Fisheries 
communities are 
equipped  with 
climate -proofed and 
improved critical 
small scale fisheries 
infrastructure 
(artisanal fish landing 
sites) and with 
climate -smart fish 
processing 
equipment (solar 
dryers and improved 
ovens)   
Capacity development 
for the CFCs 
(organizational, O&M 
and mark eting)  
100,000 Improved fish 
processing 
equipment (FTT 
smoking ovens 
and CEAS solar 
dryers)   
1,700,000 
 
Output 2.2  
Aquaculture activities 
introduced as 
adaptation measures 
for livelihood  
Trainings on each of 
the four aquaculture 
packages   
300,000  
Rice-fish culture  
 
Fish culture in 
tanks   
550,000


---
*Page 66*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
   
 improvement of 
2,800 smallholder 
rural households  
Improved 
climate change 
adaptive 
capacities   
Output 3.1  Public 
services 
strengthened to 
facilitate local 
community capacity 
to prepare for and 
respond to climate 
change risks   
Short -term specialized 
trainings  
Training on 
georeferenced NR 
monitoring  
Curricula development 
and diploma support  
Support to roll out e-
extension system   
350,000   
 
Output 3.2  Local 
communities, groups 
and HHs capacities 
to implement market 
driven adaptation 
measures are 
strengthened   
Trainings for field 
officers  
Trainings on coop. 
development and value 
addition 
Training to youth 
groups on value 
addition 
Platforms for value 
chain and financial 
inclusion  
Facilitated Household 
Methodology  
Functional literacy and 
numeracy program   
1,800,000  
Equipment for 
georeferenced 
monitoring   
50,000 
TOTAL    2,675,000   2,800,000


---
*Page 67*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
136. The project will support vulnerable Gambian fisher folk to adapt to the impact of climate change and 
improve their livelihoods  through the adoption of climate resilient aquaculture, through climate proofing of small -scale 
fisheries infrastructure and through fisheries habitat restoration. Through increasing fish availability, these interventions  
will build the resilience of beneficiaries and will improve their incomes and their nutrition, as well as unlocking their 
opportunities to expand and diversify their livelihoods.  
137. Given the size of the Gambia and the project targeting, the project is expected to have a transformative 
impact on the fisheries sector’s adaptation to climate change. Building on previous project and initiatives to 
upgrade the artisanal fisheries capacities, PROREFISH will provided targeted support to 20,198 fisherfolk and other 
value chain actors, who with their household members constitute the 167,643 direct beneficiaries of the project. In 
addition, PROREFISH will have 250,000 indirect beneficiaries or 10. 3% of the country’s population . These 
populations – the country’s most vulnerable and largely below the national poverty line – will benefit from better and 
safer working conditions at fisheries landing sites, from increased fish availability and higher  quality and healthier 
processed fish, from increased incomes and better nutrition.  
138. The project responds to the priorities identified in the Gambia’s National Climate Change Strategy and the 
sectoral policies and it contributes to four GCF’s adaptation imp act areas and one GCF’s  mitigation impact area : 
• GCF Adaptation impact area A1 : The project will increase the resilience and enhance the livelihoods of 
167,643 vulnerable Gambians within the fisheries sector (and indirectly in the broader agriculture sector). 
Of this total, 42% or 12,500 beneficiaries will be women operating in different segment of the fisheries 
value chain or who will adopt aquaculture practices as adaptation measures.  
• GCF Adaptation impact area A2 : PROREFISH will contribute to increasing the health and well -being, 
food & water security  of its beneficiaries by investing in increased production and availability of fish for 
local consumption, as well as better hygienic conditions and quality standards  for fish products. In addition, 
the proposed infrastructure and equipment investments will ensure healthier conditions (cleaner water, 
less smoke) for fish processors, as well as reduced workload for women.  
• GCF Adaptation impact area A3 : The project will have a strong focus on increasing the  resilience of 
infrastructure and the built environment to climate change. Under Output 2.1, the project will climate- proof 
and improve the existing infrastructure and equipment at seven landing sites that have been assessed as 
climate vulnerable. The estimated value of the physical assets supported by the project is at least US$ 6.7 
million, not accounting for externalities.  
• GCF Adaptation impact A4: Acknowledging the critical importance of mangroves for the fisheries s ector 
in the Gambia, the project is also focused on improving the resilience of mangrove ecosystems and 
ecosystems services in key fisheries areas in the estuary and middle segment of the Gambia river. Under 
Outputs 1.1 and 1.2, the project will complement  existing restoration actions by targeting ten mangrove 
degraded areas and investing in reforestation of 2,350 hectares  brought under improved climate- resilient 
management practice  and in empowering the local communities for sustainable ecosystem management.  
• GCF Mitigation impact area M4: While PROREFISH is conceived as a predominantly adaptation project, 
the investment in mangrove restoration will generate mitigation benefits of -2 38,519 tCO2eq over the 20-
year lifetime of the investment.  These estimates do not include further reduction in emissions due to the 
demonstration effect in the local and neighboring communities where the project will intervene, nor the 
significant effect on the restoration and conservation of biodiversity.  
139. The project will also contribute to the following GCF outcomes :


---
*Page 68*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 • GCF Outcome A5:  The project will be support  the strengthening of national capacities for climate 
adaptation in the fisheries sector. Through a mix of activities under Output 3.1, the project will promote 
better climate risk analytical capabilities and more sectoral and climate monitoring capacities, resulting in 
strengthened institutional systems for climate- responsive planning and development.  
• GCF Outcome A7 : The project’s core interventions in climate proofing small scale fisheries infrastructure, 
in aquaculture development and in mangrove restoration are all designed with the objective of building the 
climate resilience of Gambian fisher folk, of reducing their exposure to climate risks and of strengthening 
their adaptive capacity.  
• GCF Outcome A8 : Alongside the physical investments and the introduction of adaptation packages in the 
fisheries sector, the project will ensure that all value chain actors have an enhanced awareness of climate 
threats and risk -reduction processes. This objective will be realized through targeted and adapted 
trainings, but also through the introduction of a fisheries e- extension/e- outreach system, which will adapt 
and disseminate weather data, market and price information, business opportunities,  and other information 
relevant to the fisher folk and value chain actors  (with national coverage and complete outreach to the 
targeted audiences).  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
140. The proposed GCF project will lead to a paradigm shift from an artisanal  fisheries sector impacted by climate 
change, with fewer resources and high  post-harvest losses to a climate resilient sector with adapted infrastructure 
and equipment, reduced fish loss and waste supplemented with  new aquaculture production to maintain  fish 
availability for poor consumers and with improved linkages to formal markets and business opportunities for 
artisanal fisherfolk . The interventions will ensure the continuation and improvement of the livelihoods  of the Gambian 
fisher folk, who will be in a financial and technical position to expand their activities further after project completion.   
141. The project has a significant scaling up and replication potential. The technologies and practices that will 
be int roduced with project support at the seven landing sites will demonstrate how adaptation measures (such as 
improved FTT smoking ovens and solar dryers) can improve working conditions, reduce losses, improve hygiene and 
quality, and ultimately benefit nutrition and incomes. Coupled with evidence from the adoption of the improved 
technologies and infrastructure, supported by exchange visits and knowledge management, the artisanal fisheries 
communities will be able to appreciate the benefits and as a consequenc e, interest in further  replication and scaling- up 
will grow. In addition, the government is committed to revise fish landing construction standards on the basis of 
PROREFISH experience. As a result, these technologies  and practices will be introduced at other landing sites in the 
country – both coastal and riverine – and could be further expanded with public and donor support at the sites already 
supported by the GCF project. Similarly, aquaculture development’s adaptation packages prese nt an enormous 
potential for replication: for example, the rice- fish culture – which the project plans to promote on 300 ha – has been 
shown to be highly profitable in many countries and could be introduced on thousands of hectares across the Gambia. 
The integrated fish culture tanks in vegetable gardens will be supported by the project at 30 sites, yet an inventory of 
such gardens indicate that over 60 other vegetable gardening schemes have been developed and could benefit from 
the kind of complementary small -scale aquaculture investment promoted by the project. The same scaling up and 
replication considerations are applicable to the other two aquaculture packages. Similarly, the proposed mangrove 
restoration activities build on and scale up previous interventions and fit in a long history of restoring and sustainably 
managing the forests of the Gambia.  The improvement of oyster cultivation promoted by PROREFISH provides a 
significant incentive for local communities to engage in mangrove rest oration and this is another innovation that can be 
taken to scale. Finally, the new e- extension system to be introduced by PROREFISH will produce and disseminate at 
scale and low -cost timely messages on weather, storms, tides, fishing seasonality, and mark et/price information  to 
artisanal fisherfolk and aquaculture smallholders, further enhancing the project’s scaling up and replication potential.  
142. PROREFISH’s interventions in fish landing infrastructure and aquaculture development are based on the 
successf ul experiences in the West Africa’s fisheries. As such, the introduction of the new technologies and practices 
will result in knowledge sharing and learning for the beneficiaries and for the public services supporting the fisheries,


---
*Page 69*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 but will also have a de monstration effect for other countries. In addition, past experiences have demonstrated that the 
introduction of a fish processing technology usually results in local refining of the design and processes, with additional 
productivity gains (for example, the introduction of the FTT smoking oven across the coast of West Africa).  
143. The project will also contribute to the improvement of the enabling environment for the fisheries and aquaculture 
sector in the Gambia. Under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2, the project will focus on mainstreaming climate change in the sector’s 
planning and development, on building stronger capacities for georeferenced monitoring and implementation, and on 
ensuring long lasting inter -sectoral and intra- sectoral coordination (horizontally – between institutions responsible for 
natural resources  management and climate change monitoring, but also cutting across public and private, and national 
and local level) . 
144. While a major bottleneck remains on the acces s to adequate sources of finance for smallholder investments in 
adaptation and diversification options in the artisanal fisheries sector (due to the challenging loan terms especially for 
the agriculture and fisheries sub- sector), the project will mobilize substantial de -constraining interventions to unlock 
potential for a more substantial involvement of the private sector in the fisheries value chains (Output 3.2). These would 
include not only entrepreneurial capacity development – with special attention to youth and women groups – but also 
capacity development to local actors to establish linkages between smallholders and private sector actors (including 
financial institutions). As a result, and coupled with the evidence from the ground on the benefits of the investments in 
climate-proofing the artisanal fisheries value chain, the project will establish dialogue aiming to improve the regulatory 
framework and the functioning of the financial system to improve smallholder access to financial services in the artisanal 
fisheries subs ector .  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
145. PROREFISH will contribute to the achievement of several U.N. Sustainable Development Goals in the Gambia: 
SDG1 (No Poverty), SDG2 (Zero Hunger), SDG3 (Good Health and Well -being), SDG5 (Gender Equality), SDG6 
(Clean Water and Sanitation),  SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), SDG13 (Climate Action), and SDG 14 (Life 
below Water). As previously mentioned, the project is closely aligned and will contribute to the national development 
targets, as outlines in the  overarching Gambia National Development Plan (2018- 2021) and its subsequent phases.  
146. In particular, the project will have a positive impact in terms of:  
• Environmental and social co -benefits : the current practices of fish smoking in rudimentary  ovens expose 
workers – including many women, and the young children accompanying them – as well as the people 
living in proximity to the relative sites to a high health hazard and results in highly toxic compounds in the 
traditionally smoked fish products59. The improvement of  the artisanal fisheries processing systems 
through the project supported FTT ovens, accompanied by the adequate technical and managerial 
capacity development will reduce the exposure to respiratory diseases.   
• Gender -sensitive co -benefits: The project will have a significant and long- term impact on Gambian 
women, as a majority of core adaptation measures are targeted to women- led activities such as fish 
handling and processing, aquaculture in vegetable gardens, or introduction of energy efficient community 
equipment. The project will significantly reduce the workload that women experience in fish processing 
activities and reduce their health hazards. In addition, the project will support gender empowerment 
through the application of the Household Methodology for facilitated dialogue between men and women, 
and through the introduction of an adult literacy and numeracy program targeted at women. These gender 
interventions are expected to have several positive spill -overs in terms of nutrition, health and education 
at the household level.  
• Socio -economic co -benefits : With the project’s support, 20,198 households (or 167,643 individuals) will 
have better economic opportunities in the fisheries sector, generating more income and improving their 
capital base and resilience. In addition, the project implementation is expected to generate over 500 
temporary jobs and 100 permanent jobs, with would be targeted at vulnerable youth. In particular, the 
 
59 Ibid., p .37. The bonga, the preferred fish of Gambians consumers, is marketed on average at GMD 25 000 per t against GMD 20 000 for substitute species 
(i.e. sardinella).


---
*Page 70*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 project’s job creation potential will support the Gambia’s post -COVID -19 recovery, as the country has 
significantly suffered from the loss in tourism revenues and jobs. In addition, the increased fish availability 
is estimated to reduce the food import bill for other animal protein sources and to generate foreign currency 
gains through increased exports of fish and fish products. The fisheries sector has already markedly 
increased its share in the national GDP in recent years and the project’s intervention is expected to 
accelerate this trend.  
• Social co -benefits : The project’s capacity development activities - that will complement  the physical 
investments – will contribute to strengthening the human capital of fisher folk and their ability to engage 
with the public services and the private sector. As a result, project beneficiaries will have better access to 
formal markets and to information and knowledge. In addition, the project will invest in social organization: 
on one hand, in the creation or strengthening of local management committees at sites of community 
action, and on the other hand, in the organization of fisher folk and other value chain actors into common 
economic interest groups, such as cooperatives.   
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
147. The Gambia is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.  The country’s physical location 
renders it highly exposed to climate change threats from both land and sea and, due to the small size of the economy, 
the country possesses limited capacity to autonomously undertake extensive adaptation efforts in response  to threats 
for which it contributed little in creating.60 In the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND -GAIN) Index, Gambia is 
ranked 141st in the world, being the 33rd most vulnerable country and the 53rd least ready country, reflecting its high 
vulnerabilit y score and low readiness score.  
148. The Gambia’s climate vulnerability is also set in a complex development context.  The country is classified 
as a least developed country (LDC) by the UN and as low income by the World Bank61, and it ranks 172nd in the 2020 
Human Development Index. In addition, the Gambia is also now recognized as a Fragile and Conflict -affected Situations 
country, given its high institutional and social fragility. The average GDP growth of  2.9% over the last decade has 
proven insufficient to ACCELERATE  development, reduce poverty and improve food security. The Gambians, particularly 
the youth, continue to migrate from rural areas to the urbanized coastal zone, but more importantly to attempt to 
immigrate to developed countries. In addition, the economic  shock induced by the Covid- 19 pandemic on the tourism 
sector will erase some of the recent developmental gains.  Fisher folk are among the Gambia’s most vulnerable 
populations, as part of a broader agriculture sector that has stagnated in recent years.  Agriculture (including 
fisheries) is the main livelihood source for about 72 percent of poor households and 91 percent of extremely poor rural 
households.  
149. As indicated in section B.5, there is very limited public and private financing  available to address the barriers 
to adaptation in the fisheries sector. As an indication, the available public budget in a typical year would be insufficient 
at implementing the ADAPTATION  measures at a single landing site. While other international technical and financial 
partners have supported the fisheries sector, their focus has been on capture fisheries management, and less on 
climate adaptation. As such, the gap in financing adaptation remains large and requires a strong involvement of the 
GCF.  
150. The various assessments of public service delivery and implementation capacity conducted during the 
project formulation have indicated the low technical, human and financial resources available in the fisheries 
sector.  Particular issues include insufficien t staffing, particularly on the field, inadequate training and technical 
KNOWLEDGE , insufficient budget allocation for capital expenditures (development), etc. Recognizing this reality, the 
Government has requested FAO to implement the project, in close partnership with its ministries and agencies. As 
such, the project is justified in terms of the needs  of the recipient and will invest in strengthening the sectoral institutions 
and building long- term implementation capacity to support the Gambia’s adaptation efforts.  
 
60 Per capita GHG emissions in The Gambia is 1.11 Mt CO 2e, compared to the global average of 6.76 Mt CO 2e (source: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg -
emissions?breakBy=regions -PER_CAPITA&chartType=line&gases=all -ghg&regions=WORLD%2CGMB&sectors=total -including -lucf ac cessed 3/8/2020).  
61 World Bank Country and Lending Groups 2020 (https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519 -world -bank -country -and-lending -groups).


---
*Page 71*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
151. The Government of the Gambia has a strong understanding of the country’s climate vulnerability, given the 
already experienced climate impacts. As such, the Government and national stakeholders have been involved in recent 
years in increasing climate -resilience planning and development efforts and in resource mobilization to finance the 
identified priority adaptation measures.  
152. In this context, the project is aligned with the policy commitments of the Government of the Gambia. Indeed, it 
supports the adaptation measures within the fisheries sector outlined in its National Adaptation Programme of Action 
(NAPA), its latest (2020) third National Communication (NC)  and the Second NDC (2021) submitted under the 
framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Subsequently, the project design has 
been informed by national development policies, strategies and plans on development, climate change, and food 
securi ty in the Gambia. It supports the goal and the provisions of the overarching guide of the country, the National 
Development Plan (NDP) 2018- 2021, which advocates for a modern fisheries sector resistant to climate- related 
hazards. Moreover, the project alig ns with The Gambia’s United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
(UNDAF). Indeed, it directly contributes to the UNDAF strategic result of sustainable, inclusive, and integrative national 
resource management for food security, income generation and safe environment.  
153. The project is also closely aligned with the Gambia’s framework on climate change, namely the National 
Climate Change Policy (NCCP) 2018, which advocates promoting sustainable adaptive management of the fisheries 
resources. It also falls into the fisheries  sector strategy of the country’s Agriculture and National Resources (ANR) 
Policy 2017- 2026 aiming to optimize value- added, improved export earnings, greater employment opportunities and 
enhanced contribution to improved nutritional status consistent with the rational exploitation of the resource base.  
154. The project contributes to continuity in implementation and compliance with national fisheries policy 
instruments: the Fisheries Act 2007, the Fisheries Regulations 2008, and the Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector Strategy 
(FASS) 2017 -2021. Indeed, these instruments aim at ensuring responsible and ecologically sustained fishing and 
aquaculture practices through institutional capacity strengthening, key sector stakeholder capacity building and 
promotion of sustainable optimization of the value chain. Hence, the projects embodies their vision of developing the 
fisheries sector to be a critical contributor to national economic growth and development in a sustainable way.  
155. Table D-1 provides a summary of the project alignment and contribution to The Gambia’s policy commitments 
and national priorities. Further details are provided in Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study.  
 
Table D-1 Project alignment with the Gambia's policy commitments and national priorities  
 
Project Components  NDC NAPA UNDAF  NDP  NCCP  ANR Fisheries 
Act FASS  
Component 1.  
Strengthening restoration 
capacity and community 
management of artisanal 
fisheries habitats  X X  
X X X  X 
Component 2. Climate 
resilient fisheries 
infrastructure and 
aquaculture  development X X  
X X X X X 
Component 3: Improved 
climate change adaptive 
capacities  X X X X X X X X


---
*Page 72*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness ( max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
156. The total cost of the project is estimated at US$ 24.2 million, including a proposed GCF grant of US$ 17.2 
million, co- financing from the MoA (grant financed by IFAD) of US$ 5.0 million, and in- kind co -financing by the Ministry 
of Fisheries , Water Resources and National Assembly Matters (MoFWRNAM) of US$ 2.0 million). Co- financing 
represents 29 % of the total project costs.  
157. Given the very limited available resources for climate adaptation in the Gambia, the PROREFISH design has 
focused its efforts on partnering with the ROOTS project, a leading initiative in the crop agriculture sector. To enhance 
the project’s efficiency AND to ensure additionality of the GCF investments, the first two aquaculture packages (and the 
most important ones in terms of the budget of Output 2.2) build on the significant investments that the ROOTS project 
will provide. For rice- fish culture, the ROOTS project will invest in the irrigated rice schemes, the provision of inputs and 
agronomic training. PROREFISH will top- up these investments, by contributing to the adjustment of design and by 
providing aquaculture start -up kits and training. As such, per aquaculture package  investments costs (per hectare) are 
support 65% by ROOTS and 35% by PROREFISH, ensuring efficiency and a much larger scale for this intervention, 
given the available budget. Similar arrangements are applicable for the integration of fish culture in tanks in vegetable 
gardens, with a nearly identical cost -sharing ratio.  
158. An economic analysis has been conducted to evaluate the economic returns of the investments in climate 
proofing the small -scale fisheries infrastructure at the six targeted sites. As the six  landing sites represent public 
infrastructure, an economic analysis has been developed, evaluating the overall impact of the investments at each site. 
Overall, assuming a gradual decrease of the post -harvest losses ( from currently 25% and expected BAU scenario with 
climate change of 30% to a final target of 15% post -harvest loss) and a constant volume of landed fish62, the US$ 7.4 
million investments would generate over 15 years63 an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 41. 8% and net present 
value (NPV) at a social discount rate of 6% of US$ 27.3 million. Given the specificity of each site’s climate vulnerability, 
the volumes of fish landed and the subsequent PACKAGE  of investments, the results vary among the six locations. The 
Banjul landing site presents the lowest, yet positive results, due to the specific nature of  investments: the site’s 
investments are designed to accommodate landing capacity losses at other nearby sites, and less to reduce on- shore, 
post-landing losses. As such, the Banjul landing site has the highest investments costs (43%) of the total. At the other 
end, the Tanji landing site has the highest economic results, reflecting that the site is the most important in terms of 
volumes of fish and economic activity  (see table Table D -2). 
159. To complement the standard cost -benefit analysis (CBA), a break -even analysis over 15- year using the same 
social discount factor of 6% was conducted to assess the minimum decrease in losses required at each site in order to 
justify the investment costs. The results indicate that realistic and achievable reduction in losses (ranging from 1.1% to 
11.5%) are sufficient to break -even.  
 
62 In the absence of long- term site -specific statistics and in light of the expected climate change impacts, it was not possible at this stage to estimate future fish 
landings at the targeted landing sites. Yet, the project will support the capacity development of the CFCs to better monitor, record and report fish landings 
throughout project implementation and after. This component of the EFA can be revised and updated throughout implementation as necessary.  
63 The analysis has assumed that the works would be completed by Year 3 of  project implementation (in line with the activity phasing, budget and procurement 
plan) and would operate for 15 years (given the nature of the infrastructure and equipment installed at the different sites).


---
*Page 73*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
   
 Table D-2 Economic results (standard CBA) and break -even analysis small -scale fi sheries infrastructure (fish loss reduction ) 
 
160. For the four proposed aquaculture  packages, a financial analysis has been conducted over a period of 10 
years. Using a cost -benefit approach, the results indicate that each proposed adaptation activity is profitable, with 
significant returns for the project beneficiaries and with internal  rates of return ranging from 15% to 27%. In terms of 
financing options, besides  (i) fully concessional grant to cover the necessary aquaculture investments costs, the 
analysis has also tested the financial profitability of these activities assuming (i i) a full commercial loan financing, (i ii) 
and a mix (50% -50%) of commercial and potential concessional loans. The prevailing loan terms in the Gambia present 
high costs (at least 18% interest rate per year for agricultural activities) and short repayment periods (below one year)64.  
These elements are severe impediments to financial inclusion especially for small -scale farmers and artisanal fisherfolk 
targeted by the project. The aquaculture packages identified by the project present payback periods of minimum 5 
years (5 years for aquaculture packages 1 and 2, 6 years for packages 3 and 4). Under the prevailing conditions, the 
analysis of the financing scenarios (ii) and (iii) shows lower or even negative financial returns, therefore supporting the 
justification for highly concessional financing.65 The sensitivity analysis of these financial models highlights the 
importance of fish prices in generating adequate returns for the beneficiaries (see Annex 3 EFA)66. In all packages, 
price decreases of 5% -10% significantly affect profitability, which justifies the project’s interventions along the value 
chain for better marketing and value addition to remove these risks.  
Table D-3 Financial results for the aquaculture packages  
 
 
161. To account for the economic value of the net greenhouse gas emissions reductions expected to be generated 
by the project  (11,926 t CO2eq per year) has been converted into monetary value using three price ranges: current 
carbon prices ( using  EU ETS as  a proxy – 40 USD/t CO2eq), and low and high ranges of social carbon prices (as 
adopted by the World Bank – 49 USD/t CO2eq and 98 USD/ t CO2eq at project lifetime midpoint in 2030). Using these 
assumptions, the yearly economic value generated by the project ranges from US$1.1 million to US$2.7 million. 
Component 3 activities have been considered as playing an enabling role for the fisheries and aquaculture activities 
described above and as such they do not generate they own benefit streams.  
162. Overall, PROREFISH is economically justified, generating an overall economic rate of return (EIRR) of 22.0%  
and a net present value (NPV, at 6%) of the additional benefits of US$ 21.0 million , over a period of 20 years. The 
inclusion of the social valuation of the environmental externalities resulting from mangrove restoration (carbon 
sequestration potential) f urther increases these  positive results, as summarized in Table D -4.67 These economic results 
are robust when testing for several risk scenarios, including climate hazards and stressors, materializing in risks of cost Break-even analysis (15-y @6%)  
La
nding EIRR NPV Required reduction in losses   
Site (%) (@6%, US$ mn) (%)    
Banjul 11.4% $0.6 11.5%    
Brufut 78.7% $6.5 1.6%
Tanji 104.5% $10.2 1.1%
Sanyang 63.2% $2.2 2.2%
Kartong 24.0% $1.7 6.7%
Bintang 24.9% $1.0 6.5%
Total 41.8% $27.3Economic results (standard CBA)
Aquaculture package 1 Aquaculture package 2 Aquaculture package 3 A quaculture package 4
Fish culture in tanks Rice-fish culture Fish culture in ponds Clam and oyster culture
IRR (%) 22.8% 30.8% 15.3% 18.6%
NPV (@18% , US$) 1,322 396 3,423 1,912
Yearly add. income* (US$/unit) 2,813 377 6,519 1,943
Yearly add. income* (US$/beneficiary) 141 188 261 194
*at full realization of benefits


---
*Page 74*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
   
 overruns, decreased of benefits, delays in benefits generation, lower adoption rates and decreased fish pric es (a 
summary of the sensitivity analysis is provided in Table D -5). Yet, the interplay between these factors can reduce the 
economic returns of the project and the full realization of the project’s potential will depend on the full and timely 
implementati on of all project activities.  
Table D -4 Economic results  
 Base scenario without 
env. externalities  Low env. externalities 
valuation  High env. externalities 
valuation  
EIRR  22.0%  26.1%  30.1%  
NPV @ 6% (US$ m)  21.0 27.5 33.9 
 
Table D -5 Sensitivity analysis  
Scenarios   EIRR  NPV (6%)  
USD million  
Base scenario    22.0%  21.0 
Costs  + 10% 19.8%  19.4 
Costs  + 20% 18.0%  17.9 
Costs  + 50% 13.5%  13.2 
Benefits  - 10% 19.6%  17.3 
Benefits  - 20% 17.1%  13.7 
Benefits  - 30% 12.7%  8.5 
Benefits delayed by 1 year  18.3%  18.9 
Benefits delayed by 2 year  15.7%  17.0 
Benefits delayed by 3 year  13.5%  13.8 
Benefits delayed by 4 year  11.7%  10.8 
Adoption rate  - 10% 19.9%  19.3 
Adoption rate  - 20% 16.4%  14.1 
Fish prices  - 10% 21.2%  20.5 
Fish prices  - 20% 18.8%  16.5 
 
 
 
 
64 Average maturity of 90 days (source: The Gambia National Policy for MSMEs 2019- 24 - link here).  
65 Worth remarking here that under Component 3, as part of its knowledge management and policy dialogue including with the private sector, the project will 
provide evidence of the financial profitability of these investment stimulating revision of financial products and services to be more suitable for the artisanal sub-
sector and rural areas.  
66 Specific  sensitivity analysis is presented in each model.  
67 Reference to “aggregation” tab in EFA spreadsheets (Annex 3).


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL  FRAMEWORK  
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
 
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  In Gambia artisanal fisheries serve as a 
source of livelihoods for about 200,000 
people (20% of rural population) . Fish 
losses are increasing as a result of climate impacts  on storage and 
transportation to markets , with high 
repercussions on access to fish as an affordable source of proteins for a large 
segment of the society.  Low Through substanti al investment in 
artisanal fisheries, climate 
proofing infrastructure and 
supporting access to adaptation 
and diversification options in 
fisheries and aquaculture, the 
project will be able to support 
80% of the fisherfolk in the country, and to maintain the fish 
availability per capita in spite of 
negative climate change impacts, 
and improve management of 
mangrove ecosystems.   The substantial investment and outreach 
of PROREFISH positions it well to broker 
interventions in artisanal fisheries towards improved climate change resilience, to 
allow further upscaling of results. Through 
knowledge management and 
improvements in the policy and regulatory 
framework, the project  will contribute to 
create an enabling environment conducive 
to private sector investment, including for 
more inclusive financial service provision 
facilitating access to adapted technologies 
and infrastructure.


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 Replicability  Despite suitable fisheries technologies 
and infrastructure being available in the 
region, their deployment is hampered by 
smallholder producer capacity 
constraints, market barriers including 
unsuitable financial products and a lack 
of public financing for the sector. Limited 
information on impacts of climate change and insufficient capacity to address these 
hamper the use of adaptive nature- based 
solutions like restoration of mangrove forests in coastal areas.  Medium  The paradigm shift of the project 
will rely on the dissemination and 
demonstration of results of the available and tested adaptation 
options. The superior durability of 
the new fish landing infrastructure 
and fish processing equipment, 
combined with reduced losses, 
better product quality and lower maintenance costs covered by 
modest user fees, will establish a 
blueprint for future public and 
private sector investments, as 
suitable to the Gambian context.   The project will mobilize t echnology 
(FTTs , landing sites…) transfer to and 
capacity build ing for vulnerable fishing 
communities ( CFCs, CFMCs, TRY 
groups… ) and involve the actors in the 
subsequent segments of the fisheries 
value chain. In addition, project -generated 
evidence and knowledge management will document  the success and attract 
additional climate and potentially 
commercial  finance for further operations, 
as well as application in other neighboring countries with similar challenges.  
Sustainability  Small- scale farmers and artisanal 
fisherfolk who are vulnerable to climate change impacts have limited options to mobilize commercial loans. Experience 
with village or community savings is 
showing limited results due to limitations 
in the financial regulat ory system. This 
also hampers the development of market -
based and economically inclusive solutions.  Low Key element of sustainability will 
be the entrepreneurial capacities 
gained by the project beneficiaries 
and the exposure to private sector. Moreover, managerial 
capacities of CFCs  and CFMCs , 
as well as the affordable fees they 
charge will improve operations of 
the assets and guarantee the maintenance and durability of the 
investments in infrastructure, 
equipment and mangrove forests.  By training artisanal fisherfolk and 
vulnerable communities in individual and collective entrepreneurial and management act ivities and facilitating 
commercial linkages with private sector entrepreneurs (tourism, markets…), the 
project will generate sustainable business 
opportunities. Project facilitated private 
sector platforms such as the “Invest in 
Fisheries” roundtables, linking up small -
scale fisheries operators with 
entrepreneurs, coupled with adequate 
training will promote productive alliances 
including equitable value chain financing 
arrangements, which will also make smallholder producer groups more 
attractive to financial service providers.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme out comes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).   
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final68 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced project 
outcome surveys69  0 direct beneficiaries  
0 indirect 
beneficiaries  67,057 direct 
beneficiaries70 
(52.4% women)  
 
100,000 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(52.4% women)  167,643 direct 
beneficiaries 
(52.4% women)  
 
250,000 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(52.4% women)  he Government of the Gambia 
acting through 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced project 
outcome surveys71 0 beneficiary  
 Total: 67,057 
individuals (8,786 hh) – 52.4% 
women  
Males: 31,919  
Females: 35,138 
 
Sustainable 
ecosystem management  
Males: 2,370 
Females: 2,160 
 Climate -proofed 
coastal 
infrastructure: 
Males: 21,963  
Females: 24,178  Total: 167,643 
individuals 
(20,198 hh) – 52.4% women  
Males: 79,798  
Females: 87,845  
 
Sustainable 
ecosystem management  
Males: 5,926 
Females: 6,524 
 
Climate -proofed 
coastal 
infrastructure: 
Males: 54,908  
Females: 60,455  No external shocks (natural 
disasters, political or economic 
crises) with impacts on the 
targeted beneficiaries and sites  
Availability of construction 
companies and no delays in 
procurement  
Public sector support provided in a 
timely manner 
 
68 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan period 
which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expect ed to be effective.  
69 The indicator measures the adoption of improved practices and technologies supported by the project disaggregated by type and gender of beneficiaries, including investments in Sustainable ecosystem management, 
climate -proofed coastal infrastructures; aquaculture; capacity development.  
70 The beneficiaries indicated in Core 2 indicator include all project  beneficiaries, including those who benefited from restored mangrove forests against sea -level rise (adaptation benefits of mangrove).   
71 The indicator measures the adoption of improved practices and technologies supported by the project disaggregated by type and gender of beneficiaries, including investments in Sustainable ecosystem management, 
climate -proofed coastal infrastructures; aquaculture; capacity development.


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
  
Aquaculture 
development:  
Males: 4,425 
Females: 4,871 
 
Improved climate 
adaptation 
capacities  
Males: 3,161 
Females: 3,479 Aquaculture 
development:  
Males: 11,062  
Females: 12,178  
Improved climate 
adaptation capacities  
Males: 7,902 
Females: 8,698 
ARA2 Health, well -being, 
food and water security  Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with improved food security  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced project 
outcome surveys  10,000 hh (83,000 
individuals – of 
which 43,492 
women) 
 
(~50% of benef)72 14,139 hh 
(117,354 
individuals – of 
which 61,493  
women) 
(70% of benef hhs)  18,178 hh 
(150,887 
individuals – of 
which 79,065  
women) 
(90% of benef hhs)  No external shocks, adoption of 
project technologies proceeds as 
planned 
ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment  Core 3: Value of physical 
assets made more resilient to 
the effects of climate change 
and/or more able to reduce 
GHG emissions  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced mid-term and 
completion surveys  0 2 landing sites  
climate -proofed73 
and improved with 
adaptive measures, for an estimated value of 
US$ 2.0 million  7 landing sites  
climate -proofed 
and improved with 
adaptive measures, for an estimated value of 
US$ 6.7 million  Availability of construction 
companies and no delays in 
procurement  
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low- emission and/or 
climate -resilient management 
practice  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced mid-term and 
completion assessments74 0 1,800 ha of 
mangrove forests  2,350 ha of 
mangrove forests  No change in incentives for further 
mangrove deforestation (tourism, 
agriculture, etc.) and no human-
induced changes in the Gambia 
river water flow (Sambangalou 
dam construction, filling and 
operation)  
 
72 FAO (SOFI, 2021 https://www.fao.org/3/cb4474en/cb4474en.pdf ) estimated that the “prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity in the total population” of The Gambia was 56.0% on national basis. In absence of a 
specific baseline value for the project target areas, an estimated baseline of 50% was taken into account – considering that coastal populations are relatively less food insecure than the rest of the country.  
73 Including project supported physical assets.  
74 The assessments combine ground thruthing with remote sensing information on mangroves forests status.


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 Effective monitoring by the 
Department of Forestry and by the 
Department of Parks and Wildlife 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  Supplementary 4.1: Hectares 
of terrestrial forest, terrestrial 
non-forest, fr eshwater and 
coastal marine areas brought 
under resoration and/or 
improved ecosystems  Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced mid-term and 
completion assessments75 0 
  1,800 ha of 
mangrove 
forests , 
disaggregated as:  
Reforestation of 
800 ha of 
degraded 
mangroves in the 
estuary and middle 
river areas  
Assisted natural 
regeneration of 
1,000 ha of 
degraded 
mangroves in the 
estuary and middle 
river areas  2,350 ha of 
mangrove 
forests , 
disaggregated as:  
Reforestation of 
1,100 ha of 
degraded 
mangroves in the 
estuary and middle 
river areas  
Assisted natural 
regeneration of 
1,250 ha of 
degraded 
mangroves in the 
estuary and middle 
river areas  Economic stability. No changes in 
incentives in increasing fishing, 
and fish availability on market is 
increased also thanks to project 
interventions on reduction of post -
harvest losses and aquaculture  
 
MRA4 Forestry and land 
use Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced mid-term and 
completion assessments76 0 tCO 2e sequestered 
or reduced -12,026 tCO2eq  -42,092 tCO2eq 
over the 6 years 
implementation of 
the project77  It is estimated that the project will 
contribute to sequester or reduce 
emissions of 238,519 tCO2eq over 
the 20- year lifetime of the 
investment (or about 11, 926 t 
CO2eq (on annual basis)  
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (basel ine) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this sectio n. 
 
75 The assessments combine ground thruthing with remote sensing information on mangroves forests status.  
76 GHG assessment is based on the Ex -ACT carbon accounting tools and described in Annex 24. The assessments combine ground thruthing with remote sensing information on mangroves forests status.  
77 When including the capitalization period, it is estimated that the project will contribute to sequester 238,519 tCO2eq over t he 20 -year lifetime of the investment (or about 11,926 t CO2eq (on annual basis)


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer and 
innovation  Artisanal small scale fisheries 
communities use inefficient 
technologies and infrastructure 
unadapted to the increasing 
temperatures (threatening post 
harvest losses) and increasing 
flooding (vulnerable landing 
sites), ultimately increasing 
their vulnerability to climate 
and socio- economic threats.  low Rural communities relying on 
artisanal small scale fisher ies 
livelihoods will access suitable 
and profitable technologies, 
equipment and infrastructure 
(climate -proofed equipment for 
fish smoking and drying, 
energy efficient technologies 
for fish handling and 
processing, flood- proofing 
measures, improved increase 
of fish feed production facility 
run by youth groups…) to 
strengthen resilience and 
improve options for access to 
markets.  Especially via interventions 
and investment in Outputs 1.2, 
2.1 and 2.2, the project will 
ensure dissemination, access 
(and strong capacities to 
utilize, manage and maintain) 
of adequate adaptive 
technologies and infrastructure 
for artisanal small scale 
fisheries and mangrove forest 
restoration and maintenance. 
In addition, the project will also 
disseminate equipment for 
georeferenced monitoring of 
natural resources under 
climate threats.  Multiple sub- national ar eas 
within a country  
Core Indicator 5: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to strengthening 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low emission 
climate -resilient development 
pathways in a country -driven 
manner The Gambian fisheries sector 
is dependent on multiple 
factors, which often are under 
the jurisdiction of different 
ministries and agencies. To 
date, no systematic 
coordination mechanisms exist 
to bring together fisheries, 
agriculture, forestry, 
environment,  trade and 
economy decision- makers and 
to introduce climate change 
considerations in planning and 
implementation of public policy 
and investments.  low The project will support the 
update and revision of at least 
two national policies/strategies 
to include climate risk analysis 
and mitigation and adaptation 
directions. In addition, 
fisheries, water resources and 
mangrove status information 
will be available through a 
publicly available portal of 
georeferenced information and 
data. Related institutional 
capacities to manage 
information and support 
evidence based decision 
making will be strengthened at 
all levels, from local 
communities to national 
institutions.  Via investments in knowledge 
generation and dissemination, 
evidence based dialogue and 
direct contributions to revisions 
of policies, strategies and 
regulatory framework deployed 
in Component 3, the project 
will enable line ministries , 
agencies and local 
communities to better analyse 
and include climate risks in 
national policy and decision 
making processes relevant for 
the fisheries and aquaculture 
sector . This will also provision 
of evidence to foster 
improvements in the financial 
regulatory system, potentially 
stimulating higher 
opportunities for rural 
communities to access to 
financial services.  National level (one country)


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformation at 
the sectoral, local, or national 
level While CFC and CFMC exist in 
some fisheries and mangrove 
forests sites, their capacities 
are limited and need 
systematic support to improve 
entrepreneurial activities and 
linkages to markets  medium  Rural communities, public 
actors and private sector will 
be able to anticipate and plan 
for climate change and will 
have stronger capa cities to 
adopt suitable and market -
driven adaptation options. As 
fruit of project  facilitation, 
knowledge management and 
public -private policy dialogue, 
smallholders artisanal 
fisherfoks will have increased 
access to markets and 
potentially also suitable 
financial services  Interventions in Output 3.2 will 
support market linkages and 
entrepreneurial activities for 
facilitating a post -project 
financial exit strategy. This will 
include among others the 
promotion of platforms and 
dialogues with private sector 
entrepreneurs (in tourism, and 
market distribution) to further 
expand the sector’s output as 
well as the value addition by 
organised artisanal 
processors . In addition, the 
project will collaborate with 
financial institutions to 
stimulate further investment  
(commercial and potentially 
concessional loans) in the 
fisheries sub- sector.  Multiple sub- national areas 
within a country  
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and use of 
good practices, methodologies 
and standards  The fisheries sub -sector 
especially for small scale 
fisherfolks communities is 
caracterised by limited 
knowledge about technologies 
proven successful. There are 
mixed past experience with 
improved fisheries and 
aquaculture technologies that 
represent a potential. The 
financial system is unadapted 
to serve the agriculture sector, 
providing unaffordable 
conditions for smallholders 
(high interests, short duration) 
and general lack of interest for 
complex and not  standard 
investment such as required 
for agriculture and fisheries.  medium  Rural vulnerable communities 
will be able to manage, 
operate and maintain 
productive infrastructure and 
equipment accessed via 
project -supported 
concessional technology 
transfer s. Moreover, private 
sector and financial institut ions 
will be able to appreciate the 
profitability of the fisheries 
operations as investment and 
potentially collaborations 
between small -scale fisheries 
groups and entrepreneurs in 
subsequent segments of value 
chains will be established.  Under outputs 2.1 and 2.2., the 
project will support fisherfolk, 
farmers and project 
beneficiaries with dedicated 
training, capacity development 
and knowledge transfer to 
ensure strengthening their 
capacities in relation to 
technology transfers and 
adaptation to climate change 
(in Output 2.1 and Output 
2.2).on a broader national 
scale, the project will conduct 
know ledge generation and 
mana gement and public -
private policy dialogue (in 
output 3.1 and 3.2)  National level (one country)


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set project/programme specific indicators. If any c o-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co -benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co -benefit indicators ” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this se ction should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).
 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Component 1 Outcome . 
Fisheries habitats (mangrove 
ecosystems) are sustainably 
restored and managed by the 
local communities  Continuous Change 
Detection and Classification 
(CCDC) using FAO’s 
publicly accessible SEPAL 
platform in all 10 degraded 
mangrove ecosystem 
intervention areas  Project initial, mid-term and final 
NDVI assessment  
Source: earthmap  / satellite 
imageries  tbd (at initial survey in 
PY1)  +10%  +15%  Full participation from the local 
communities  
Availability of seeds and planting 
material  
Absence of any natural hazards 
in the targeted areas  
Component 1 Outcome   
Increased  CO2e 
sequestration through 
improved management of 
mangrove forests  N/A78 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
Output 1.1 . Mangrove 
ecosystems sustainably 
restored in fisheries priority 
areas  Ha of degraded mangrove 
areas in key fisheries 
hotspots reforested  
Community reporting, yearly 
progress reports, mid- term and 
final evaluations, remote 
sensing  0 ha 800 ha 1,100 ha As for the Outcome indicator 
(Core 4 and supplementary 4.1): 
No change in incentives for 
further mangrove deforestation 
(tourism, agriculture, etc.) and no 
human- induced changes in the 
Gambia river water flow 
(Sambangalou dam construction, 
filling and operation)  
Effective monitoring by the 
Department of Forestry and by Ha of mangrove forests in 
key fisheries hotspots 
under Assisted natural 
regeneration (ANR)  0 ha 1,000 ha 1,250 ha 
 
78 This outcome is measured by the core indicato r 1 “GHG emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered” reported to in Section E.3, above.


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
 the Department of Parks and 
Wildlife  
Output 1.2 . Local  
communities equipped to 
sustainably manage 
mangrove ecosystems as 
fisheries habitat  Number of community 
forest management 
committees (CFMC) 
established  Project monitoring, community 
reporting 0  At least 7 the 
intervention sites  In at least 10 
intervention sites  Availability of local communities  
Institutional stability to ensure 
tenure transfer  Number of communities 
assuming tenure over the 
restored forest plots  0 At least 7 
communities  At least 10 
communities  
Component 1 Outcome   
Increased CO2e 
sequestration through 
improved management of 
mangrove forests  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered Yearly progress reports and 
final evaluation  
Georeferenced mid-term and 
completion assessments79 0 tCO 2e sequestered 
or reduced -12,026 tCO2eq  -42,092 tCO2eq 
over the 6 years 
implementation of 
the project80  It is estimated that the project will 
contribute to sequester or reduce 
emissions of 238,519 tCO2eq 
over the 20- year lifetime of the 
investment (or about 11, 926 t 
CO2eq (on annual basis)  
Component 2 Outcome . 
Fisherfolks livelihood s 
become climate resilient by 
increased fish availability and 
additional income generation Increased fisher folks’ 
income from fishing and 
fish processing  Yearly CFCs reports, baseline, 
mid-term and final evaluations  200 USD/ month per 
crew member 
100 USD/month per 
women fish 
processor81 220 USD/month for 
crew members (+ 
10%)  
110 USD/month for 
women processors 
(+10%) 260 USD/month for 
crew members (+ 
30%)  
130 USD/month for 
women processors 
(+30%) Full adoption of new technologies  
Effective operation and 
maintenance  
No external shocks (natural 
disasters, political or economic 
crises) with impacts on the 
targeted beneficiaries and sites  
 Post-landing fish losses at 
the project intervention 
sites (percentage) Yearly CFCs reports, baseline, 
mid-term and final evaluations  25% 20% 15% Full adoption of new technologies  
Effective operation and 
maintenance  
Additional yearly fish 
production from project 
supported aquaculture 
activities (tonne)  Beneficiaries records, yearly 
progress reports, mid- term and 
final evaluations  0 tonnes  450 tonnes  750 tonnes  Continuous availability of inputs  
Effective operation and 
maintenance  
Output 2.1 . Fisheries 
communities are equipped  
with climate -proofed and 
improved  critical small scale Number of fisheries 
communities with climate Project monitoring, community 
reporting 0 (4) Climate -proofed 
equipment for fish 
smoking and 
drying at Brufut , (4) Climate -proofed 
equipment for fish 
smoking and 
drying at Brufut , Availability of local communities  
Continuous availability of material  
 
79 GHG assessment is based on the Ex -ACT carbon accounting tools and described in Annex 24. The assessments combine ground thruthing with remote sensing information on mangroves forests status.  
80 When including the capitalization period, it is estimated that the project will contribute to sequester 238,519 tCO2eq over t he 20 -year lifetime of the investment (or about 11,926 t CO2eq (on annual basis)  
81 Baseline to be cross chjecked at project inception. Estimates provided based on expert referrals and field visits in potential project interventions sites.


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
 fisheries infrastructure 
(artisanal fish landing sites) 
and with climate- smart fish 
processing equipment (solar 
dryers and improved ovens)  proofed landing sites under 
full operation  Tanji , Gunjur  and 
Sanyang  landing 
sites  
(1)  Flood- proofing 
measures and 
climate proofed 
equipment 
introduced at 
Kartong landing 
site 
(1) flood- proofing 
measures 
developed at 
Bintang landing 
site 
(1) climate -proofed 
Banjul  landing site 
to accommodate 
loss of capacity at 
other climate 
impacted sites  Tanji , Gunjur   and 
Sanyang  landing 
sites  
(1) Flood- proofing 
measures and 
climate proofed 
equipment 
introduced at 
Kartong landing 
site 
(1) flood- proofing 
measures 
developed at 
Bintang landing 
site 
(1) climate -proofed 
Banjul  landing site 
to accommodate 
loss of capacity at 
other climate 
impacted sites  
Number of fisheries 
communities operating 
around targeted mangrove 
areas82 receiving efficient 
technology packaging for 
fish handling and 
processing  Project monitoring, community 
reporting 0 At least 7 
communities  At least 10 
communities  
Output 2.2 . Aquaculture 
activities introduced as 
adaptation measures for 
livelihood improvement  of 
2,800 smallholder  rural 
households  Number of aquaculture 
packages (AP) fully 
adopted and applied by 
beneficiaries  Yearly progress reports, 
outcome surveys   Total number of  
aquaculture 
packages: 230 
AP1:  Integrated 
rice-fish production 
on 150 hectares  
AP2: Integration of 
fish culture in tanks Total number of 
aquaculture 
packages: 430 
AP1:  Integrated 
rice-fish production 
on 300 hectares  
AP2: Integration of 
fish culture in tanks No external shocks (natural 
disasters, political or economic 
crises) with impacts on the 
targeted beneficiaries and sites  
Timely availability of inputs and 
no delays in procurement  
Public sector suppor t provided in 
a timely manner  
 
82 For targeted mangrove areas, refer to Component 1.


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
  
  
 in 20 vegetable 
gardens  
AP3: Fish culture 
in 30 ponds  
AP4: 30 groups 
engaged in 
sustainable oyster 
and clam culture  in 30 vegetable 
gardens  
AP3: Fish culture 
in 60 ponds  
AP4: 40 groups 
engaged in 
sustainable oyster 
and clam culture  Effective training and supervision  
Component 3 Outcome . 
Local communities, public and 
private actors  in the fisheries 
sector  anticipate and plan for 
climate change adopting 
suitable and market driven 
adaptation measures  Number and level of 
effective coordination 
mechanisms  6-month reports of the TAC, 
project progress reports, final 
evaluation  No mechanism  Twice yearly 
meetings of the 
Fisheries Technical 
Advisory 
Committee (TAC) 
in Response to 
Climate Change, 
with at least 50% 
of the agenda 
dedicated to 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development (not 
project related)  Twice yearly 
meetings of the 
Fisheries Technical 
Advisory 
Committee (TAC) 
in Response to 
Climate Change, 
with at least 90% 
of the agenda 
dedicated t o 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development (not 
project related)  Full commitment from the 
Government of the Gambia and 
provision of in- kind co -financing  
Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability  E-extension/e- outreach 
quarterly and annual reports  
Capacity Development outcome 
assessments83  0 45% of fisher folk 
using on- demand 
the e- extension/e-
outreach system  
(45% in coastal 
areas and 45% 
inland) 85% of fisher folk 
using on- demand 
the e- extension/e-
outreach system  
(90% in coastal 
areas and 75% 
inland) The system will be developed to 
provide information through text 
messaging, on- demand.  
Effective use will be proxied 
through the demand from fisher 
folk. 
Target percentages relative to 
the latest (2016) Frame Survey 
for the fisheries sector  
Targets will be updated based on 
survey data during 
implementation  
 
83 The outcome assessment of capacity development interventions in the project will be carried out in two phases: a. an ex -ante knowledge test (representing the baseline knowledge level for the beneficiaries); b. an 
immediately ex -post knowledge test (to measure immediate knowledge gains); and c. a ex -post survey  on the use of knowledge gained (conducted four to six months after the training) to measure the outcome or behavioural 
change (source: FAO capacity development learning modules https://www.fao.org/3/i2532e/i2532e.pdf ).


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
  
  
 Output 3.1 .  Public services 
supported to analyze, 
anticipate and respond to 
climate risks  Number of fisher folk and 
value chain actors 
strengthened (assuming at 
least 80% success rate on 
total participants) in climate 
adaptation measures  Training records, yearly 
progress reports  
 
Before/after capacity 
assessment  0 800 (out of 1,000)  1,600 (out of 
2,000) Captured under Result 3, but 
incorporating all the direct 
trainees throughout the project 
interventions  
Continuous interest and 
participation in project trainings  
Number of public sector 
staff (at central and field 
level) whose capacity is 
strengthened to support 
climate adaptation in the 
fisheries sector (assuming 
at least 80% success rate 
on total participants)  Training records, yearly 
progress reports, learning 
outcome surveys84 
 
Before/after capacity 
assessment  0 80 (out of 90) 110 (out of 137) Proper staffing in the line 
ministries  
Limited staff turnover  
Active and continuous 
participation of trainees  
Established and 
operationalized e-
extension/outreach system 
for fisheries and 
aquaculture  Government report, Project 
monitoring, record of e-
extension  No e -extension 
system is available   1 extension system 
fully functioning 1 extension system 
fully functioning Proper staffing in the line 
ministries  
Limited staff turnover  
Active and continuous 
participation of trainees  
Output 3.2 .  Local 
communities, producers 
groups and HHs  capacities 
developed to support the 
implementation of adaptation 
measures  Number of technical 
officers strengthened on 
georeferenced monitoring 
NR and investment  Training records, yearly 
progress reports, learning 
outcome surveys85 0 60 technical 
officers trained and 
equipped 80 technical 
officers trained and 
equipped Proper staffing in the line 
ministries  
Limited staff turnover  
Active and continuous 
participation of trainees  
Number of business to 
business  platforms 
established  Project reports  0 3 Invest in 
Fisheries 
roundtables  
100 artisanal fish 
processors trained  5 Invest in 
Fisheries 
roundtables  
100 artisanal fish 
processors trained  Active and continuous 
engagement of private sector 
actors.  
 
84 Reference to capacity development outcome surveys mentioned above.  
85 Reference to capacity development outcome surveys mentioned above.


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
  
  
 Number of women whose 
capacity of the functional 
literacy and numeracy 
have been strengthened  Training records, yearly 
progress reports, learning 
outcome surveys86 0 800 1,500 women  Active and continuous 
participation of trainees  
Project/programme co -bene fit indicators  
Co-benefit 1 :  Public health is 
improved around the fish 
landing sites from the reduced 
pollution from the improved 
ovens  Percentage of lung disease 
deaths out of total deaths  WHO Lung Diseases Deaths  1.56%  1.2%  1.0%  WHO updates the data at least 
every three years  
Co-benefit 2 : Intra-
households and societal 
gender based discriminations 
are reduced  Percentage of women who 
first marry or enter marital 
union before age 15 in rural 
areas87 National Statistics (Multiple -
Indicator Cluster Survey) 12.9%  12% 10% Multiple -Indicator Cluster Survey 
is conducted at least every three 
years  
The targeted groups are willing to 
participate in gender 
empowerment activities.  
Co-benefit 3:  Smallholders 
have increased access to 
markets  Percentage of increased 
volume of domestic 
artisanal fisheries products 
on the total volume of 
fisheries products in the 
market  National statistics  0 +3 +10%  Domestic market develops along 
with financial sec tor, transport 
infrastru cture is maintained  
Increased market linkages are 
supported by increased credit 
worthiness of the fisherfolks   
The trainers/facilitators are skilled 
in stimulating interests and 
guiding the beneficiaries over 
time.  
WHO  updates the data at least 
every three years  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5  implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of  activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity.  
 
86 Reference to capacity development outcome surveys mentioned above.  
87 Under the assumption that the Household Methodology provided by the project in output 3.2 has the potential to reduce intra household and social gender basd discrimination and therefore supports a process of 
emancipation of young women including in discouraging early marriage.


---
*Page 88*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
  
  
 Activities  Description  Sub-activities88 Deliverables  
Component 1. Strengthening restoration capacity and community management of artisanal fisheries habitats  
Output 1.1 Mangrove ecosystems sustainably restored in fisheries priority areas  
Activity 1.1.1 Reforestation of  1,100 ha of 
degraded mangrove areas in key fisheries 
hotspots  Replanting in degraded areas identified as critical to fisheries and at risk due to increased 
climate change pressures (salinity, sea level rise, etc.)  
 
Community -led replanting approach 
(stake holders will be mobilized for mangrove 
nursery establishment, planting and monitoring 
of reforested plots)
 1.1.1.1 Select planting sites within targeted 
mangrove areas  
1.1.1.2 Supporting the sensitization and training 
of communities surrounding the mangrove 
reforestation  sites on mangrove conservation and sustainable utilization of resources (co -
funded and executed by FAO ) 
1.1.1.3 Mobilise local communities (identify and 
train planting teams) and determine planting plan 
1.1.1.4 Equip participating communities with 
restoration toolkits in each reforestation area  
1.1.1.4 Equip participating communities in each 
planting area with mangrove reforestation 
toolkits  
1.1.1.5 Community -led planting campaigns  
1.1.1.6 Seedling survival monitoring and 
replacing of dead plants as needed 10 degraded mangrove areas restored through a mix of reforestation and assisted natural 
regeneration, for a total of 2,250 ha
 
Activity 1. 1.2 Support assisted natural 
regeneration (ANR) on 1,250 ha of moderately degraded mangroves in key fisheries hotspots
 Enrichment planting and protective measures to accelerate natural regeneration of degraded 
mangroves identified as critical to fisheries and 
at risk due to increased climate change pressures  
 
Same community -led approach
 1.1.2.1 Identify ANR sites and site -specific ANR 
measures within targeted mangrove areas  
1.1.2.2 Support the sensitization and training of 
communities surrounding the mangrove ANR 
sites on mangrove conservation and sustainable utilization of resources  (co-funded 
and executed by FAO ) 
1.1.2.3  Mobilise local communities (identify, train and equip work teams) and determine ANR work plan  FAO 
1.1.2.4 Equip participating comm unities with 
restoration toolkits in each ANR area 
1.1.2.5 Community -led Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) campaigns  
1.1.2.6 Monitor, evaluate and replace dead 
plants  
 
88 Except where explicitly indicated, all sub- activities are executed by FAO. Annex 4 provides a detailed budget allocation and indication of financier for each sub-activity.


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
  
  
 1.1.2.7 Joint planning and execution of 
mangrove restoration ( co-funded and 
executed by the Government of the Gambia 
acting through MoA ). 
Output 1.2 Local communities equipped for sustainable ecosystem management  
1.2.1 Capacity development for local 
communities  Awareness raising and social organisation for 
sustainable ecosystem management of the 
restored mangrove areas  1.2.1.1 Provide trainings on mangrove 
monitoring, conservation and sustainable 
resource use  
1.2.1.2 Establish  community forest 
management committees (CFMCs) at each 
intervention site  CFMCs established at each intervention site  
1.2.2 Support the establishment of community 
forest status (where applicable) for the 
interventions sites and the transfer of tenure to 
the local communities  Incentivising local communities to participate in 
restoration activities and subsequent 
sustainable management by establishing the 
community forest status and transferring 
ownership to the respective communities  1.2.2.1 Review forest situation, determine 
boundaries and establish community forest 
status  
1.2.2.2 Prepare and enact forest tenure 
agreements  
1.2.2.3 Conduct awareness raising workshops 
for communities on rights and obligations  Transfer of tenure for 10 community forests  
1.2.3 Provide t echnical support to the execution 
of the mangrove restoration activities and 
ensuring environmental and social safeguards   Supporting communities and stakeholders 
involved in implementation by mobilizing 
expertise dedicated to transfer of capacity on 
Natural resources management and related 
fisheries activities,  and to ensure respect of 
social and environmental safeguards  1.2.3.1 Supervision and extension for fisheries 
and related NRM activities ( co-funded and 
executed by the Governm ent of the Gambia 
acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
1.2.3.2 Provision of capacity development to 
local communities on NRM / Mangrove forestry   
1.2.3.3 Supervise and ensure the correct 
application of environment and social 
safeguards (ESS)  Communities in 10 degraded mangrove areas 
receiving support and technical expertise  
Component 2. Climate resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture development  
Output 2.1 Fisheries communities are equipped with climate -proofed and improved critical small scale fisheries infrastructure (artisanal fish landing sites) and with climate -smart fish 
processing equipment (solar dryers and improved ovens)  
2.1.1 Environmental and So cial Impact 
Assessment (ESIA ), detailed design and 
supervision for all sites  Conduct ESIA, detailed design and supervision 
for all sites , and provide capacity development 
to local communities on fisheries  2.1.1.1 Conduct Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for construction 
works at all fish landing sites  
2.1.1.2 Detailed design of all construction works  
2.1.1.3 Supervision of construction works  
2.1.1.4 Provision of capacity development on 
environmental and social safeguards for 
artisanal fisherfolk, including on their role in ESIA conducted in identified sites  
At least 7 fishing communities received capacity development on fisheries related activities


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
  
  
 implementing the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)  
2.1.2 Expand the Banjul  landing site to 
accommodate loss of capacity at other climate 
impacted sites (Package 1)  Develop additional fish landing and handling 
capacity by introducing four additional pontoons 
for artisanal fisheries canoes and necessary 
shore facilities  
 
(In particular, in response to the lack of possible 
adaptive measures at the nearby Bakau landing 
site, impacted by climate change)  
 
Capacity development for the CFC 
(organisational, O&M and marketing) provided 
in activity 2.1.6  2.1.2.1 Mobilisation and dredging  
2.1.2.2 Piling works  
2.1.2.3 Installation of 4 new pontoons for fish 
landing 
2.1.2.4 Installation of shore facilities for fish 
handling Operational, expanded landing coastal site  
2.1.3 Introduce climate- proofed equipment for 
fish smoking and drying at the Brufut , Tanji , 
Gunjur  and Sanyang  landing sites (Package 2)  Replace climate exposed fish smoking and 
drying facilities and equipment wi th improved, 
climate -resilient technologies (FTT ovens and 
CEAS solar driers)  
 
Improve water access for fish handling 
operations  
 
Capacity development for the CFC 
(organisational, O&M and marketing) provided 
in activity 2.1.6  2.1.3.1 Installation of improv ed fish smoking 
units  
2.1.3.2  Installation of improved solar fish driers  
2.1.3.3 Installation of solar -powered sea water 
fish rinsing lines  Three operational, climate- proofed coastal 
landing sites  
2.1.4 Develop flood- proofing measures and 
introduce climate- proofed equipment for fish 
smoking and drying at the Kartong  landing site 
(Package 3)  Develop additional fish landing and handling 
capacity to respond to over -crowding at other 
nearby landing site s (due to beach erosion)  
 
Raise the fish landing site and install new 
floating pontoons  
 
Replace climate exposed fish smoking and 
drying facilities and equipment with improved, 
climate -resilient technologies (FTT ovens and 
CEAS solar driers)  
 
Improve water  access for fish handling 
operations  2.1.4.1 Platform level raising works  
2.1.4.2 Piling works and installation of floating 
pontoons  
2.1.4.3 Installation of im proved solar fish driers  
2.1.4.4  Installation of improved fish smoking units  
2.1.4.5  Installation of solar -powered sea water 
fish rinsing lines   One operational, climate- proofed coastal landing 
site


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
  
Capacity development for the CFC 
(organisational, O&M and marketing) provided 
in activity 2.1.6  
2.1.5 Develop flood- proofing measures at the 
Bintang landing site (Package 4 ) Installation of new floating pontoons and 
improved road access to the landing site  
 
Capacity development for the CFC 
(organisational, O&M and marketing) provided 
in activity 2.1. 6 2.1.5.1 Road level raising works  
2.1.5.2 Piling works and installation of floating 
pontoons  One operational, climate- proofed river landing 
site 
2.1.6 Capacity development for the Community 
Fisheries Centers ( CFCs ) provision of organizational, operation and 
maintenance, marketing capacity for CFCs  2.1.6.1 Trainings on equipment and technologies 
use, on organisational arrangements for 
equitable use and for user fee collection, on 
maintenance and repairs  
2.1.6.2 Prov ision of capacity development for 
post harvest equipment management and 
maintenance ( co-funded and executed by 
FAO ) 
2.1.6. 3 Capacity development for the CFCs - 
organisational, O&M and marketing including 
negotiation skills ( co-funded and executed by 
the Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoFWRNAM ) At least 7 CFCs received capacity development  
2.1.7 Introduce energy efficient technologies for 
fish handling and processing in 10 mangrove 
management communities89 Introduction of small solar powered equipment 
and improved fish smoking ovens (FTT ovens) 
to reduce the use of firewood and to improve 
fish processing operations   2.1.7.1 Identify site specific priority needs of the 
mangrove communities to reduce firewood use 
and fish losses  
2.1.7.2 Provide and install the necessary 
equipment  
2.1.7.3 Install additional equipment ( co-funded 
and executed by FAO ) 
2.1.7.4 Capacity development for the artisanal 
fisherfolk in the mangrove communities 
(technical, O&M, and organizational including 
negotiation skills ) Energy efficient technology packages in 10 
communities  
Output 2.2 Aquaculture activities introduced as adaptation measures for livelihood improvement of 2,800 smallholder rural households  
2.2.1 Expansion of  the Jahally Aquaculture 
Center  Improve the capacity of the Center to produce and deliver increased numbers of catfish and 
tilapia fingerlings to meet the demand 2.2.1.1 Upscale the fingerling production 
capacity (additional ponds, scale- up inputs –  
feed, hormones)  Operational Aquaculture Centre capable of 
progressively meeting fingerling, and training 
demand  
 
89 These communuities  comprise beneficiaries of mangrove restoration activities financed under component 1.


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
  
  
 generated by project investments and to serve 
as an aquaculture training center  2.2.1.2 Develop a training centre and a 
demonstration pond  
2.2.2 Promote the increase of fish feed 
production through four manufacturing units  Scale- up fish feed production to meet 
increasing demand by fully operationalising the 
two existing units and supporting the 
development of two additional units. All to be 
provided with extrusion equipment  2.2.2.1 Provide additional inputs for the full 
operationalisation of existing units  
2.2.2.2 Finance the creation of two additional, 
youth- led units  
2.2.2.3 Provide training and quality control for 
fish feed production, including business aspects  Four activ e fish feed units capable of 
progressively meeting feed demand  
2.2.3 Integrate catfish production in fish tanks in 30 communal vegetable gardens ( aquaculture 
package 1)
 Promote integrated aquaculture- agriculture 
activities and generate additional fish production by introducing catfish production in fish tanks in 
15 existing and 15 new communal vegetable gardens
 2.2.3.1 Construction and infrastructure works  
(co-funded and executed by  the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoA ) 
2.2.3.2.  Provide fish tanks, smoking ovens, 
shelters and start -up aquaculture kits (tools and 
inputs)  
2.2.3.3 Provide training and supervision for fish 
production and smoking, and use of water with fish excrements as fertilizer in horticulture and 
negotiation skill s 30 producer groups equipped and trained for fish  
production in tanks, integrated with vegetable 
production
 
2.2.4 Introduce integrated rice- fish culture in 
300 ha of new irrigated schemes ( aquaculture 
package 2)  Promote integrated aquaculture- agriculture 
activities and generate additional fish production 
by developing fish culture in 300 ha of new 
irrigated rice production schemes in the 
proximity of the Jahally Aquaculture Center  2.2.4.1 Contribute to the works o f developing 
new irrigated schemes (top- up for additional cost 
of works) ( co-funded and executed by  the 
Government of the Gambia acting through 
MoA  ) 
2.2.4.2 Provide technical assistance for 
developing the adjusted design and technical 
specifications for the integration of fish cultivation 
in the irrigated rice schemes  
2.2.4.3 Provide start -up kits (tools and inputs)  
2.2.4.4 Provide technical training and 
supervision for the beneficiaries of integrated 
rice-fish production and negotiatio n skills  Adjusted technical specifications for rice- fish 
irrigated schemes  
 
600 rice producers  (300 ha of rice- fish culture)  
equipped and trained to produce fish in their 
irrigated fields, reducing the use of chemicals 
(fertilizers and pesticides)  
2.2.5 F und the development of fish culture in 60 
earthen ponds ( aquaculture package 3)  Increase the fish production in the interior of the 
Gambia in order to improve fish availability by 
investing in the rehabilitation of 10 existing 
ponds and in the creation of 50 new ponds (400 
sqm each)  
 
Ponds will be organised in clusters of 5 ponds 
each for joint water access and economies of scale in production and marketing  2.2.5.1 Improve water access and provide lining 
for 10 existing ponds and execute the works and 
provide equipment for 50 new ponds  
2.2.5.2  Provide start -up kits  to the beneficiaries  
(tools and inputs)  
2.2.5.3 Provide technical training and 
supervision for fish pond production and 
negotiation skills to the beneficiaries  60 producers equipped and trained in pond 
production


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
  
  
 2.2.6 Promote sustainable clam and oyster 
culture in 40 communities ( aquaculture 
package 4)  Improve the management of fisheries resources 
and protection of mangroves by promoting oyster 
culture on artificial substrate and clam and 
cockle culture on mudflats  
 
This package will also be introduced in all the 
mangrove restoration communities.  2.2.6.1 Train 30 women’s groups in clam and 
cockle culture on mudflats and train 10 women’s groups in oyster culture and negotiation skills  
2.2.6.2 Provide necessary inputs for clam rearing 
on mudflats (cultivation beds) ,canoes , necessary 
materials and motorized canoes  40 women groups equipped and trained in 
sustainable clam and oyster culture 
2.2.7 Provide technical support to the execution 
of the aquaculture activities and ensuring 
environmental and social safeguards  Supporting fisherfolks and stakeholders involved 
in implementation of aquaculture activities by 
providing capacity development via dedicated 
relevant experts, and to ensure respect of social 
and environmental safeguards  2.2.7.1 MoFWRNAM’s  provision of supervision 
and extension expertise for aquaculture activities (co-funded and executed by  the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
2.2.7.2 Provision of technical assistance and 
guidance of aquaculture activities by a dedicated Specialist for the full implementation period of 
the project  
2.2.7.3 Supervise environmental and social 
safeguards and monitor implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management 
Framework  ESS system functioning  
Component 3 Improved climate change adaptive capacities  
Output 3.1 Public services strengthened to facilitate local community capacity to prepare for and respond to climate change r isks  
3.1.1 Strengthen the sectoral institutions and 
policies and develop additional capacity to 
respond to climate risks  Enable the line ministries and agencies to better 
analyse and include climate risks in national 
policy and decision making  processes relevant 
for the fisheries and aquaculture sector  
 
Increase the technical capacity of line ministries’ 
staff 3.1.1.1 Short -term specialised trainings on 
climate risks, climate analysis and 
mainstreaming climate change in national 
policies and st rategies  
3.1.1.2 Develop of updated curricula on fisheries, 
aquaculture and ecosystem management, 
integrating climate change, in partnership with 
local education institutions  
3.1.1.3 Design climate change content for 
Diploma/Advanced Diploma training for f isheries 
technicians  
3.1.1.4 Support for climate related sectoral 
studies and subsequent revision of national 
policies and strategies  
3.1.1.5 Organize institutional collaborations and facilitate interaction and decision making through 
policy and knowledge sharing opportunities  50 technical staff trained 
 
5 technical staff obtaining specialised 
Diplomas/Advanced Diplomas from partner local 
education institutions  
 
2 national policies/strategies revised to include 
climate risk analysis and mitigation and 
adaptation directions


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
  
  
 3.1.2 Improve public sector capacities to 
monitor the fisheries sector and its associated 
ecosystems and integrate climate risks  Increasing the ability of the line ministries and 
agencies to generate on a constant basis the 
data and information required for climate 
sensitive decision making  3.1.2.1 Organise a Frame Survey with a strong 
climate vulnerability assessment component 
(co-funded and executed by the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
3.1.2.2 Support the expansion of monitoring 
capacities for Gambia river water parameters  
3.1.2.3 Strengthen major coastal CFCs 
capacities to monitor and report fishing efforts 
and catches ( co-funded and executed by the 
Government of the Gambia acting through 
MoFWRNAM ) 
3.1.2.4  Establish regular monitoring mechanism 
for mangrove forest cover and train relevant 
government staff  
3.1.2.5 Organize trainings and on the job learning opportunities for national institutions on 
georeferenced monitoring  Up-to-date fisheries, water resourc es and 
mangrove status information available through a 
publicly available portal of georeferenced 
information and data  
3.1.3 Establish an e- extension /out-reach 
system for fisheries and aquaculture Introduction of an e -extension/out -reach system, 
capable of communicating low cost (text 
messaging) at scale (reaching at least 90% of 
coastal fisher folk and 75% of inland fisher folk)  
 
Adapted messaging on weather, storms, tides, 
fishing seasonality, and market/price information  3.1.3.1 Prepare the feasibility study and 
technical parameters for the system  
3.1.3.2 Set -up and test the system  
3.1.3.3 Registration of fisher folk and other VC actors  
3.1.3.4 National roll -out 
3.1.3.5 Continuous operation and ref inement of 
e-extension system (co-funded and executed 
by the Government of the Gambia acting 
through MoFWRNAM ) Operational e- extension system  
Output 3.2  Local communities, groups and HHs capacities to implement market driven adaptation measures are strengthened  
3.2.1 Capacity development for field fisheries and forestry officers to support fisheries, 
aquaculture and mangrove investment  Develop the capacities of field officers to provide implementation support to the project activities 
and to accompany other private and public 
initiatives in the future  3.2.1.1 Trainings on aquaculture production 
(facilities and logistics) ( co-funded and 
executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
3.2.1.2 Provision of expertise for trainings on 
fisheries and aquaculture  
3.2.1.3 Trainings on mangrove monitoring, 
restoration and sustainable management  
3.2.1.4 Provision of technical equipment for effective georeferenced monitoring of 
implementation  80 technical officers trained and equipped


---
*Page 95*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
  
  
 3.2.2 Support to private investment, value 
addition and integration with other sectors  Promote more private investment in fisheries and aquaculture to further expand the sector’s output 
as well as the value addition by organised 
artisanal processors  
 
Support the linkages and commercial 
partnerships between the fisheries and tourism 
sectors  3.2.2.1 Organise yearly Invest in Fisheries 
roundtables with priv ate and public participation 
(co-funded and executed by the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM ) 
3.2.2.2 Support the organisation of fisheries 
actors into cooperatives/producer organisations 
(co-funded and executed by the Government 
of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM  ) 
3.2.2.3 Train artisanal fish processors on quality 
standards, marketing, export rules, etc. ( co-
funded and executed by the Government of 
the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM  ) 
3.2.2.4 Promote partnership s between fisheries 
actors and the tourism sector  
3.2.3.5 Organize platforms for discussion 
between artisanal fisherfolk  and private 
entrepreneurs (processors, markets, ...)  
including development of productive alliances  
3.2.2.6 Providing training (techni cal and 
entrepreneurial) to youth groups in production of 
fish feed  
3.2.2.7 Facilitating evidence- based dialogue and 
sensitization on financial inclusion (including 
RuralInvest or other tools to enhance capacity of 
financial institutions)  
3.2.2.8 Providing capacity development to 
artisanal fisheries actors on development of 
entrepreneurial and business opportunities 
within the value chain including negotiation skills  
3.2.2.9 Supervise and ensure environment and social safeguards  5 Invest in Fisheries roundtables  
 
100 artisanal fish processors trained  
At least 10 productive alliances  
 
 
3.2.3 Support to gender and youth 
empowerment through the application of the 
Household Methodology  Introduction and use of the Household 
Methodology approach to adaptation packages 
beneficiaries in order to promote more gender 
equality within the household and subsequently 
improve adoption of the project’s technologies 
and practices  3.2.3.1 Household Methodology Training of 
trainers  
3.2.3.2 Household Methodology large scale 
training ( co-funded and executed by FAO ) 
3.2.3.3 Facilitation of Household Methodology 
meetings with the project beneficiaries, 
sensitization of community gatekeepers prior to 
Household Methodology facilitated meetings on 
gender and community -led support measures 
against SEAH and GBV   3-year gender and youth empowerment 
process for 600 households


---
*Page 96*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
  
  
 3.2.4 Implement a functional literacy and 
numeracy programme targeted to project 
female beneficiaries  Reduce the literacy and numeracy barriers that 
hinder adoption of new practices and 
technologies, and entry into the formal market, 
by promoting an adult learning programme 
targeting the women beneficiaries 3.2.4.1 Identification of participants and definition 
of approach (including TRY women groups)  
3.2.4.2 Training of trainers (younger, literate 
women in the community) 
3.2.4.3 Functional literacy and numeracy classes  1,500 women completing the programme  
3.2.5: Train executing- agency personnel on 
gender in general , SEAH, and establish and 
operationalize referral pathways for GBV  Develop capacities of 100 executing- agency 
professionals and train 100 referral -pathway 
professionals  3.2.5.1 Training of professionals from executing 
agencies, including strengthening of FAO GRM 
in handling SEAH and GBV incidents  
3.2.5.2 Training of professionals along referral pathways   
3.2.5.2 Training of professionals along referral pathways  
3.2.5.3 Establishment and operationalization of referral pathways  
3.2.5.4 Communication of GBV and referral 
pathways to public  60 persons at executing agencies trained 
20 professionals along each GBV referral 
pathway trained 
1 GBV pathway each established and 
operationalized for each target district  
    
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
163. In its role as Accredited Entity, FAO will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project in accordance with the agreement  signed between FAO 
and the GCF and as detailed in the implementation arrangements.  FAO will be responsible for the establishment of the M&E unit, which will comprise of a dedicated 
M&E specialist in the PMIU, supported by the FAO Office of Evaluation (OED) in headquarters.  
164. Throughout the reporting period, the project -level monitoring and evaluation will be performed by FAO Gambia in compliance with FAO policies. The PMIU 
under FAO Gambia will implement tools and methods  to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of the project. In particular, the PMIU M&E Specialist will develop a 
database to track project progress, building on the logical framework, and will work in close consultation with the lead tech nical specialists fo r each component. The 
M&E system  will aggregate reports from the various activities and stakeholders and consolidate the information and report for each indicator. The M&E specialist 
will be also responsible for the periodic reporting to the PMIU, the PSC and the TAC, as well as to FAO headquarters and the GCF.  
165. The project will include a baseline study, a mid- term evaluation and final evaluation,  the last two executed through the FAO Office of Evaluation using short -
term consultants with experience in these types of assignments.  
166. The FAO Office of the Inspector General  (OIG) provides oversight of the programmes and operations of the Accredited Entity (FAO), through internal audit 
and investigation. The Office has two Audit Units (Corporate Audit Unit and Field Audit Unit) and an Investigative Unit. They conduct their work in accordance with 
the Code of Ethics and International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing published by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA). Auditors follow


---
*Page 97*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
  
  
 a scheduled biennial audit plan, determined according to accepted methods of risk assessment, combined with cumulative instituti onal knowledge and analysis of 
policy directions from the Governing Bodies, and they also respond to audit needs identified during the course of scheduled audits.  
167. Internal Audit activities are coordinated, as appropriate, with the work of the External Auditor, the Office of Evaluation (OED) and the Investigations Group 
of the Office of the Inspector  General, to ensure that activities are complementary without wasteful overlaps. Upon completion of audits, the Office of the Inspector 
General proposes actions to management to improve efficiency and effectiveness, and enhance internal controls.  
168. With regards to procurement, interim payments  to procured parties may be authorized by the FAO Responsible Officer following verification that the 
corresponding milestone described in the payment schedule has been achieved with the required deliverables received or completed to an acceptable quality 
standard.


---
*Page 98*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
Please describe financial, technical,  operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Proh ibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as  fraudulent, coercive, 
collusive, and obstructive practices  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational  HighHigh  MediumMedium  
Description  
Inadequate human resources for project implementation  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will recruit on a competitive and transparent basis the personnel of the PMIU, who will benefit from the 
technical support of FAO Gambia office, as well as the FAO Regional Office for Africa (based in Ghana), the FAO Sub -
regional Office for Western Africa (based in neighboring Senegal) and the FAO Headquarters. In addition, the project 
will invest in the planning and implementation capacities of key line ministries and agencies (for example under Activities 
3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.2.1).  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
GovernanceGovernance  MediumMedium  LowLow  
Description  
Changes in the development priorities of the Government of the Gambia  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project’s implementation arrangements  have foreseen that the highest level of project governance – the Project 
Steering Committee (PSC) – will include multi- sectorial high- level representatives (at least at Permanent Secretary 
level) and will debate together with the NDA about any changes in government policy that might have an impact on the 
project, its activities and its implementation modalities. The FAO Representative in the Gambia will remain in constant dialogue with the Government counterparts to anticipate potential changes in policies  and strategic directions and to 
propose – together with the PMIU – the necessary measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational  HighHigh  MediumMedium  
Description  
High illiteracy levels among the targeted communities  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Under Activity 3.2.4, the project will implement a multi -year adult literacy and numeracy program – in partnership with 
a local NGO – to ensure that the female project beneficiaries – the most affected group – will develop sufficient 
literacy skills to suc cessfully adopt the project’s climate adaptation packages. In addition, all trainings delivered under


---
*Page 99*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
   
 the project will be carefully designed to adapt their deliver method and content to the educational and literacy (and 
local language, when applicable) of the trainees.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category  Probability  Impact  
OtherOther  LowLow  High 
Description  
Political and economic instability  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project has been designed taking into consideration the fragility of the country. The activities, their complexity and 
timing take into account the potential implementation delays due to political and economic crises, as well as the cost 
over-runs due to inflation. As highlighted under the Risk Factor 2, the project will make use of its governance structure 
and the in- country presence of FAO to minimize the potential disruption to implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category    
OtherOther  LowLow  High 
Description  
Extreme natural hazards  in the project areas or in the watershed of the Gambia  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Where possible, the project targeting included the results of the climate analysis and of other natural hazards to avoid 
investing in risk areas. Nevertheless, for the residual risk, the project will support better monitoring and enhanced anticipation capacities by the public services (for example, monitoring of water quality parameters on a constant basis). 
The project’s climate analysis has also highlighted the hypersalinity risks associated with the dam construction on the 
Gambia river and will continue disseminating the findings to the stakeholders involved in the formulation


---
*Page 100*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
169. An Environmental and Social Assessment  was undertaken during project preparation according to the 
Environmental and Social Standards and FAO Environmental and Social Management Guidelines. The key findings on 
potential positive and negative impacts of the project are as follows:  
170. Positive impact of the project. O verall, the environmental and social impacts of the project will be highly 
positive as it ensures a strong climate adaptation of the means of production. It will restore fish habitats and ecosystems 
services and minimize soil desiccation, conserve biodiversity, maintain riverbank stability and protect swamplands. It 
also will optimize and sustainably use the natural resources such as fresh water and wood. It will develop the diversification and integration of means of production, such as rice- fish culture or vegetable gardens integration. It also 
increases sustainably the fish production and processing with direct impact on income generation and improve 
livelihoods for households, in particular the women and the youth who are the majority of actors of the landing sites. The project will as well attract youthful groups due to its economic impacts. By climate- proofing the infrastructure with 
adequate equipment, it also contributes in improving workers conditions by limiting fire outbreak and air pollution risk, which irreversibly affect health of actors.  
171. Environmental, social risks and main mitigation measures. The risks on the environment are limited to the 
infrastructure construction management, the sand mining for construction, the waste and wastewater management as well as ensuring the use of adequate endemic varieties of mangrove and fish. The project integrates in its design solution to limit waste and related pollution by supporting the integration of productive systems such as rice -fish 
production and the integration of specific infrastructure in the landing sites to avoid any pollution. The construction 
companies will ensure the implementation of C -ESMP, manage waste and submit to the PMIU the origin of construction 
material with relevant certificates. The risks on the social dimension are related to the risk of nepotism and corruption among committee member and the potential  conflict among facilities users, as well as the risk of temporary and limited 
access to old infrastructure during rehabilitation. The PMIU will accompany the existing local management committees 
in managing these risks and ensure no- discrimination of any kind among community members. It will also ensure the 
implementation of the SEP and the GAP. All of the social and environmental risks are therefore manageable with 
adequate mitigation measures and regular monitoring, engaging closely with all the local and institutional stakeholders. 
The FAO Gambia is used to the implementation of ESMF tools and ESMP monitoring system and will dedi cate adequate 
and competent resources. The institutional entities capacities were assessed for the EbA funding proposal.  Although 
concluded insufficient, the EbA project has since August 2017 strengthened the institutional capacities to implement climate -related activities as well as to apply participatory communication, with one entire component devoted to policy 
support, institutional strengthening and knowledge generation.  
172. Risk categorization . According to FAO  Guidelines followed in this assessment, the project has been 
categorised as a moderate risk project ( Category  B). The detailed  of the safeguard instruments and mitigation measures 
are presented in the following table.  
FAO Safeguard Policies  Triggered  Safe guard Instruments & Mitigation Measures  
ESMG - General 
consideration  YES ESMF : ESMP , SEP, GRM system , PSEA GRM , E&S Screening  (Annex 1)  
ESS 1 – Natural Resources 
Management  YES ESMF : ESMP  and C-ESMP   
The fish culture in rice-field, ponds, and fish tanks will create wastewater that 
will be use as fertilizer for horticulture and home gardens.  
The project integrates seawater use for cleaning facilities to limit the use of 
fresh water.  
Pollution and waste from infrastructure rehabilitation and construction will be 
manage by competent companies following C -ESMP. 
ESS2 – Biodiversity, 
Ecosystems, and Natural Habitats YES ESMF : ESMP , E&S screening  (Annex 1)  
All project activities will be carried out of any protected areas but will consider 
strength ened of the ecosystems and ecosystems services through mangrove


---
*Page 101*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
   
 restoration and management. Project build on experienced actors (Department 
of Nature and Wildlife, Department of Forestry, TRY association).  
ESS3 – Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and 
Agriculture  YES ESMF: ESMP  
The project will undertake mangrove restoration, by which mangrove seeds, of 
appropriate autochthonous species, will be used for restored mangrove 
forests.  
ESS4 – Animal – Livestock 
and Aquatic Genetic 
Resources for Food and 
Agriculture  YES ESMF: ESMP.  
The project will use autochthonous fish species from different suitable parts of 
the country for the aquaculture activities. Through breeding selection improved fish strains may be the result as regards growth performance.  
ESS5 – Pest and Pesticide 
Management  NO ESMF: Exclusion List  (Appendix1, Part B)  
The project will not introduce pesticides.  
ESS6 – Involuntary 
Resettlement and Displacement  NO ESMF: Exclusion List  (Appendix1, Part B)  
The project will not remove people from their homes or restrict access to their 
means of livelihoods. Project will ensure access to fishing facilities during 
construction or rehabilitation (alternative to land)  
ESS7 – Decent Work  NO ESMF : Exclusion List  (Appendix1, Part B) & Procedures for managing 
contractors  & UN supplier Code of Conduct  (Appendix 2)  
The project will not affect employment and labour conditions and rights  
ESS8 – Gender Equality  NO Gender Assessment and action plan . 
As per GCF requirements a gender assessment and action plan will be 
developed, with specific gender -targeted activities built into the project design 
and social approaches.  
ESS9 – Indigenous Peoples 
and Cultural Heritage  NO ESMF: E&S screening  (Annex 1), Change find procedure  (Appendix 3)  
Indigenous people in The Gambia are mainly associated to nomadic 
pastoralism, whereas the project activities will focus on fisheries. FPIC 
procedure is not relevant for the present project. The Chance find procedure 
will be applied, only if and when this s afeguard policy is triggered.  
 
173. Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework (ESMF) Approach . As called for by the 
FAO and IFC guidelines, the project will be using an ESMF  approach, as the exact beneficiaries can only be known at 
the time of implementation  and relevant sites for mangrove restoration and aquaculture activities are still not finally 
defined. Nevertheless , a comprehensive E&S analysis has been done for known si tes relative to Coastal and river 
small -scale infrastructures. Tools for sites screening are provided within the ESMF to ensure preliminary risk analysis.  
174. Stakeholder engagement  (see also Annex 7) . The project considered engagement through all the project 
cycle from design to the closure.  Multiple technical and consultations missions have been held for the Concept Note 
and the Funding Proposal elaboration, reaching local communities. National engagement was held with the support of 
the FAO Gambia office thr ough  bilateral exchanges, meetings, and plenary discussions. Two complementary and 
separate missions have been held in March 2021, one on the E&S risk assessment and one on the gender aspects. 
This approach has led to transparency, inclusiveness of consultation and ensured free speech of all stakeholders in a 
patriarchal context. All of the following stakeholders have been therefore consulted and engaged closely: the national institutions at central and local level, the local authorities, the producers, and facilities users, the representatives of the 
civil society and the groups of women and youth. The major concern of land availability for infrastructure has been 
therefore eliminated thanks to close exchang e with the Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources and the local 
communities guaranteeing the availability. Engagement will continue during implementation according to the 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan within the ESMF.  
175. Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) . The PMIU will be responsible in managing the grievance and 
redress mechanism. The GRM system is based on existing structure and procedure, but with a strong linkage with the PMIU and FAO Gambia  officers to ensure the right application of GRM principles. Grievances at landing sites will be 
managed by site committees considering a four -step GRM (Fishery site office/committee, Community  Alkalo, Fishery 
Head Office, Banjul and Police). Related SEA grievances will be managed through the existing UNFPA pathway and are detailed in the Gender Action Plan.


---
*Page 102*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
   
 176. The ESMP is attached  as a part of the ESMF document . A summary of safeguard -related consultations 
undertaken to date is included in Annex 7 of this funding proposal.  
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
177. Women and men are different actors of the same  value chains in the fishery sector, operate on different scales 
and serve different markets.90 Women’s work is of low productivity and profit margin, meant for the domestic market. 
The division is based on the social norm that women are responsible for house chores and caregiving, which allow only 
work near the house.91 It also originates in unequal access to productive assets. To fill this gap, the project proposes 
introduction of the FAO -Thiaroye fish processing technique (FTT), which uses less fuel and produces less smoke.92 
178. Gambian households do not specialize in one type of livelihood and have the potential to accommodate 
aquaculture to supplement the declining source of protein. The women and the youth consulted were willing to take up 
aquaculture if there is an opportunity. Full integration of aquaculture into women’s daily activities will necessitate 
reduction of their other duties, implying  that men will need to shoulder some of women’s unpaid work. The Gambian 
women are savvy enough to earn more than their husbands, but close to half of them believe that husband’s beating 
his wife is justified when she neglects the children, argues with him, goes out without telling him, etc.93 To achieve 
behavioral changes within the family, wives and husbands will  engage in conversations on what they wish for the family 
and construct a common vision as well as a roadmap based on a household methodology.  
179. Gambian women have little information outside their immediate circle due to illiteracy. They are hesitant to 
enter the formal sector and unprepared for climate change. The project will leverage the female youth, another group of underutilized resources, to help the older generation obtain literacy and numeracy skills. Women in the fishery sector are well aware that their livelihoods are dependent on mangroves and that the trees have been diminishing, a trend 
that is likely to continue.
94 They have not, however, completely eliminated their habits to cut mangroves for house roofs 
or fuel.95 The project proposes two activities on the environment for women – mangrove rehabilitation and 
environmental awareness raising – for sustainable management of their livelihoods  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
180. Financial control and procurement processes will be implemented as per FAO rules and regulations, which 
were certified as acceptable to the GCF in the FAO accreditation process. FAO has an Administrative Manual organized 
across vario us Chapters covering Finance, Human Resources, Travel and Procurement. The FAO Intranet provides 
access to this Manual and to other procedures, information and guidance via the “FAO Handbook”.  
181. FAO has deployed an Oracle based ERP system the Global Resources Management System" (GRMS) to its 
world -wide offices, which provides all FAO employees, in all locations globally , with travel, human resource, 
procurement and finance functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial 
monitoring and reporting, increases  transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control.  FAO maintains a chart 
of accounts which is used by the whole organization and that allows for a separation of income and expenditure by 
donor and project and support and provides a standardized coding structure that enables data to be recorded, classified 
and summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements.  
 
90 UNCTAD, 2014. “ The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.”  
https://unctad.org/system/files/official -document/ditc2013d4_en.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
91 UNCTAD, 2014. “ The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.”  
https://unctad.org/system/files/official -document/ditc2013d4_en.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
92 Mindjimba, K., 2020. “Study of the profitability of fish smoking with FTT ‐Thiaroye kilns in Côted'Ivoire.” FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Circular No. 1155. 
ttps://doi.org/10.4060/ca8220en (accessed April 2021).  
93 World Bank, 2021. “Women who beli eve a husband is justified in beating his wife (any of five reasons) (%) - Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.REAS.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2019. “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
 https://mics -surveys-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/MICS6/West%20and%20Central%20Africa/Gambia/2018/Survey%20findings/The%20Gambia%202018%20MICS%20Survey%20Fin
dings%20Report_English.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
94 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul, Tambi and Bintang, March 9- 17, 2021.  
95 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul, Bintang and Kartong landing sites, March 9 -20, 2021.


---
*Page 103*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
   
 182. Procurement and Letters of Agreement Services are managed by a d edicated FAO unit, which provides policy 
and operational support to ensure that the Organization procures goods, works and services based on "Best Value for 
Money" principles as embodied in the Manual Section 502 and for Letters of Agreement under Manual Section 507.  
183. As mentioned in Section C.4. FAO as the Accredited Entity of the GCF will have overall responsibility for quality 
assurance and oversight of co- executing entities. In addition to this, FAO will be responsible for the financial execution 
of GCF  funds according to FAO rules and regulations mainly contained and detailed in the FAO Handbook (including 
those referred to financial monitoring, audit and procurement).  
184. During implementation, FAO will provide oversight and quality  assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures. This may include monitoring missions, spot checks and participation at project governance meetings. The 
project will be subject to FAO’s  audit regime of FAO, including the external audit and internal audit functions.  
185. FAO Country Representative in the Gambia (FAOR) is responsible for financial monitoring and is supported by 
a management team comprised of a Program Assistant, Management Assistant, and a Strategic Operations Officer. 
Such team will interact and support the work of the PMIU . 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ W ith confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 104*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provide d) 
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Theory of Change Chart  
☒ Annex 23  Summary of Project Beneficiaries  
☒ Annex 24  Carbon accounting (spreadsheet)  
☐ Annex X  Other references


---
*Page 105*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 106*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood 
Improvement in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia)  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country 
or location (s) of programme  The Gambia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English  is the official language of The Gambia and the 
language understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.fao.org/3/cc0193en/cc0193en.pdf   
Other link(s) FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org//env ironmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 FAO The Gambia website:  
https://www.fao.org/gambia/resources/en/   
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English  is the official language of The Gambia  and the 
language understandable to affected  peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.fao.org/3/cc0193en/cc0193en.pdf  
Other link(s) FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 FAO The Gambia website:  
https://www. fao.org/gambia/resources/en/


---
*Page 107*
---

Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category 
B project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if 
applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Place  Hard copies of the ESMF will be made available to  
stakeho lders without internet access at the following 
location s: 
FAO Representation in Gambia 
FAO Building East Street 10 'M' Section. Banjul  
Mailing Address:  
Private Mail Bag No. 10, Banjul  
Tel:+220- 4498034  
Fax:+220- 4498036  
FAO -GM@fao.org   
 National Environment Agency, Jimpex Road, Kanifing, PM B 
48, The Gambia.  
 
Department of Fisheries, 6 Marina Parade, Banjul, The Gambia.  
 
Brufut Community Fisheries Center, Brufut, West Coast Region.  
 
Tanji Community Fisheries Center, Tanji, West Coast 
Region.  
 
Gunjur Co mmunity Fisheries Center, Gunjur, West Coast 
Region.  
 
TRY Oyster Women’s Association, Old Jeshwang, Kanifing 
Municipality.


---
*Page 108*
---

Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Sunday, July 17, 2022  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 109*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 109 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP 188  
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement 
in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Republic of the  Gambia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project fosters a strategic and enabling 
environment for the artisanal fisher ies sector 
in Gambia through increasing the resilience  
of key landing sites as well as diversifying 
local farming systems with aquaculture packages.  An exit strategy to replicate and scal e up the 
project beyond this project will need to be identified during the project implementation (e.g. through strengthened partnership ) in 
order to expand the impacts beyond the 
project and share the lessons learned from 
the artisanal fisheries sector.  
The project supports the diversification of 
the artisanal fisheries sector that supports vulnerable communities with four innovative aquaculture packages that provides a clear and significant platform for scale and sustainability.  The capacity -building ac tivities under 
Component 3 will need to ensure that the 
long- term strategic support  to the fisheries 
sector  at various  level, including policies and 
regulatory frameworks , will be sustained . 
The project targets the fisher ies sector which 
diversifies the GCF investment portfolio.   
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum VI, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The climate  resilient fisher y initiative for livelihood  improvement  in the Gambia 
(PROREFISH Gambia) will build resilience in the artisanal fisher ies sector in the country by 
boosting the fisher ies infrastructure and aquaculture production to help diversity local


---
*Page 110*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 110 
 
 
livelihood strategies and by restoring the key aquatic habi tats in the country through mangrove 
restoration.  
4. The project aims to support vulnerable and poor fishing communities by introducing 
technology improvements and processing techniques ; increasing the resilience  of local fish ing 
infrastructure; and diversif ying  local food systems. The project will benefit a total number of 
417,643 beneficiaries (direct and indirect) wh o are members of some of the most vulnerable 
and poorest communities. The project will also help to deliver mitigation benefits estimated at 
238,519 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq) over 20 years , as a result of the 
interventions on restor ing mangrove  ecosystems .  
5. The objectives will be achieved through the variety and interlinkage s of key activities, 
such as strengthening restoration capacity and management of local mangrove forests and 
replanting efforts combined with sustainable forest management principles; boosting local 
fisheries infrastructure and promoting  new approaches to aquaculture  packages ; and capacity -
building of communities, and government  bodies  as well as boosting extension services for the 
fisheries sector.  
6. The fisher ies sector in the Gambia is facing numerous challenges from climate change 
impacts. Communities across the country rel y heavily on the River Gambia  for the ir livelihoods, 
and artisanal fisheries are the backbone of the livelihoods for vulnerable and rural poor 
communities. The artisanal fisher ies sector provides jobs, incomes and , most importantly , gives 
access to nutrien t- and protein -rich diets. However , these local livelihoods are under threat  
because climate change is impacting marine, coastal and riverine fish ing: it is damaging fish ing 
infrastructure (e.g.  landing sites), and increasing salinity and acidity levels which are  impacting 
the range and availability of fish species. This will impact communities by reducing  fish stocks, 
and therefore reducing income generation and access to protein.  
7. The total pro ject finance costs are USD 25 million with the GCF grants  accounting for 
USD 17.2 million. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), through a  project under the  International 
Fund for Agricultur al Development (IFAD) , will provide co -financing in the form of  a grant of 
USD 5 million. The Ministry of Fisheries and Water resources and National Assembly Matters 
(MoFWR NAM ) will contribute with USD 2 million in kind and the Food and Agriculture 
Organiz ation of the United Nations ( FAO ) will provide  a grant of USD 0.8 million. The 
environmental and social safeguards  category of the project is B.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1: Restoration of key fisheries habitats (total cost: USD 3. 2 million; GCF cost: USD 2.3 
million)  
8. Mangrove ecosystems play a crucial role as fish habitats. The first component will focus 
on restoring degraded mangrove ecosystems through replanting , including introduc ing species 
with higher tolerance to increased salinity levels , as well as on improv ing the management of 
mangrove resources.  
9. The component will target a total of 1,100  ha of degraded mangrove areas in key 
fisheries hotspots to be reforested. An additional 1, 250 ha will be restored through assisted 
natural regeneration.   
10. This component wil l have a strong community focus, with targeted communities in both 
areas leading the reforestation and regeneration activities. The communities will receive 
training and capacity -building and will become local leaders of sustainable ecosystem 
management. T he component will support the creation of community forest management 
committees to  assist with  the sustainable management of the mangroves and their long -term 
conservation . The communities  will also receive training on how to develop business


---
*Page 111*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 111 
 
 
opportunitie s built on sustainable mangrove management, and the groups will be empowered 
to access finance to support long -term sustainable planning and operations.   
Component 2: Climate -resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture development (total cost: 
USD 17 million; GCF cost: USD 10.7 million)    
11. The second component focuses on improving the current infrastructure used by the 
fisheries industry,  which is of significant importance  to the artisanal sector for landing and 
selling and processing their catches and will , in parallel , help to promote four aquaculture 
packages that will support the diversification of livelihoods and boost the resilience of local 
farming systems.  
12. The comp onent supports increasing the resilience  of some of the most important 
landing sites for the artisanal fisher ies sector by improving the infrastructure , while also  
improv ing and diversifying  the processing facilities on those targeted sites to allow fisher folk 
better landing access and increase their opportunities to process and sell their catches .  
13. The processing facilities will include  solar dryers, smoking ovens and solar -powered fish 
rinsing lines. These facilities will not only help to  diversify the en d product reaching the local 
markets but will also help to reduce loss of catches and to maintain quality for a longer period 
than currently possible . These techniques will enable the fisherfolk to reach more markets, 
allow for transport of the processed products for longer distances if required and , most 
importantly , increasing the  shelf life  of the products .  
14. The component will also diversify livelihoods by fostering a transition of local farming 
systems through focusing o n four different aquaculture pack ages.  The four packages  are 
tailored to support the local challenges and context across the target communities . These are ( 1) 
integrated vegetable and fish production in a communal setting; ( 2) rice –fish farming systems; 
(3) fish culture through targeted pond production at the village level ; and (4) oyster and clam 
production in open, brackish water.  
15. The combination of the packages plus the boost  to infrastructure and processing 
facilities at the landing sites will provide a significant transformation of t he artisanal fishing 
sector and support the diversification and processing of a multitude of fish products with 
communities in the lead.  
Component 3: Improved climate change adaptive capacities (total costs: USD 3.6 million; GCF cost: 
USD 3.3 million)  
16. The third component supports capacity -building for government stakeholders and key 
sectoral institutions, so that they can  support the enabling environment for the artisanal 
fisher ies sector and boost the linkages and partnerships across public and private actors.  
17. The component will  enable the relevant ministries to better analyse and integrate 
climate risks in to policies,  strategy planning and decision- making  for the artisanal fisheries 
sector . This will be combined with technical support and training  for staff in line ministries, as 
well as data collection and analysis to support better management and outreach to 
communities. The component will focus on building a strong and innovative extension service 
support to the sector for locally based field fisheries  and forestry officers for aquaculture and 
mangrove investments.  
Project management (total cost: USD 1. 2 million; GCF cost: 0.8 million)  
18. The GCF portion of the project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria


---
*Page 112*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 112 
 
 
3.1 Impact potential                                        Scale: N/A  
19. The project focuses on diversifying the livelihoods of vulnerable and rural poor 
communities,  reaching a total of 417,643  beneficiaries , and on delivering important mitigation 
benefits from mangrove restoration amounting to estimated emissions of 238,519 tCO 2eq over 
20 years , further benefiting the future key fish habitats.  
20. The projec t provides key solutions for transforming local farming systems where 
artisanal fisheries play a crucial role in providing nutrient -rich diets and support ing the 
livelihoods of the vulnerable rural communities. The project will enable the communities to 
manage and protect the key fish habitats at present and for future generations by actively 
managing and restoring the mangroves and , by working through the community management 
groups , create ownership and stimulate the establishment  of sustainable local business 
solutions. As well as increasing the climate -resilience of the landing sites, and improving 
processing facilities and diversifying local farming systems,  the project will ensure long -term 
transformation and impact with a strategic opportunity for sca ling up.  
3.2 Paradigm  shift potential                 Scale: N/A  
21. The combination of the three components offers a transformative and strategic 
approach to improv ing the sustainability of this key sector in the Gambia by increasing 
resilience across the communities and landing sites, supporting diversification of local food systems through the aquaculture strategi es, and improving processing facilities at the landing 
sites.  There is also a strong emphasis on data  management and analysis and extension support 
to drive these sustainable solutions forward s and scale up the rest of the country.  
22. The project targets sustainability and scalability at various levels , starting with the focus 
on mangrove restoration , which  is based on engagement with  community groups who will not 
only be leading the restoration activities but  will also be empowered to identify small -scale 
business opportunities relating to sustainable management of the mangroves. This will greatly impact th e current and future availability of fish species due to the improved conservation and 
sustainable management of the mangroves ; and the model proposed by the project can be 
adapted and scaled up to other mangrove areas across the country.  
23. The project’s se cond component (i.e. to deliver more climate -resilient  landing sites)  is 
crucial and represents a unique opportunity to secure long -term access for the artisanal 
fisher ies sector to be able to bring their catches straight to market and to be able to proces s 
them straight away , thereby  securing better access to markets, prices, shelf life and overall 
quality. The four packages aim to boost local farming systems through focus ing on different 
aquaculture models , cons titute a very scalable model for numerous communities to scale up.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                 Scale:  N/A   
24. The project will support the restoration and sustainable management of the crucial 
mangrove ecosystems, which  are the key aquatic  habitats for the current fisheries  sector and 
the backbone of the future sector. The project will support processing of fish through innovative 
approaches using  ovens and sun dryers rather than relying on unsustainable use of firewood , 
and will provide a stro ng basis for job creation  while creat ing a strong enabling environment for 
local start -ups in the intersecting economies of mangroves, fisheries and agricultur al 
production.   
25. The project supports key solutions to improve socioeconomic conditions for the 
targeted beneficiaries and will deliver a clear scalable model for the rest of the country through


---
*Page 113*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 113 
 
 
the strong focus on community groups and gender aspects , and by building a str ong platform for 
community groups to diversify and continue develop ing and driv ing innovation.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                      Scale:  N/A   
26. The project targets vulnerable and poor communities in the Gambia who rely on the 
artisanal fisher ies sector for survival and as a key source  for protein -rich diets. The 
communities and their livelihoods are under threat from climate change due to the degradation 
of the landing sites, limited processing facilities and degraded mangroves and aquatic habitats.  
27. The project proposes  solutions to change the current situation , with communities 
driving the change and innovation forward s to transform the currently challenging artisanal 
sector and its dependent livelihoods into a sustainable and  innovative sector where 
communities have access to a varied range of adaptation solutions.   
3.5 Country ownership                Scale:  N/A  
28. The fisher ies sector is the backbone of the Gambia, and in particular the artisanal sector 
is the safety net for people in the poor est and most vulnerable groups. The project targets this 
key sector and allows for a strong integration of the artisanal sector into government planning 
and decision -making. The project will empower this sector and make it more visible and also 
open to more support and resources from public and private partnerships.  
29. The project and its objectives are well embedded in national strategies, policies and 
plan s, and it offers a strategic opportunity to scale up the best practices and lessons learned to 
the rest of the country. The draft Country Programme1 identifies the climate -resilient fishing 
industry as a priority.  The project is fully aligned with key tar gets identified in the national 
adaptation programme of action; national communications, nationally determined contribution and numerous national policies such as the national climate change policy, the national fishery 
strategy, and the fisheries and aquaculture sector strategy .  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                     Scale: N/A  
30. The project supports vulnerable and poor communities to boost resilience to climate 
change and offers a unique and strategic approach for achieving this.  
31. The project works with subsistence fisherfolk and farmers to provide an enabling 
environment to diver sify their livelihoods and offer s the opportunity to identify business 
opportunities across their local food system,  from mangroves, to fish processing and 
aquacultur al production. The communities are driving these innovative approaches and , with 
the suppo rt of the project, they will be able to implement strategic and long -term solutions 
across their livelihoods.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
32. Project background.  The project’s objective is to build the resilience of the country’s 
fisher folk against climate change and improve their livelihoods through the implementation of 
three inter- linked components pertaining to strengthening community management of artisanal 
 
1 As of June 2022.


---
*Page 114*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 114 
 
 
fishery habitats and mangrove ecosystems, developing climate -resilient fishery infrastructure 
and aquaculture development, and improving capacities to adapt to impacts of climate change. 
Environmental and social co -benefits include the improvement of the artisanal fisheries’ 
processing systems, which are expected to reduce exposure to respiratory diseases and 
contribute to strengthening the fisher folk’s local management capabilities and better access to 
formal markets, information and knowledge.  
33. Environmental and social risk category an d safeguards instrument . The project is 
classified as Category B and is within the accreditation level of the AE. The AE has provided an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines the risks/impacts of 
the project and mitigation meas ures to address these risks/impacts.  
34. Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards standards.  The 
paragraphs below provide a brief description of the programme’s compliance with 
environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards.  
35. ESS 1: Assess ment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts.  The ESMF provides a description of how environmental and social impacts and risks 
will be managed, mitigated, and supervised both at the framework level and the project 
operational level as  the exact beneficiaries will only be known during implementation and some 
of the relevant sites such as for mangrove restoration and aquaculture activities are still not 
fully defined. It also provides for the preparation of intervention -specific environm ental and 
social impact assessments given that these will be further developed during implementation. 
Nevertheless, initial risk and impact analyses have been done for known sites. The 
environmental risks are mainly limited to construction of infrastructur e facilities including 
generation of waste and wastewater. Potential social impacts include the temporary and limited 
access to existing infrastructure facilities in the course of their rehabilitation.  
36. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. The project may engage workers during 
construction and rehabilitation of the facilities including in its livelihood interventions. Hence, 
appropriate mitigation measures concerning labour and working conditions will be established. 
It will promote subcontracting to local entrepreneurs and employ local workers (to the extent 
possible) to enhance local employment creation under decent working conditions. The project 
will also follow the procedures for managing contractors and the United Nations supplier Code 
of Conduct and e stablish a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM). Given that the 
existing processing facilities at the sites are already old, the project aims to enhance the 
occupational health and safety conditions of the workers (e.g. concerning workers’ exposure to 
air pollutants during the smoking process) particularly in the value chain by employing state -of-
the-art technologies. The project will not involve child labour and has provided an exclusion list 
to avoid it. It will also engage the support and partner ship of local authorities to ensure that 
monitoring is adequately implemented and no child labour takes place in its activities.  
37. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention.  The project is expected to have 
limited risk and impacts arising from its interventions in relation to mangrove restoration and 
co-management, aquaculture production activities, and small- scale infrastructure. For instance, 
the construction of the landing sites could result in natural resource degradation as a result of 
sand min ing and could produce construction solid waste and wastewater. To mitigate these 
risks, a construction -environmental and social management plan (C -ESMP) to include water 
treatment and appropriate drains, among other approaches, will be required to be developed by 
the construction company. An adequate sand mining certificate from the relevant authorities 
will also be required. Regular monitoring and reporting, including involving communities will 
also be instituted. Regarding risk in relation to potential pesticide use in the aquaculture -rice 
production systems, the project will avoid the use of any highly toxic pesticides (e.g. will only 
allow reasonable use of low toxicity pesticides) and will promote Integrated Pest Management. 
Training on appropriate limited pesticide use will also be provided including monitoring of


---
*Page 115*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 115 
 
 
residues in cooperation with the relevant authorities. The project will likewise integrate the 
design of seawater rinsing infrastructure in its sites to minimize pressure on freshwater supply.  
38. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security.  The project could affect the 
communities’ environmental health and safety such as in relation to construction activities (e.g. 
nuisance noise and dust pollution, and potential limited restricted access to exis ting facilities). 
As indicated above, the project will require the development of a C -ESMP to minimize impacts 
on the community. The ESMF has likewise indicated “ potential conflict among facilities users” as 
one of the project's risks as there could be une qual access to the newly constructed 
infrastructures. To address this, the project will establish and train project staff and support the 
strengthening of existing local GRM procedures to be aligned with the AE’s standards. The 
project should also ensure t hat relevant conflict sensitivity analysis/assessment is undertaken 
to appropriately assess the level of risk and that mitigation measures are developed, as needed.  
39. ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.  The result of project 
consultations s howed that the project will have land available for the rehabilitation, 
construction, and operation of the facilities under the project.  Hence, it is expected that the 
project “will not remove people from their homes or restrict access to their means of 
livelihoods” and it “will ensure access to fishing facilities during construction or rehabilitation 
(alternative to land).” The project will also ensure that a work schedule is developed to 
minimize disturbance to existing livelihood activities in the area during the construction and 
rehabilitation works. Nevertheless, it is recommended that in the enactment of forest tenure 
agreements, the project has to ensure that there will be no inadvertent loss of livelihoods or 
restrictions to access (particularly to those who may be informally using the areas), and if it is 
unavoidable, mutually agreed mitigation measures should be arrived at.  
40. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources.  The ESMF indicated that all project a ctivities would be carried out outside of any 
protected areas but would consider strengthening ecosystems and ecosystems services through mangrove restoration and management. The ESMF further indicated that the project would 
undertake mangrove restoration, whereby mangrove seeds, of appropriate autochthonous 
species, would be used for restored mangrove forests. The project should ensure that invasive 
species (both plants and animals) are not inadvertently introduced in implementing the 
activities by conside ring local species to avoid any negative impact on the introduction of exotic 
species into the ecosystem. This will be monitored in collaboration with local authorities such as 
the Ministry of Fisheries, the Department of Park and Wildlife Management and t he Department 
of Forestry.  
41. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous peoples.  In relation to the 
Indigenous Peoples Policy, the AE through its environmental and social baseline data provides 
an overview of the communities in the Gambia. It notes nine main ethnic groups and at least 10 
language groups, with English as the official language. The AE's assessment notes that there is 
no structural discrimination based on ethnic identity or language. The AE confirms that there is 
no recent history of in tertribal conflict. The different groups typically have multiple livelihood 
sources, with many engaged in artisanal fisheries. Based on the screening conducted, the AE has determined that the requirements of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the FAO indig enous 
peoples policy, ESS 7 (GCF) and ESS 9 (FAO) standards will not need to be applied. At the site-specific level, the AE has provided further information on the local communities present by 
their role in the local fishery value chain (e.g. as fishers, s mokers, fishmongers, etc.) and by 
highlighting gender composition in each. Conflict resolution mechanisms at the local level are 
also identified, with the first points being local committees and the Alkalo  (village chief). Further 
relevant safeguards can b e found in the sub -project exclusions that exclude activities that 
involve temporary or permanent resettlement and restriction of access to means of livelihoods; 
voluntary resettlement; land appropriation; and activities that would create adverse impacts o n 
ethnic groups within the village and/or in neighbouring villages. Sub -project screening also


---
*Page 116*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 116 
 
 
attends to relevant issues such as looking into whether project activities would be implemented 
in cattle transhumance routes, and whether proposed activities wo uld deny or restrict access to 
natural resources to which people have rights of access or use. In line with the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, the GCF independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous 
peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has 
been made.  
42. ESS 8: Cultural heritage . The project’s activities are not anticipated to adversely affect 
cultural heritage. Nevertheless, should there be instances of chance discoveries during 
implementati on, the ESMF included a “chance find procedure” to be implemented if and when 
this safeguard standard is triggered. The project also excludes activities that would result in 
‘damage or loss to cultural property, including sites having archaeological (prehi storic), 
paleontological, historical, religious, cultural and unique natural values.”  
43. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment safeguarding. The 
revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM -2021/18 requires 
safeguard ing against sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF -financed 
activities. The PROREFISH project aims to enhance climate resilience of fisher folk living in the 
Gambia while contributing to greenhouse gas emission reduction objectives through  restoration 
of fish habitats, climate -resilient fishery infrastructure and aquaculture development, and 
improved climate change adaptive capacities. As the project will also facilitate the construction 
of various infrastructure, the negative impacts and r isks of the overall project and mitigation 
measures of SEAH and gender -based violence (GBV) more generally is required.  
44. The ESMF therefore addressed the SEAH and GBV safeguarding including the project’s 
commitment to addressing SEAH emphasized in the ESMF  and the Gender Action Plan – by 
strengthening the FAO GRM in handling SEAH and GBV incidents; training executing agency 
personnel on SEAH; and establishing and operationalizing referral pathways for GBV. The AE 
will also establish collaboration with the U nited Nations Population Fund in the country in 
order to support survivors of SEAH (and GBV) through medical care, psychosocial support, legal and social/reintegration support. The project will establish a GRM system that will be specific to 
the FAO Gambia  country office (separate from the FAO worldwide) and link the GBV and SEAH 
referral pathways; it will facilitate the resolution of grievances promptly through an accessible, fair, transparent and constructive process, that is also survivor -centred and gen der-responsive 
in the case of SEAH in order to strengthen SEAH safeguarding at all levels. This will be culturally 
appropriate and readily accessible at no cost to the public, and without retribution on the 
individuals, groups, or communities that raise issues or concerns.  
45. The SEAH safeguarding undertaken by the AE is aligned with the SEAH provisions of the 
revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The AE is required to take all necessary measures 
to ensure alignment to prevent and respond effectively t o SEAH in a survivor -centred and 
gender -responsive way.  
46. Implementation arrangements. The AE will be responsible for the overall 
management of the project. The project has a Project Steering Committee (PSC) and a Technical 
Advisory Committee ( TAC) at the governance and coordination levels while a dedicated Project 
Management Unit (PMIU) wil l be established to oversee implementation on the ground. It will 
have technical lead specialists on aquaculture development, fishery infrastructure, mangrove 
restoration/natural resource management, capacity development, and on ESS and gender. The 
project  has likewise provided for the implementation, monitoring and reporting of compliance 
with various national laws and regulations and the AE’s safeguards requirements. A capacity -
building for all stakeholders has also been considered to ensure consistent im plementation of 
the project’s environmental and social safeguards. Monitoring protocols including provision of 
an external audit have been considered to ensure adequate implementation (including budget 
and implementation calendar) of the ESMF and its corresponding management measures.


---
*Page 117*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 117 
 
 
47. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure . The project has engaged with 
various stakeholders during the project design, appraisal and preparation. This was done 
through multiple technical sessions with national government representatives and 
consultations with local communities. Bilateral exchanges, meetings, and plenary discussions 
were held involving national institutions at the central and local level, local authorities, 
producers, facility users, and representatives  of civil society and women and youth groups. 
Engagement and information disclosure will continue during implementation in accordance 
with the stakeholder engagement plan.  
48. Grievance redress mechanism.  The project has an institution -level GRM (through the 
AE’s GRM) and activity -level grievance mechanisms (which will be managed by the PMIU) to 
receive and assist with the resolution of concerns and grievances of stakeholders that may arise in connection with a project’s environmental and social performance. A GRM registration and 
monitoring form is also available for this purpose. Conflict resolution mechanisms are also 
reported to exist at the landing sites which are handled by the local village committee and have 
a key role in managing local grievances. Moreo ver, the beneficiaries and potentially affected 
people will also have access to the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism . 
4.2 Gender policy  
49. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF G ender Policy.  
50. The gender assessment provides the context of the enabling environment to enhance 
gender equality and women’s empowerment in t he Gambia. The country has ratified the core 
international treaties that support equality between women and men in all spheres of life, most notably the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW). The Constitution of The Gambia also declares that “[w]omen shall be accorded full 
and equal dignity of the person with men” and “shall have the right to equal treatment with 
men, including equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities”.  However, the 
Constitution incorporates customary law and shari a that apply to 95  per cent  of the population 
and rule out application o f no-discrimination principles on “adoption, marriage, divorce, burial, 
devolution of property on death or other matters of personal law”. The Ministry of Women’s Affairs, the National Women’s Council and the Women’s Bureau are mandated to spearhead t he 
Women’s Act 2010 and the formulation, implementation, coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation of t he Gambia’s gender policy. The Women’s Act covers a wide range of topics 
concerning women and was amended in 2015 to criminalize female genital mutilation . Effe ctive 
implementation of these laws has been hampered by patriarchal norms and beliefs. The 
National Youth Policy of The Gambia 2019 –2028 is designed to “lead the process and coordinate 
the creation of knowledgeable, skilful and properly comported youths wh o can contribute 
optimally to national development.” The AE’s assessment also notes that in 2018 tensions along 
ethnic, regional and religious lines had  reached “toxic levels” , which are likely to affect 
proportionally more of the most vulnerable, which in cludes ethnic minorities, young women 
and young men.  
51. The gender assessment was compiled based on stakeholder consultations and a desk 
review. A total of 132 villagers in the target areas were consulted, of which 81 were women and 
41 were aged 15 –35. Women’ s views on livelihood -related issues were collected through 
consultations exclusively with women. Institutional meetings were held at the national level 
with nine institutions and organizations, including private and public institutions focused on 
women’s issues. The consultations resulted in recommendations on the implementation 
strategy with a key gender focus , as well as environmental and social considerations to ensure 
sustainable use of natural resources  including aquatic habitats.


---
*Page 118*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 118 
 
 
52. The gender assessme nt presents a wide- ranging review of gender issues and gender 
gaps across the country and within the sectors that are the focus of this project. It identifies 
information, technical, financial, market and institutional barriers facing women along with 
social cultural barriers and root causes. Women comprise about 80 per cent of the  labour force  
in the fisheries sector. However, the sector is heavily segregated by gender, with women 
generally not involved in harvesting  marine resources, except for shellfish. Rather, t hey are 
largely involved in the processing and selling of fish and shellfish for the domestic market , 
which has lower profit margins than for the export market. Gender gaps in literacy and in access 
to information, technical and financial capital , along with social and cultural barriers make it 
difficult for women to access the formal sector and the export market. Infrastructure required 
for the export market is more often constructed with men in mind and presents technical, 
financial and institut ional barriers for women. Women’s productive activities are also 
commonly taken over by men when the activities start attracting investment, especially in the 
form of machinery. Extension services for women’s subsectors are rare,  and cultural norms and 
low levels of literacy contribute to the lack of women in decision -making and leadership roles in 
fisheries- related organizations and planning. Women are largely excluded from land ownership, 
limiting their access to finance and productive opportunities. Desp ite these barriers, women 
processors and sellers in the fisher ies sector often generate more income than their husbands 
and male counterparts. They generally have autonomy over their incomes and finance, and 
responsibility for their children’s education an d everyday household needs. The rate of gender -
based violence is high and close to half of the Gambian women think husbands have the right to beat them if they are not satisfied about the household or their conjugal relationship. Cultural 
norms and lack of educational and livelihood/employment opportunities also contribute to high 
rates of early marriage. The gender assessment has provided recommendations for relevant activities in the gender action plan to address gender gaps and barriers that inhib it women’s full 
involvement and benefits from project investments . 
53. The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement 
of the GCF G ender Policy.  
54. The gender action plan provides activities that address the challenges faced by women 
and includes baseline, indicators, targets, timelines and budgets. The project activities include 
collection of sex-disaggregated key indicators,  and inclusive consultations with women and 
other traditionally marginalized groups (including youth).  Gender -based targets in the gender 
action plan have a strong focus on women’s participation through consultations, training and 
capacity -building ; and on equipment provision, strengthening extension services to women, 
involvement in planning, and equita bly benefit ing from project investments with benefits rising 
to 100  per cent  in some cases. The project aims to engage rural young women with an 
intermediate level of education – the group which suffer from one of the highest unemployment 
rates – to help the  older generation of women to gain literacy and numeracy skills. Women will 
also be trained i n sustainable environmental management under climate change and 
negotiation skills. In order to tailor the intervention s more closely to the needs and strengths of  
women and to ensure their ownership, women will be consulted on the location, dimensions, 
efficacy and effects of infrastructure and the appropriateness of exact intervention sites; invited 
to observe or participate in the construction processes; consulte d on the development of 
extension services for women; and involved in mangrove restoration and conservation, 
including monitoring and evaluation of mangroves . They will also be part of planning and 
executing various campaigns as well as community -level dec ision -making. The AE has budgeted 
for an expert dealing with environmental and social safeguards , gender, youth , and sexual 
exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment . 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment (medium risk)


---
*Page 119*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 119 
 
 
55. PROREFISH Gambia is an adaptatio n project that aims to assist Gambian artisan 
fisherfolk to build resilience against climate change and improve their livelihoods, while also 
providing mitigation co -benefits through mangrove restoration and the development of 
fisheries value chains. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 17.2 mil lion. Total co -
financing of USD 7.8 million will come from the AE, via a grant of  USD 0.8 million, as well as the 
host country’s MoA, in the form of a USD 5 million grant via an IFAD -funded project2 and USD 2 
million from MoFWR NAM , in the form of a n in-kind payment .  
56. The Gambia is a least develop ed country and is recognized as a f ragile and c onflict -
affected S tate. Given the public nature of this project and limited availability of funding to meet 
the adaptation needs in the country’s fisheries sector, the use of grant instrument s is 
appropriately justified.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
57. FAO will serve as the AE for this project. Since FAO representation was established in 
the Gambia in 1978, FAO has supported sustainable development of the agriculture and natural 
resources sectors in the country, demonstrated by the implementation of 130 projects for 
improved food security and resilience in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors. In terms 
of collaboration with GCF, FAO has 15 projects in the GCF portfolio, targeting a range of 
countries across Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin America and the Caribbean.  
58. The project will be executed by the Government of the Gambia, acting through  MoA and 
MoFWRNAM, with FAO jointly delivering project activities via its Gambia country office. The AE 
has not provided a capacity assessment of MoA and MoFWRNAM, citing that a relevant 
assessment has been done by IFAD in the context of the formulation of the ROOTS project. The 
main risks identified are related to capacity gaps in internal controls, internal audit, due 
diligence and staffing. FAO has indicat ed that all necessary mitigation measures have been 
agreed to ensure that MoA can successfully undertake its role in this project. MoFWRNAM, on 
the other hand, is going to provide in -kind co -financing and manage its own contribution, with 
no procurement or f inancial management action. MoFWR NAM  is involved in a number of 
aquaculture and fisheries projects funded by various organizations , including the E uropean 
Union.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
59. Financing risk (sustainability): Co -financing o f this project will come from the country’s 
two ministries. Although the Government of Gambia has expressed its commitment to improv ing the livelihoods of its people through enhanced resilience of the fishing communities, 
it does not have the budgetary res ources to sufficiently finance dedicated activities. Coupled 
with limited interest from the private sector in  invest ing in aquaculture, accessing continued 
funding to sustain climate impact beyond the timeline of this project may be a challenge. The projec t has an exit strategy that is based on empowering local stakeholders, introducing durable 
infrastructure, and creating an enabling environment for private sector involvement. It is important that the capacity -building and training elements of the project can materially result in 
increased income and sustainable ecosystem management practices in the long run.  
60. Project operations risk (governance and additionality): PROREFISH is designed with an 
emphasis on  partner ing with the ROOTS project, an initiative in  the crop agricultural sector. In 
particular, for the aquaculture packages, per package investments costs (per hectare) will be 
supported  by ROOTS and by PROREFISH  (65 and 35 per cent, respectively) . Notwithstanding 
the technical and socioeconomic selectio n criteria that have been developed, achievement of 
 
2 Resilience of Organizations for Transformative Smallholder Agriculture  (ROOTS)  programme.


---
*Page 120*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 120 
 
 
complementarity and avoiding overlaps will require a sound governance structure, and close 
coordination and management on the ground. Implementation risks of other projects may also 
spill over and affect the results of this project.   
61. Economic analysis: Overall the project has an economic internal rate of retur n (EIRR ) of 
22.0  per cent  and a net present value of additional benefits of USD 21 million over 20 years. 
Positive environmental externalities expec ted from mangrove restoration are accounted for in 
the analysis, which strengthens the economic value. A sensitivity analysis that tests climate 
hazards and stressors has also been conducted to model the economic returns under a set of 
risk scenarios. Although the EIRR results remain robust, the interplay between different factors 
can reduce the economic returns , and the full realization of the project’s potential will depend 
on the adequate and timely implementation of all project activities.  
4.3.4.  GCF portfoli o concentration risk (low risk)   
62. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non -
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal.  
4.3.5.  Compliance risk (medium risk)   
63. In relation to  the scope of  integrity risks covered under the GCF policies on p rohibited 
practices (PP) and anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT ), FAO has advised that it has conducted risk assessments in relation to AML/ CFT and 
PP as well as a capacity assessment ( through IFAD) o f the executing entities.  
64. Regarding  the institutional and project -specific safeguards to be implemented to 
mitigate and prevent the identified integrity risks and vulnerabilities in this project, FAO 
confirmed that it manages  integrity  risks on an ex -ante and ex -post basis at project level as well 
as whole portfolio level.  
65. On an institutional level, the FAO country office in the Gambia also establishes and 
validates a fraud plan a nnually  and does the same with its risk management plan every six 
months.   
66. FAO has further confirmed that a ll its office s involved  in implementing the project 
(primarily its Gambia country  office) will prepare (1) on a yearly basis a fraud prevention plan 
that is reviewed and monitored by FAO regional office in Ghana ; and (2) a risk log with a plan 
for mitigating actions that is reviewed and updated every six  months. The enterprise risk 
management unit at FAO  headquarters  (HQ) will also monitor compliance with fraud 
prevention and risk management policies  throughout the project cycle . In addition, FAO will 
include in the project agreement to be signed between FAO and the Government of Gambia relevant clauses related to AML/CFT  and the prevention of other forms of prohibited practices 
to safeguard GCF resources .  
67. During project implementation, FAO, as AE, will provide close monitoring and 
supervision through its Gambia country office , as well as via its regional office in Ghana  and its 
HQ, to ensur e that the activities are implemented in full compliance with the signed project 
agreement  including the integrity risk management obligations.  
68. In relation to procurement -specific integrity risk , FAO will implement a n institutional 
tried -and-tested  robust automated system for detection  and prevention of related risk s. In 
addition, FAO will conduct a  know -your-customer exercise prior to  listing ; due diligence  will 
also  be performed at the time of any call for tender . Moreover, during the registration stage, 
FAO will conduct further  verifications on the parties  and corresponding financial information to 
ensure sync hroniz ation . As a supplementary safeguard, FAO will include specific provisions in


---
*Page 121*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 121 
 
 
all the agreements signed with co -financing and co -executing partners as well as in Letters of 
Agreement with procured parties.   
69. However, although FAO indicated  that it has conducted a risk assessment, F AO has not 
provided insights into the  actual project -specific risks and vulnerabilit ies identified from its 
assessment. Furthermore, while IFAD has co mpleted a capacity assessment on the executing 
entity, MoA, the funding proposal does not provide clear reporting on the outcome of the 
assessment  and any capacity  gaps identified. Considering  this, the Secretariat is  presently 
unable to conclude its evaluation on the overall residual risk exposure and mitigants in 
connection with this funding proposal . Therefore, the overall risk is assessed as medium 
pending the receipt of supplementary information from the AE.  
4.3.6.  Recommended risk rating:  Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment  Risk assessment  
Overall project/programme Medium GCF grant proceeds will be used to finance 
resilience strengthening activities to improve 
the livelihoods of the fisherfolk communities 
in the Gambia. Given the potential to build synergies with existing projects, it is 
important the project is structured and 
implemented in a way that ensures GCF additionality. The government’s ability to 
mobilize funding beyond this project is crucial 
to generating lasting climate impact to the Gambian fisheries sector.  Accredited entity /executing 
entity  capability to implement 
the project/programme  Medium 
Project- specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary  
70. FAO will serve as both the AE and the EE in the project. In its role as AE, FAO will be 
responsible for the overall management of the project, including (i) all aspects of project 
appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial, and technical oversight and super vision throughout 
project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and 
quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) projec t closure and evaluation. FAO will assume these 
responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the a ccreditation master 
agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF.  
71. The project will also be executed by MoA and MoFWRNAM  together with FAO in a co -
execution modality to jointly deliver the project activities and all functions relevant to the 
execution of the envisaged activities. MoA and MoFWRNAM  will be responsible for executing 
respective co -financing activities and FAO will oversee the execution of selected activities 
funded by GCF proceeds through the FAO Rep resentation in t he Gambia, and it will bear the 
overall responsibility for fulfilling its relevant EE functions of this project. The technical assistance will be provided by mobilizing FAO experts, or FAO -supervised consultants and 
procured parties . 
72. FAO wi ll fulfil its AE functions by setting up a dedicated p roject task force (PTF ) which  
will be independent of the EE functions also performed by FAO. The PTF will be composed of  
the budget holder, the l ead technical officer (LTO), a funding liaison officer, an HQ technical 
officer and other officers, as appropriate. FAO ( Gambia ) will also assign a dedicated national 
climate finance specialist and project assistant to ensure the AE function on the ground.  The 
LTO will be appointed in the regional office and will be responsible for the technical supervision


---
*Page 122*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 122 
 
 
and oversight of project activities throughout project implementation. More specifically, the 
LTO will have overall technical responsibility for the implementation of the project apart from 
supporting the budg et holder of the project based in FAO ( Gambia ) that involves  
implementation and monitoring of the a nnual work plan and b udget, including work plan and 
budget revisions. The LTO will be responsible and accountable for providing and/or obtaining 
technical cl earances of technical inputs and services procured by the EEs. In addition, through 
supervision missions,  the LTO will provide technical backstopping to the project 
execution/management team to ensure the delivery of high -quality technical outputs. The LTO 
will coordinate the provision of appropriate technical support from the PTF to respond to 
requests from the Project Steering Committee (PSC) . 
73. A dedicated p roject management unit (PMIU) will also be established and hosted by the 
FAO Representation in Ba njul, the Gambia,  and will be functional for the duration of the project. 
The PMIU will be responsible for supporting the  day-to-day execution of activities,  including 
working with participating regional and local governments and other stakeholders, and 
monitoring and reporting on project progress. The PMIU will be directed by a national project 
director and will be managed by a project -recruited national project coordinator , who  will be 
responsible for overall project management and coordination with all s takeholders. The PMIU 
will also include a finance officer, an operation s officer, a human resources and admin istration  
officer , and a procurement and contracting officer.  
74. The PMIU will coordinate directly with the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)  and the  
PSC. The PMIU will follow the FAO operational, financial and procurement procedures and will 
implement all activities in accordance with the annual work plans and budgets approved by the TAC. All operational and administrative aspects of the project (such  as procurement plans, 
financial plans and periodic reporting) will be cleared with the TAC. Issues for special 
consideration beyond the mandate of the TAC will be brought to the PSC . 
75. The PSC, which will be composed of high -level representatives from M inistry of Finance 
and Economic Affairs  (the national designated authority ), MoFWRNAM , MoA, Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources ( MoECCNR ), Gambia Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (representing the private sec tor), and FAO will provide strategic 
guidance for the project. The PSC will meet  once a year to review progress and address any 
implementation bottlenecks or policy/regulatory issues that require higher -level decision -
making. FAO will also assume the secretariat role for keeping record s of PSC activity and 
decisions . 
76. The TAC will be responsible for continuous technical oversight and for support ing 
project implementation. The TAC’s core membership will be from the d epartments of fisheries, 
water resources, forestry, parks and w ildlife, and a griculture, as well as from  the FAO and the 
ROOTS project unit and other organization s.3 The TAC will meet  twice a year and will be 
responsible for approving the a nnual work plans and b udgets, reviewing progress, providing 
technical guidance, and reporting to the PSC.  
77. In line with the implementation arrangement s of the project, the funds that FAO 
receives from GCF in its capacity as AE will be transferred to the FAO Representation in t he 
Gambia, which will manage t he funds and hire technical expertise for the PMIU in charge of 
executing the p roject. The PMIU will execute the activities either directly or through 
partnerships with several implementing entities, partners and procured parties. These 
engagements will fo llow the established operational, financial, procurement and reporting rules  
of FAO . 
78. Procured parties involved in project implementation, such as MoFWR NAM  and 
MoECCNR, will receive GCF proceeds through funds transfer in accordance with the FAO 
 
3 Namely, the NARI and NEA.


---
*Page 123*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 123 
 
 
procurement rules and will be contracted in accordance with FAO rules and regulations 
pertaining to the procurement of goods and services. On the other hand, in -kind and grant co -
financing from M oA and MoFWR NAM  will be executed by those entities directly to project 
beneficiaries. FAO will have overall responsibility for quality assurance and oversight of co -
executing entities.  
79. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented as per the FAO 
rules and regulations using the FAO Global Resources Managem ent System . Accountability on 
the use of financial resources will be ensured through the review of annual and bi -annual 
project reports, as well as through monitoring reports. In addition to this, FAO will be 
responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds according to FAO rules and regulations . FAO 
(Gambia ) is responsible for financial monitoring . During implementation, FAO will provide 
oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures , which may 
include monitoring mission s, spot checks and participation at project governance meetings. The 
project will be subject to the FAO audit regime , including the external audit and internal audit 
functions.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
80. As a cross- cutting initiative, the project ai ms at generating both mitigation and 
adaptation results. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall 
emission reductions of 238,519 tCO 2eq over the project lifespan of 20 years, as per the metrics 
of the GCF core indicator for mitigation based on the accounting methodology detailed under 
annex 24 of the funding proposal. On the adaptation side, 167,643 direct beneficiaries and 
250,000 indi rect beneficiaries are expected as adaptation impact. The AE has provided a 
methodology and rationale for defining both direct and indirect beneficiaries in annex 23 of the funding proposal.   
81. The theory of change diagram adequately captures different level s of expected changes 
as well as logical linkages between them from the goal statement to the proposed activities. It is 
good to capture the logical relationship s between project outcomes with identification of co -
benefits. The barriers and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified 
and linked to pertinent activities which will tackle them accordingly.    
82. The logical framework has been well designed in accordance with the GCF integrated 
results management framework ( IRMF ). The proj ect is expected to have huge paradigm shift 
potential since artisanal fisheries serve as a big source of livelihood for about 20% of rural population in Gambia. It will contribute to all four GCF adaptation result areas and one GCF 
mitigation result area ( Forestry and land use) with four project outcomes. Appropriate IRMF 
core and supplementary indicators are selected to monitor and report the project results in respective GCF result areas, and for each indicator baseline and targets (mid -term and final) ar e 
set based on  data available from credible sources.  
83. At the GCF outcome level of “ Enabling environment ”, four GCF core indicators have been 
identified: institutional and regulatory framework, technology deployment and dissemination, market development and  transformation, and knowledge generation, capture and learning. 
Given the relatively low or medium baseline of each indicator, the project is expected to build a 
comprehensive enabling environment at the national level.  
84. The project has listed relevant pr oject -specific indicators for project outcomes and 
output, and it is expected to enable a strong monitoring and evaluation of the project. The indicators are SMART
4 and have considered both qualitative and quantitative aspects of results. 
It is good to ha ve co -benefits and measure them with specific indicators:  this will increase the 
 
4  Specific, measurable , attainable , relevant and time -bound.


---
*Page 124*
---

       
GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 02 
Page 124 
 
 
level of understanding of the project and will give an opportunity for the Secretariat to capture 
non- climate results that are worth monitoring and reporting.  
85. The i mplementati on timetable (annex 5 of the funding proposal) clearly describes how 
and when project activities will be conducted, and key deliverables will be delivered. Annex 11 
contains the monitoring and evaluation  plan.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
86. The AMA was signed with the A E on 8 June 2018, and it became effective on 4 October 
2018.  
87. The A E has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
88. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of t he Gambia, a country in 
which GCF  is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, 
GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat submitted the first draft of the privil eges and immunities 
agreement to the Government of the Republic of t he Gambia on 18 May 2016. The draft 
agreement is currently under negotiation. The latest communication in that regard was sent by 
the Secretariat to the Government of the Republic of t he G ambia on 5 October 2018.  
89. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where  the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been p rovided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions  (including legal)  
90. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agr eement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 125 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP188 
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement 
in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Republic of the Gambia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                            Scale:  N/A  
1. The Gambia  is the smallest country within mainland Africa . Stretching  450 km along the 
Gambia River , the country has an area of 10,689 km2 and is surrounded by Senegal, except for a 
60-km Atlantic Ocean front. With  a population of 2.4 million ,1 the Gambia is one of the most 
densely populated countries in Africa.  
2. The Gambia is heavily reliant on agriculture and fishing ; this creates vulnerability to 
climate change s hocks , which  affect the country’s  most vulnerable  people . Overall, climate 
change w ill affect  marine, coastal and riverine fisheries, through damage to fisheries 
infrastructure and through the effects of increased temperature, salinity and acidity as well as 
sea level rise  on many important  fish and shell fish species.  This will in turn  threaten the 
livelihoods of poor fisher s and decrease the availability of fish from capture fisheries, which is 
now the main source of protein for the Gambian population and a pillar of sustainable diets and 
food and nutrition security (including access to protein) for the  poor est and most vulnerable 
people.  
3. In this context, the Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement in 
the Gambia (PROREFISH ) project aims to build the resilience of the Gambian artisanal fisher s in 
the face of climate change and improve their livelihoods.  The project  involves interventions at 
the coastal level, in the mangrove ecosystems and inland with aquaculture interventions , 
through the three components  discussed below.  
4. Component 1  aims to reverse the degradation of the mangrove ecosystems in key 
fisheries areas by investing in restoration through replanting and assisted natural regeneration 
of more salt -tolerant species, coupled with support to sustainable ecosystem management . The 
proje ct will invest in mangrove restoration of 2,350 ha (1,100 ha full reforestation and 1,250 of 
assisted natural regeneration) in the 10 areas prioritized during project preparation .  
5. Component 2 aims to increase overall fish availability and enhance the inco mes of poor 
fisher s and farmers by improving the artisanal fisheries infrastructure (thus reducing fish 
wastage) and by promoting aquaculture production through different climate -resilient 
technologies, including oyster cultivation and rice -fish farming.   
6. Component 3  aims to provide the cross -cutting support necessary for the successful 
implementation, scaling up and sustainability of the interventions in mangrove restoration, 
 
1 See https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/gambia/overview#1 .


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 126 
 
 
infrastructure climate proofing and aquaculture, as well as paving the way for in creased private 
sector engagement in the fisheries sector.  In this component, the project plan s to deliver  several 
activities that in the view of the independent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP)  are somehow 
disconnected, limited and not sufficiently explaine d. This will include the desi gn of short -term  
training courses and diplomas in climate change ; the develop ment of  updated curricula on 
fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management ; and integrating climate change and support 
for climate -related sectoral studies into national policies and strategies.  
7. Through this component the project will also organi ze annual “Invest in Fisheries ” 
round  tables to support the fish endeavours through private and public participation ; support 
the organi zation of actors  in the fisheries sector  into cooperatives/producer organi zations ; train 
artisanal fish processors on quality standards, marketing, export rules, etc ; promote 
partnerships between actors  in the fisheries and tourism sector s and other actors to forge 
productive alliances ; support youth groups in the production of fish feed ; facilitat e evidence-
based dialogue and sensitization on financial inclusion ; support gender and youth 
empowerment through the application of the household methodolog ies developed by the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO ); implement a functional literacy and 
numeracy programme targeted to female beneficiaries  of the project ; and t rain executing  entity  
personnel on gender .  
8. One of the main activities under this component is to i mprove public sector capacities to 
monitor the fisheries sector and its associated ecosystems and integrate climate risks. However, 
when the in dependent TAP inquired about the baseline indicators to deliver a robust 
monitor ing system and to assess climate  impact, the proponents responded that they would  
assess (i) change in forest cover ; (ii) livelihoods,  including income generation, reduc tion  in fish 
losses and additional fish production ; and (iii) the change in behaviour of the beneficiaries, the 
number of ecobusiness platforms developed and the number of women  with improved literacy 
and capacity skills.  The independent TAP believes that the indicators could be improved and 
that there is an urgent need to develop baseline i ndicators of the status of mangroves and fish 
resources.  
9. Through th ese mix of activities PROREFISH will provide targeted support to 20,198 
fisher s and other value chain actors, who with their household members constitute the 167,643 
direct beneficiaries , 52.4  per cent  of whom are women . In addition, PROREFISH will have 
250,000 indirect beneficiaries , or 10.3  per cent  of the country’s population . Through increasing 
fish availability, these interventions are expected to build the resilience of beneficiaries and 
improve their incomes and nutrition, as well as unlocking opportunities to expand and diversify 
their livelihoods.  
10. Although PROREFISH  is prese nted as an adaptation project, FAO has performed a n ex 
ante assessment of potentially incremental net greenhouse gas  emissions, including the results 
of all project -funded interventions. Overall, the project  reduces emissions, mainly owing  to the 
carbon se questration that will result from mangrove restoration activities, with  the mitigation 
benefits of a reduction in emissions of 238,519 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( t CO 2 eq) 
over the 20 -year lifetime of the investment.  
11. For the capture fisheries, th e project does not invest in increasing overall fish capture, 
but rather in more efficient use of the fish that is currently being caught. One important project 
benefit that is not reflected in the Ex -ACT analysis because it does not generate direct 
greenh ouse gas  emission reductions is that the lowering of post -harvest fish loss and waste will 
reduce the carbon footprint per k ilogram  of fish consumed as a result of more fish reach ing the 
market with no increase in fishing effort.  
12. The climate trend analysis and projections of climate change were conducted by 
downscaling global circulation models and  projected change in temperature and precipitation. 
The entire watershed of the Gambia R iver was included in the geographical scope of the analysis


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 127 
 
 
for a complete understanding of future stream flow.  The project presents historical and future 
trends in temperature and precipitation,  sea surface temperature , global mean sea level rise and 
salinity . The analysis concludes that over the medium term (20 years), climate change is 
estimated to reduce the volume of artisanal capture fisheries by at least 10  per cent and will 
impact mangrove ecosystems through increase d salinity.   
13. However, in a deeper  analysis it is important to highlight that only 460 km of the 1,150  
km-long Gambia River falls within the geographic boundary of Gambia. Moreover , because of 
Gambia’s  precarious  position as a country  encompass ing only a small part of the Gambia River 
watershed, compounded by scanty meteorological data points within the watershed, the trend 
analyses of meteorological parameters relied heavily on global reanalysis data. Such data have 
been improved through a systematic bi as correction, followed by an embedded validation 
process that is facilitated by Earth o bservation remote sensing tools and satellite -based 
observations. The process presents a historical data  set that provides daily temperature and 
precipitation data covering 1979 –2018. It is found that the average temperature has increased  
by 0.2  ℃ per decade, with a total rise of 0.74  ℃ for the baseline period. It is also found that the 
said increase in temperature has occurred uniformly over the entire watershed, with s lightly  
higher increases in the upper reaches of the watershed and in the co astal areas. For 1979 –2016, 
the corresponding change in average annual precipitation (i.e.  rainfall) has been in significant, 
exhibiting an increase of about 1  mm per year.  
14. Applicat ion of the Thornthw aite equation shows  a gradual increase in potential 
evapotranspiration in the watershed as a result of the rise in temperature and the seasonal variation in rainfall availability . At the local level, there have been reports of drought proneness 
in the watershed, which is believed to be linked to occasional instances of drastic decline in the 
outflow of the river, resulting in inward penetration of salinity along the coastal reaches and 
loss of artisanal fisheries.  
15. The projection of future climatology is found to be somewhat flawed, as the general 
circulation models employed for the projection have not been validated for the Gambia River 
Basin. The projection years chosen cover  2011 –2040, which corresponds well with the project 
timeline. Represent ative  Concentration Pathway (RCP) RCP  4.5 and RCP  8.5 have been used for 
the projection analyses. The projections indicate a decline in rainfall, although there is no confidence in the projection. Even though  the rate of change in temperature and rainfall will 
remain small for the projection years (using both scenarios), a net rise in average temperature and only a slight decline in rainfall will be enough to increase hydrological balance in the 
watershed and destabilize the flow patterns and the corresponding shift in mixing zones 
between fresh water in the river and the penetration of the saline front through the estuary. 
From such understanding, it is highly likely that in the watershed and also i n the near -shore 
open ocean, the artisanal fisheries will face difficulties in carry ing on under climate change. 
Given the high dependence of the Gambian population on artisanal fisheries for both income 
and food security and the general economic condition  of the country, the projected impacts of 
climate change warrant immediate actions for the fishers and the fisheries -based value chain to 
adapt to the conditions.  
16. The project outcomes are highly dependent on the joint actions developed with Senegal 
as the neighbour country, as the Gambia B asin and the marine resources are totally dependent 
on the actions of Senegal to protect and manage the ecosystem and its resources at the 
landscape level. The project will need to support Gambia’s new Fish eries  Policy and  Strategy , 
that as explained in the Country Ownership section, ( see para. 62 below)  involves a subregional 
approach to manage and control common fisheries.    
17. Overall, the project has a medium to high  impact potential in terms of adaptation . There 
are t wo points of caution : the need to further demonstrate how to monitor the impacts of 
climate change over the lifetime of the project ; and the need to prioritize actions in view of the


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 128 
 
 
large number of proj ect activities that could result in reduced impacts due to the dispersion of 
efforts on too many fronts.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                              Scale:  N/A  
1.2.1.  Innovation  
18. PROREFISH is one of the few projects presented to the GCF i n the fisher ies sector  aiming 
to ensure fish availability to the most vulnerable communities in the Gambia.  The proposal has 
an interesting approach that geographically target s coastal areas, the estuary  and the river as 
well as the nearby farming areas to integrate fish production with rice cultivation and vegetable 
gardening , co-financed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) 
Resilience of Organizations for Transformative Smallhol der Agriculture ( ROOTS ) project.   
19. However, the project present s too many activities that do not necessarily relate to each 
other, giving a sense of the light touches  in many propose d outcomes.  
20.  In terms of the coastal interventions, the project expect s to support seven  landing sites , 
which  account for 70  per cent  of the estimated catch volume of the artisanal sector and include 
a higher share of the total number of fisher s. The sites will target food loss through such landing  
sites, along with improve d storag e and  drying and smoking facilities. Although the climate -proof 
infrastructure is crucial , there is also a need to c reate strong coordination among the landing 
sites and increase the contractual power of negotiation with the industrial owners and facilities 
and dedicated a uthorities.  
21. The mangrove component has been proposed based on the current degradation level, on 
the relevance for fisheries (as spawning areas and nurseries), on the climate vulnerability and 
on non- protected area status in the estuary and middle river zones . Restoring  mangrove forests 
is essential to protect fish habitat  and also to ensure  ecosystem stability  in order  to protect 
coastal areas. In the view of the independent TAP, much of the destruction is man -made  and not 
climate ind uced. As presented in the project proposal, there should be no incentives  for further 
mangrove deforestation  from tourism  and agriculture  and no human -induced changes in the 
Gambia River water flow from  the construction of the Sambangalou dam, filling and operation s. 
Aside from the need to restore the selected mangrove sites, the  project needs to promote the 
overall protection of the mangrove ecosystems by governmental authorities , including the 
means to effectively control its depletion  and the overall impacts of the above -mentioned  
agriculture and infrastructure sectors.    
22. Aquaculture support will focus on the inland part of t he Gambia, where fish availability 
is much lower and the development of aquaculture is more relevant . The projec t will support 
integrated fish production in communal vegetable gardens  (coordinated by the ROOTS project), 
integrated rice -fish culture, fish culture in ponds and s ustainable oyster and clam culture (in 
open, brackish water) . Even though aquaculture is no t innovative as a practice, depending o n 
the selection of sites and communities, support in developing sustainable livelihoods and 
market  integration could make a difference to the communities involved.  
23. The theory of change is well presented , but the proje ct tries  to resolve all the adaptation 
barriers instead of concentrating on prioritizing effective long -term changes.  In particular, in 
the different activities proposed in component 3, the project aims to deliver too many activities 
and does not concentra te on achieving concrete and effective long -term outcomes . For example, 
support ing wom en’s literacy could  be perfectly well delivered with the Ministry of Education to 
resolve the gap in literacy in a more structur ed manner rather than just delivering a training of 
trainers that could end up not resolving the real educational challenge of the targeted 
communities.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 129 
 
 
24.  Moreover, while the project aim s to strengthen institutional capacity, it seems that FAO 
is leading and executing most of the project activities. It is crucial to ensure ways in which 
different governmental and national institutions are involved in delivering activities, gaining the 
capacity to support the overall objectives of the project.  
1.2.2.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
25. The project aims  to tackle institutional, social, technical, information  and financial 
barriers in an integrated manner, but as explained above, this seems to result in  weak  outcomes  
with  structural gaps in the country  left unres olved. These gaps include women ’s education and 
the market and financial structures to support poverty alleviation.  
26. The mangrove component is well structured, as it will ensure knowledge -sharing of the 
communities involved for recovering and maintaining the mangr ove ecosystem. The c oastal 
component is more practical, as it will deliver infrastructure to the fish ers, but there is the  
potential to create long -term knowledge -sharing to ensure coordination  among them and better 
negotiating power to ensure more sustainable and profitable  markets.  
27. The project seems to offer training in multiple  aspects as a way to resolve the structural 
gaps identified in the theory of change. For example , the project will pr ovide training in 
negotiation skills as well as in forest monitoring, equipment and technologies;  quality control ; 
fish feed ; fish production and smoking ; supervision of fish production (coastal and 
aquaculture) ; clam and cockle culture on mudflats ; and oyster culture.  
28. While training is important, there could be other options to ensure  that more people can 
be effectively  trained during and after project completion, including the development of 
guidelines and accompanying technical institutions that could su pport technical capacity 
transfer after project completion.  
29. This also involves the provision of all the expected training in climate change to 
governmental employees, who are normally not stable employees owing  to governmental 
changes. While the project wi ll support diplomas and deliver curricul a in fisheries, there could 
be options to support national non- governmental organization s that are able to support 
technological transfer on climate change adaptation to the communities.  
1.2.3.  Contribution to the  enabling environment and  regulatory framework and policies  
30. According to the proponents, PROREFISH, through its capacity -building of g overnment 
institutions, will contribute to the implementation of the new national Fisheries Policy and 
Strategy (draft technically validated in May 2022).  However, it is difficult to understand how  
this will be a ffected , as the proposal does  not present th e objectives  of the policy  and possible 
ways of supporting its implementation.  
31. Aside from this policy, o ne of the project objectives is to support policies at the national 
level. However, the explanation of the type of policies needed  aside from the Fisher y Policy is 
not clear. When the independent TAP inquired about specific policies being developed or those 
that need to be better implemented with the support of the communities , the proponents 
answered that s pecific policies and regulatory frameworks are s ubject to  potential review and 
that reform will be assessed during project implementation.  
32. The independent TAP believes that i t is critical to understand the current policy gaps 
and to structure effective policies based on an analysis of what has worked  in the past and what 
is needed to ensure ways and means t o control fish resources , together with the effective 
management of coastal and mangrove ecosystems. Therefore, in its  opinion,  the overall policy 
gaps  must be addressed  at the beginning of the project  to ensure that there are concrete and 
effective actions delivered as part of the activities to support policy reforms during the lifetime of the project.


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 130 
 
 
1.2.4.  Scalability and replicability  
33. Scalability and replicability will largely depend on the availability of resources to 
promote activities after project completion with the communities involved in the project.  
34. Moreover , the particularities of t he Gambia are not necessarily replicable to o ther 
countries, as it occupies a narrow strip of land that surrounds the Gambia R iver with  a coastal 
area of only 60  km. However, the lessons learn ed from the mangrove rest oration, the 
aquaculture management and the development and use of coastal infrastru cture can be shared 
with other countries through knowledge exchange and sharing.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential                         Scale: N/A  
1.3.1.  Environmental co-benefits  
35. The restoration of mangrove ecosystems  are critical for landscape sustainability and for 
ensuring spawning areas and nurseries for fish.  
36. The project will also  reduce the exposure of the communities to high toxic compounds 
that result from the traditional way of smoking fish products .  
37. The project will support air quality. F ish smoking in rudimentary ovens expose s 
workers – including many women and the young children accompanying them – as well as the 
people living in proximity to the rel evant  sites to a high health hazard and results in highly toxic 
compounds in fishing co mmunities The project will alleviate this risk with effective technology  
equipment . 
1.3.2.  Economic co -benefits  
38. The project will support more effective value chains for the communiti es that live on fish 
resources , allowing them to improve their income generation and therefore their  quality of life.  
39. There are also possibilities to create new employment from the aquaculture ventures 
and to support the fish  and oyster  cooperatives in becoming  more profitable and sustainable.  
The project is expecting to generate over 500 temporary jobs and 100 permanent jobs, wh ich 
would be targeted at vulnerable youth.  
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits  
40. The improvement of the artisanal fisheries processing systems throu gh the project -
supported FAO -Thiaroye process ing t echniqu e ovens, accompanied by adequate technical and 
managerial capacity development , will reduce the exposure to respiratory diseases.   
41. More food security will be ensured for households and the intake of fish protein s will be 
diversified . At the same time communities will be more resilient to the effects of climate change 
following the restoration of the mangrove ecosystems , which  will support the long -term 
opportunity to live from fish resources.  
42. The different training and capacity -building activities could support more social 
cohesion and greater community responsibility in  support ing their fishing grounds and 
resources . 
43. The project will also support the i nvolvement of women in developing effective fishing 
systems and in improving their ability to support their households with skills to negotiate fair 
trade agreements.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 131 
 
 
44. The project has a very good gender analysis, demonstrating t he challenges of women in 
the Gambian  fisheries  sector, where they represent about 80  per cent  of the sector’s labour  
force. According to the project proposal, Gambian women are not involved in the capture of 
marine resources, except for shellfish , which is reserved for them. However, as they process and 
sell fish and shellfish for the domestic market,  they generate more income than their husbands .  
45. The project gender action plan is well developed in that it tackles several barriers with 
concrete ac tions targeted at wom en. Moreover, the plan includes indicators and targets and has 
quantified the budget of the project representing investments in wome n’s activities.  
46. All training  session s and consultations under the proposed project will have slots 
rese rved for women , who  will be encouraged to take part in activities that are commonly 
restricted to men.  
47. However, as explained above,  the project is planning  too many activities under  
component 3 ; training for woman need s to be carefully thought through in order to ensure 
concrete impacts , rather than  offering  sporadic training  sess ions and capacity -building 
activities.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                      Scale: N/A  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country and vulnerable groups  
48. The Gambia is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change owing to its 
geography and limited  lowland  area combined with its population density . In the Notre Dame 
Global Adaptation Initiative i ndex, the Gambia is the 33rd most vulnerable country and the 53rd  
least ready country in the world, reflecting its high vulnerability score and low readiness score.  
49. Despite the presence of the Gambia River, which runs through the middle of the country, 
only one  sixth of the land is arable and poor soil quality has led to the predominance of a single 
crop , namely peanuts. Tourism is an important source of foreign exchange, as is the money sent 
home by Gambians living abroad .2 The country has limited resources to address climate change.  
50. The country has both a narrow ocea nic economic exclusion zone extending 200 nautical 
miles into the Atlantic Ocean and an associated watershed situated predominantly in 
neighbouring countries Senegal and Guinea , stretching only 10 km on each side of the Gambia 
River.  The dynamic hydrologic  system of fresh to saltwater bodies, and the habitats and species 
that it supports is subject to and responds differently to the major climate change forces 
encountered along it s transect.  
51. According to the project proposal, a griculture, including fisheries, plays an important 
role in the Gambia’s development, employing nearly half – 46 per  cent  – of the labour force and 
representing the source of livelihood for 80 per  cent of the rural population. For about 72 per  
cent of poor households and 91 per  cent of extremely poor rural households, agriculture is the 
main source of income. In 2019, the sector contributed 23.7 per  cent of gross domestic product  
and 33% of all foreign exchange earnings from exports. However, 79 per  cent of households 
engaged in agriculture and fisheries live on less than US D 1.25 a day.  
52. The Gambia’s gross domestic product  contract ed by an estimated 2.4  per cent  in 2020  
owing to the restrictions imposed by coronavi rus disease 2019 , after growing by 6.2 per cent  in 
2019. On the su pply side, the tourism and trade sectors were the most affected, while on the 
demand side, subdued domestic and external demand damaged  the economy .3 
 
2 See https://www.bbc.com/news/world -africa -13376517.  
3 See https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/west -africa/ga mbia/gambia -economic -outlook .


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 132 
 
 
53. Fisheries -related activities represent the main source of income for coastal fishing 
communities and are an important complementary activity for rural communities along t he 
Gambia River. Moreover, fish is the main source of protein in the diets of 80 per cent  of the 
Gambian population.  
54. The small -scale/artisanal fisher ies subsector supplies fish products to lo cal consumers , 
and shrimps, cephalopods and high -value species to the processing facilities. Originally 
practi sed on a subsistence basis, small -scale/artisanal fisher ies are today targeting commercial 
species in response to  increasing market demand. Despite the fact that most  fisher s still target 
fish for supplying the local market demand, a significant number of them are now engaged in 
fishing high -value species, such as sole, snapper and cephalopods , which  are processed fo r 
export or for the internal tourism market.  
55. Inland fisher ies are less developed, with  the operators often practi sing  traditional 
methods. Th e fisheries employ both subsistence and traditional commercial fishers, who 
occasionally sell their catches of shri mps, sole and other high -value species  to the industrial 
companies . 
56. The project has identified several barriers , including a mbiguous separation between 
climate change impacts and fisheries over -exploitation issues ; very limited data and analysis on 
climate  change  impacts on the sector and weak knowledge o f adaptation measures ; no 
disposable income for investing and weak access to credit ; and p oor-quality standards for fish 
products and insufficient linkages between fish value chain actors (producers) and buyers.  
57. Moreover, the country lacks technological capacities in the fish eries  sector and past 
experience with improved fisheries and aquaculture technologies  has been mixed.  The project 
proponents explain that t he lessons learn ed from past projects, including FAO aquaculture 
projects in the Gambia , have been incorporated in to the design of the present project, in order 
to scale up the successful practices and address the weaknesses identified . However, the 
independent TAP believes that the p roject has to analyse the past experiences  in more depth  
and focus on  the activities that will bring about  real transformational change.  
58. The country needs to strengthen the institutional capacity to manage both climate 
change and the coastal and inland fis h resources and ecosystems. There is insufficient capacity 
for natural resource monitoring and management and the availability of public funding is  
limited. Climate change is introducing an additional burden on the line ministries and agencies 
responsible for the governance and management of the complex fisheries sector , as they lack 
relevant knowledge on its critical importance for the future of the country.  There is also a lack of 
systematic intersectoral coordination.  
59. Overall, the re is a need to strength en institutional and implementation capacity in 
relevant institutions to understand climate change and to manage , sustain and restore 
mangrove and fish resources and to support the most vulnerable fish er population in the 
country, a s explained in the propo sal’s theory of change.  
1.5 Country ownership                                       Scale: N/A  
1.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy  
60. The project has been developed at the request of the Government of the Gambia, in close 
alignment with  its national and sector policies and strategies on climate change. The project is 
aligned with the National Development Plan 2018 –2021, which advocates for a modern 
fisheries sector resistant to climate -related hazards. Moreover, the project also responds to the 
country’s national adaptation programme of a ction, third n ational communication and s econd 
nationally determined contribution (2021) submitted und er the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 133 
 
 
61. The project is also closely aligned with the Gambia’s framework on climate change, 
namely the National Climate Change Policy 2018, which advocates promoting sustainable 
adaptive management of t he fisheries resources. It also falls into the fisheries sector strategy of 
the country’s Agriculture and National Resources Policy 2017 –2026 , aiming to optimize value -
added, improved export earnings, greater employment opportunities and enhanced 
contribut ion to improved nutritional status consistent with the rational exploitation of the 
resource base.  
62. The country developed the Fisheries Act 2007, the Fisheries Regulations 2008 and the 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector Strategy 2017 –2021, but the level of c ompliance and 
implementation are not explained in the proposal.  In May 2022.  the Gambia validated the new 
national Fisheries Policy and Strategy.  In this policy the country is committed to develop ing and 
implement ing a cooperation framework with Senegal for the sustainable management and 
utilization of the common fisheries resources of the Sene gambia subregion through a joint 
Management Committee to be supported by a joint s cientific body working through a w orkplan 
with indicators and reference points for monitoring the performance of the fisher ies resources . 
63. The project presents  several past and ongoing projects related to its overall objectives 
such  as the small- scale fish feed mills  project  (FAO) and the Protection of the Canary Current 
Large Marine Ecosystem , a joint project of FAO, the Global Environment Facility and the United 
Nations Environment Programme  involv ing the development of a mangrove protection plan. 
Since the project explains in its theory of change  on barriers to be addressed that the results of 
these projects  are mixed , the independent TAP requested that the lessons learned from these 
past experiences  be specifically explain ed. According to FAO, the project design took into 
consideration the differen t experiences  and lessons learned, but only described some technical 
issues such as  the reduction in  pressure from unsustainable harvesting on mangrove forests, 
both through improved fish processing technologies reducing the use of wood fuel and through 
improving oyster cultivation methods in mangroves . 
64. However, it is important to analyse the challenges in terms of t he Gambia ’s institutional 
capacity to directly manage the projects, or at least to get more involved in reduc ing its 
dependency o n the international institutions in delivering climate change related projects.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
65. FAO will serve as the a ccredited entity and e xecuti ng entity  for the project. As such, it  
will be responsible for the overall management of this project . FAO is the agency in the United 
Nations system that is specifically involved in agriculture and forestry issues, and it is also 
accredited by GCF. The organization has a solid reputation in the fields of forestry, ag riculture 
and food with a long history of climate change  related knowledge and innovation, particularly in 
terms of the fundamental objectives of the strategic intervention areas of GCF.  
66. The role of FAO as accredited entity  will be attributed to the relev ant offices and 
divisions in FAO h eadquarters located in Rome, Italy, the Sub-Regional Office for West Africa - 
located in Dakar, Senegal , and the office of the FAO Representation in the Gambia,  which  has 
strong, demonstrated experience in supporting the Government of the Gambia since the 
creation of the country office in 1978. FAO has provided vital support to the sustainable 
development of the agriculture and natural resource sectors in the country, having 
implemented 130 projects.  
67. The project will be executed by the Government of the Gambia acting through the 
Ministry of Environment , the Ministry of Agriculture ( MoA ) and the Ministry of Fisheries, Water 
Resources and National Assembly Matters  (MoFWRNAM ) and FAO in a co -execution modality to 
jointly deliver the project activities.  As executing entity, FAO will act through the FAO 
Representation in t he Gambia ; it will b e responsible for the management of the GCF proceeds 
and it will bear the overall responsibility for fulfilling its relevant executing entit y functions of


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 134 
 
 
this project. Technical assistance will be provided by mobilizing FAO experts or FAO -supervised 
consu ltants and procured parties.  
68. The project explains that the Government of the Gambia acting through MoFWRNAM 
and MoA will be executing entit y only for the activities it co -finances.  Moreover, the Project 
Management Unit will be established and hosted by the FAO office Representation in the 
Gambia, located in Banjul . These arrangements, as explained below , leave an open question on 
the real country ownership and sustainability of the project interventions at project completion.  
69. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic guidance for 
the project. The National Project Director of the P roject Management Unit  for this project will 
act as Rapporteur to the PSC. The PSC will be composed of high -level representatives (at 
Permanent Secretary level or equivalent) from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs 
(national designated authority ), MoFWRNAM, MoA, Ministry of Environment, Climate Change 
and Natural Resources -  MoECCNR, the Global Green Growth Institute  (representing the private 
sector) and FAO.  
70. The project will also have a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) responsible for the 
conti nuous technical oversight and support to project implementation. The core membership of 
the TAC will include the Directors (or equivalent, or other designated staff) from the 
Departments of Fisheries ; Water Resources ; Forestry ; Parks and Wildlife ; and Agri culture, as 
well as from the  National Environment Agency, the  National Agricultural Research Institute, 
ROOTS P olice Intervention Unit and FAO. The TAC will be chaired by the Department of 
Fisheries, with FAO as Vice-Chair and S ecretariat.  
71. FAO will work wit h local organizations, including non -governmental and civil society 
organizations such as the TRY Oyster Women’s Association (over 600 members), the National 
Agricultural Research Institute (on integrated rice -fish cultivation), the independent Institute 
for Social Research and Development, the National Association of Artisanal Fisheries Operators, 
the National Sole Fishery Co -Management Committee,  the National Fisheries Platform and the 
Gambia Artisanal Fisheries Development Agency.  
72. In the view of the independent  TAP, the project activities are highly dependent on FAO , 
not allowing for a real country ownership of the project and for the need to strengthen the institutional capacities to directly manage climate change projects. T he indep endent TAP  
recommends having  a closer look at the day -to-day execution arrangements, in which personnel 
from the ministries participate and learn from the development of the project to allow for more 
knowledge -sharing and capacity -building . There ought to be a technical task  and 
skills/knowledge transfer from FAO to the relevant gov ernment ministries and personnel  in a 
more structur ed manner, with a phased approach. Moreover, it is important to analy se whether 
the Project Management Uni t could be located wi thin one of the ministries to  allow for real 
knowledge transfer  and cooperation.   
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
73. The project presents evidence of two  consultation workshops , on 25 February and 29 
April 2021, to  support and validate the output of the design process of the project , with the 
participation of  national stakeholder s. The consultations involved the communities through the 
National Federation of Gambian  Women, the TRY Oyster Women ’s Oyster Association , the 
Gambia Women’s Bureau  and others.  
74. Moreover, field missions  were developed , visiting the project sites and allowing for 
exchange of views with the communities. The proposal includes a very clear report on these 
consultations. The field consu ltation allow ed FAO  to confirm the adequacy and relevancy of the 
project design .


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 135 
 
 
75. The stakeholder implementation plan is short  and simple,  and FAO will be responsible 
for most of the engagement activities. The annexes include a more robust stakeholder analysis.   
76. Overall, the project will depend o n an effective coordination of activities in which all the 
relevant parties get involved, and where the benefit -sharing arrangements are clear for the 
communities.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                     Scale: N/A  
77. The total cost of the project is estimated at US D 24.2 million, including a proposed GCF 
grant of US D 17.2 million, co -financing from MoA in the form of a grant financed by IFAD of US D 
5.0 million and in -kind co -financing by MoFWRNAM of US D 2.0 million.  
78. The finance provided by IFAD is a grant under its Debt Sustainability Framework, to 
finance the ROOTS project . The project aims to promote sustainable and climate -resilient and 
nutrition -sensitive agricultural technologies and practices a s well as  value chain and market 
linkages. ROOTS will finance the development of irrigated rice schemes and communal 
vegetable gardens, where PROREFISH aquaculture activities will be introduced. To enhanc e the 
project’s efficiency and to ensure additionality of the GCF investments, the first two aquaculture 
packages (and the most important ones in terms of the budget of o utput 2.2) build on the 
significant investments that the ROOTS project will provide. F or rice -fish culture, the ROOTS 
project will invest in irrigated rice schemes, the provision of inputs and agronomic training. 
PROREFISH will top  up these investments by contributing to the adjustment of the design and 
by providing aquaculture start -up kit s and training.  
79. The project provides an economic analysis involving the different components of the 
project. In terms of the six landing sites,  assuming a gradual decrease in the post -harvest losses 
(from currently 25 per cent  and expected business as usua l scenario with climate change of 30  
per cent to a final target of 15  per cent  post -harvest loss) and a constant volume of landed fish, 
the US D 7.4 million investments  in landing sites would generate over 15 years an economic 
internal rate of return of 41. 8 per cent  and net present value at a social discount rate of 6  per 
cent  of US D 27.3 million. The project provides different economic results for each of the sites, 
reflecting the investment and the volumes of fish, with positive results in all cases.  
80. For the four proposed aquaculture packages, a financial analysis was  conducted over 10 
years. Using a cost –benefit approach, the results indicate that each proposed adaptation activity 
is profitable, with significant returns for the project beneficiaries and w ith internal rates of 
return ranging from 15 to 27  per cent . The project justifies the fully concessional grant, as 
commercial loan financing or a mix of concessional and commercial loans show lower or even 
negative financial returns for the beneficiaries. The sensitivity analysis of these financial models 
highlights the importance of fish prices in generating adequate returns for the beneficiaries. In 
all packages, price decreases of 5 –10 per cent  significantly affect profitability, which justifies the 
project’s interventions along the value chain for better marketing and value addition to remove 
these risks. However, in the view of the independent TAP, the project should work to ensure a 
better price through effective value chains, as the reliance on grants will not be sustainable, and 
will impede the scaling of the aquaculture models.  
81. The project also presents the economic value of the net greenho use gas emission 
reductions expected to be generated by the project. However, high estimates of carbon prices 
used by the E uropean Union Emissions Trading System  and the World Bank rang ing from USD  
40/t CO 2 eq to USD  98/t CO 2 eq were used in the calculatio n. Therefore for 11,296 t  CO 2 eq per 
year, the project estimates an economic value generated of US D 1.1–2.7 million.  
82. Component 3 activities have been considered as playing an enabling role for the 
fisheries and aquaculture activities described above and a s such, they do not generate the ir own 
benefit streams.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 136 
 
 
83. In terms of the budget, the project spends a considerable  proportion of the resources in 
the supervision and provision of technical assistance in components 1 and 2, which could be 
better invested in more assets for the communities. On the other hand, the project invests small 
amounts in the different activities of component 3, giving the impression again that most of 
these activities provide insubstantial  project outcomes. 
84. In terms of market support, the project proponents explain that they will identify the 
most prominent markets via consulting the private sector entrepreneurs representing the 
demand side and will facilitate private sector platforms such as the “Invest in Fisheries” round  
tables, link ing up small -scale fisheries operators with entrepreneurs. However, the project does  
not explain how fair prices and equitable value chain financing arrangements  will be supported , 
involving , for example , the government institutions in public procurement, the tourism value 
chains or other relevant actors that together could ensure long -term contracts under fair price 
arrangements.  
85. The project introduces  an interesting co -management arrangement of the artisanal 
fisheries, where fish cooperatives are supporte d in manag ing the new artisanal fisheries 
infrastructure autonomously, through the introduction of a fee mechanism to fund o perations 
and maintenance  in the  long  term.  
86. Finally, the project present s reasonable value for money and efficiency in the use of 
concessional resources, but could deliver more integral outcomes , especially in component 3. 
Moreover, the project could develop more effective and structural processes and mechanisms to 
develop know ledge -sharing, capacity -building and supervision activities, reducing costs and 
involving relevant public and private institutions in t he Gambia.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
87. The independent TAP believes that the overall ob jective of the project to support the 
resilience of the Gambian artisanal fisher community is well intended, but that the project 
involves too many activities in the coastal, mangrove and inland areas, which should be 
monitored over time to measure climate impacts. For this reason, the project should start by 
creating a set of baseline indicators and a monitoring system that could be managed with the 
governmental authorities, during and after project completion.  
88. On the other hand, one of the project objecti ves is to support policies at the national 
level, but the proponents have not provided an analysis of the specific policies and regulatory 
frameworks that need to be reviewed or assessed during project implementation. Therefore, 
there is a need to develop this analysis at the beginning of the project, to ensure that the 
proponents could support concrete policy changes in agreement with the government, ending up in tangible policy achievements.   
89. In this context, the independent TAP recommends that the Board  approve the project 
subject to the following condition  prior to the second disbursement of the project : 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF,  in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat , of: 
(a) A monitoring and reporting framework document, with concrete set of baseline 
indicators that shall provide the basis for monitoring the outcomes and outputs of the 
project, together with nat ional systems to monitor the changes over the lifetime of the 
project. The set of indicators shall include at least: the current status of fish catchments,  
income and prices,  food loss measurements , level of food security of the direct 
beneficiaries , level of degradation/restoration of mangrove forest (e.g. t biomass/ha) , 
leakages related to the restoration and protection of mangrove forests in selected


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/ Add.02  
Page 137 
 
 
project areas , level of water salinity , and social indicators and economic indicators of the 
selected beneficiaries;  and  
(b) A document containing a policy analysis around artisanal fisheries development and 
social and economic welfare of the fisher communities in the host country, specifying 
the concrete  policy changes required as per the theory of change set out in section 
B.2(a) of the Funding Proposal, with concrete expected outcomes in terms of the policies 
that the project will support.


---
*Page 138*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 3/02 /Add.02  
Page 138 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP188 ) 
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement 
in the Gambia (PROREFISH Gambia)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Republic of t he Gambia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
 
Impact potential  
 
The AE would like to highlight that this is the first GCF project with a strong focus on 
fisheries.   As per T heory of Change , the climate change issues  and barriers related  to 
artisanal fisheries in The Gambia, a Least Developed Country, need to be addressed through a 
holistic approach  to generate sustained adaptation impact by  strengthening (i) fisher folks ’ 
livelihoods resilience, (ii) fisheries eco systems,  (iii) linkages to markets and (iv) national 
capacity to address climate change. The climate resilient artisanal fisheries ecosystems and 
infrastructure investments in components 1 and 2 cannot generate the expected paradigm 
shift and be scaled up without the institutional capacity development and enabling 
environment for private sector investment promoted by component 3 .  
FAO , through other projects , has been and is supporting r egional efforts to improve 
transboundary management of fisheries resources, including biennial fish monitoring by CECAF.    The inter -ministerial collaboration and related capacity development  promoted 
through  component  3are instrumental to strengthen ing Gambia ’s position in dialogue and 
collaborations with neighbo uring countries in the Gambia basin. The project’s investment and 
the national institutions capacity strengthening are the direct and immediate support to the implementation of the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Strategy (draft validated on 12 
May 2022) . 
Performance indicators for all pro ject’s dimensions are measured through a solid M&E 
system implemented jointly with the relevant stakeholders. Specific baseline data for 
mangroves will be established during the inception phase , with national coverage .  
 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
In addition to the elements of response provided above regarding project coherence  and 
consistency (see Theory of Change and Adaptation Barriers in Para 33 of the FP) , FAO is 
pleased to confirm that t he project design and implementation modalities have been 
conceived in a highly participatory manner and to ensure the most effective exit strategy. The 
Communit y Fisheries Centres (CFCs) and the government counterparts will be active 
contributing stakeholders in project implementation and will be accompanied in a  
progressive handover of responsibility in natural resource management and planning/ 
monitoring. Mangrove restoration and aquaculture activities are co -executed and co -financed


---
*Page 139*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 3/02 /Add.02  
Page 139 
 
 
 by government institutions ( Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National  Assembly 
Matters (MoFWRNAM) and Ministry of Agriculture (MoA ). The AE confirms that the project 
will assess , at inception phase, the gaps in policies and implementation capacity .   The project 
will support the impl ementation  of the F isher y Policy , through strengthening  the planning, 
monitoring and extension capacities of relevant national institutions .   PROREFISH includes a 
solid MEL (monitoring, evaluation and learning) system, that will provide evidence for wider 
strategic and policy -making related use to promote reforms related to climate change and 
fisheries in The Gambia .  
 
Sustainable development potential  
 
iTAP assessment is acknowledge d. 
 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 iTAP assessment is acknowledged.  
 
Country ownership  
 
The project was design ed through a highly participatory approach which generated a high  
degree of country ownership  and Government support .  FAO, as EE, will work in close 
collaboration with the co -financing and co -executing Entities (MoFWRNAM) and MoA). Inland 
aquacultur e activities will be managed by MOA co-financing through ROOTS project, thus 
avoiding dispersion of project management efforts.  To ensure effective and efficient 
management of the fisheries and forestry resources of the country the project will work 
extens ively with local organizations, including non -governmental and civil society 
organizations, such as the TRY Oyster Women’s Association (TOWA, with over 600 
members), the National Agricultural Research Institute (NARI, on integrated rice -fish 
cultivation), the independent Institute for Social Research and Development (ISRAD), 
National Association of Artisanal Fisheries Operators (NAAFO), the National Sole Fishery Co -
Management Committee (NASCOM) and the National Fisheries Platform are particularly critical, Gambia Artisanal Fisheries Development Agency (GAMFIDA. These NGOs and CSO 
have substantial experience in the forestry and fisheries sectors and will be key partners to 
deliver a number of services.   
In addition to specific capacity strengthening in Compo nent 3, the project will systematically 
transfer knowledge and competences to the national institutions. Th ese span  technical 
functions (extension, monitoring, reforestation, co- management of landing sites) as well as 
planning/management (annual workplan and budgets, communication).  
Finally, the project has a highly participatory governance, coordinated under the Project Steering Committee  (PSC) and the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC).


---
*Page 140*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 3/02 /Add.02  
Page 140 
 
 
 During design, it has been envisaged that Project Management Unit (PMU) be based in the  
FAO Country Office (h osted in government office).   During inception phase, due 
consideration will be given to the feasibility of locating the PMU in one of the relevant 
ministries. Independent of PMU location, and as mentioned above, the project will work in 
close coordination with all key national counter parts.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
 
The market and sector analysis supporting PROREFISH design show s substantial efficiency 
and effectiveness. The mix of soft and hard investment will fill-in the gaps in innovative 
technologies, knowledge and skills (public and private) to overcome market failures 
(adaptation barriers, FP para 33). The three interlinked components will strengthen (i) fisher 
folks’ livelihoods resilience, (ii) fisheries eco systems , (iii) linkages to markets and (iv) 
national capacity to address climate change.  
Communit y Fisheries Centres and Community Forest Management Centres will receiv e a 
significant set of assets , such as climate -proofed landing facilities, low emissions fish 
processing equipment  (84% of C2 or 57% of the total  cost ), as well as tenure over improved 
mangrove forests, to improve their livelihoods  in a sustainable manner . Specialized training s 
for artisanal fisher folk  and women and equitable partnerships building with commercial 
buyers  (“invest in fisheries” roundtables) will generate increased margins and value addition, 
especially for high -end local consumption and export ( FP para 87). 
  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
 
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall asse ssment and recommendation for the Board approval.  
FAO confirms that the proposed iTAP conditions can be met prior to second disbursement.  
FAO would like to confirm that the project’s logframe includes relevant indicators for 
monitoring progress, including key outcomes on improved resilience of fishing communities’ livelih oods and of fisheries ecosystems.   
Regular surveys  (Activity 3.1.2), together with the baseline survey (to be carried out in year 
1) and the annual outcome surveys, will track key indicators cover ing i) fisherfolk 
livelihoods -related information, gender di saggregated ; ii) ecosystem resilience -related 
aspects, and  access to basic services; iii)  food security. T he project will also develop the 
Government’s capacity to engage in  nation -wide monitoring of mangrove forests to assess  
leakage.  
The results of the baseline survey will serve to provide additional information for a dedicated 
focused policy analysis on artisanal fisheries’ livelihoods and related value chain 
development, carried out in the first year of the project (Activity 3.2.2). This will include an 
updated and complementary identification of policy and regulatory framework constraints to 
the climate resilience of artisanal fisheries in the Gambia .


---
*Page 141*
---

Annex 8  
Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
For the GCF -FAO Project “ Climate Resilient Fishery Initiative for Livelihood Improvement ” Gender documentation for FP188


---
*Page 142*
---

Contents  
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  .................................................................................................................. 5 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  .................................................................................................................................  7 
TRANSFORMING GENDER ASSESSMENT INTO ACTION PLAN FOR MAINSTREAMING  ............................................. 7 
LEGAL , ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPIRITUAL FRAMEWORK  .................................................................................. 8 
GENDER AND YOUTH IN RURAL GAMBIA  ..................................................................................................... 9 
SOCIAL PARTICIPATION OF RURAL GAMBIAN WOMEN  ................................................................................. 11 
RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FACING RURAL GAMBIAN WOMEN  ..................................................................... 12 
PRINCIPLES OF PROJECT FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION  .................................................................... 13 
PART I: GENDER ASSESSMENT  .................................................................................................................... 14 
1. INTRODUCTION  .................................................................................................................................  14 
1.1 Project Introduction from Gender Perspective  ..................................................................... 14 
1.2 Objective of the Assessment  .................................................................................................  16 
1.2.1 Rationale ............................................................................................................................... 16 
1.2.2 Objective .............................................................................................................................. 16 
2. METHODOLOGY  ................................................................................................................................ 17 
3. LEGAL , ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPIRITUAL FRAMEWORK  .......................................................................... 18 
3.1 Equality, Inclusion and Protection: Women, Youth and Children  ........................................ 18 
3.1.1 Treaties, Constitution and Laws  ........................................................................................... 18 
3.1.2 Treaties, Constitution and Laws in Practice  .......................................................................... 23 
3.1.3 Gender Policy  ....................................................................................................................... 24 
3.1.4 Yo uth Policy  .......................................................................................................................... 26 
3.1.5 Gender, Youth and Ethnic Minorities Protection  .................................................................. 27 
3.1.6 Religion in Legal Sphere  ........................................................................................................ 28 
3.2 Fishery, Crop Agriculture, Livestock and Climate Change Policies on Women and Youth .. 28 
3.2.1 Gender and Policy on Agriculture and Natural Resources  .................................................... 28 
3.2.2 Youth and Policy on Agriculture and Natural Resources  ...................................................... 30 
3.2.3 Gender and Climate Change Policy  ...................................................................................... 30 
3.2.4 Youth and Climate Change Policy  ......................................................................................... 32 
3.2.5 Mechanism for Gender Mainstreaming  ............................................................................... 32 
3.2.6 Mechanism for Youth Mainstreaming  .................................................................................. 34 
4. GENDER AND YOUTH IN RURAL GAMBIA  .............................................................................................. 35 
4.1 Basic Statistics  ........................................................................................................................ 35 
4.1.1 Gender Parity  ....................................................................................................................... 35 
4.1.2 Population, Ethnic Groups and Languages  ........................................................................... 37 
4.1.3 Literacy and Education  ......................................................................................................... 39 
4.1.4 Poverty  .................................................................................................................................  43 
4.1.5 Employment  ......................................................................................................................... 43


---
*Page 143*
---

4.1.6 Marria ge ............................................................................................................................... 47 
4.1.7 Religion  .................................................................................................................................  49 
4.2 Labor Division, Decision Making and Autonomy  .................................................................. 50 
4.2.1 Fishery  .................................................................................................................................. 50 
4.2.2 Crop Agr iculture  ................................................................................................................... 52 
4.2.3 Livestock  ............................................................................................................................... 54 
4.2.4 Household Work  ................................................................................................................... 55 
4.2.5 Supplementary Income ........................................................................................................ 56 
4.2.6 Decision Making and Autonomy  ........................................................................................... 58 
4.2.7 Conflict Resolution  ............................................................................................................... 63 
4.3 Access to Resources and Services .......................................................................................... 63 
4.3.1 Land, Crops, Animals, Equipment and Infrastructure  ........................................................... 63 
4.3.2 Extension Services  ................................................................................................................ 64 
4.3.3 Climate Information Services ................................................................................................ 66 
4.3.4 Credit  .................................................................................................................................... 67 
4.3.5 Mobile Phone, Computer and Internet  ................................................................................ 68 
4.3.6 Traditional Sources of Information  ....................................................................................... 70 
4.3.7 Environmental Awareness: Climate Change and Ecosystems  .............................................. 71 
4.3.8 Access to Markets  ................................................................................................................ 71 
4.3.9 Other Professional Needs  ..................................................................................................... 72 
4.4 Water and Sanitation  ............................................................................................................. 72 
4.5 Energy  ..................................................................................................................................... 73 
4.6 Health  ..................................................................................................................................... 74 
4.6.1 General Health  ..................................................................................................................... 74 
4.6.2 Reproductive Health  ............................................................................................................. 78 
4.6.3 Health System  ....................................................................................................................... 80 
4.7 Coping with Negative Shocks  .................................................................................................  82 
4.8 Aspirations of the Youth ........................................................................................................ 83 
5. SOCIAL PARTICIPATION OF RURAL GAMBIAN WOMEN  ........................................................................... 84 
5.1 Rural Women’s Voice in Politics  ............................................................................................ 84 
5.2 Harvester/Processor/Seller and Farmer Organizations  ........................................................ 85 
6. RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RURAL WOMEN FACING CLIMATE CHANGE  ............................................. 86 
7. PRINCIPLES OF PROJECT FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION  .............................................................. 89 
7.1 Principles of Project Formulation  .......................................................................................... 89 
7.1.1 Enabling Women for Strategic Decision Making ................................................................... 89 
7.1.2 Enabling Women for Strategic Actions  ................................................................................. 89 
7.1.3 Female Youth as Agents of Change ...................................................................................... 90 
7.1.4 Ensuring Sustainability through Ownership  .......................................................................... 90


---
*Page 144*
---

7.2 Principles of Project Implementation  .................................................................................... 90 
7.2.1 Building on and Enhancing the Strengths of Women  ........................................................... 90 
7.2.2 Investment in Women  .......................................................................................................... 91 
7.2.3 Female Youth as a Distinct Group  ........................................................................................ 91 
7.2.4 Social Acceptance of Gender Empowerment  ....................................................................... 91 
7.2.5 Sexual Exploitation, Harassment and Abuse and Gender -Based Violence  ........................... 92 
7.2.6 Integration of the Environment in Business  ......................................................................... 94 
8. FIELD CONSULTATION : PARTNERS AND QUESTIONS  ................................................................................ 95 
8.1 Consultation Partners  ............................................................................................................ 95 
8.2 Cons ultation Questions  .......................................................................................................... 99 
8.2.1. Core Consultation Questions for Institutions  ...................................................................... 99 
8.2.2 Core Consultation Questions for Female Harvesters/Processors/Sellers Farmers  ............... 99 
8.2.3 Core Consultation Questions for Youths  ............................................................................ 102 
8.2.4 Core Consultation Questions for Community Leaders  ....................................................... 103 
PART II: GENDER ACTION PLAN ................................................................................................................ 105 
1. INTRODUCTION  ............................................................................................................................... 105 
2. GENDER ACTION PLAN ..................................................................................................................... 109 
3. TIMELINE AND MILESTONES  .............................................................................................................. 135 
3.1 Component 1: Strengthening Restoration Capacity and Community Management of 
Artisanal Fisheries Habitats  ....................................................................................................... 135 
3.1.1 Output 1.1: Mangrove Ecosystems Sustainably Restored in Fisheries Priority Areas  ....... 135 
3.1.2 Output 1.2: Local Communities Equipped for Sustainable Ecosystem Management  ....... 139 
3.2 Component 2: Climate Resilient Fisheries Infrastructure and Aquaculture Production ... 144 
3.2.1 Output 2.1: Crit ical Small Scale Fisheries Infrastructure Climate -Proofed and Improved  145 
3.2.2 Output 2.2: Aquaculture activities introduced as adaptation measures for livelihood improvement  .............................................................................................................................. 154 
3.3 Component 3: Improved Climate Change Adaptive Capacities  .......................................... 164 
3.3.1 Output 3.1: Public Services Supported to Analyze, Anticipate and Respond to Climate Risks .................................................................................................................................................... 165 
3.3.2 Output 3.2: National Capacities Developed to Support the Implementation of Adaptation Measures  ..................................................................................................................................... 171


---
*Page 145*
---

 
 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
AF Adaptation Fund  
AIDS  Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome  
ANR  Agriculture and natural resources  
CC Climate Change  
CEDAW  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women  
CFC Community Fisheries Center  
DPT Diphtheria , Pertussis (whooping cough)  and Tetanus  
EU European Union  
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FASDEP  Food and Agriculture Sector Development Project  
FGM  Female genital m utilation  
FTT FAO -Thiaroye Fish Processing Technique  
GABECE  Gambia Basic Certificate Examination  
GAFSP  Global Agriculture and Food Security Program  
GAMHOPE Association of Horticultural Producers and Exporters of The Gambia  
GDP  Gross Domest ic Product  
GRM  Grievance Redress Mechanism  
HDI Human Development Index  
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus  
ICT Information and Communication Technology  
IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development  
IMCC   Inter -ministerial Climate Committee  
LGA Local G overnment Are a 
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
MoA  Ministry of Agriculture  
MoFWRNAM  Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National 
Assembly Matters  
MPI Multidimensional Poverty Index  
MWA  Ministry of Women’s Affairs  
NAATIP  National Agency against Trafficking in Persons  
NAT  National Assessment Test  
NCC  National Climate Committee  
NCCC  National Climate Change Council 
NFCS -GAM  The Gambia National Framework for Climate Services  
NGO  Non -governmental organization  
NWC  National Women’s Council  
O&M  Operation  and Maintenance  
PEP Post -Exposure Prophylaxis   
PMIU  Project Management and Implementation Unit  
SEAH  sexual exploitation, abuse and harrassment  
UNDP  United Nations Development Program me  
UNFPA  United Nations Population Fund  
USD  United States Dollar


---
*Page 146*
---

6 
 WASSCE  West African Senior School Certificate Examination  
WB Women’s Bureau  
WHO  World Health Organization  
WMO  World Meteorological Organization  
World Bank  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD)


---
*Page 147*
---

7 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
TRANSFORMING GENDER ASSESSMENT INTO ACTION PLAN FOR MAINSTREAMING  
Women  comprise a great majority  of the workers in the fishery sector  in The Gambia at about 80% of the 
sector’s labor force . Women do  not participate in all  subsectors of fishery,  as work  is differentiated by 
gender . The Gambian women are not involved in capture of marine resources, except for shellfish which 
is reserved for them. Processing and selling  of fish and shellfish for the domestic market  have lower profit 
margins  than for the expor t market and are women’s domain . The widespread illiteracy  among women 
(information , technical and financial barriers) makes it difficult for them to access the form al sector , which 
includes export markets (market barrier ). The latest infrastructure , without which export would be 
difficult, is more than often constructed with  men in mind (technical and institutional barriers).  Productive 
activities  are commonly  defemi nized when the activities start attracting investment , especially in the 
form of machinery . Extension services  for women’s subsectors are rare (technical and institutional 
barriers) , and i lliteracy forces women  to cede the Treasurer’s positions of their organizations to men 
(informational barrier).  
 
Despite these setbacks, women processors and sellers in the fishery sector generate more income than 
their husbands. T hey have complete au tonomy over their incomes and finance almost single -handedly  
their children’s education and everyday household needs . Men’s monetary contribution to these matters 
is on an ad hoc basis (financial barrier against women).  Regardless, many women swallow their words 
when there is disagreement  with their  husbands  so that  the marriage  is not negatively affected ( social 
barrier). Close to  half of the Gambian women think husbands have the right to beat  them if they are not 
satisfied about the household or their conjugal relationship (social barrier). As girls in the rural areas h ave 
very limited opportunities to study or earn a living, the only option left  for them is usually early marriage , 
which perpetuat es the vicious circle for women (social barrier).  
 
The most fundamental constraints  that the women  in the fishery sector face are gender imparity  of 
decision -making power  and illiteracy. The impacts of climate change  on women are considered much 
larger  than on men, as their lack of literacy and numeracy skills make women inept at conceiving  strategic 
actions  that are required for effective adaptation  to climate change. Limited decision -making power and 
access to productive resources among women do not give them the full range of adaptation options  that 
would be available under gender parity , and thus negative ly affecting  their business as well as 
management of the environment and ultimately  the adaptation capacity  of the entire society . 
 
The project tackles these root causes  through activities to improve decision -making parity , involving 
women, men and community gatekeepers and applying household methodology. The discussions under 
this methodology will include sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) and gender -based 
violence  (GBV) , as appropriate, and the community gatekeepers will be sensitized and mobilized for 
community -driven support measures against them. These measures are to mitigate the possibilities  that 
the engagement of women in new activities and their acquisition of new skills upset the current gender -
based  power -balance in the household and community to  provoke SEAH or GBV. The Grievance Redress 
Mechanism of FAO Gambia will be strengthened to handle such incidents in an inclusive, survivor -
centered and gender responsive manner. Referral pathways  for gender -based violence  will be 
established and professionals trained for their operationalization.  The effectiveness of these 
interventions rests  on the willingness of the targeted groups to learn from the trainings and dialogues, 
which in turn partly depends on th e skills of trainers/facilitators.


---
*Page 148*
---

8 
 The project will make use of rural young women  with  intermediate level of education – the group which 
suffer from one of the highest unemployment rates – to help the older generation of women  to gain 
literacy and numerac y skills . Women will also be trained on sustainable  environmental management  
under climate change and negotiation  skills . In order to  tailor the intervention more closely to the needs 
and strengths of women  and to create their ownership , they will be: consulted on the location, 
dimensions, efficacy and effects of infrastructure  that concern them and appropriatene ss of exact 
intervention sites ; invited to observe or participate  in the construction  processes; consulted on the 
voice -over version  of extension services  for women; involved in mangrove restoration and conservation, 
including monitoring and evaluation of mangroves; and be part of  planning and executing  various 
campaigns  as well as community -level decision making .  
 
LEGAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPIRITUAL FRAMEWORK  
Constitution and National Laws : The Constitution of The Gambia 1997 declares that women and men are 
equal in all domains of life,  but also incorporates the customary law and shari’a, which are not entire 
compatible  with gender equality . Many  national legislations on women, yout h and children draw from the 
treaties that the country ratified, but the ir effective implementation has been hampered by  the time -
honored patriarchal norms and beliefs . 
 
Policies : Both the National Gender Policy 2010 -2020 and Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) Policy 
2017- 2026 recognize the importance of women in agriculture sect or as well as the low productivity  of 
female farmers. One of the objectives of the ANR Policy is to improve participation and representation of 
female and youth farmers . Lack of negotiation skills among women is among the concerns highlighted by 
the ANR Policy.   
 
The National Climate Change (CC) Policy 2016 aims for achieving, among others, environmental  justice 
and “addressing social inequalities, particularly relating to gender, age, infirmity and socioeconomic 
status, which would be aggravated by climate change [.]” With respect to forests, the Policy underlines the 
necessity of adopting fuel -efficient cooking stoves and forest restoration, such as that of mangrove 
systems.  The National Youth Policy 2019 -2028 recognizes the youth as the most important and valuable resource 
as well as the agriculture as the source of employment. It lists “[t]he increasin gly high number of school 
drop -outs, forced and early marriages and teenage pregnancies”  as issues that deserve attention . The 
ANR Policy sees  out-migration of rural youths as an obstacle to the vibrancy of the sector. According to 
the CC Policy, the youth are vitally important in the country’s response to climate change .  
 
Government Officials : In connection with women and youth, the  government officials interviewed were 
most concerned about the loss of livelihoods due to climate change and lack of capacity to cope with it.  
According to them, fishery specific issues were: illegal fishing by industrial fleets ; and lack of mangrove 
restoration. Other general obstacles observed were lack of: bargaining power and marketing/literacy/  
numeracy skills ; access to funds ; and voice . Additional problems identified were: gender -based domestic 
violence ; unbalanced work responsibilities between genders ; penury of freshwater in the rural areas ; and 
unsustainability of projects due to insufficient integration of local knowledge in design and 
implementation. Landing Site Managers did not consider women as landing site users , although they are 
physically present at the landing sites to purchase fish  which they  process or sell.  The youth being a 
relatively new topic to the policymakers, the officials consulted often saw the problems of women and youth together.


---
*Page 149*
---

9 
  
Religion : Religions do not rule every aspect of the lives of the Gambians, but are the cornerstones with 
respect to women’s reproductive health, marriage and inheritance . 
 
GENDER AND YOUTH IN RURAL GAMBIA  
Women and the youth  – including both male and female – are often treated together as one group. While 
rural women face particularly disadvantaged conditions  and deserve attention as a group on its own, their 
plight is usually in the shadow of broader issues of women or development. According to the latest C ensus 
in 2013, 35% of the total population were aged 13 -30 and most of them live d outside the capital. In 2020, 
it was estimated that slightly over 40% of the population lived in the rural areas.  
 
Basic Statistics – Gender Parity : According to the Human Development , Gender Development and Gender 
Inequality Indices  of the  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) , Gambia was one of the least 
developed and the least gender unequal  in the world  in 2019. Gender inequality is said to be manifestation 
of social stratification on a larger scale in the Gambian society.  
 
Basic Statistics – Population: The population growth rate peaked in 1988 at 5.0% and was 2.9% in 2019 , 
which resulted in a large youth population (about 35% in 2013). More than 60% of youths lived in the rur al 
areas at the time of last Census in 2013.  
 
Basic Statistics – Literacy and Education: A mere 34% of women aged 15 and above and 51% of men aged 
15 and above were literate in 2013, but the rates for women and men aged 15 -24 were much higher at 
64% and 7 1%, respectively in 2015. The school enrolment rate increased rapidly, but a non -trivial 
proportion of children were still out of school in 2017 , with higher percentage for girls . The dropout rate 
has been  higher for girls; the possible contributing factors were preference for boys’ education, early and 
forced marriages,  teenage pregnancy  and child labo r. The numeracy skills of children trailed behind their 
reading skills ; less than 9% of children demonstrated satisfactory level in 2018. Girls who had satis factory 
numeracy skills led boys by three percentage -points in the country, but the rural girls with satisfactory 
skills were less than 2 %.  
 
Basic Statistics – Poverty : UNDP  identifies multiple deprivations suffered by individuals in three 
dimensions: health, education and standard of living.  An average Gambian in 2018 lived practically in 
severe multidimensional poverty.  It is estimated that the latest pandemic has added a great number of 
additional people into poverty . 
 
Basic Statistics – Employment : It is believed that 70% of Gambian women are engaged in low productivity 
rural subsistence agriculture. I nformal employment is higher for women at all education levels, but the 
gender gap is the largest when the  highest education level attained is intermediate . Around 2000, less 
than half of the  persons aged 13 -30 were economically active and comprised 70% of all unemployed . 
Gender gap among the  youth who are not in education, employment or training is the largest when the  
highest education level  attained  is intermediate. Rural unemployment is low for all ages . Emigration is 
widespread, generating 15% of Gross Domestic Product in 2019.  
 
Basic Statistics – Marriage : Nearly 10% of women aged 15 -49 were  married before the age of 15 in 2018, 
compared to 0.3% of the male counterparts. In 2018, more than half of the women aged 15 -24 and 
married had a spouse who was older by ten years or more . For women, m ore than often there are no 
meaningful alternatives to marriage including work opportunities in the rural areas . The statistics  imply


---
*Page 150*
---

10 
 that women’s  empowerment  influences  the types of unions , including involvement in transactional 
intimacy, as they depend  on gendered economic inequalities.  
 
Basic Statistics – Religion : Well o ver 95% of the population in the country were  estimated  Muslims  in 
2019. It was estimated in 2018 that the tensions along the ethnic, regional and religious lines had  reached 
high levels,  which are likely to affect proportionally more the most vulnerable .  
 
Labor Division : Women and men are not only different actors of the same value chains, but also operate 
on different scales and serve different markets . Anything meant for local consumption is women’s work 
and is o f low profit margin. Household chores and caregiving are almost entirely women’s responsibilities.  
Most households engage in small -scale farming and livestock raising on a subsistence basis, even if their 
main livelihood is in fishery sector.  Commercial se x in the tourist sector , human trafficking  and related 
exploitation appear to continue, and their  targets tend to be women  rather  than men.  
 
Decision Making and Autonomy : Men are by default the heads of households. Women  and youth are 
consulted in decision s related to their work, but do not have the same decision -making power as adult 
men.  In case the parents are involved in the same work as the youth, the parents speak for all.  At home, 
women make decisions on day -to-day issues and are consulted for bigger family matters such as 
inheritance, but the husband is the ultimate decision makers of each household.  Women have complete 
autonomy over their own income, which is used to run  the household, supplemented by husband’s 
income. Women do not own any of big-ticket assets.  
 
About one in three women in The Gambia experience sexual or physical violence in their lifetime. The latest pandemic has led to loss of jobs and possibility of questioning men’s authority, which is likely to 
have drive n men to violence.  In 2018, more than three- quarters of girls and women aged 15 -49 had 
undergone female genital mutilation. Child marriage remains common among girls, especially in the rural 
areas.
 Nearly 50% of women were of the opinion in 2018 that beating the wife was justified when: the 
wife neglects the children; she burns the food; she argues with him; she goes out without telling him; or 
she refuses to have sex with him . Women allow men to have power in the household, because they know 
that otherwise men may be discontented and create problems for the marriage and the household . All 
community leaders interviewed emphasized the importance of dialogues in conflict resolution.  
 
Access to Resources and Services : Women do not own land and access is given through their male family 
members.  The so -called women’s crops and animals are usually for subsistence purposes. Women are 
often allotted the least attractive units of infrastructure. Extens ion services are unsatisfactory, in 
particular for subsectors dominated by women. Climate information services are not available for women or men.  Formal credit is hard to come by in the rural areas, and combined with illiteracy, women rely on 
borrowing from family and friends.  Women’s access to mobile phones was on par with that of men’s . 
Gender and rural -urban gaps were pronounced for computer access, with the largest gaps observed 
among the  youth, the group with the  highest access.  The most popular media was the radio for both 
women and men.  There is no organized information on markets or extension services that is diffused by 
the media  and accessed by women.  
 Women in fishery kno w that mangroves are indispensable  for their liveliho ods, but  many continue to 
harvest the mangroves for fuel and roofing, while  being aware that  the mangroves  will continue to 
diminish  with the current management practices . Women listed insufficient quantity as one of the most 
concerning issues of water, but they were also willing to engage in aquaculture if proposed by a donor.  
Gender -based division of work confers on women  less profitable  markets  and little investment .


---
*Page 151*
---

11 
  
Water and Sanitation: More than 90% of the population ha d access to an improved source of water in 
2018.  The time required to reach an improved drinking -water  source was 30 minutes or more in the rural 
areas . It was women over 15 years of age who collected water. Less than 2% of households in the rural 
areas had access to an improved drinking- water source located on premises, free of E. coli and available 
when needed . Improved sanitation was observed less among rural than among urban households.  
 
Energy : The vast m ajority used solid fuel, and little over half used  three stone stove or open fire. The fuel 
was primarily wood and charcoal ; almost  all was wood in the rural areas . It was the women who collected 
or purchased fuel. Artisanal smoking and drying of fish were  estimated larger in terms of fuel use than the 
rest of the sector and inefficient per landed fish. Electric lighting was available to over half of the 
population.  
 
Health: Life expectancy at birth in 2018 for Gambian women and men was roughly on par with the Sub-
Saharan average. More than half of the deaths were caused by communicable diseases and maternal, 
prenatal and nutrition conditions, implying the unsatisfactory state  of the health services. The prevalence 
of undernourishment was 1 2%; the rate has been constantly below the Sub -Saharan average. 
Micronutrient deficiencies were considered widespread and affected women and under -five children 
most.  The country was evaluated medium by the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of 
malnutrition for stunting and for wasting, while high for underweight in 2018.  
 Women aged 15 -24 from the poorest households engaged more in sex than women of the same age group 
but from wea lthier households. Sexual activities diminished progressively with wealth. For men, the level 
of education attained or household wealth did not clearly affect their behavior as they did for women; 
men’s engagement in sex slightly increased with education l evel and was the highest for those from the 
richest households, although the poorest was the second highest . The overall fertility rate declined from 
6.4 in 1983 to 4.4 in 201 8. The adolescent fertility rate expressed as number of births per 1,000 women 
aged 15 -19 also declined from 200 in 1983 to 67 in 2018 ; the number remained  high in the rural areas at 
108.  Health services  are underutilized  by the adolescents , and unsafe abortion is  considered a major factor 
in the high maternal mortality rate.
   
 
Coping  with Negative Shocks : Limitations in fiscal, monetary and financial buffers do not allow the 
country to establish a full-fledged system of social safety nets. The practice of informal social protection 
is based on th e tradition of kinship -support through cash or in -kind transfers; it  is the most preferred and 
used method in the rural areas.  
 
Aspirations of the Youth: Many  youths  believe that self -employment through small enterprises is the way 
to improve their lives and mentioned acquiring skills. For training and capital for such endeavors, donor support was expected. Prosperity was the social goal for them.  
 
SOCIAL PARTICIPATION OF RURAL GAMBIAN WOMEN  
Rural Women’s Voice in Politics : Gambian women have made a big progress in terms of political 
representation at the  regional and national level – about 10% of National Assembly members and nearly 
15% of regional governors/mayors were women in 2015 – but women’s voice was not as prominent at 
the local level  – slightly over 1% of local ward councilors were wome n in 2015.


---
*Page 152*
---

12 
 Harvester/Processor/Seller and Farmer Organizations: The fish and oyster harvesters, processors and 
sellers belong to a local association comprised of women of the same profession. Fees are collected from 
the members, and some associations use the fees for equipment purchase and also as revolving funds. The President and the Secretary of these associations are women, but that of the Treasurer is often 
assume by a man, owing to illiteracy among women in the profession.  
 
RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FACING RURAL GAMBIAN WOMEN  
Livelihoods under Climate Change : The women in the fishery sector are mostly illiterate and acquired  
professional skills by helping their mothers in the same profession. They are aware of the effects of climate 
change on their work, but do not have a concrete strategy for the future. The youth  facing a similar 
situation are also yet to embark on a new career adapted to climate change.  Aquaculture could help the 
women and youth in the fishery sector to make use of the ir knowledge and skills.  
 
New Activities and Unpaid Work: If women are to take up new activities, household members who are 
not participating in household chores and caregiving must shoulder some of the women’s share. If the country is to make the best use of its human resources, all must be given decision making power regardless of gender, in particular equal power between wife and husband. Open dialogues will help guide 
them to more equitable participation in family life.  The project personnel may use their power related to 
the project and engage in sexual exploitation, abuse or ha rassment  (SEAH) , or gender based violence  
(GBV) . 
The engagement of women in new activities and their acquisition of new skills may upset the 
prevailing gender -based  power -division  and provoke SEAH and GBV  by their male family members and 
other men in the c ommunity . For prevention of SEAH and GBV, the project trains project -related 
personnel on the subject. FAO Grievance Redress Mechanism  (GRM) will be strengthened so that SEAH 
and GBV related grievances are adequately managed in inclusive, survivor -centred and gender -responsive 
ways  through training of GRM respondents and linking of GRM to GBV referral pathways . GBV pathways 
will be established and operationalized to provide timely services and redress to survivors. The issue of unequal gend er relations will be approached using a household methodology , whose unit is a household, 
at the community level . Additional mitigation measures against risks outside their homes include: 
sensitization and involvement of community gatekeepers; and gender training of project personnel (including some of their supervisors) and professionals along the GBV referral pathways.  
 
Awareness  of Community Leaders : Sensitization of community gatekeepers will be necessary for them to 
understand the soft  issues that prev ent women from achieving their full potential and to approve equal 
distribution of decision -making power between wives and husbands.  The community gatekeepers will also 
be involved in community -driven support measures  against SEAH and GBV.  
 
Limitations from Illiteracy : Many  women are astute enough to generate more income than their 
husbands , but  are limited by lack of literacy and numeracy skills, especially when it comes to financ e. 
Women are also reluctant to expand their business and enter the formal sector. Their business acumen could be further sharpened with more information, but un likely if written information remains  off-limits 
to them.  
 
Negotiation Skills : Lack of negotiation skills is often cited as one of the prominent factors that hinders 
wome n from realizing their full economic potential. While female -headed households without male 
relatives are rare  in the rural areas, equipping them with negotiation skills will give them access to same 
income generating opportunities as o ther women .


---
*Page 153*
---

13 
 Social Integration of Female Youth: Poverty and patriarchy pose high risk s to female youth  of falling victim 
to violence and of being deprived of opportunities for self -fulfillment. Meaningful employment is rare; t he 
unemployment rate for female youths  with inter mediate level of education is higher than for male youths 
with the same level of education or for female youths with  other levels  of education.  Teenage pregnancy 
rate is high. Young women in the rural areas could be integrated in the society through  work t hat makes 
good use of their strength: higher literacy and numeracy skills compared to that of rural women of older 
generations.  
 
Ownership, Sustainability and Empowerment : Involvement of women users in location selection, design, 
installation and maintenan ce of equipment to be introduced will not only improve ownership and 
sustainability of the equipment, but also empower women by equipping them with the knowledge and skills related to the tools of their trade. Women do not think they are responsible for sa feguarding the 
environment, limiting  the sustainability of their actions.  
 
PRINCIPLES OF PROJECT FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION  
Principles of Project Formulation : Women will be enabled for strategic decision making and actions, while 
female youths will be engaged as agents of change by focusing on their strength  – stronger  literacy and 
numeracy skills than the women of the older generations. Negotiation skills , often highlighted in various 
gender assessments of the country as the weak points, will be included in professional trainings of the project. Sustainability of the project will be ensured by creating sufficient ownership.  
 
Principles of Project Implementation : The project will build on and enhance the strengths of women by  
filling the investment gap left by the society. Female youths will be recognized as a distinct group with their own strengths, which can be  leveraged for the whole communities . Gender empowe rment will be 
supported by strengthened capacity on gender – including capacity related to sexual exploitation, abuse 
harassment  and gender -based violence  – of technical officers , executing agencies  and community 
gatekeepers. The Grievance Redress Mechanis m of the FAO Country Office will be strengthened t o 
manage such incidents in an 
inclusive, survivor-centred and gender -responsive way . The project will 
support establishment and operations of referral pathways for gender based violence. Awareness on the environment among women and female youth will be raised to make their decisions on business and 
household management sustainable by taking the environmental impacts into account . Stakeholders 
must be consulted for organizational/logistical  matters and conten t of all activities,  especially women, 
who have many more household ob ligations than men and whose needs and  strengths tend to be seen 
as unimportant . The project’s Technical Advisory Committee as a member will include as member s a 
gender and social inclusion expert, the representatives of the Ministries of Women’s Affairs, Youth and Sports and of female professional associations related to the project, such as oyster harvesters and lawyers . 
 The indicators of the Gender Action Plan will be monitored by the Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender Specialist for adaptive management.


---
*Page 154*
---

14 
 PART I: GENDER ASSESSMENT  
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Project Introduction from Gender Perspective  
1 Between 25,000 and 30,000 people wer e engaged in artisanal fishery and about 2,000 people 
were employ ed in the industrial sub -sector in 20141 in a country of slightly over 2 million. The Ministry of 
Fisheries and Water Resources estimates that about 80% of people engaged in the sector are w omen.2 
Small pelagic fish such as sardinella, bonga , horse mackerels and mackerel serve as important protein 
sources for the inhabit ants, providing more than a half of total protein intake.3 4  
 
2 Aroun d the world, a significant proportion of workers in the fishery and aquaculture sectors are 
women, mostly responsible for non -vessel related activities, such as processing and marketing,5 and that 
is indeed the case in The Gambia. W omen and men  are not only  different actors of the same value chains, 
but also operate on different scales and serve different markets, which in some cases mean s 
differentiation of products by gender.6 Anything meant for local consumption is women’s work and is of 
low profit margin; shellfish is only for the local market and women harvest them.  Such demarcation  is not 
limited to the fishery sector, but also exists in crop cultivation and animal raising,  although the boundaries 
can be fluid for  crops.  
 
3 The division of economic activities by gender is based on the social norm that women are 
responsible for house chores  and caregiving, which allow only  work near the house .7 It also originates in 
unequal access to productive assets , which does not allow meeting the rigors of non -local markets. 
Women in the sector do not have formal schooling , except for the younger generation s. They learned the 
trade from  their mothers and are not equ ipped with  other economic skills.8 Due to illiteracy, they are at 
a great disadvantage when the business concerns written documents, especially financial matters, putting them at the mercy of men .
9 
 
4 An evaluation of the fishery sector in The Gambia in 20 14 identified integration of gender 
consideration s into the design and implementation of infrastructure as a one of the most critical issues.10 
The project proposes installation of the FAO -Thiaroye fish processing technique (FTT), which has been 
adopte d in many Sub -Saharan countries11 and reduces the amount of required fuel, a  primary concern to 
 
1 UNCTAD, 2014. “ The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
https://unctad.org/system/files/official -document/ditc2013d4_en.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
2 Interview with the Acting Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of the Fisheries and Water Resources, Banjul, March 12, 2021.  
3 Olleros, X. and Hesling, L., 2019. “T he women fish sellers of West Africa.”  
https://chinadialogueocean.net/8887 -women -fish-sellers- gambia- west -africa/ (accessed March 2021).  
4 Ragusa, G., 2014. “Overview of the Fisheries Sector in the Gambia.” Fisheries and Aquaculture Journal.  Vol. 5, Issue 3.  
5 FAO, 2021. “The essential role of women in fisheries | Women’s cooperative ‘Belyounesh Wave.’ “ Gender.  
http://www.fao.org/gender/resources/videos/video -detail/en/c/1381720/ (accessed April 2021).  
6 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
7 Ibid.  
8 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul , BInting and Kartong  landing site s, March 9 -20, 
2021.  
9 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
10 UNCTAD,  “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
11 Mindjimba, K., 2020. “Study of the profitability of fish smoking with FTT -Thiaroye kilns in Côte d'Ivoire.” FAO Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Circular No. 1155. ttps://doi.org/10.4060/ca8220en (accessed April 2021).


---
*Page 155*
---

15 
 the processors (all of whom are women) .12 It hence  lessens  generation of smoke, polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons and other substances harmful to health.13 The lack of proper ventilation at the 
smoking/drying facilities is a major problem at some landing sites.14 
 
5 Women in the sector are well aware that their livelihoods are dependent on mangroves and that 
the trees  have been diminishing, a trend that is likely to continue  with the current management 
practices .15 They  have not completely eliminated  their habits to  cut mangroves for  fuel or house roofs ,16 
while knowing that the practice is subject to fine for good reasons. Some women who have been 
participating in a mangrove reforestation project recognize that the mangroves can be brought back to 
good health with their own efforts.17 The project proposes m angrove  rehabilitation and environmental 
awareness raising involving women for sustainable management of the environment  and their livelihoods.  
 
6 Along the Gambian coast, t he amount of fish and shellfish catch has been decreasing and the 
oyster season short ening, both of which ha ve been attributed to climate change and overexploitation. 
The Gambian households do not specialize in one type of livelihood, and the farming households have the 
potential to accommodate aquaculture to supplement the declining sourc e of protein for the country.  The 
women and the youth consulted we re willing to take up aquaculture if there is an opportunity, just as 
they took up veg etable gardening proposed by  development partners in the past years , generating a 
considerable amount of  cash income for the women involved.18 
 7 Full integration of aquaculture in to women’s daily activities will necessitate reduction of their 
other duties, as they are in charge of housekeeping and caregiving, in addition to their work for cash income. This implies that men will need to shoulder some of their unpaid work, in which they do not 
engage as the society  does not prescribe to do so . Women harvesters, processors and sellers often earn 
more than men and put their children through school with thei r income, while men contribute to the daily 
household expenses as they see fit. Despite the economic achievement by many, close to half of the 
women believe that husband’s beating his wife is justified when she neglects the children, argues with 
him, goes out without telling him, etc.
19 They also let the men have the final say in strategic matters of 
the family so as not to c ause  problems  in the family . For further gender equality, wives and husbands 
need to engage in honest conversations on what they wish for the family and construct a common vision as well as a roadmap.  
 8 Women put more rice  on the table than their husbands, but they often delegate the role of 
treasurer of their professio nal associations to  literate  men . The lack of written numeracy skills also leave 
the women vulnerable to financial fraud. Women are reluctant to expand their sm all business and e nter 
 
12 Focused group discussion with women invol ved in processing/selling, Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
13 Mindjimba, Study of the profitability of fish smoking with FTT -Thiaroye  kilns in Côte d'Ivoire.”  
14 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Bintang and Kartong landing si tes, March 13 and 20, 
2021.  
15 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul, Tambi and Bintang, March 9 -17, 2021.  
16 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul, Bintang and Kartong landing sites, March 9 -20, 
2021.  
17 Focused group discussion with women involved in farming, Jahally, March 17, 2021.  
18 Focused group discussion with women involved in farming, Njoben and Medina Lamin Kanteh, March 12 and 18, 2021.  
19 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a  husband is justified in beating his wife (any of five reasons) (%) -  Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.REAS.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2019. “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.” https://mics -
surveys-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/MICS6/West%20and%20Central%20Africa/Gambia/2018/Survey%20findings/The%20Gambia%20201
8%20MICS%20Survey%20Findings%20Report_English.pdf  (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 156*
---

16 
 the formal sector, as they view it  as a men’s world , most certainly intimidated because of their lack of 
competence in literacy and numeracy . The Gambian women are savvy enough to earn respectable amount 
of cash without being able to  read, but they have little information outside their immediate circle s and 
are limited in strategic planning.  
 
1.2 Objective of the Assessment  
1.2.1 Rationale  
9 Climate change impacts the vulnerable members of the society proportionately more than others. 
It has been estimated that women and children are 14 times more likely to die during a disaster,20 whose 
frequency and intensity are increasing due to climate change.  At the same time, addressing the needs of 
these members in projects and policies is known to improve their outcomes.  
 
10 The assessment examines the si tuation of  female and youth workers engaged in fishery  and 
farming  with respect to climate change to find the most effective ways to reduce the vulnerability of the 
weak members of the society  and also to maximize the benefits of the interventions.  The youth represent 
an important disadvantaged group, half of which are women. The youth need to have the experience and 
training on the job today to be able to shoulder the national economy in the f uture . 
 11 The Gambia  has ratified international agreements and goals related to the gender and children , 
most notably the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
21 and the 
Convention on the Rights of the Children. The natio nal laws on women’s and children’s rights are based 
on the international treaties that the country has ratified, but other laws and the Constitution are not necessarily compatible with the treaties.
22 
 
12 The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) recognizes that gender 
equality is key to its mandate to achieve food security for all. As evidenced by FAO Policy on Gender 
Equality ,23 the Organization  is of one mind with  a wide range of global agreements and conventions that 
guide FAO’s work  in recognizing gender equality as a building block towards sustainable development. 
Every  one of the 17 Sustainabl e Development Goals  (SDGs)  concern s the lives of women , youth  and 
children,  and The Gambia has adopted the  Goals, whose overarching objective is to leave no one behind.  
 1.2.2 Objective  
13 The Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund (GCF) project, “Climate Resilient Fishery 
Initiative for Livelihood Improvement ,” studies the socioeconomic conditions of women and men targeted 
by the proposed project to shed light on gender -specific constraints and needs for a strategic approach to 
the integration of gender dimensions into the project. The Assessment also briefly exa mines the youth for 
the same, as many policies often treat them as one group . The strategies for both  are summarized as the 
Gender Action Plan.
  
 
 
20 UN Women, 2018. Turning Promises into Action: Gender Equality in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development . New York: 
UN Women.  
21 UN, 2019. “Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.” United Nations Treaty Collection. 
https://treaties.un.org/P ages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV -8&chapter=4&clang=_en (accessed February 2021).  
22 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, 2020. Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law: Mapping and Analysis of the Laws 
of the Gambia from a Gender Perspective.  New York: UN Women.  
23 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2020. FAO Policy on Gender Equality 2020 -2030. Rome: FAO.


---
*Page 157*
---

17 
 14 The underlying theory of change is: the project will recognize the strengths, constraints and needs 
of the wome n so that their potential as agents of change will be realized for achieving the best outcomes 
possible under the proposed project. It will necessarily entail changes in access to and distribution of 
resources and decision -making power between women an d men in the targeted communities. The same 
applies to the youth, as their capacities complementary to others’ have not been fully t aken  advantage 
of.  
 
15 While the proposed  project focus es on one subsector of food production systems, i.e., fishery, 
the subs ectors  are connected in terms of inputs and outputs, especially for smallholders. The finite 
amount of labor and financial means must be divided among them  and the by -products of one food 
production process are often used as inputs to others. The assessmen t examines the role of women in the 
food production systems, while keeping the focus on fishery.  It will also touch upon the role of youth, a 
group which  composed  nearly one  quarter  of the total population  in 2019,24 but alienated and more likely 
to be unemployed than the older working population.25 
 
 
2. METHODOLOGY  
16 The Gender Assessment fo cuses on the situation of women in fishery and crop agriculture in areas 
targeted by the proposed project: Banjul, Bintang and Kartong landing sites, Tambi Wetlands Complex, 
and the farming villages of Njoben, Jahally and Medina Lamin Kanteh . It also examines the situation of 
youth , who comprise another vulnerable social group  and are likely to be affected by and affect the 
projec t. 
 17 Consultations were the primary means to determine the  key issues p ertaining to the lives of 
women in volved in fishery  and in crop farming  (Section 8. 2 lists the core questions asked ). A total of 132 
villagers in the target area s were consulted, of which 81 were women  and 41 were aged 15 -35. Women’s 
views on livelihood  related issues  were collected through consultations exclusively for women . 
Institutional meetin gs were held at national levels with nine  institutions  and organizations . The issues thus 
identified were assessed in detail with the aid of literature search, whose results are summarized in this document. As a reference project on aquaculture, farmers involved in Food and Agriculture Sector 
Development Proj ect (FASDEP) of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) in 
Nyaniberreh and Lamin were also consulted. The analysis elucidated the risks and opportunities for female 
workers  engaged in  fishery and  crop  agriculture  under  climate change and c ontributed to project 
formulation . 
 18 To the best  extent possible, the a ssessment is based on official statistics and published research 
results pertaining to and field consultations conducted in the target  regions . Where relevant information 
could not be fo und, it relies on that of the whole nation. Where no such  information is available, the 
assessment may refer to the general consensus among the professionals in the field or anecdotes.  
  
 
24 World Bank, 2021. “Population ages 10 -14, female (% of female population) –  Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/i ndicator/SP.POP.1014.FE.5Y?locations=GM (accessed February 2021).  
World Bank, 2021. “Population ages 10 -14, male (% of male population) –  Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.1014.MA.5Y?locations=GM (accessed February 2021). 
25 United N ations Economic Commission for Africa, 2017. “Africa’s youth and prospects for inclusive development: Regional 
situation analysis report.” https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Youth/UNEconomicCommissionAfrica.pdf (accessed 
February 2021).


---
*Page 158*
---

18 
 3. LEGAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPIRITUAL FRAMEWORK  
3.1 Equality , Inclusion and Protection: Women , Youth  and Children  
3.1.1 Treaties, Constitution and Laws  
19 As is the case with the majority of the countries in the world, The Gambia has ratified the core 
international treaties that enshrine equality between women and men in all spheres of life, most notably 
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Disc rimination against Women (CEDAW). It has also 
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Children African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the 
Child . Unlike  other countries  whose dominant population is of Muslim faith as is The Gambia, the country 
has not express ed reservations on the rights of women and children in view of contradiction with shari’a.26 
However , the  country has not signed the Optional Protocols to the two major treaties on women and 
children which allow the respective Committee on the  Convention to receive and consider complaints on 
the matter from persons in its jurisdiction.  
 
Table 1 : International Treaties on Women , Youth and Children 
 
Title  Description  Status for 
The Gambia  
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights  Declares that all human beings are born free and equal in 
dignity and rights and that they are endowed with reason 
and conscience.  Sets a common standard of achievement 
to promote respect for these rights and freedoms.  Not part of 
the United 
Nations at 
the time of 
votin g 
International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights  Ensure s the equal right of women and men to the 
enjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights.  Ratified  
International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights  Declares that all peoples have the right of self -
determination. By virtue of that right they freely 
determine their political status and freely pursue their 
economic, social and cultural development.  
Together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights, they make up the Int ernational Bill of 
Human Rights, which p romotes , protects and monitor 
human rights and fundamental freedoms.  Ratified  
Convention on the Elimination of all 
Forms o f Discrimination against 
Women  Eliminate s discrimination against women in political and 
public life and promote s equal rights for women and 
men.  Ratified  
Optional Protocol to the Elimination 
of all Forms of Discrimination against 
Women  A signatory state  recognizes the competence of the 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women -- 
the body that monitors States parties' 
compliance with the Convention -- to receive and 
consider complaints from individuals or groups within i ts 
jurisdiction.  Not signed  
African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights  Promote s and protect s human rights  and basic freedoms 
in the African  continent.  Ratified  
 
26 Forced Migration, undated. “Who has signed what…” 
https://www.fmreview.org/sites/fmr/files/FMRdownloads/en/FMRpdfs/Human -Rights/signatories.pdf (accessed February 
2021).


---
*Page 159*
---

19 
 Protocol to the African Charter on 
Human and Peoples Rights on the 
Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo 
Protocol)  Ensure s promotion, realization and protection of rights 
of women so that they can fully enjoy their human rights.  Ratified  
Solemn Declaration on Gender 
Equality in Africa  Accelerate s the implementation of the Maputo Protocol 
in areas such as women’s health, gender -based violence, 
gender parity and women’s land and property rights.  Adopted  
African Youth Charter  Aims to strengthen and consolidate efforts to empower 
young people throug h meaningful youth participation 
and their equal partnership in driving Africa’s 
development agenda.  Ratified/ 
Acceded  
Convention on the Rights of the Child  Guarantees the civil, political, economic, social, health 
and cultural rights that should be enjoyed by any human 
being under the age of eighteen, unless the age of 
majority is attained earlier under national legislation.  Ratified  
Minimum Age Convention (with the 
specification that the minimum age is 
14 for the country)  Sets the general minimum age for admission to 
employment or work at 15 years (13 for light work) and the minimum age for hazardous work at 18 (16 under 
certain strict conditions), with the possibility of initially 
setting the general minimum age at 14 (12 for light work) 
where the economy and educational facilities are 
insufficiently developed.  Ratified  
Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on the 
involvement of children in armed 
conflicts  A signatory state  commits not to involve  children under 
the age of 18 in armed conflicts.  Ratified  
Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on the sale 
of children child prostitution and child 
pornography  Strengthens implementation of the Convention and 
increases the protection of children from involvement in 
armed conflicts and from sale, prostitution and 
pornography.  Ratified  
Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on a 
communications procedure  A signatory state recognizes the competence of th e 
Committee on the Rights of the Child --  the body that 
monitors States parties' compliance with the Convention 
-- to receive and consider complaints from a child of 
her/his representative within its jurisdiction.  Not signed  
African Charter on the Rights and 
Welfare of the Child  Highlights the issues of greater importance to the African 
continent, such as child marriage and child soldiers, while building on the same basic principles as the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child.  Ratified  
Primary s ource:  UN Women (2009), United Nations (2021).  
 
20 The Constitution of The Gambia 1997 declares under Section 28 Rights of Women that “[w]omen 
shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men” and “shall have the right to equal 
treatment with m en, including equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities.” It also 
accords right to identity and education in conformity with the international treaties , but s ome clauses of 
the Constitution and national legislations remain discriminatory against women. On the one hand, Section 28 of the Constitution endorses the CEDAW by stating that women shall be accorded “full and equal 
dignity of the person with men” and “t he right to equal treatment with men, including equal opportunities 
in political, economic and social activities.”
27 On the other hand, Section 33 (2) of the Constitution 
contradicts the CEDAW; it adds that “[s]ubject to the provisions of subsection (5), n o law shall make any 
 
27 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law.


---
*Page 160*
---

20 
 provision which is discriminatory either of itself or in effect[,]” but subsection (5) (c) and (d) rule  out 
application of no -discrimination principle on “adoption, marriage, divorce, burial, devolution of property 
on death or ot her matters of personal law” as well as  “application in the case of members of a particular 
race or tribe of customary law with respect to any matter in the case of persons who, under that law, are 
subject to that law.” 28  
 
21 The Constitution states under Section  27 Right to marry that: “(1) Men and women of full age and 
capacity shall have the right to marry and found a family. (2) Marriage shall be based on the free and full 
consent of the intended parties.”29 It also guarantees the “ freedom to practice any religion and to 
manifest such practice” under Section 25 Freedom of speech, conscience, assembly, association and 
movement.30 Section 26 of the Constitution accords political rights to all persons in The Gambia “without 
unreasonable restrictions.”31 Similarly, the “Directive Principles of State Policy” of the Constitution 
contains most of the socioeconomic rights stipulated in t he CEDAW, but the Constitution  adds that 
“[t]hese principles s hall not confer legal rights o r be enforceable in any court, ”32 nullifying their power on 
the ground.  
 
22 The Constitution incorporates the customary law and shari’a by stipulating that “in additio n to 
this Constitution, the laws of The Gambia consist of … (e) Customary law so far as concerns members of 
the communities to which it applies; (f) The sharia as regards matters of marriage, divorce and inheritance among members of the communities to whic h it applies.” Over 95% of the population in the country were 
Muslims in 2011
33 and a higher proportion was estimated in 2019. 34 The Gambia’s legal system is thus 
based on English law, customary law and shari’a, where English law includes the common law, equity 
principles and statutory  law.35 The customary law and shari’a apply only to indigenous Gambians and 
Muslims .36 The customary law is administered by the District Tribunals and shari’a  by the qadi courts37 on 
the matters of marriage, divorce and inheritance .38 Both courts are  placed under the Magistrates’ 
Courts .39 
 23 The Alternative Dispute Resolution Act 2005 established an alternative dispute resolution 
secretariat to facilitate dispute resolution,
40 but most citizens are unaware of this mechanis m and believe 
that court proceedings are the only manner to resolve disputes41 in case  dialogues at the ground level 
turn out ineffective. Neither are lawyers, judges and magistrates  equipped with sufficient knowledge of 
 
28 ibid. 
29 The Republic of The Gambia, 1997. Constitution of the Republic of the Gambia, 1997.  
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=&p_isn=48490&p_country=GMB&p_count=44 (accessed February 2021).  
30 ibid.  
31 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law.  
32 ibid. 
33 Liu, J., 2011. “Table: Muslim Population by Country.” Religion & Public Life, Pew Research Center.  
https://www.pewforum.org/2011/01/27/table -muslim -population- by-country/ (accesse d February 2011).  
34 US Department of State, 2019. “2019 Report on International Religious Freedom: The Gambia”  
https://www.state.gov/reports/2019 -report- on-international -religious -freedom/the- gambia/ (accessed March 2021).  
35 Amie Bensouda & Co., 2019. “Legal System.” http://www.amiebensoudaco.net/legal -system/ (accessed February 2021).  
36 ibid.  
37 ibid.  
38 Ngo-Martins, F.O., 2019. “UPDATE: Researching Gambian Legal Information.” GlobaLex.  
https://www.nyulawglobal.org/globalex/Gambia1.html (accessed February 2021). 
39 Lexadin, 2010. “Courts and Cases Gambia.” The World Law Guide.  
https://www.lexadin.nl/wlg/courts/nofr/oeur/lxctgam.htm (accessed February 2021).  
40 Ngo-Martins,  “UPDATE: Researc hing Gambian Legal Information.” GlobaLex.  
41 The West African Law Institute, undated. “ Summary of Findings: Alternative Dispute Resolution in The Gambia.”  
http://www.undp.org › content › dam › gambia › docs (accessed February 2021).


---
*Page 161*
---

21 
 the Act.42 It also suffers from a s tructural problem, namely that the Secretariat  is under the supervision 
and control of the Ministry of Justice.43 The Secretariat is hence a governmental body and unlikely to be 
viewed as an independent body, a feature that is essential to successful dispu te resolution by a neutral 
third party.44 
 
24 Many  national legislations  on women, youth and children  largely draw from  the treaties (Table 2), 
and some were amended to reflect the recommendations of the CEDAW Committee issued in response 
to the country repor t submitted in 2012;45 the Women’s Act and Children’s Act were revised in 2015 and 
2016, respectively, to legally prohibit female genital mutilation (FGM) and child marriage.46 Effective 
implementation of these laws has been hampered by  the time -honored  patriarchal norms and beliefs.47 
  
Table 2 : National Legislations on Women , Youth  and Children 
 
Title  Description  
Criminal Code 1933  Establishes a code of criminal and penal law.  
Women’s Act 2010  
(amended in 2015 to prohibit female 
genital mutilation)  Implement s the legal provisions of the National Policy for the 
Advancement of Gambian Women and Girls, and incorporate s and 
enforces  the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms 
of Discrimination Against Women and the Protocol to the African Charter 
on Human and Peoples’ Rights o n the Rights of Women in Africa.  
Sexual Offences Act 2013  Protect s all persons, especially vulnerable groups, including women, 
children and people who are m entally and physically disabled,  against 
sexual crimes.  
Domestic Violence Act 2013  Combat s domestic violence and provide s protection for the victims of 
domestic violence, particularly women and children.  
African Youth Charter  Aims to strengthen and conso lidate efforts to empower young people 
through meaningful participation and their equal partnership in driving 
Africa’s development agenda.  
Labo ur Act 2007  Provides  for equ al employment opportunities for both women  and 
men ,48 prohibits exploitative labor of children and makes provisions for 
maternity leave and return afterward.  
Trafficking in Persons Act 2007  Provides for the prosecution of perpetrators of trafficking in persons 
and for the trea tment of victims of trafficking.  
Tourism Offences Act  Defines offences which are tangential to the tourism sector, including 
unlawful sexual advances, sexual abuse of a child, and procurement of a 
child for sex, child pornography  and sexual exploitation of a child.  
Child ren’s  Act 2005  
(amended in 2016 to prohibit child 
marriage)  Protect s children through placing the best interest of the child as the 
primary consideration in any matter co ncerning her  or him , applying the 
Act to  all children residing in The Ga mbia, regardless of nationality, and  
 
42 ibid.  
43 The West Afri can Law Institute, “ Summary of Findings: Alternative Dispute Resolution in The Gambia.”  
44 ibid.  
45 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law.  
46 ibid. 
47 ibid. 
48 United Nations, 2015. “List of issues and questions in relation to the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports of the Gambia.” 
CEDAW/C/GMB/Q/4- 5/Add.1  (accessed February 2021).


---
*Page 162*
---

22 
 stipulating the responsibilities of children towards their parents, elders, 
community and country .49 
Primary s ource: Law Hub Gambia (2018).  
 
25 The Women’s Act 2010 covers a wide range of topics concerning women and was amended i n 
2015 to illegalize FGM, but  does not prohibit practices harmful to women, such as levirate marriage and 
unequal inheritance.50 The Act, like the Constitution,  contains provisions which allow  personal law to 
prevail in the areas of: health and health care; choice of matrimonial home; separation, divorce and annulment of marriage; widows’ rights; and inheritance.
51 The Sexual Offense Act 2013 does not 
recognize marital rape, contrary to the CEDAW  General Recommendation No. 35 on Gender -Based 
Violence against Women, Updating General Recommendation No. 19  issued in 2017.52 
 
26 Various national laws are not necessarily in line with each other. The Women’s Act does not go 
beyond the Constitution on the subject of marriage. Hence, four types of marriages are recognized in the 
country: Muslim m arriages, governed by shari’a  law and the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act 1941; 
Christian marriages, governed by the Christian Marriage Act 1862; civil marriages, governed by the Civil Marriage Act 1938; and customary marriages, influenced by shari’a.
53 At the same time, the Criminal Code 
1933, which prohibits bigamy, is still in force.  The Code  also criminalizes abduction and “defilement” of 
girls under age 16.  
 27 While the Women’s Act stipulates six months of maternity leave for all pregnant women in Part V 
“Prohibition of Discrimination against Women in Employment,” the Labour Act provide s for 12 weeks of 
maternity leave if the employee has “two years of continuous service with the same employer” or if her 
“period of service with the same employer has been interrupted by one  or more periods, none of which 
exceeds seven months  and who has in aggregate not less than eighteen  months service with the same 
employer.”
54 The Wills Act 1992 provide s that the voluntary order of property devolution cannot exceed 
the limits laid down by shari’a , which is one -third  of the estate to a woman.55 Exceptions similar to those 
in the Constitution and the Women’s Act are permitted in the Child ren’s  Act 2005 in terms of the r ight to 
parental property.56 It is subject to personal law and puts children born out of wedlock as well as  girls at 
a disadvantage.57 The exception clause of the Act could in principle also be applied to child marriage.58 
 28 The Trafficking in Persons Act 2007, Section 28, stipulates a fine of no less than 50,000 Dalasi 
(roughly USD 970 in February 2021) and no more than 500,000 Dalasi (r oughly USD 9,700) in addition to 
minimum imprisonment o f 15 years and maximum for life.
59 Under the Tourism Offences Act 2003 
 
49 Child Protection Alliance, undated. “The Children’s Act 2005 of The Gambia: Provisions on Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children.”  
https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/ELECTRONIC/90620/104569/F960858535/GMB90620%20Summary%20of%20Act.pdf 
(accessed February 2021).  
50 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
51 ibid. 
52 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
53 Tahirih Justice Center, 2021. “Forced Marriage Overseas: The Gambia.”  
https://preventforcedmarriage.org/forced -marriage -overseas- the-gambia/ (accessed February 2021). 
54 UN W omen and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
55 International Federation of Human Rights, 2005 . “Note on the situation of Women in Gambia, 33rd session (5 –  22 July 2005) 
New York.”  
https://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/gm_cedaw2005a.pdf (accessed February 2021).  
56 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
57 ibid. 
58 ibid. 
59 ibid.


---
*Page 163*
---

23 
 (Section 13), buying, selling, procuring or trafficking in children or removing them from Gambia by tourists 
or any other person constitutes an offence.60 Section 7 of the same Act states that “[a]ny person who gets 
or finds a child so that he or she can be sexually abused by another person or so that the child can be used 
as a prostitute can be imprisoned for 10 years.”61 The Traffick ing in Persons Act 2007, Part X  Application 
of Certain Enactments, assures coherency with the Extradition Act, Children’s Act 2005 and the Criminal Code , but  the Trafficking Act  imposes a penalty of five years’ imprisonment for traffickin g of a child 
(Section 13), while the Children’ s Act 2005 stipulates life imprisonment for trafficking of a person under 
age 18 (Section 39) . 
 3.1.2 Treaties, Constitution and Laws in Practice  
29 In spite of Section 28  (Rights of Women ) of the Constitution , a testimony of two wom en is equal 
to that of one man under the influential shari’a.
62 In practice, inheritance is governed mostly by shari’a 
and customary law .63 The patriarchal and patrilineal nature of customary law  has resulted in exclusion of 
women from land inheritance, and qur’an allocates daughters half the share of their brothers.64 According 
to customary law, a wife cannot inherit her husband’s property unless she remarries a member of her husband’s family.
65 Women are thus increasingly taking their grievances over inheritance issues to the 
qadi  courts than  to the District Tribunals, but those who do so  are frowned upon a nd occasionally shunned 
by the  male members of the ir families .66 
 
30 Under  the customary law, it is the husband who owns the house of the couple and decides 
wheth er the wife may claim the rights to  the house after separation, d ivorce or annulment of marriage,  
while the Women’s Act stipulates that both parties “have the right to equitable sharing of the joint 
property derived from the marriage.”67 The decisions are usually made without taking into account the 
wife’s contribution to the acquisition of the property.68 Upon annulation of marriage, women are often 
asked to return the gifts and dowry from the former partner.69 
 
31 Most marriages are not registered with the government and many instances of forced marriage 
are not reported.70 Polygamy is most commonly found in West and Central Africa, and The Gambia  ranks  
the third highest i n the region  of 16 countries  at 30% of individuals belonging to po lygamous households 
in contrast to 2% worldwide.71 Thirty percent of them in The Gambia are Muslims and 12% Christians.72 
 
60 International Labour Organization, undated. “Demande directe (CEACR) –   ado ptée 2010, publiée 100ème session CIT (2011).”  
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/fr/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:13100:0::NO::P13100_COMMENT_ID,P13100_LANG_CODE:2323062,en 
(accessed February 2021 ). 
61  Child Protection Alliance, 2019. “Sexual Exploitation of Children in The Gambia : Submission  for the Universal Periodic 
Review of the human rights situation in The Gambia.”  
https://uprdoc.ohchr.org/uprweb/downloadfile.aspx?filename=6896&file=EnglishTranslation  
62 Wikigender, 2015. “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
 https://www.wikigender.org/wiki/africa -for-womens -rights -gambia/ (accessed February 2021).  
63 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
64 ibid. 
65 Wikigender, “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
66 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law: Mapping and Analysis of the Laws . 
67 ibid. 
68 ibid. 
69 Wikigender, “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
70 Tahirih Justice Center, “Forced Marriage Overseas: The Gambia.”  
71 Kramer, S., 2020. “Polygamy is rare around the world and mostly confined to a few regions.”  
 https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2020/12/07/polygamy- is-rare-around- the-world -and- mostly -confined- to-a-few-
regions/ (accessed February 2021).  
72 Tahirih Justice Center,  “Forced Marriage Overseas: The Gambia.”


---
*Page 164*
---

24 
  
32 The Sexual Offences Act  2013 stipulates  the punishment s of offenders and construction of a 
shelter for rehabilitation .73 As of 2015 , effective remedial and re habilitation services were unavailable , 
mainly because of insufficient resources allocated to  institutions mandated to provide such services. 74 As 
required by the Domestic Violence Act 2013, the Victims of Violence Advisory Committee was established, but its effective functioning had not been realized and thus the government was in violation of P art II 
Sections 4, 5, 6 and 7 in 2015.
 75 It remained difficult to access official data on how often these Acts have 
been invoked before the Courts .76 
 
33 The amended Child ren’s  Act prohibits child marriage and establishes the minim um age for 
marriage as 18 years.77 The Criminal Code 1933 stipulates that “defilement” of girls under age 16 is an 
offence. Customary law allows girls of 13 years to be married off by their parents, es pecially in rural 
areas.78 Around 2015, 26%  of the girls in The Gambia were married before the age of 18 and 8% married 
before the age of 15.79 Female genital mutilation (FGM)  became illegal by the amendment of the Women’s 
Act in 2015, but its prevalence r ate was 76% in 2020.80 The rate varies among  ethnic groups ; it is estimated 
that FGM affects 100% of Mandingo and the Soninke (Sarakole)  women, 90% of Fula women and 65-70% 
of Jola women.81 
 
34 Human rights is one of the priority areas of t he latest national policy of the Gambia on gender 
2010- 202082 (described in detail under 3.1.3 Gender Policy below) . The policy states  that it is “critical that 
matters relating to customary and religious laws are addressed, as these fall within the realm of ‘personal 
law’,  which is expressly made applicable by virtue of the constitution and other laws of The Ga mbia.” It 
identifies  a related challenge  as “how to ensure that the constitutional principles that accord equal dignity 
of the person to both man and woman, prevail over the other constitutional provisions that recognize 
customary laws and practices, that tend to subjugate and abrogate these fundamental rights that wom en 
should enjoy.” The policy resolves  to “address these inconsistencies, because most of the discrimination 
against women arises directly from the discriminatory practices perpetuated under the guise of religious 
and customary laws .” 
 3.1.3  Gender Policy  
35 The Gambia Gender National Policy  2010 -2020,
83 the latest of its kind, was developed “as an 
integral part of the national development objectives to enhance the overall government strategy of 
 
73 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, 2015. 
“The Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW):  
List of Issues and Questions in Relation to the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of The Gambia .” 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org  › Treaties › CEDAW › GMB (acc essed February 2021).   
74 ibid.  
75 ibid.  
76 ibid.  
77 Girls Not Brides, 2021. Gambia.  
https://www.girlsnotbrides.org/child- marriage/gambia/ (accessed February 2021). 
78 Wikigender, “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
79 Girls Not Brides, Gambia.  
80 UNICEF, 2020. “Joint statement by UNFPA, UNICEF on International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation.”  
https://www.unicef.org/gambia/press -releases/joint -statement -unfpa -unicef -international -day-zero -tolerance -female -genital 
(accessed Febr uary 2021).  
81 Wikigender,  “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
82 Ministry of Women’s Affairs, undated. “The Gambia National Gender Policy 2010 -2020.” 
https://www.ilo.org/dyn/travail/docs/1958/Gambia%20national%20gender%20policy.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
83 ibid.


---
*Page 165*
---

25 
 growth through poverty eradication.”  The vision of the Policy i s that all attain  dignified living standards . 
The four mission s of the Policy are  to: achieve gender equity and equality at policy, programme and 
project levels in all institutions across all sectors ; achieve sustainable eradication of gendered poverty and 
deliver an acceptable quality of life; eliminat e all forms of gender -based discrimination and violence; and 
empower women to be able to take their rightful position in national development.  The guiding principles 
are: gender equity  and equality; women -in-development and gender -and-development approach es;84 
affirmative action;  partnership; cultural pluralism and tolerance.  
 
36 It notes that the Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MWA), National Women’s Council (NWC) and the 
Women’s  Bureau (WB)  are mandated to spearhead the formulation, implementation, coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of the gender policy  and that  the responsibility of the policy implementation 
rests with each of these institutions  in accordance with its  mandate. It also notes that  the role of the 
Gender Policy is to enhance gender sensitive implementation of institutional policies.  
 
37 It sets its priority areas as:  education; health; sustainable livelihoods development; governance; 
human rights; and poverty reduction and ec onomic empowerment. Under sustainable livelihoods 
development, the Policy states that it focuses on “ gender issues in agricultural production to redress the 
constraints women and men face that limits their productivity.”  It recognizes that women play a key  role 
in smallholder agriculture by constituting over 50% of full time farmers and accomplish ing nearly 70% of 
all the agricultural work and food production, but that their productivity is limited  by lack of access, control 
and ownership of productive reso urces, such as land, credit, and improved technology and extension 
services, among others.  Under sustainable development, the Policy has: nutritional security; agricultural 
production; water resources and supply ; and fisheries . 
 38 The goal of agricultural production under sustainable development of the Policy is to “ensure 
equal access to productive resources (land, capital, farming implements and skill and inputs) by 2020 [,]” 
which is supported by following six objectives , aligned with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy 
2017- 2026, but with more nuanced description on gender :  
 
1. To promote  national efforts for food self- sufficiency;  
2. To lobby for increased access to and control of land by women and men in both matrilineal 
and patrilineal systems ; 
3. To encourage increased access by women to agricultural extension services;  
4. To advocate for increased availability, access and control of credit by disadvant aged 
farmers particularly women ; 
5. To lobby for increased accessibility to processing and marketing of agricultural produce; 
and 
6. To advocate for the generation of appropriate and affordable gender sensitive 
technologies.  
 Fisheries under sustainable development does not have a goal, but its objective is “[t]o encourage the participation of indige nes, men and women in fish farming, processing and marketing.”  With respect to 
the priority area, poverty reduction and economic  empowerment , the goal is to “[r] educe national poverty 
level by 30% and ensure equitable distribution of national resources between male and female by 2020 .” 
 
 
84 The Policy  describes the women -in-development approach as: “ mainstreaming of development so as to improve their 
condition and bridge gender  gaps.” It describes the gender and development approach as a strategy to  “support women and 
men in their roles in  development through advocating for structural transformat ion in reproductive and productive spheres .”


---
*Page 166*
---

26 
 39 The Mid -Term Review of the National Gender Policy 2010 -2020 conducted in 2017 found  that 
among the 11 strategies under  the sub -theme – Agriculture, Business and Industry  –  “to create an 
enabling environment for  the elimination of gender disparities in access to training, credit, appropriate  
ICT technologies, value adding, labour saving devices, and markets for the expansion of agricultural 
production and productivity and Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs )[,]” over 10% were fully 
implemented .85 The sub -theme of F isheries aimed  “to enhance the participation of indigenes, men, 
women and youths in fish farming, processing, marketing and post harvesting techniques[,]” and all three 
strategies were  under  implement ation in 2017 .86 The Review identified challenges under these two sub -
themes: “gender insensitivity” at institutional and policy levels; lack of equipment for aquaculture among 
women; and dependence on donor funds for gender related activities, among others. 87 
 
3.1.4 Youth Policy  
40 The National Youth Policy of The Gambia 2019- 202888 is a manifestation of the government of 
The Gambia to “lead the process and coordinate the creation of knowledgeable, skilful [ sic] and properly 
comported youths who can contribute optimally to national development.” It notes that it also 
demon strates the government’s commitment to all international conventions and charters that affect the 
youth and the country has signed. The Policy intends “to provide guidelines and direction for all 
stakeholders involved in the implementation of policies, pro grams and projects for the development of 
youths in The Gambia.”  
 
41 Following the African Union’s African Youth Charter, The Gambia defines youth or young people 
as every person between the ages of 15 and 35 years.  The Policy also recognizes several categories of 
people relevant to this age group  which deserve special at tention: potential youths ( persons of ages 0 -
14); students in secondary, tertiary and higher educational institutions; out -of-school youth; unemployed 
and under -employed youth; female youth; r ural yo uth; youth that are differently -abled; youth engaged 
in social crimes and delinquency; commercial sex workers; and fully employed youth.  Under female youth, 
the document underlines that “[ t]he increasingly high number of school drop -outs, forced and  early 
marriages and teenage pregnancies recorded across the country is also an indication that young women require specific support measures in this regard.” Under rural youth, it notes that the young in the urban areas are much more like ly to be unemploy ed than  in the rural areas and adds that the agriculture sector 
plays an important role in absorb young rural workers.  
 42 The Policy’s main guiding principles and core values are:  needs of potential youth (0 –14 years) 
formation; youth as the most important and valuable resource of the nation;  national commitment to 
mainstream  youth issues with sectoral differences in mind; government commitment to integrate the 
youth in economic and development planning; youth -driven and - centered programmes for youths; 
national commitment to youth participation in the democratic process.  The Policy goal is to “ establish a 
holistic and harmonious youth cohort imbued with adequate knowledge and competencies, strong 
professional ethics, spiritual and moral values; and a level of independence, patriotism and commitment 
that gives them life options to choose development and progress in alignment with the national vision. ” 
 
85 Women’s Bureau, 2017. “ Mid-Term Review Report of th e National Gender And Women Empowerment Policy 2010 -
2020.”  
86 ibid.  
87 Ibid.  
88 Ministry of Youth and Sports, 2019. “National Youth Policy of The Gambia 2019.”  
https://nyc.gm/wp -content/uploads/2020/04/National -Youth -Policy -of-The-Gambia -2019- 2028- Final.pdf  
(accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 167*
---

27 
 Its vision is to “ empower  and render the Ga mbian youth capable and willing to make sustainable life 
choices. ” While the policy priority areas are defined, it falls short of providing an action plan  to indicate  
activities, responsible parties and timelines.  
 
43 The Gambia Gender National Policy 2010 -2020 also touches upon youth and contains goals, 
objectives an d strategies, such as: “[e] nsure gender parity at all levels and equitable access to equality 
education and  appropriate livelihood skills for women and men, girls and boys by 2015” (goal); “ advocate 
for the development of specific integrated programmes on  counseling in family life, behavioral change 
and moral education and reproductive health  for adolescents and youths”(objective);  “reduce maternal 
and infant morbidity and mortality rate by 30% ” (objective); “[e] stablish and strengthen existing post -
abortio n care and counseling to the youth ”(one of the strategies for the objective on the material and 
infant morbidity and mort ality rate); “ encourage the creation of increased employment opportunities for 
the youths”(objective); and “ advocate for the improvemen t of the socioeconomic status of vulnerable 
groups such  as women, children, yout hs and people with disabilities”(objective).  A specific policy on 
children does not exist for The Gambia.  
 
44 The Mid -Term Review of the National Gender Policy 2010 -202089 examined the implementation 
of the objective “to ensure equal employment opportunities and benefits for women, men and youth” under the sub -theme of employment. It reported that four out of five strategies associated with the 
objective were under implementation i n 2017.  
 3.1.5  Gender, Youth and Ethnic Minorities Protection  
45 The relationships among various social groups have been maintained and mediated by themselves 
in a traditional and historical context  – a mechanism which in cludes  the directions given by the leaders, 
such as chiefs, imams and elders  – to result in strong  tolerance and conflict -enduring capacity.
90 The 
mechanism is used  within and between communities and often among family members.91 For legal 
matters  related to wom en, o rganizations such as the Female Lawyers Association of The Gambia offer 
legal counseling and other services relating to their statutory rights, gender violence, family maintenance and child custody.
92 
 46 The Constitution Part 7 on Political Parties stat es that “[n] o association shall be registered or 
remain registered as a political party if (a) it is formed or organised on an ethnic, sectional, religious or 
regional basis.” T here is no national policy aimed at protecting ethnic minorities in The Gambia.  
 
47 Ethnic, regional and religious sentiments have been stirred up during the Second Republic for 
political purposes , weakening the social fabric that so far spared the country from falling into major 
internal conflicts.
93 It was estimated in 2018 that the tensions along the ethnic, regional and religious lines 
have reached “toxic levels,” which are likely to affect proportionally more the most vulnerable, which 
includes ethnic minorities, young women and young men.94 In the same year, it was noted that “ [o]f 
 
89 Women’s Bureau, “Mid -Term Review Report of the Natio nal Gender And Women Empowerment Policy 2010 - 2020.”  
90 Government of The Gambia, 2018. “Conflict and Development Analysis –  The Gambia.”  
https://peaceinfrastructures.org/Home%20Documents/Conflict%20and%20Development%20Analysis -
The%20Gambia/GovernmentGambia WANEPJointProgramme_CDATheGambia_2018.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
91 ibid.  
92 Republic of the Gambia, 2012. “The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
https://www.lse.ac.uk/women -peace -security/assets/documents/2019/ NAP/Gambia -NAP -2012.pdf (accessed February 2021).  
93 Government of The Gambia, “Conflict and Development Analysis – The Gambia.”  
94 ibid.


---
*Page 168*
---

28 
 particular concern are the embedded patterns of mistrust and divisions amongst ethno -linguistic groups, 
which have been fostered and engineered by the state through intentionally unequal access to goods and 
services, and through the active fomenting of di sparities and divisions based on ethnic ity, tribal, and 
political affiliation.”  
 48 The concern seems to remain today;  an observer remarked that the fears of political -power 
monopolization by certain ethnicities are disproportional to organized attempts to do so and that 
accusatory politics are salient, but neglected, feature s of ethnic dynamics in Africa.
95 Consequently,  
observations on the relative numbers of tribes have become contentious, as there exists  no absolute 
majority tribe covering the entire country.  
 
3.1.6  Religion in Legal Sphere  
49 As di scussed above, t he Constitution of The Gambia 1997 declares that women and men have 
equal rights but also incorporates the customary law and shari’a, which are not necessarily compatible 
with the provision of equal rights . Religions do not rule every aspect of the lives of the Gambians, but are 
the cornerstones with respect to women’s reproductive health , marriage  and inheritance, which are 
reinforced by the patriarchal nature of the society. Under one of its priority areas,  human rights , the last 
Gambia Gender National Policy96 lists a strategy to “[e] nsure the review of all harmful customary practices 
perpetuated  under the disguise of religion .” 
 
3.2 Fishery, Crop Agriculture, Livestock and  Climate Change Policies on Women  and Youth  
3.2.1 Gender and Policy on Agriculture and Natural Resources  
50 The Agricultural and Natural Resources  (ANR) Policy 2017- 2026 of The Gambia97 is concerned 
about the declining share of agriculture and natural resources in employment and exports while the sector 
remains of primary importance to the economy. All products from the sector have been increasingly 
reliant on importation, except fruits, vegetables, onions, milk and fish. Given the disintegration of the Association of Horticultural Producers and Exporters of The Gambia (GAMHOPE), which jolted the horticulture subsector , the Policy deems it indispensable to strengthen the involvement of the private 
entities and women if the country wishes to revitalize the subsector.  
 51 As for the factors contrib uting to the economic decline of the ANR sector , the Policy lists : climate 
change ; declining primary commodity prices ; and inadequate domestic policy on poverty and food 
security. In view of these factors, the Policy emphasize s the importance of an enabling environment  which 
promotes  private  sector participation, diversification of the production base,  domestic savings, h ealthy 
environment and mainstreaming of women in the development process, and at the same time, 
discourages rural- urban migration and natural resources degradation.  
 
52 Ten constraints related to  the system and institutions are identified in the Policy: techn ical 
departments; farmer organizations; extension; agricultural research; rural finance and input/output marketing; agricultural mechanization; land and water resources; gender and youth; household food 
 
95 Hultin, N. and Sommerfelt, T., 2020. “ Anticipatory tribalism: accusatory politics in the ‘New Gambia’ .“ The Journal of Modern 
African Studies. Vol. 58, No. 2, 257- 279.  
96 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
97 The Republic of Gambia, 2017. “ The Agricultural and Natural Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
https://www.gafspfund.o rg/sites/default/files/inline -
files/6.%20The%20Gambia_Ag%20and%20Food%20Security%20Strategy_0.pdf (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 169*
---

29 
 security; and the environment. Under the constraints related to gender and youth , the Policy states that 
their contribution to agriculture and household welfare is limited by: lack of property rights;  small- scale 
of operations ; use of tradi tional production technologies; low access to productive resources in clud ing 
capital and improved inputs;  lack of access to technical information and knowledge ; and  inadequate 
distribution and marketing systems.  The constraints related to land and water resources include land 
tenure system that discriminates against women and leads to degradation of the resources.  
 
53 The Policy recognizes in its rationale that the majority in the sector are smallholders and hence 
should aim for improvement of their efficiency and surplus generation, in particular among  women 
farmers and operators. Its vision includes narrowing th e gender gap in capacity . Based on the above 
rationale and vision, the Policy defines five objectives, one of which is to achieve wider and more effective 
participation and representation of sub sistence farmers/operators especially women and youths in 
modern and commercial production, agribusiness and trade.  
 
54 One o f the strategies of the Policy –  greater role of the private sector – include expanding market 
outlet for small- scale producers especi ally women  farmers.  The Policy also contains sixteen sub -sector / 
enterprise policies: macroeconomic policy; food and cash crop policy;  seed production system; gender 
and youth mainstreaming policy; livestock and range management sub -sector policy; feed pro duction 
system; ANR Institution/services policy; forestry policy; parks and wildlife policy; marketing policy; food 
security policy; horticulture sub -sector policy; fisheries sub -sector policy; agricultural mechanization 
policy; environmental management po licy; and land and water use policy.  
 
55 Under food and cash crop policy, women farmers are referred to under sweet potato cultivation 
that they are able to produce two crops a year by taking advantage of seasonal moisture of the soil as well 
as water from shallow wells. Other parts of food and cash crop policy does not make reference to women 
or youth.  
 
56 With respect to the gender and youth mainstreaming policy, the Policy proposes six threads which 
it considers are in line with the country’s commitment s under the Convention on the Elimination of all 
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW): land tenure; access to credit; appropriate technologies 
for female and youth farmers; reliable sources of water; training and marketing . The  second thread of th e 
gender and youth mainstreaming policy pays attention to women in the fishing industry by proposing 
support in their bargaining and purchasing fish for processing with  their own capital and notes that this 
measure requires establishment of female fish mon ger groups and cooperatives.  
 57 Another thread  entitled training  touches upon training on formation of self- managed ( kafo ) 
groups to negotiate prices in the markets.  The thread also points out the necessity of awareness raising 
on food and nutritional secur ity as well as training in food preservation and processing to ensure food and 
nutritional security all year around.  The six th thread  – marketing  – also emphasizes the importa nce of 
women’s forming groups for price negotiation.  
 
58 Under livestock and range management sub -sector policy, women are mentioned in relation with 
small ruminants and poultry, which are considered “women’ s animals. ” While women are  also involved 
in feeding, washing and milking of other animals, such as cattle  (excepting the free- range cattle ), horses, 
donkeys, pigs, ducks, turkeys, guinea fowls and rabbits,
 they are not mentioned in relation with them in 
the Policy.  Topics such as food production system, ANR institutions/services policy, forestry policy, parks  
and wildlife policy, marketing policy, food security policy do not refer to women.


---
*Page 170*
---

30 
 59 The horticulture sub -sector policy included in the ANR Policy proposes establishment of a National 
Horticultural Development Authority , whose main objective is to provide organized production and 
marketing systems for horticultural crops mainly produced by small growers, especially women.  While it 
is a sub -sector highly dominated by female producers, they are not mentioned under all produ ction 
systems: only in pomology, and not under o reliculture or floriculture. Similarly, fisheries sub -sector policy, 
agricultural mechanization policy, environmental management policy or land and water use policy do not 
make any explicit reference to women . 
 
3.2.2 Youth and Policy on Agriculture and Natural Resources  
60 As mentioned in the analysis of women in Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy, the youth 
appears together with women under institutional support services and system -wide constraints, one of 
the objectives of the Policy, and gender and youth main stream ing policy (access to credit, appropriate 
technologies and training). Although information specific to the youth is not found in these sections, the second of the six rationales of the ANR P olicy  refers to aging farm labor “ due to exodus of able -bodied  
rural youths”  and the youth’s “preference for non -farm jobs.”  
 3.2.3 Gender and Climate Change Policy  
61 The National Climate Change Policy of The Gambia 2016
98 provides directions to implement 
national development strategies in a climate -resilient manner through institutional arrangements for  
coordination and mainstreaming:  an integrated approach to resource mobilization and human resources 
development.  The Policy vision is:  to “[a] chieve a climate -resilient society, through system s and strategies 
that mainstream climate change, disaster risk reduction, gender and environmental management, for sustainable social, political and economic development. ” 
 62 The Policy is based on the following principles : equity and social inclusion; inter- generational 
equity; cooperation; precautionary and preventive; polluter pays; sust ainable development; 
environmental justice; informed participation; evidence -based; innovation ; and duty to maintain a decent 
environment . One of them – environmental justi ce – is on “ addressing social inequalities, particularly 
relating to gender, age, infirmity and socioeconomic status, which would be aggravated by climate change, 
and enabling access to justice for all. ” 
 
63 The four focal areas of the Policy are:  
1. Climate resilient food systems and landscapes : Agriculture, food security, forestry and 
natural resources, including water, biodiversity and wildlife ;  
2. Low emissions and resilient economy : Energy, transport, infrastructure, and the key 
economic sectors of  tourism and financial services;  
3. Climate resilient people : Health, education, equitable social development, and human 
settlements ; and   
4. Managing coastlines in a changing environment : climate -aware Int egrated Coastal 
Zone Management.  
 
  
 
98 Department of Water Resources, Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Water, Forestry and Wildlife, 2016. “The National 
Climate Cha nge Policy of The Gambia.”  
http://thepoint.gm/africa/gambia/article/national -climate -change- council -inaugurated (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 171*
---

31 
 64 The Policy objectives  are: 
1. Advance the understanding, capacity and social empowerment of all Gambians so that 
they can adequately respond to climate change;  
2. Ensure adequate climate change research for informed decision making , and promote 
timely access to climate information and early warning of climate risks;  
3. Put in place sound and equitable adaptation and mitigation measures that promote 
effective management of ecosystems and biodiversity, reduce vulnerability to climate change impacts, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, to  achieve sustainable low -
carbon socio- economic development;  
4. Effectively integrate climate change into all sectors and across all scales, through 
mainstreaming climate risks and opportunities into national and sectoral frameworks , 
and through effective poli cy coordination and implementation;   
5. Build the resilience of communities and ensure health and welfare through participatory, equitable and pro -poor approaches  to climate change that emphasiz e 
the meaningful inclusion of women and vulnera ble groups;  
6. Integrate community -based adaptation with ecosystem -based approaches to 
strengthen people’s adaptive  capacities and develop more climate -resilient 
livelihoods, by investing in sustainable natural r esource management initiatives; and  
7. Coordinate national and  international financial resource mobilization to address 
climate change by mainstreaming climate finance readiness  and identifying, 
developing and promoting innovative financing mechanisms.  
 
65 For establishing climate resilient food systems and landscapes  (first focal area) , the Policy 
proposes : participatory integrated watershed management; adapta tion strategies in agriculture,  forestry,  
fishery , water and parks/wildlife/biodiversity sectors ; participatory sustainable forest management; and 
restoration of the River Gambia watershed.  The adaptation strategies in agriculture include: selection and 
promotion of crop varieties with  short maturity, improved and stable yields, and  tolerance to stresses 
such as drought, pests, diseases and soil toxicities ; product diversification; and s ustainable use of irrigation 
water . Forest sector strategies include: fuel- efficient cook stoves; and afforestation and reforestation 
(e.g., restoration of mangrove systems).  
 
66 The strategies of fishery sector are:  sustainable fishery management (e.g., use of appropriate 
fishing methods);  capacity development of the Fishe ries Department;  awareness raising am ong the p ublic;  
improved access to microfinance for artisanal operators, including young women processors;  and so on . 
The first water sector strategy is to: improvement in adaptive capacity to river salinity increase through a 
flow regulation system and water- use regulations. Other strategies include: adaptation to diminishing 
groundwater recharge through cross -sectoral planning; and development of small- scale rainwater 
harvesting systems.  
 67 Besides the references above  to gender under the principle of environmental justice and to young 
female processors in connection with climate change adaptation, women  or gender are  explicitly or 
implicitly  mentioned with respect to National Climate Change Council (NCCC) and 
Inter -ministerial 
Climate Committee (IMCC) , whose members include the Minister on gender, and to the National Climate 
Committee (NCC) , which is composed of representatives of farmers, women, scientific community,


---
*Page 172*
---

32 
 children’s and youth groups, communities, workers and trade unions, business and industry, non -
governmental organizations, and local authorities.99 
 
68 The Policy also proposes co llaborative implementation with the civil society and the private 
sector. In this context, it suggests the role of non -governmental entities as the ones to lead in tracking 
climate change expenditure in the national budget “with a strong focus on gender eq uality and informed 
inclusion of women.” The Policy states that the indicators and outcomes will be disaggregated by age and 
gender “to ensure correct targeting and to guide responses towards assisting the poorest and most 
vulnerable people and groups.”   
 
3.2.4 Youth  and Climate Change Policy  
69 According to the National Climate Change Policy of The Gambia 2016,100 the youth are 
represented at the national level on the topic of climate change; the Minister on youth issues is  a member 
of the National Climate Change Council (NCCC) and Inter -ministerial Climate Committee (IMCC) , and 
youths are members of  National Climate  Committee (NCC) . The Policy states under collaborative 
implementation with the civil society and the private sector that the y outh represent “ a vitally important 
sector in the response to climate change, and their meaningful participation in planning clim ate change 
responses should be ensured.” It adds that “ [y]outh entrepreneurs and leaders should be engaged in all 
policy development and review initiatives, as well as in capacity development, monitoring and tracking 
progress. ” The Policy otherwise does no t mention the youth, except for identifying them as a vulnerable 
group.  
 
3.2.5 Mechanism for Gender Mainstreaming  
70 The National Gender Policy 2010 -2020101 defines the National Gender Machi nery  as composed of 
the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Gender , the National Women’s Council and the Women’s  Bureau ,102 
which are mandated to spearhead the formulation, implementation, coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation of the Policy. It  also states that individual stakeholders shall be responsible for the 
implementation  of components  relevan t to its institutional mandate, while noting that the Policy does 
not replace institutional policies but  enhance s their im plementation process and ensures their gender 
sensitivity.  
 
71 Under the Policy , each stakeholder org anization must nominate a g ender focal point  and establish 
gender units . The network composed of gender focal points is responsible for: advising the Ministry and 
institutions in each relevant field on gender; providing feedbacks for effective monitoring and evaluation; 
identifying priority gender issues; planning for relevant interventions; and assessing and reviewing 
 
99 The Council and Committees are national -level bodies for climate change policy implementation. The NCCC governs the Gambia 
Climate Change Fund, IMCC assists the NCCC in carrying out its functions and NCC advises the Climate Change Secretariat on 
climate change -related questions and prov ides its views on complementary and related issues.  The Climate Change Secretariat is 
mandated to work with sectors and institutions on integrating climate change into the national and sub- national plans, and 
coordinating Policy implementation The Secretariat is housed in the Ministry of Environment, Climate Ch ange, Water, Forest and 
Wildlife  and works closely with the Ministry of Planning, Policy and Development and the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Affairs.  
100 Department of Water Resources, Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Water, Forestry and Wildlif e, “The National 
Climate Change Policy of The Gambia.”  
101 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
102 The Policy states that the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Women’s Bureau are to be renamed  as the Ministry of Women’s 
Affairs and Gender and Gender Bureau, respectively. T he names used in March 2021 is  the Ministry of Women’s Affai rs, 
Children and Social Welfare and the Women’s Bureau.


---
*Page 173*
---

33 
 progress in Policy implementation. The Gender Machinery is to assist the training of staff in the gender 
unit on gender analysis, gender bud geting, advocacy and gender mainstreaming strategies.  According to 
a report in 2012, the Women’s  Bureau succeeded in ensuring that gender mainstreaming is strategically 
relevant in the policy making and planning agendas of member institutions of the networ k.103 The Policy 
further details institutional structure roles and responsibilities for Policy implementation.104 
 
72 The government bodies consulted  at their headquarters for the formulation of the proposed 
project were: Ministry of Environment, Climate Change  and Natural Resources ( National Environment 
Agency,  Department of Forestry  and D epartment of Parks and Wildlife) ;105 Ministry of Fishery and Water 
Resources; Ministry of Agriculture; the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs; and Women’ s Bureau ( a 
body responsible for giving po licy guidance and proposals to t he national government  on issues affecting 
women).106 All officials consulted were aware of the CEDAW, except the Departments of Forestry, Parks 
and Wildlife and the Ministry of Finan ce and Economic Affairs.  
 
73 Although without the knowledge of  the fundamental convention on the rights of women, the 
Departments of Forestry and Parks and Wildlife were well aware of the role of women and projects 
targeting  women in their domain of work. The  Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs indicated that the 
International Monetary Fund had offered to support them on gender budgeting –  an approach to 
budgeting that uses fiscal policy and administration to promote gender  equality as well as  girls' and 
women's development107 – but had not had the opportunity to take it up . Most of the officials participated 
in the interviews were aware of the National Gender Policy 2010 -2020, but few were not.  
 
74 All interviewed  – except the Ministry of Fin ance and Econom ic Affairs, which is the National 
Designated Authority –  asserted that the gender dimension was integrated into their work , which was 
backed by their understanding of the problems that women face in their field of expertise. The most 
salient points raised were : women and the youth are losing their livelihoods  due to climate change  
(National Environment Agency, Departments of Forestry and Parks and Wildlife); and they do not have 
 
103 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
104 The major ones are those of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Gender which is tasked to: oversee coordination and 
harmonization of various stakeholders’ actions; establish appropriate mechanism for coordination of gender mainstreaming at 
all levels; lobby, advocate and mobilize resources for Policy implementation; and provide support to gender units and focal points. 
Those of the Women’s Bureau are to: provide technical support on gender mainstreaming to ministries, institutions, organizations 
local government bodies, CSOs and the private sector; coordinate, monitor and evaluate Policy implementation; provide 
backstopping support in critical areas; and set standards, develop guidelines and disseminate and monitor Policy  operations. The 
National Women’s Council’s roles and responsibilities are to: advise the government on gender; oversee Policy implementation at the decentralized level; lobby and advocate for policy reviews and law enactment for gender mainstreaming; and sensitize and 
advocate on gender at grassroots level.  
As for the Ministries and parastatals, they are to: translate the Policy into institutional specific policies, strategies and 
programmes; support gender units and focal points by building their capacity  in gender analysis, planning and providing budget 
lines for their operations; monitor ,evaluate and provide disaggregate data on sector programmes and their impact on gender 
equity; institute and implement affirmative actions on a short term basis to reduce gender gaps; partner with the Ministry of 
Women’s Affairs and Gender and the Women’s Bureau; mobilize, allocate and release resources for gender mainstreaming; and 
ensure that institutional policies and programmes are gender sensitive and benefit women and men. The NGOs, CSOs and CBOs 
also are tasked to translate the Policy into institutional specific policies, strategies and programmes, to develop and imple ment 
programmes addressing key areas of the Policy, etc.  
105 The Tambi Wetland Complex, an important  location in terms of wilderness, is under the jurisdiction of the Department of 
Parks and Wildlife. There are many subsistence activities taking place in the Complex, one of which is oyster harvesting.  
106 Interviews with the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources (the National Environment Agency, the 
Department of Forestry and the Department of Parks and Wildlife), the Ministry of Fishery and Water Resources, the Ministry o f 
Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs and the Women’s Bureau March 5 -24, 2021.  
107 Stotsky, J. G., 2016. “Gender Budgeting: Fiscal Context and Current Outcomes.” IMF Working Paper. WP/16/149 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2016/wp16149.pdf (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 174*
---

34 
 the capacity to cope with the changing climate (W omen’s Bureau,  Ministry of Agriculture and  Department 
of Parks and Wildlife).  
 
75 Fishery specific issues that affected women’s lives were: illegal fishing by industrial fleets 
(Departmen t of Fishery) and lack of mangrove restoration at the Tambi Wetland Complex (Department of 
Parks and Wildlife). Other more general obstacles observed were lack of: bargain ing power and 
marketing/literacy/ numeracy skills (Ministry of Agriculture ); access to funds (Department of Parks and 
Wildlife and Ministry of Agriculture) ; and voice (Department s of Fishery and Forestry). Gender -based 
domestic violence was also raised as a major issue by the Women’s Bureau.  Unbalanced work 
responsibilities between gender s were pointed out by the Department of Fisheries and the Mini stry of 
Agriculture.  The Depart ment of Fishery was of the opinion that penury of freshwater in the rural areas 
was a major issue . Unsustainability of projects were attributed to not integ rating local knowledge in 
design and implementation (National Environ ment Agency and Department of Forestry).  Landing Site 
Managers  who belong to the Ministry of Fishery and Water Resources , on the other hand, did not consider 
women as landing site users and could not provide information  on the conditions of fish processors  who 
are physically present  at the landing sites  to purchase fish .108 
 76 One each of national and international non -governmental organization s (NGO s) was interviewed 
with respect to their views and activities on gender and youth : Agency for the Development of Women 
and children; and Action Aid International.
109 They were well aware of CEDAW in addition to  the country’s 
National Gender Policy, partly due  to donors ’ being the main source of funds for gender related projects. 
The organizations  asserted their commitment to  strengthening the capacity of women and youth , but the  
collaboration mechanism in place under the Policy was not very clear to them.  
 
77 Whe n asked about the challenges that women and the youth face, t he community leaders 
interviewed for the project formulation (those of landing sites and farming villages) did not refer to 
separate issues for both, expect in terms of material needs , which matc hed well with what each group 
expressed themselves .110 111 All asserted that women and the youth are important participants in 
decision -making; they are consulted, but  not authorized  to make final decision s. 
 3.2.6 Mechanism for Youth Mainstreaming  
78 The National Youth Policy of The Ga mbia 2019 -2028
112 identified the lack of mechanisms for 
mainstreaming youth development and empowerment issues in sector policies and strategies as one of the obstacles in attaining the objectives of the prev ious Youth Policy. In recognition of this hurdle, the 
current Policy is “based on a common understanding of the need for deliberate formation of desirable quality youths, mainstreaming their empowerment in national development through formal and informal formation, and imbuing them with a set of core fundamental values and beliefs that determine how 
aptitude and character can be created in them for given societal purpose.”   
 
79 One of the ten priority areas of the Policy is to advocate for mainstreaming youth in economic 
planning and programming as prerequisites to growth and employment creation.  As for a  mechanism  to 
mainstream youth , the Policy states under the topic of coordination that “[t] he task of effectively forming 
 
108 Interview with Landing Si te Managers, Banjul and Bintang, March 9 -13, 2021.  
109 Interviews with the Agency for the Development of Women and Children and Action Aid International, April 1 -7, 2021.  
110 Interviews with community leaders, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kant eh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
111 Focused group discussions with harvesters/processors/sellers and youth , Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin 
Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
112 Ministry of Youth and Sports,  “National Yo uth Policy of The Gambia 2019.”


---
*Page 175*
---

35 
 and mainstreaming  youths in national development is by default a partnership task between institutions, 
and must be  coordinated effectively. This coordination task forms the core task and responsibility of the 
Ministry of Youth and Sports and its satellite institutions esp ecially the National Youth Council. ” Further 
detai ls are not found in the Policy.  
 
80 The youth being a relatively new topic to the policymakers, the seven government bodies 
consulted often saw the problems of women and youth together . The Women’s Bureau was the only one 
among the consulted to raise a specific concern regarding the youth, namely low quality of education. The national government has been encouraging the youth to take up  various livelihoods –  farming, tailoring, 
carpentry and so on – in the c ountry, instead of emigration. Their efforts have reached as far as large 
towns in the rural areas.   
 81 The community leaders (those of landing sites and farming villages) distinguish ed the youth from 
women with respect to  material needs , which was  in line with  what each group identified as their needs .
113 
114 Women and the youth are recognized by all as important stakeholders in decision -making , but the  
power to make  final decisions lie with adult men . Some community leaders were concerned about male 
youths’ lack of livelihood skills, which was also expressed frequently by the youth, while one in Jahally explicitly referred to lack of education among female youth.  
  
4. GENDER AND YOUTH IN RURAL GAMBIA  
4.1 Basic Statistics  
4.1.1 Gender Parity  
82 Gambia was categorized as one of the “Low Development” countries in 2019 – a group consisting 
of 33 countries  and territories  among 189 worldwide – according to the United Nations Development 
Programme’s Human Development Index (HDI), a summary measure for assessing long -term progress in 
a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living.115 Between 1990  and 2019, 
the value of the Index steadily improved, supported by increases in life expectancy and education attained while the Gross Natio nal Income per capita stagnated .
116 In terms of  overall ranking only a slight 
improvement was observed during 2014 -2019, ending in  the 172th in 2019.117 When the HDI value is 
accounted for inequality, the value is lowered  by 32.5%, slightly over the average loss due to inequality 
among low HDI countries and that among Sub -Saharan African countries, which are 31.4% and 30.5 %, 
respectively.118 
 83 The Gender Development Index of the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) – which 
measures gender inequalities in health, education and command over economic resources –  puts the 
country in Group 5, a group of countries with the least gender equality .
119 Table 3 demonstrates the 
 
113 Interviews with community leaders, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
114 Focused group discussions with harvesters/processors/sellers and youth , Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin 
Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
115 UNDP, 2020. Human Development Report 2020: The next frontier – Human development and the Anthropocene. New York: 
United Nations Development Programme.  
116 UNDP, 2020. “Human Development Report 2020 Briefing note for cou ntries on the 2020 Human Development Report  
Gambia. ” http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country -Profiles/GMB.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
117 UNDP,  Human Development Report 2020: The next frontier –  Human de velopment and the Anthropocene.  
118 UNDP, “Human Development Report 2020 Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report  Gambia. ”  
119 ibid.


---
*Page 176*
---

36 
 gender gap which constitute  the Gender Development Index.120 In a country where overall human 
development is low and not evenly distributed, it points to the critical situation for women, especially for 
thos e with scant socioeconomic means.  
 
Table 3: Human Development of  Women and Men121 
 
Human 
Development 
Index  Life Expectancy 
at Birth Expected Years 
of Schooling Mean Years of 
Schooling  Gross National 
Income per 
capita  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
0.448 0.530 63.5 60.7 10.0  9.8 3.4 4.6 1,145 3,207 
Source: UNDP  (2020 ). 
 84 The Gender Inequality Index reflects gender -based inequalities in reproductive health, 
empow erment and economic activity, which  can be interpreted as the loss in  human development due to 
inequality between female and ma le achievements in the these three dimensions.
122 The statistics – 597.0 
deaths from pregnancy related causes for every 100,000 live births, 78.2 births per 1,000 women aged 15 -
19, 10.3% of pa rliamentary seats held by women, 31.5% of adult women having attained secondary level 
of education or more compared to 44% of the same among adult men , labor market participation rate of 
51.2% for women and 68.0% for men  – placed the country the 148th amon g 162 countries in 2019  (Table 
4). 
 
Table 4: Gender Inequality Index  and Its Components123 
 
Gender 
Inequality 
Index 
Rank ing Maternal 
Mortality 
Ratio  Adolescent 
Birth Rate  Female 
Seats in 
Parliament 
(%) Population with at 
least some 
secondary 
education  
(%) Labor Force 
Participation Rate 
(%) 
Female  Male  Female  Male  
148 out 
of 162 597.0  78.2  10.3  31.5  44.0  51.2  68.0  
Source: UNDP  (2020 ). 
 85 It is thought that the situation of rural women is  not given the r ecognition it deserves  and tends 
to be subsumed under  the general discussion of women and development is sues.
124 Because of their 
geophysical location, they are socially excluded from mainstream development initiatives tha t can 
strategically improve  their lives.125 Neither are th e cultural customs  in their favor.  
 
120 ibid.  
121 ibid.  
122 Reproductive health is measured by maternal mortality and adolescent birth rates; empowerment by the share of 
parliamentary seats held by women and attainment in secondary and higher education by each gender; and economic activity 
by the labor market participation rates for women and men.  
123 UNDP,  “Human Development Report 2020 Briefing note for countries on the 20 20 Human Development Report  Gambia. ”  
124 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civ il Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discri mination against Women (CEDAW) .”  
125 ibid.


---
*Page 177*
---

37 
 4.1.2 Population , Ethnic Groups and Languages  
86 General and Female Population: The population in The Gambia has been steadily increasing since 
1960 to reach over 2.3 million in 2019,126 of which 50.4% are women.127 The population growth rate 
peaked in 1988 at 5.0% and was 2.9% in 2019, higher than that in 1961 and the world average in 2019 
(2.0% and 1.1% , respectively ),128 which will lead to doubling of the population in slightly less than 25 years 
if the rate is maintained. The population density is one of the highest in Africa with nearly 180 persons 
per square kilometers.129 High concentration of the population in the per i-urban areas, especially the 
growing seats of local administration, began in the early 2000s,130 and close to 60% of the total population 
today is estimated to live in the urban and peri -urban areas.131 The population of seven Districts that 
contain the target areas are shown in Table 5.  
Table 5: Population in Target Districts
132 
 
Local Government Area  Population  
Banjul (and Tambi Wetlands)  31,054  
Brufut  21,766  
Tanjeh  14,531  
Sanyang  12,572  
Karthong  3,322  
BIntang  773 
Jahal ly 2,066  
National Total  1,857,181  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013 ) 
 
87 Youth:  The Gambia today defines youth or young people as every person between the ages of 15 
and 35 years, following the African Union’s African Youth Charter, but at the time of 2013 Population and 
Housing Census, the youth was defined as persons aged 13 -30.133 The analysis in this subsection is based 
on the former definition of 13 -30. According to the 2013 Census,  the sources of data inaccuracy include:  
age misreporting; age heaping around zeroes and fives; and use of proxy respondents .134 
 88 Between the two C ensuses in 2003 and 2013, the youth population increased by 41.1% or 3.4% 
yearly to 690,836 persons , which is slightly faster than  the national annual population growth r ate of 3.1% 
during the same period.
135 In 2013, the youth comprised roughly 35% of the total population. The latest 
Census showed that 52.8% of the yout h were females and 47.2% were males.136 Among the youth, 12.0% 
were aged between 13 and 14 years, 31.0%  between 15 and 19 years, 26.6%  betwee n 20 and 24 years, 
 
126 World Bank, 2021. “Population, total – Gambia, The.” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=GM 
(accessed March 2021).  
127 World Bank, 2021. “Population, female (% of total population) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
128 World Bank, 2021. “Population growth (annual %) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.GROW?locations=GM (accessed March 2012).  
129 World Bank, 2020. “The World Bank in Gambia: the Overview.”  
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/gambia/overview (accessed March 2012).  
130 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
131 World Bank, “The World Bank in Gambia: the Overview.”  
132 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Directory of Settlement . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
133 Gambia Bur eau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
134 ibid.  
135 ibid.  
136 ibid.


---
*Page 178*
---

38 
 23.1%  between 25 and 29 years and 7.3%  aged 30 years. At the time of the last Census, 63.0% of the male 
youth lived in the urban areas while 60.3% of the female youth did, reflecting the higher tendency among 
males to migrate than females. About 2% of the total youth lived in Banjul, which was the lowest among 
the Local Government Areas (LGAs). The 2013 Census  characterized the youth in Gambia as the most 
mobile age -group among the population, which migrates for various reasons, such as employment, 
education, family formation and reunification.  
 
89 Ethnic Groups : The Gambia R iver basin has been  a focal point for immigrants  fleeing the  western 
Sudanic wars dating from the 12th century.137 The people with the longest hi story of the residence are the 
Jola, mostly located in the western part of the country.138 The Wol of are  predominant in Banjul as in 
Senegal. 139 The Fula in the upriver areas established a kingdom and was a major power in the late 19th 
century.140 The upstream also hosts concentration of Soninke.  The 2013 Census distinguishes ten 
categories of ethnic groups: Mandinka/Jahanka ; Fula/Tukulor/ Lorobo ; Wollof  (Wolof) ; Jola/ Karoninka ; 
Sarahule ; Serere; Creole/Aku ; Manjago; Bambara; and other.141 As the table below indicates, the ethnic 
composition has lately been in a flux.  
 
Table 6: Ethnicity Distribution142 
 
Ethnicity  Population Share in Year  (%) 
1973  1983  1993  2003  2013  
Mandinka/ Jahanka  42.3  40.8  39.5  35.9  34.4  
Fula/Tukulor/ Lorobo  18.2  19.0  18.8  21.9  24.1  
Wollof  (Wolof)  15.7  13.7 14.6  14.5  14.8  
Jola/ Karoninka  9.5 10.4  10.6  11.4  10.5 
Sarahule  8.7 8.3 8.9 8.1 8.2 
Serere  2.1 2.5 2.8 3.1 3.1 
Creole/Aku  1.3 1.7 0.8 2.0 0.5 
Manjago  0.4 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.9 
Bambara  1.0 0.8 1.8 0.5 1.3 
Other  – 0.7 0.3 0.2 1.5 
Not indicated  0.9 1.5 1.2 1.4 0.0 
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013 ) 
 
90 The official language of the country is English, but Mandinka and Wolof are widely spoken as the 
lingua franca.143 Other languages spoken include : Pulaar (Fulbe), Serer, Jola and Soninke. 144 
   
 
137 Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2021. “The Gambia”  
https://www.britannica.com/place/The -Gambia/Government -and-society  (accessed March 2021).  
138 ibid. 
139 ibid. 
140 ibid. 
141 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Ho using Census: Spatial Distribution  Report . Banjul: Republic of 
Gambia.  
142 ibid.  
143 Encyclopaedia Britannica, “The Gambia”  
144 ibid.


---
*Page 179*
---

39 
 4.1.3 Literacy and Education  
91 Literacy : The literacy rates according to gender and age indicate that The Gambia is catching up 
with other  countries in Sub- Saharan Africa (Table 7); the percentage- point difference  by gender  for the 
adult total literacy rate was 12.7 in 2015, but 7.2 for the youth  total literacy rate in the same year. T he 
percentage- point difference for female youth literacy between Gambia and Sub -Saharan African average  
was smaller than that for male youth literacy, while the situation is reversed for adult literacy , implying  
that women are advancing faster than men in terms of relative literacy in Sub -Saharan Africa.  
 
Table 7: Literacy Rates according to Gender and Age145 
 
Literacy Indicator  Year of Latest 
Gambian Data  Gambia  Sub-Saharan Africa  
(in the same year)  
Adult total (% of peoples aged 15 and above)  2015  50.8  63.5  
Adult female (% of peoples aged 15 and 
above)  2013 33.6  54.5  
Adult male (% of peoples aged 15 and above)  2013  51.4  70.4  
Youth total (% of peoples aged 15 and above)  2015  67.2  74.4  
Youth female (% of peoples aged 15 -24) 2015  64.4  70.5  
Youth male (% of peoples aged 15 -24) 2015  70.7  78.3  
Gender Parity Index  2013  0.85  0.89  
Source: World Bank (2021)  
 
92 Education: The Right to Education Section of the Constitution states that the basic education shall 
be free, compulsory and available to all,146 but slightly less than one -third of the youth had never attended 
school in 2013 .147  Another o ne-third was  attending school and  slightly over one -third had attended in the 
past at the time of 2013 Census.148  During 2015- 2019, the enrolment rate increased progressively for all 
education levels at an annual rate of 6.9% .149 The National Study on Out -of-School Children in The Gambia 
2017 indicated that 16.7% and 24.2% of girls and  boys  aged 7 -12, respectively, were out of school .150 Most 
children aged 5 -14 both work and attend school, and children with work often do not seek educa tion 
beyond primary school or never attend school.151 Around 2005, e ducation was deemed by the great  
majority of poor 10 -19 year -olds as the single most important factor in progressing to a ‘good career,’ but 
the 20 -29 year olds tended to reckon that academic qualifications beyond basic literacy in English had 
done little to advance their employment or earning opportunities and that what mattered more was social 
 
145 World Bank, 2021. “Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) - Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?loc ations=GM (accessed March 2021)  
and other literacy related data from the World Bank Data site (accessed March 2021).  
146 The Republic of The Gambia, Constitution of the Republic of the Gambia, 1997.  
147 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
148 ibid.  
149 Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education, 2019. “Education Statistics Summary Report 2019.” http://www.edugambia.gm › 
reports › download (accessed March 2021).  
150 Republic of Gambia, 2017. “Nat ional Study on Out -of-School Children in The Gambia.” 
https://www.unicef.org/gambia/media/636/file/National -Study -of-Out-of-School -Children- in-The- Gambia- 2017.pdf (accessed 
March 2021). 
151 Newgarden, S., 2021. “10 Facts about Child Labor in Gambia.” The Borgen Proejct.  
https://borgenproject.org/10 -facts -about -child- labor -in-the-gambia/ (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 180*
---

40 
 networks .152 Many without any experience in formal schooling think of it as an investment not worth the 
time . 153 154  Nonetheless, the primary school completion rate was 70% in 2019.155 
 
93 In 2019, 82.9% of lower basic education schools had access to safe drinking water, 79.4% of all 
schools (lower and upper basic education and senior secondary education schools) had adequately separated toilets, and 94.2% had permanent classrooms.
156 Improve d safety and hygiene conditions in 
schools are ensuring that more  girls are enrolled and retained in school.157 In the same year, 60% of senior 
secondary education s chool had access to electricity.158 The number of students per teacher ratio 
improved between  2015 and 2019 for upper basic education level from 23 to 18.159 During the same 
period, the ratios remained at the same moderately high to low levels for lower basic education and senior secondary education, 35 and 23, respectively.
160 
 
94 In 2018, the p ercentage of children aged 7 -14 years who demonstrated basic  reading skills was 
low at below 20% for all subgroups: female/male; and rural/urban.161 The rural areas lagged behind the 
urban areas by 9 -11 percentage points, and the gender gaps were minimal in both areas.162 While boys’ 
skills did not improve with mo thers’ educational level,  girls’ skills responded to their mothers’ higher 
education. 163 So was the case with the wealth level; boys’ skills did not respond, but the girls’ did.164 The 
results for basic numeracy skills were worse overall at 8.6% of children demonstrating satisfactory levels, 
where girls led boys by three percentage -points.165 The situation was at worrying 2.6% for rural areas and 
1.9% for rural girls.166 The relationships of children’s skills to mothers’ education level and to wealth 
appeared inconclusive, except for that between girls’ skills and wealth.167 
 95 National Assessment Test (NAT) for Grade 3  stud ents  in 2019  was taken by 95% of the registered 
students . The  passing rates for English and mathematics were  61.3% and 55. 9%, respectively.
168 The NAT 
test for Grade 8 in 2019 w as taken by 93.3% of the registered students, and 70.1% passed the English test 
and 16.6% the mathematics test.169 The Gambia Basic Certificate Examination ( GABECE) is a national 
examination which marks the end of nine years of basic education and grants acce ss to senior secondary 
 
152 Chant, S. and Jones, G.A,, 2005. “Youth, Gender and Livelihoods in West Africa: Perspectives from Ghana  and The Gambia.” 
Children’s Geographies , Vol. 3, No. 2, 185– 199.  
153 Newgarden, “10 Facts about Child Labor in Gambia.”  
154 Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
155 Newgarden,  “10 Facts about Child Labor in Gambia.”  
156 Ministry of Basic a nd Secondary Education, “Education S tatistics Summary Report 2019.”  
157 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, 2015. 
“The Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discri mination against Women (CEDAW).”  
158 Ministry of Basi c and Secondary Education,  “Education Statis tics Sum mary Report 2019.”  
159 ibid.  
160 ibid.  
161 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey  Findings Report.”  
162 ibid.  
163 ibid.  
164 ibid.  
165 ibid.  
166 ibid.  
167 ibid.  
168 Ministry of Basi c and Secondary Education,  “Education S tatistics Summary Report 2019.”  
169 ibid.


---
*Page 181*
---

41 
 education in the Gambia .170 In 2018, less than half of the students who took the exam passed.171 The “very 
poor performance” in English and mathematics was noted by the examiners.172 
 
96 According to the 2013 Census, 16%  of the youth had attained primary education, 23% lower 
secondary education, while 24% reached upper secondary level.173 Only 1% had vocational education and 
3% reached tertiary level, painting a problematic picture in terms of their future employability and 
employment.174  Students were most likely to leave school when they are between 15 and 19 years old.175 
In the rural areas, the years spent in school was shorter than in the urban areas;176 73% of 15- 17 year olds 
in urban areas we re still in  school, against 61% in rural areas.177 Formal education wa s limited outside 
cities , and for higher quality education and training, the students  needed to  migrate to the Greater Banjul 
Area or overseas.178 The drop in school attendance did  not match with inc rease in employment, which 
indicates that the students become inactive after dropping out of school.179 
 
97 The W est African Senior School Certificate E xamination (WASSCE) is for senior secondary school 
students from the five Angl ophone countries in West Afric a: The Gambia, Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone 
and Liberia.180 This e xamination marks the end of senior secondary education and grant s admission to 
universities and other higher institution of learning .181 In 2018, 12,121 candidates (54.6% female) 
registered for the examination in 32 subjects , and 3.2% of female students obtained credit passes in five 
subjects or more, including English and mathematics, while the rate for male students was 4.0% .182 Among 
all students, 1.7% obtained cre dit passes in nine subjects and 17.6% in one subject, and the overall 
performance was judged worse compared to the year before.183 
 98 The statistics on education  paints a picture that women are slightly ahead of men in The Gambia  
as is the case with literacy . In 2019, the gross enrolment rate for the low basic education attained gender 
parity of 1.08 .
184 The e xpected years of schooling (the n umber of years of schooling that a child of school 
entrance age can expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age -speci fic enrolment rates persist throughout the 
child’s life ) is alr eady higher for girls. The expected years of schooling for female children is 1.3 years longer 
than the average of the group of Low Human Development Countries, to which The Gambia belongs. The  mean 
years of schooling is only 0.6 years shorter than the average of the same countries, while for male the mean 
years are 1.4 years shorter.  However, the actual mean years of schooling is shorter  for girls than for boys (Table 
 
170 ibid.  
171 The West African Examinations Council, 2018. “The Gambia Basic Education Certificate Examination May 2018 Chief 
Examiners’ Reports.”  
https:// www.waecgambia.org/Portals/0/C%20E%20Report%20GABECE%202018%20FINAL%202.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
172 ibid.  
173 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Ho using Census: Youth Report . 
174 ibid.  
175 Ministry of Youth and Sports,  “National Youth Policy of The Gambia 2019.”  
176 ibid.  
177 ibid 
178 ibid.  
179 ibid.  
180 Ministry of Basi c and Secondary Education,  “Education S tatistics Summary Report 2019.”  
181 ibid.  
182 Freedom Newspaper, 2018. “ Gambia: Breaking News: 90 Percent of Gambian Students Who Sat for This Year’s WAEC Exams 
Failed Miserably!” Freedom Newspaper. July 30, 2018.  
https://www.freedomnewspaper.com/2018/07/30/gambia -breaking -news -90-percent -of-gambian -students -who -sat-this-
years -waec -exams -failed -miserably/ (accessed March 2021).  
183 Ministry of Basi c and Secondary Education,  “Education S tatistics Summary Report 2019.”  
184 ibid.


---
*Page 182*
---

42 
 8). The higher dropout rate for girls at all levels of education, both in rural and urban areas,185 is attributed 
to: preference for boys’ educat ion; early and forced marriages;  teenage pregnancy ; and child labo r.186 
Given that  each of the girls’ completion rates of lower basic, upper basic an d senior secondary education 
were  higher than for boys in the same year,187 the dropout rate  among girls is rapidly declining and  female 
youth is closing the gap.  
 
Table 8: Expected and Mean Years of Schooling in 2019188 
 
 Expected Years of Schooling  Mean Years of Schooling  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
The Gambia  10.0  9.8 3.3 4.6 
Low Human Development Countries  8.7 10.1  3.9 6.0 
World  12.9  12.7  8.5 9.2 
Source: UNDP (2020).  
 
99 Against the  background that the population is predominately Muslim , Mad rassa e ducation 
continuous to flourish.189 The flexible  teaching- learning approach widely employed by Madrassas is 
convenient and attractive to the less  privileged and  marginalized populations who invariably pursue 
education and livelihood needs at the same time .190 The system provided access to education to hundreds 
of thousands of children, out -of-school youths and adults over the years.191 General Secretariat for 
Islamic/Arabic Education was established in 1996 under t he Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education , 
which resulted in harmonization of the syllabi, alignment of the Madrassa ’s educational activities with 
national development goals  and widen ing the scope of Islamic Education to include technical and 
vocational skills training .192 The improved quality and standardization of learning outputs  have  led to 
higher  adult literacy rates  in the country .193 Between 2003 and 2004, about 162 Madrassa were in 
operation in Gambia with a total enrolment of 55,685 learners ( 21,859 females and 28,234 males ) and 
about 20% of school -age children were attending Madrassa in 2014. 194 
 100 Little less than a quarter of children aged 7 -14 could not attend class in 2018 , with higher 
proportion among girls than boys and among rural c hildren than  urban children.
 195 The most common 
reasons were teacher strike or absence (74.0% of the children aged 7 -14) and teach er absence (29.9% for 
the same).196 The inability to attend decreased with mother’s education level and also with wealth, 
suggesting the poor’s worse access to education or their tendency for truancy.197 
 
 
185 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
186 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW ).”  
187 Ministry of Basic  and Secondary Education, “Education S tatistics Summary Report 2019.”  
188 UNDP, Human Development Report 2020: The next frontier –  Human de velopment and the Anthropocene.  
189 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010- 2020.”  
190 UNESCO, 2014. “Islamic Education System in The Gambia, Gambia.”  
https://uil.unesco.org/case- study/effective -practices -database- litbase -0/islamic -education- system -gambia- gambia (accessed 
March 2021).  
191 ibid.  
192 UNESCO, “Islamic Education System  in The Gambia, Gambia.”  
193 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
194 UNESCO, “Islamic Education System in The Gambia, Gambia.”  
195 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
196 ibid.  
197 ibid.


---
*Page 183*
---

43 
 4.1.4 Poverty  
101 Gambian economy is an overwhelmingly agricultural one, with groundnuts as the most important 
cash crop. Tourism and remittances are also important sources of foreign exchange and contributed to 
about 12% of Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) in the early 2010s.198 In 2019, GDP  per capita in Gambia was 
USD 778, less than half of the Sub- Saharan average, even when we exclude the high- income countries in 
the region.199 Purchasing Power Parity  GDP per capita had more or less continued to increase  from 1990 
to 2010, but  it took a sharp dive in 2011 , because of the deepest and most widespr ead recession in half a 
century200 and the decline continued until 2014.201 It was  yet to recover to the 2010 level in 2019.202 
Poverty is higher in the rural than in the urban areas.203  
 102 UNDP identifies multiple deprivations suffered by individuals in three dimensions: health, 
education and standard of living.
204 If the score is greater or equal to 20%, but less than 33.3%, the 
household and its members are vulnerable to multidimensional po verty , if the deprivation score is 33.3% 
or greater, they are  classified as multidimensionally poor, and if the score is greater than or equal to 50%, 
they live in severe multidimensional poverty.205 In 2018, 41.6 % of the population were  multidimensionally 
poor and  an additional 22.9% were  vulnerable to  multidimensional poverty ; an average Gambian ’s 
deprivation score was 49% and hence practically in severe multidimensional poverty.206 
 103 The level of poverty  in The Gambia  increased between 1992 and 2003 from 31% to 58%
207 and 
has stayed stable at 48% in the last five years.208 During 1993- 2003, the disparity between the rural and 
urban areas also widened.209 The Gini index was 35.9 in 2015, but historical data does not exist.210 The 
latest data of a neighboring country, Senegal , is 40.3  in 2011, showing larger income inequality.211 The 
COVID -19 pandemic is expected to have dampened GDP growth in The Gambia t o between 2.5 % and 
negative 2.4%212 and deepened the inequality gap in 2020. The economic impacts of the pandemic ha ve 
stemmed from  fewer  tourists , trade disruption and lower commodity prices.213 
 4.1.5  Employment  
104 Women versus Men: Since the 1990 s, the unemployment rate for Gambian women stayed slightly 
above 12%, while that for women in Sub -Saharan Africa also remained nearly constant around 6%; the 
 
198 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
199 World Bank, 2021. “GDP per capita (current $) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
200 OCED, 2010. African Economic Outlook 2010.  Paris: OECD.  
201 World Bank, 2021. “GDP per capita, PPP (current international $) – Gambia, The.” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=G M (accessed March 2021).  
202 ibid.  
203 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
204 UNDP, “Human Development Report 2020 Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report  Gambia. ” 
205 ibid.  
206 ibid.  
207 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
208 World Food Programme, 2021. “Gambia.” https://www.wfp.org/countries/gambia (accessed March 2021). 
209 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010-2020.”  
210 World Bank, 2021. “Gini index (World Bank estimate) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?locations=GM  
211 ibid.  
212 World Bank, “The World Bank in Gambia: the Overview.”  
213 ibid.


---
*Page 184*
---

44 
 rates were 12.0%  and 6.4%, respectively in 2019.214 The unemployment rates ha ve evolved differently for 
males; almost steady decline from above 7.1% in 1990 to 6.5% in 2019 for the Gambians, and from 6.4% 
to 6.1% during the same period for Sub -Saharan Africans as a whole.215 The latter  had seen rapid gains in 
employment, only to lose them  between 2002 and 2008;  its unemployment rate has been  climbing since 
2015, unlike for the Gambians .216 The unemployment rate for  the total population of the country and  that 
for the Sub -Saharan average moved in parallel with each other and in line the respective male 
unemployment rates;  the male unemployment rates  showed larger swings and stayed  approximately 3 
percentage points lower  than the rates for the total populations  at around 5 -7%.217  
 105 The comparative history of the unemployment rates implies that female employment in Sub -
Saharan Africa is insulated from the world economy; its informal nature and strong connection to local economies persist. It is believed that 70% of Gambian women are engaged in low productivity rural subsistence agriculture.
218 The employment of Gambian men also appears grounded in local economies, 
albeit to a lesser extent. Overall, the employment in The Gambia is much more informal than the Sub -
Saharan average.  
 
106 Youth: The picture changes when the focus i s narrowed to the youths. Trajectories similar to the 
total unemployment rate s were observed for female unemployment among youths aged 15 -24 in The 
Gambia alone and also in Sub -Saharan Africa, which indicates greater integration of the youth in the 
economies outside the borders .219 The rate at 16.7% in 2019 was much higher than 12.0% for the female 
total in The Gambia or 13.1% for the Sub -Saharan average for female aged 15 -24.220 
 107 For male youths  aged 15 -24, the Gambians fared better than the Sub -Saharan average  by 2 -3 
percentage points throughout the period 1990 -2019; the unemployment rate in 2019  was 8.9% and 
12.2 %, respectively, for The Gambia and Sub -Saharan average,
221 although  the rates were higher than  
those  for the corresponding total male population.222 223 The gap between the two has been growing since 
2015, as unemployment  for 15 -24 year olds  is abated in the Gambia and soars in Sub -Saharan Africa as a 
whole.224 Around 2000, 39.5% and 4 6.7 % of female and male youths, respectively, were economically 
 
214 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemployment, female (% of female labor force) (national estimate) - Gambia, The, Sub-Saharan 
Africa.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
215 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemployment, male (% of male labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, The, Sub-Saharan 
Africa.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.MA.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
216 ibid.  
217 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemploymen t, total (% of total labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, The, Sub-Saharan 
Africa.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
218 Touray, O., 2016. “ Review of the Livestock/Meat and Milk Value Chains a nd Policy Influencing Them in The Gambia.”  
http://www.fao.org/3/i5262e/i5262e.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
219 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemployment, youth female (% of female labor force ages 15- 24) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, 
The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.FE.ZS?locations=GM-ZG (accessed March 2021). 
220 ibid.  
221 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemployment, youth female (% of male labor force ages 15 -24) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, 
The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.MA.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
222 ibid.  
223 World Bank, 2021. “ Unemployment, male (% of male labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, The, Sub-Saharan 
Africa.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.MA.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
224 World Bank, “ Unemployment, youth female (% of male labor force ages 15- 24) (modeled ILO estimate) - Gambia, The.”


---
*Page 185*
---

45 
 active, proportions comparable to all women in the country, but the unemployed youths aged 13 -30 
comprised 70% of all unemployed.225  
 
108 Types of Employment : The unemployment rates segregated by  gender and education level (Table 
9) show that informal employment is higher for women at all education levels, but the gender gap is the 
largest when the highest education level attained is intermediate. The share of  youth not in education, 
employment or  training, segregated by gender, also points to the same situation.  The informal sector was 
described in 2009 as vibrant, as poor women and men start micro and small  businesses for family 
survival;226 it is the informal sector that provides  the m ajority of work for women . 
 
Table 9: Various Unemployment Rates in 2018227 
 
Unemployment Related Rate  Percentage  
Unemployment wit h advanced education (% of female  labor force with advanced education)  n/a 
Unemployment with advanced education (% of total labor force with advanced education)  7.0 
Unemployment with advanced education, male (% of male labor force with advanced 
education)  5.9 
Unemployment with intermediate education, female (% of female labor force with 
intermediate education)  23.8  
Unemployment with intermediate education, male (% of male labor force with intermediate 
education)  13.4  
Unemployment with basic education, female (% of female labor force with basic education)  14.7  
Unemployment with basic education, male (% of male labor force with basic education)  9.7 
Share of youth not in education, employment or training, female (% of female youth 
population)  53.5  
 
Share of youth not in education, employment or training, male (% of male youth population)  45.3  
Source: World Bank (2021).  
 
109 In the early 2000s, 45% of economically active population were women, representing 16.4% in 
fisheries, 22.1% in manufacturing, 41.3% in hotels and restaurants, 2.7% in financial services, 7.0% in storage and communication, 40.0% in commercial, social and personnel services and 43.5% in wholesale and retail.
228 Female youths aged 13 -30 were more likely than male youths to be self -employed or unpaid 
family worker than males of the same age group.229 
 110 Urban youths  were  more likely to be employed for pay ment  than rural youths,
230 but 
unemployment rate itself was higher in the urban areas.231 In fact, rural unemployment is low for all ages, 
which implies the ability of the agriculture to tap into labor that rural area provides, including youth  
labor.232 Urban unemployment is the highest for those aged 20 to 24 years, and young workers tend to 
 
225 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
226 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
227 World Bank, 2021. Data (“Unemployment with advanced education (% of total labor force with advanced education) – 
Gambia, The.” etc.  
https://data.worldbank.org (accessed March 2021).  
228 Minis try of Women’s Af fairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
229 Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
230 ibid.  
231 Ministry of Youth and Sports, “National Youth Policy of The Gambia 2019.”  
232 ibid.


---
*Page 186*
---

46 
 be employed in jobs of low quality and high levels of informality.233 The agriculture sector is considered 
the key when investing in the youth; the sector accounted for 41.5% of employed youth aged 13 -30 years, 
52.2% of female and 30.7% of male.234 Agriculture is also responsible for 66.3% of employment of this age 
group in the rural areas versus 7.5% in urban areas. 235 In the urban areas, the service sector employs this 
age group as much as agriculture in the rural areas at nearly 65%.236 
 
111 Child Workers : Among the male population aged 7 years and older at the time of 2013 Cen sus, 
53.2% were economically active compared to 37. 8% of their female counterparts.237 The economically 
active population for the age bracket 7 -9 was 10.1% for males and 7.3% for females . 238 In 2019, it was 
estimated that over 60% of the population were und er the age of 25 with the median age of 17 and that  
20% of children work ed in the country, 95% of them in the agriculture sector.239 As The Gambia chose the 
lower  age limit option provided by the Minimum Age Convention, the general minimum age for admission  
to employment or work is 14 , but 12 for light work.  
 
112 Migration : The country has been historically a hub for migration, including transatlantic slave 
trades during the 15th-20th centuries,  because of  its geographical location.240 Rural- urban migration has 
been high and the proportion of urban population increased from 58% to 37% between 1993 and 2010, 
principally owing to youths relocating to the urban areas in search of work.241 In 2017, internal migration 
was estimated to involve  more than a quarter of the population.242 The economic instability has fueled 
emigration among all segments of the society, in particular nurses and doctors; the skilled emigration rate at 63% in 2000 was among the 20 highest rates in the world and the second highest in Africa.
243 More 
than 90,000 Gambians were estimated to live abroad in 2017: half of them in the United States, Spain or the United Kingdom, a quarter in other West African countries, and the last quarter in other European countries.
244 
 113 Many Gambian s emigrate along “back way” routes out of Africa, passing through Mali or Niger 
and to Libya in order to cross the Mediterranean Sea.
245 In 2016, 6.6% of people arrived by sea in Italy 
were Gambians, mostly men aged 15 -40. Among the minors who arrive by sea in Italy, Gambia was one 
of the most common nationalities, together with Nigeria and Eritrea.246 Remittances constituted 15.1% of 
GDP in 2019.247 
 
 
233 ibid.  
234 ibid.  
235 ibid.  
236 ibid.  
237 Gambia Bu reau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Youth Report . 
238 ibid.  
239 Newgarden, “10 Facts about Child Labor in Gambia.”  
240 Kebbeh, C. O., 2013. “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s ‘Smiling Coast.’” The Online Journal of the Migration Policy Institute.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2429807 (accessed March 2021).  
241 Kebbeh, C. O., 2013. “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s ‘Smiling Coast.’” The Online Journal of the Migration Policy Institute.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abs tract_id=2429807 (accessed March 2021).  
242 Armitano, F. , 2017. “Migration in the Gambia: a Country Profile 2017.”  Dakar: IOM  (accessed March 2021).  
243 Kebbeh, C. O., 2013. “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s ‘Smiling Coast.’” The Online Journal of the Migrati on Policy Institute.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2429807 (accessed March 2021).  
244 Armitano, F. , 2017. “Migration in the Gambia: a Country Profile 2017.”  Dakar: IOM  (accessed March 2021).  
245 ibid.  
ibid.  
247 World Bank, 2021. “Personal remittances, received (% of GDP) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.TRF.PWKR.DT.GD.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 187*
---

47 
 4.1.6 Marriage  
114 Age: The 2013 Census showed that well over half of Gambian women, but only slightly over 10% 
of men, were married before the age of 25.248 Before turning 30, approximately 80% of women and 30% 
of men had been married.249 The gender gap closed for the age group 30 -34 and further for the age group 
40-44: 97.0% of women and 89.6% of men were married or had been married at some time in their lives 
before the age of 45.250 Around 2015, 36% of women aged 20 -24 reported that they were married before 
the age of 24 , ranking it  the 9th highest among 16 West African countries, a region which contains  some 
of the highest rate of child marriage in the world .251 According to the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 
2018, 9.6% of women aged 15- 49 were married before the age of 15 , compar ed to 0.3% of the male 
counterparts .252 In 2018, more than  half of the women aged 15 -24 and married had a spouse who was 
older by ten years or more, and the proportion was higher for women aged 15 -19 than for those aged 20 -
24.253 Early marriage among women proportionally increases  roughly with the distance  from th e coast.254 
 
115 In a study that targeted urban Muslim poor in The Gambia and Tanzania, it was concluded that 
education was an important factor in delaying marriage  but that the perception of both parents and the 
girls themselves (that the drawbacks outweighed benefits) and the hidden costs of schooling (extra fees, 
transportation, uniforms and books) were preventing girls’ longer education.255 The girls and their families 
in urban Gambia and Tanzania saw  three contributing factors to early marriage which are intertwined:  
poverty, cost of education and prevalenc e of premarital sexual activity.256 Often early marriage is 
considered by the parents and the girls as the best available option for girls among the urban poor,257  and 
more than often there are no meaningful alternatives to marriage including work opportunities in the 
rural areas .258 Education is acknowledged to delay marriage by urban families who can afford schooling 
and whose girls do well in school.259  Girls who have no access to education or have lost the motivation to 
attend school often engage in intimate relationships , either to obtain financial support from boyfriends 
or to fill the time;260 gendered economic inequalities facilitates transactional intimacy.261 The fear of 
premarital sex is also  an important element in early marriage among girls,262 263 and girls are becoming 
increasingly more sexually active, at least in the urban areas .264 The prevalence of child marriage differed  
 
248 Gambia Bureau  of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . Banjul: Republi c of Gambia.  
249 ibid.  
250 ibid.  
251 OECD, 2016. “West African Girls are Being Married Off Too Young.” Maps and Facts, No 33. Sahel and West Africa Club.  
https://www.oecd.org/countries/chad/33 -child%20marriage.pdf (accessed March 2012).  
252 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
253 ibid. 
254 UNFPA, 2020. “Adolescents and Youth Dashboard – Gambia.”  
https://www.unfpa.org/data/adolescent -youth/GM (accessed March 2021).  
255 Jouhki, J. and Stark, L., 2017. “ Causes and Motives of Early Marriage in The Gambia and Tanzania Is New Legislation 
Enough?” University of Jyväskylä, Poverty a nd Development Working Papers  1/2017. 
https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/55704/978-951-39-7225- 7.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed March 2021).  
256 ibid.  
257 ibid.  
258 Lowe, M. et al., 2020.  “Social and cultural factors perpetuating early marriage in rural Gambia: an exploratory mixed 
methods study.” (Version 3)  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6974925/ (accessed March 2021).  
259 Jouhki and Star k, “Causes and Motives of Early Marriage in The Gambia and Tanzania Is New Legislation Enough ?” 
260 ibid.  
261 ibid. ). 
262 ibid.  
263 Lowe et al., “ Social and cultural factors perpetuating early marriage in rural Gambia: an exploratory mixed methods study.”  
264 Jouhki and Stark, “ Causes and Motives of Early Marriage in The Gambia and Tanzania Is New Legislation Enough ?”


---
*Page 188*
---

48 
 within countries among various ethnicities  in the late 1990s ,265 and that is thought to be the case in The 
Gambia today .266 267 
 
116 Type s of Union : The 2013 Census  indicated that  66.6% of the ever -married population aged 12 
years and older were in monogamous relationships, while 30.3% were in polygamous (mor e precisely, 
polygynous) unions.268 The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018 reported that 36.2% of women aged 
15-49 were in polygynous unions,269 implying increase in the practice from 2013 to 2018. In 2013, 
polygamy was more common among the ever -married female population than males  (36.4% and 28.7%, 
respectively) , which the Census explained as a fact of polygamy (more precisely, polygyny); when a man 
takes on three wives for example, three women would be reported as being in polygamous union.270 
 
117  Among the persons in polygynous  unions  in 2013, the most common occupation was agriculture 
for both women and men (67.3% and 40.4%, respectively),271 implying higher prevalence of polygyny in 
the rural areas. In 2018, 43.6% and 32.3% of women aged 15- 49 in rural and urban areas, respectively, 
were in polygynous marriages/unions. 272 The most common level of educational attainment was pre-
primary or none in 2018, when 45.8% of women with such level of educational attainment were in polygynous relationships.
273 The most common education level was none at  75% among persons in 
polygynous  unions  in 2013 , but no  education was also the mos t common  among t he monogamous 
persons at 54.5%  in the same year .274 The Survey in 2018 indicated that women with handicaps were more 
likely to be in a polygynous relationship; 48.9% and 36.4% of women aged 18- 49, with and without 
functional difficulties, re spect ively, were involved in polygyny,275 implying the effects of empowerment 
on types of unions.  
 118 A survey conducted in the late 1990s in four Sub- Saharan countries (Ghana, Kenya, Senegal and 
Zimbabwe) concluded that the husband’s education was a contributing factor in monogamous marriages, 
while it was observed that the higher the level of social modernity, the more the wife’s education mattered.
276 Comparing the  ethnicity of the head of household, Gambian women aged 15 -49 were most 
likely to be in a polygynous marriage when the head was Sarahule (56.5%) and least likely when the head was Jola (25.6%).
277 Other Gambian groups compared – Mandinka, Wolof, Fula and other ethnic groups – 
showed rates higher than 30%.278 Women were more likely to be divo rced, separated or widowed than 
men; 6.6% among rural women and 1.0% among rural men, and slightly higher for both groups in the urban areas.
279 
 
 
265 Hayase, Y. and Liaw, K -L., 1997. “Factors on Polygamy i n Sub -S aharan Africa: Findings Based on the Demographic and Health 
Surveys .” The Development Economics.  Vol. 35, No.3, 293-327. 
266 Lowe et al., “ Social and cultural factors perpetuating early marriage in rural Gambia: an exploratory mixed methods study.”  
267 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
268 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . 
269 ibid. 
270 ibid.  
271 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . 
272 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
273 ibid. 
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . 
275 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
276 Hayase and Liaw, “Factors on Polygamy i n Sub -S aharan Africa: Findings Based on the Demographic and Health Surveys .” 
277 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018:  Survey Findings Report.”  
278 ibid.  
279 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report .


---
*Page 189*
---

49 
 119 The Census commented that polygamy is a “long- standing cultural practice” which “is deeply 
rooted in the African society and is widely practiced among Muslims and Christians alike in many parts of 
the continent.”280 It has helped  various tribes survive in a rather unproducti ve and hostile physical 
environ ment.281 The rationales for polygamy (more precisely, polygyny) in Africa are that it is a remedy 
for: female infertility ; menopause, pregnancy and nursing (in some societies , sex with women in these 
conditions are forbidden); social exclusion (the social norm is to be married and have children, leading to 
levirate marriage in some cases); acquisition of labor; lack of male heir; sick, absent or working mothers 
(who cannot engage in household work and caregiving); and sexual incompatibility.282 These reasons are 
seen primarily from men’s point of view to overcome inconvenie nces and fulfill desires.  
 
120 When women initiate divorce , husbands often do not respect court rulings in terms of child 
support , and in most cases the child is left under the custody of the mother without any contribution from 
the father .283 The application and reinforcement of court outcomes are not given sufficient  attention 
because qadi  courts are presided over by men,284 and it  is said that there is  reluctance to  appoint female 
qadi .285 Under customary law,  a wife needs to remarry  a member of her husband’s family  in order to 
inherit her husband’s property .286 
 
4.1.7 Religion  
121 According to an estimate in 2019, 95.7% of the population is Muslim, whose majority consists of 
Sunni.287 The religious minorities include: Christians (4.2 % of the population);  Ahmadi Muslims ; Baha’is ; 
Hindus ; and Eckankar ( the last four together constitute less than 1% o f the population).288 Some follow 
indigenous beliefs blended  with Islam and Christia nity.289 The Constitution Section 17 provides for 
Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms and states that “[e] very person in the Gambia, whatever 
his or her race, colour, gender, Language, religion, political or other opinion, National or social origin, 
property, birth or other status, shall be entitled to the fundamental human rights and freedoms of the individual contained in this chapter, but subject to respect f or the rights and freedoms of others and for 
the public interest. ” No law requires public or private schools to include religious instructions in their 
curricula.
290 
 122 The Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education assigns  teachers on religion to public schoo ls for 
an academic cours e on major world religions, which is offered by the  majority of public schools and 
attended by most students .
291 Some private schools also offer similar classes .292 Following  the 
harmonization and upgrading of curricula by the governm ent which started in the late 1990s, most 
Gambian Madrassa  provide , besides Islamic studies, instructions on a range of subjects in common with 
 
280 ibid.  
281 Hayase and Liaw, “Factors on Polygamy i n Sub- Saharan Africa: Findings Based on the Demographic a nd Health Surveys .” 
282 Baloyi, E. M., 2013. “Critical reflections on polygamy in the African Christian context.” Missionalia . (Online) Vol.41, No. 2.  
http://www.scielo.org.za/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0256 -95072013000800006 (accessed March 2012).  
283 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW ).”  
284 ibid.   
285 ibid.   
286 Wikigend er, “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
287 US Department of State, “2019 Report on International Religious Freedom: The Gambia”  
288 ibid.  
289 ibid.  
290 ibid.  
291 ibid.  
292 ibid.


---
*Page 190*
---

50 
 the secular national curriculum: languages (Arabic, English and local lan guages); history; geography; 
mathematic s; life skills (conflict resolution, peace -building, tolerance, etc.); vocational education and 
training; science and health; social and environmental studies; and physical education.293 The primary 
focus of the Madrassa remains the Islamic studies, as the government allows flexibility over time 
allocation per subject area,294 which may be a reflection of possible penury of qualified instructors on 
secular subjects in a religious context.  
 
123 The government in place continues to make efforts for interfaith unity, spanning various Muslim 
faiths and Christianity.295 The Supreme Islamic Council (SIC), a religious body to provide Islamic religious 
guidance  in the country , continued to state  that the Ahmadiyya co mmunity did not belong to Islam and  
did not include the community in its events and activities.296 Interfaith marriages remain common and 
accepted by the society.297 The Constitution of The Gambia 1997 incorporates the customary law and 
shari’a, which leads to curtailing  the rights of women with respect to reproductive health, marriage and 
inheritance, despite its commitment to equal rights between women and men.  
 
124 In recent years, Tablighi Jamaʻat , a global educational and missionary movement wh ose primary 
purpose is to encourage Muslims to be more religiously observant,298 has become p opular among the 
Gambian youths.299 Similar to Pentecostal Christianity, Tablighi Jamaʻat followers are reformists whose 
primary goal is spiritual rebirth and remaking of religious practice by breaking from the local traditions 
and extricating the practice  from the local cultural context,300 which is not seen favorably  by the elders 
and parents.301 Like the Pentecostals, the Tablighi Jamaʻat  believers are provided with new ways of 
integrating modernity into religious practices, which encompass access to economic networks, material 
goods, modern lifestyl es and transnational links and allow them to relate to  India and Saudi Arabia, 
countries which are viewed to have succeeded in reconciling religiosity with prosperity .302 
 
4.2 Labor Di vision,  Decision Making and Autonomy  
4.2.1 Fishery  
125 In 2014, between 25,000 and 30,000 people wer e engaged in artisanal fishery and about 2,000 
people were employ ed in the industrial sub -sector .303 Another 200,000 persons were indirectly 
dependent on f isheries and related activities304 in a country of slightly over 2 million. Of all engaged in the 
 
293 UNESCO, “Islamic Education System in The Gambia, Gambi a.” 
294 ibid.  
295 US Department of State, “2019 Report on International Religious Freedom: The Gambia”  
296 ibid.  
297 ibid.  
298 Pew Research Center, 2010. “Tablighi Jama’at.”  
https://www.pewforum.org/2010/09/15/muslim -networks -and- movements- in-western -europe- tablighi -jamaat/#fn -5877- 41 
(accessed March 2021).  
299 Janson, M., 2015. “‘How, for God’s sake, can I be a good Muslim?’ Gambian Youth in Search of a Moral Lifestyle.” SAGE in 
Ethnography.  Vol. 17, Issue: 1, 22- 46. 
300 ibid.  
301 Janson, M., 2016. “We don’t despair, since we know that Islam is the truth: New Expressions of Religiosity in Young 
Adherents of the Tabligh Jama’at in the Gambia.” In Gomez -Perez, M. and LeBlanc M. N. (eds.), L'Afrique des générations  : Entre 
tensions et négociations . Paris: Karthala.  
302 Janson,  “‘How, for God’s sake, can I be a good Muslim?’ Gambian Youth in Search of a Moral Lifestyle.” . 
303 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
304 ibid.


---
*Page 191*
---

51 
 fishe ry sector, about 76% were estimated to be Gambian nationals.305 The Ministry of Fisheries and Water 
Resources estimates that about 80% of people engaged in the sector are women.306 Small pelagic fish such 
as sardinella (Sardinella aurita and Sardinella maderensis ), bonga  (Ethmalosa fimbriata) , horse mackerel s 
(Trachurus tracae , Trachurus trachurus  and Caranx rhoncus ) and mackerel ( Scomber japonicus ) serve as 
important protein source s for the inhabitants along  the coast and  also inland.307 More than a half of 
protein intake  in the country  is from fish .308 309 An evaluation of selected pelagic fis h in 2018 found that 
sardine stock was not -fully exploited, chub -mackerel and anchovy  stocks  fully exploited, while sardinella, 
bonga, Atlantic horse mackerel  (Trachurus trachurus ) and Cunene horse mackerel (Trachurus trecae) 
stocks were overexploited.310 
 
126 As a rule, women and men produce different products, operate on different scales and serve 
different markets.311 Shellfish are harvested  by women  and fish caught by men , although a few  women 
have their own fishing unit or provide funding and equipment to other fishers.312 Processing of  fish meant 
for domestic market , mostly pelagic,  is the work of women and other export- oriented fish are handled  by 
men. It was estimated that 80% of fish processors were women and h alf of the small- scale fish traders 
were women.313 These numbers overestimate the proportion of men, since most of them are not engaged 
in these tasks themselves, but hire women to do the work. Women deal in the domestic mark et for fresh 
and cured fish products ; raw fish is bought from large -scale mongers at landing sites in small quantities 
and directly sold to consumers , with or without processing,  on a daily basis with low profit margins.314 
Roughly 2,000 people worked in th e industrial subsector in 2007 , mainly in processing factories315 and 
well over half of them were women. 316 Men are involved in operations with higher profits margins, which 
serve markets further away and are capital intensive.317 Some of them export  unproce ssed fish318 – about 
80% of which is destined to the European Union  (EU) and the rest mainly to Africa and Asia319 – as well as  
smoked and dried fish  --- to neighboring West African countries.320 321 The artisanal catch of high value 
fish species (shrimps, soles, sea -breams, lobsters and cephalopods) are usually purchased by the industrial 
fishing companies for processing in the factories and exported mainly to the EU.322 
 
 
305 Avadí, A. et al. , 2020. “Fisheries Value Chain Analysis in The Gambia. Report for the European Union, DG -DEVCO. Value Chain 
Analysis for Development Project.” europa.e u › file › download (accessed March 2021).   
306 Interview with the Acting Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of the Fisheries and Water Resources, Banjul, March 12, 
2021.  
307 Olleros and Hesling, “The women fish sellers of West Africa.”  
308 ibid.  
309 Ragusa, “Overview of the F isheries Sector in the Gambia.”  
310 FAO, 2018. “Fishery Committee for The Eastern Central Atlantic, Scientific Sub -Committee, Eighth Session, Abidjan, Côte 
d´Ivoire, 23 -26 October 2018, Status Summary For Small Pelagic Stocks In The Northern Ar ea of the Eastern Central Atlantic –  
Cecaf.” CECAF/SSCVIII/2018/2  
311 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
312 Avadí  et al. , “Fisheries Value Chain Analysis in The Gambia. Report for the European Union, DG -DEVCO. Value Chain Anal ysis 
for Development Project.”  
313 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
314 ibid.  
315 Ragusa, “Overview of the F isheries Sect or in the Gambia.”  
316 Avadí  et al. , “Fisheries Value Chain Analysis in The Gambia. Report for the European Union, DG -DEVCO. Value Chain Anal ysis 
for Development Project.”  
317 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
318 Ibid.  
319 Ragusa, “Overview of the F isheries Sector in the Gambia.”  
320 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
321 Ragusa, “Overview of the F isheries Sector in the Gambia.”  
322 ibid.


---
*Page 192*
---

52 
 127 Such gender -based division of  the economic sphere , which has consequences in terms of income 
generation, is based on the social norm  that women are responsible for  household chores and caregiving, 
restrict ing them to small- scale work around and near the house.323 It also stems from the inequality in 
access to productive assets; women tend to be allotted less attractive assets and work in units with less 
favorable conditions.324 At the Banjul landing site, for example, the processing unit used by women had a 
leaking roof, although their task was to smoke or dry fish,  and no drinking water was available.325 The site 
had one toilet  for all workers ,326 but when asked, women answered that there was none on site. 327 No 
secure storage facility existed  for them , which resulted in occasional theft of their products.328 A similar 
situation exist ed at the Bintang landing site, which is located inland unlike Banjul  on the coast .329 The 
smoking facility at Bintang was built by  the E U, but without ventilation mechanism that could 
accommodate the intensified use, and the entire structur e has dilapidated.330 331 The one toilet at the 
landing site was used by men only.332 Defeminization of the activities is common when they start 
attracting  investments .333 
 128 Almost all women involved in the sector, except for the younger generation, do not have formal 
schooling. They were trained in the trade by their mothers and do not have other livelihood  skills.
 334 335 
As a consequence,  they are strongly committed to their occupation , and their biggest concern is the 
dramatic reduction in the amount of fish available for catch in the past few years .336 337 Due to illiteracy, 
they are at a great disadvantage when the business concerns written documents, especia lly financial 
matters which men tend to control.338 
 
4.2.2 Crop Agriculture  
129 Agriculture in T he Gambia is rainfed, subsistence, of low degree of diversification and about 50% 
self- sufficient.339 Nearly 40% of the foreign exchange earnings owe to the crop subsector, which also 
generates about 75% of total household income.340 The subsector employs 70% of the labor force and 
accounts for slightly less than one -third of GDP.341 According to the latest Agricultural Census of The 
Gambia 2011/2012, the largest primary occupation at the national level was crop farming with 90.6% of 
 
323 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
324 Ibid.  
325 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
326 Interview with land site manager, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
327 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
328 ibid.  
329 Focused group discussion w ith women involved in harvesting/ processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
330 ibid.  
331 Interview with community leader,  Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
332 Interview with land site manager,  Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
333 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
334 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
335 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/ processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
336 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
337 Focused group dis cussion with women involved in harvesting/ processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
338 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
339 FAO, 2021. “Gambia at a Glance.” FAO in Gambia.  
http://www.fao.org/gambia/gambia- at-a-glance/en/ (accessed March 2021).  
340 ibid.  
341 ibid.


---
*Page 193*
---

53 
 the total population  aged 10 or above and engaged .342 Close to half of the same population named crop 
farming as their secondary occupation.343 
 
130 Women in The Gambia appear to devote less time than the avera ge African women to agriculture 
at 30%, compared to 60 -80% in Cameroon.344 Nonetheless, a pproximately half of the full- time far mers 
are estimated to be women, who  contribute to about  70% of all crop food  production despite their low 
productivity, which is c aused by lack of access, control and ownership of productive resou rces (e.g., land, 
credit, technology and extension services) .345 Around 2010, women produced 80% of v egetables and 99% 
of rice,346 crops which are considered women’s . It is not  women alone who take care of all stages of 
vegetables and rice production. M en prepare the land for both vegetables and  rice. They also  join women 
in rice harvesting.  
 
131 Men are heavily involved in cultivation of cash crops , such as groundnut , as well as  coos (pearl 
millet) ,347 cassava and corn,348 which are considered men’s crops. As is the case with vegetables and rice, 
men are not exclusively responsible from land preparation to sale; for example, shelling of groundnuts is 
done mainly by women.349 In other w ords,  “women’s ” and “men’s ” crops refer to those that each group 
has control over  and for which they solicit  the others’ help as necessary .350 In areas where rice production 
has become impossible  due to saltwater intrusion , women grow the same crops as men, but 
independently.351 
 132 The separation of tasks is such that the knowledge on crops is also gender dependent .
352 Women 
and men from the same compound work independently from one another without sharing labor and other inputs that are applicable to both.
353 One motivation for such separation is thought to be prevention of 
control exertion concerning what is considered their own production processes, especially for women.354 
In fact, rice used to be a women’s crop, but the adoption  of centralized pump irrigat ion transformed rice 
into a community crop under the authority of the male compound head, although the irrigation was designed and introduced to benefit women .
355 It was also noted that  women in T he Gambia are willing to 
trade some autonomy in exchange for greater male participation in shelling groundnu ts, which  eased the 
post -harvest bottleneck and reduced drudgery for women.356 They also saw it as an opportunity to 
 
342 Republic of The Gambia, 2012. “Report of the Agricultural Census of The Gambia, 2011/2012: Volume 1: Background and 
Methodology.”  
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ess/ess_test_folder/World_Census_Agriculture/Country_info_2010/Reports/Reports
_6/GAM_R EP_ENG_2011_2012.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
343 ibid.  
344 Palacios -Lopez, A.  et al., 2017. “How much of the labor in African agriculture is provided by women?” Food Policy .Volume 
67, 52- 63. 
345 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
346 ibid.  
347 ibid.  
348 Nuiten, E., 2010. “Gender and management of crop diversity in The Gambia, ” Journal of Political Ecology.  Vol. 17, Issue 1, 42-
58. 
349 Orr, A.,  et al., 2015. “What do we mean by ‘women’s crops’? Commercialisation, gender, and the power to name” Presented 
at the International Conference of Agricultural Economists, Milan, 8 -15 August 2015.  
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/219473864.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
350 ibid.  
351 Nuiten,  “Gender and management of crop diversity in The Gambia. ”  
352 ibid.  
353 ibid.  
354 ibid.  
355 Doss, C.R. 1999. Twenty- Five Years of Research on Women Farmers in Africa: Lessons and Implications for Agricultural 
Research Institutions; with an Annotated Bibliography. CIMMYT Economics Program Paper No. 99 -02. Mexico D.F.: CIMMYT  
356 Orr et al., “What do we mean by ‘women’s crops’? Commercialisation,  gender, and the power to name.”


---
*Page 194*
---

54 
 increase income for the household and not as a threat which may  erode their cont rol over operations and 
finance.357 
 
133 When vegetable gardens were introduced in The Gambia, there was a debate over whose crops 
they should be.358 It is said to have ended in a compromise but with significant power given to  women,359 
as witnessed by the gender  categorization of vegetables today. While vegetable gardens promoted by 
development agencies are generally believed to have contributed significantly to economic 
empowerment of women,360 some think many of them are white elephants without adequate water 
supply, fences or proper organization among women for the task.361 Some men are quite willing to 
venture into the  trade , as they see well equipped plots and the income it  generates.362 Vegetables grown 
include: tomatoes, onions, eggplant, bitter tomatoes, swee t pepper, lettuce, and hot pepper .363 Okra was 
grown by 63.1% of the agricultural households  in the country,  followed by 56.5%  growing hot pepper  in 
2011/2012 . 364 
 
4.2.3 Livestock  
134 According to the latest Agricultural Census of The Gambia 2011/2012, 0.8% of the population aged 
10 and ab ove engaged in  livestock  work  as their primary occupation.365 Over 3% of the same population 
were engaged in livestock keeping as a secondary occupation.366 When compared with the previous 
Census 2001/ 2002, the  number of cattle increased by roughly 20% and so did sheep and goats.367 Nearly 
40% of households owned cattle, over 60 % goats, over 35% sheep, 40% donkeys, over 10% horses, 0.9% 
pigs, over 40% chicken and other poultry in 2011/2012.368 Many households in Banjul k eep pigeons and 
some keep ducks369 and sheep.370 Horses and donkeys are widely used for transport operations in both 
urban and rural areas, pulling a two -wheel cart to carry people and various goods, in addition to field and 
farm work.371 It is common for each household to keep several types of animals.372 
 
135 While cattle is considered “men’s ” animal,  well over 10% of cattle was owned by women.373 
Although small ruminants, such as goats and sheep, are “women’s ” animal, only roughly a quarter to one -
 
357 ibid.  
358 ibid.  
359 ibid.  
360 Nuiten,  “Gender and management of crop diversity in The Gambia. ” 
361 Adaptation Fund Board, 2019. “Proposal for The Gambia.”  
https://www.adaptation- fund.org/wp- content/uploads/2019/09/AFB.PPRC_.25.21- Proposal -for-the-Gambia.pdf (accessed 
March 2021).  
362 Focused group discussion with youth,  Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
363 Sabab Lou, 2017. “ The Gambia –  Vegetable gardens are in full bloom .” 
https://www.sabab- lou.de/en/vegetable- gardens- in-bloom/ (accessed March 2021).  
364 Republic of The Gambia, “Report of the Agricultural Census of The Gambia, 2011/2012: Volume 1: Background and 
Methodology.”  
365 ibid.  
366 ibid.  
367 ibid.  
368 ibid.  
369 Wilson, R.T., 2018. “Domestic Livestock in African Cities: Production, Problems and Prospects.” Open Urban Studies and 
Demography Journal.  Vol. 4, 1 -14. 
https://openurbanstudiesanddemographyjournal.com/VOLUME/4/PAGE/1/FULLTEXT/ (accessed March 2021).  
370 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 9 -10, 2021.  
371 Wilson, “Domestic Livestock in African Cities: Production, Problems and Prospects.”  
372 ibid.  
373 Republic of The Gambia, “Report of the Agricultural Census of The Gambia, 2011/2012: Volume 1: Background and 
Meth odology.”


---
*Page 195*
---

55 
 third of them were owned by women in 2011/2012. 374 Women in the rural areas identified sheep and 
goats as the most important animals  for them .375 Women participate in keeping of  all animals in one way 
or another, except for cattle reared in the open.  Women are involved in collecting milk, which is a process 
of low efficiency due to lack of: easy access to the market; hygienic containers and cooling facilities.376 
There were eight dairy cooperatives in the country in 2016, through which women produced yoghurt and 
ghee.377 
 
4.2.4 Household Work  
136 Data pertaining to  less than 40% of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) indicators are collected 
in The Gambia, including unpaid care and domestic work.378 The focus groups discussion with women 
processors associated with the Banjul landing site revealed that while they spend  their time 
processing /selling  at the site, their female relatives or hired -hands take care of the household work and 
caregiving, with  the processors /sellers  themselves supplement ing two hours per day.379  During the 
weekends, they spent abo ut eight hours p er day ; men did not help in  household chores or caregiving.380 
The female youth joined their cash -earning mothers when the workload become heavy, such as during 
the oyster seasons in Tambi.381 
 
137 In rural communities , women depend ed on female relatives for household work and caregiving, 
while women with outside work  spent  up to four hours per day to cook .382 If there were  no elderly women 
or children old enough to take care of younger siblings at home, mothers  took children w ith them to their 
work location, 383 which  was perceived  as a difficult situation.384 Such  labor division between women who 
earn cash income and those who sta y at home, usually the young, to look after the house is common in 
The Gambia.385  
 
138 Gambian girls regularly perform a wide range of activities including coo king, cleaning, washing, 
sewing and looking after younger siblings, whereas boys are expected  to sweep the compound, to run 
errands, or to accompany younger brothers and sisters to school ; this gend er disparity is in line with the 
social norm that domestic chores are  women’s work.386 One young man  in Bintang said he helps his wife  
with work around the house, such as sweeping and cooking.387 
    
 
374 ibid.  
375 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin 
Kanteh and Kartong, March 12 -20, 2021.  
376 Touray, “Review of the Livestock/Meat and Milk Value Chains and Policy I nfluencing Them in The Gambia.”  
377 ibid.  
378 UN Women, 2021. “Gambia,” Women Count.  
https://data.unwomen.org/country/gambia (accessed March 2021). 
379 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing /selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
380 ibid.  
381 Focused group discussion with women involved in oyster harvesting  and processing , Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021 
382 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/ processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
383 ibid.  
384 UNCTAD, “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
385 Chant and Jones, “Youth, Gender and Livelihoods in West Africa: Perspectives from  Ghana and The Gambia.”  
386 ibid.  
387 Focused group discussion w ith youth, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.


---
*Page 196*
---

56 
 4.2.5 Supplementary Income  
139 An overwhelming majority of households report crop agriculture as primary occupation, and the 
most prevalent secondary occupation is crop farming.388 Most families have diverse sources of income ; 
non-farm employment (especially trade)  and remittances are important sources  besides crop 
agriculture.389  
 
140 In general, children start participating in unpaid work around the house, including family far m 
plots, at around 7 -8 years of age .390 As many as half of the children aged 11 -12 in 2005 we re likely to have 
engaged in par t-time remunerated work – such as assistance to relatives at  market stalls and in small 
family businesses  – or engagement in own -account informal services and commerce  – such as r unning 
errands or street -vending.391 Children may devote to these activities 1 -2 hours before or after s chool 
hours as well as weekends;392 nearly  one-fifth of children aged 5 -11 worked at least one hour per week in 
2018, with higher frequency among boys than girls and in the rural than in the urban areas.393 Among 
children aged 12 -14, 12.8% worked 14 hours or more per week, with almost equal participation between 
girls and boys.394 Among those aged 15 -17, 0.9% worked 43 hours or more per week:  1.5% among boys 
and 0.4% among girls.395 The children’s engagement in work roughly decreases w ith the mothers’ 
education and wealth, but not  smoothly, suggesting variety  in the nature of work that the children 
undertake.  
 
141 The children’s eagerness  to contribute to h ousehold income was said to be not only motivated by 
poverty, but also by strong sense of obligation to return to their parents what they owe for their 
existence.396 Muslim youth in The Gambia believe that the more one does for one’s parents, the more 
blessings one accrues.397  Nowadays  their own material well- being also plays a factor.  
 
142 In 2018, about a quarter of the children aged 5 -17 were involved in child labor: girls slightly more 
than boys , proportionately more than twice as much rural children as urban children , and proportionately 
more children from poorer households .398 Over 15% of the same age group worked under hazardous 
conditions: boys slightly more than girls , proportionately more tha n twice as much in the rural than in the 
urban areas , and proportionately more from poorer households .399 Overall 13.6% of children worked at 
or above age -specific threshold; the proportion of children working above age -specific threshold 
decreased with hou sehold wealth.400 
 143 The majority of children participate in household chores across age groups, and the gender gap is 
about 10 percentage -points or less for each age group: 5 -11, 12 -14 and 15 -17 years old.
 401 Neither the 
 
388 Republic of The Gambia, “Report of the Agricultural Census of The Gambia, 2011/2012: Volume 1: Background and 
Methodology.”  
389 ibid.  
390 Chant and Jones, “Youth, Gender and Livelihoods in West Africa: Perspectives from  Ghana and The Gambia.”  
391 ibid.  
392 ibid. . 
393 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
394 ibid.  
395 ibid.  
396 Chant and Jones, “Youth, Gender and Livelihoods in West Africa: Perspectives from  Ghana and The Gambia.” . 
397 ibid.  
398 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
399 ibid.  
400 ibid.  
401 ibid.


---
*Page 197*
---

57 
 mothers’ education nor wealth level s eemed seem to reflect the amount of household chores.  About 4 % 
of them engaged in household chor es above age -specific threshold: girls overwhelmingly more than boys, 
and more in the rural than in the urban areas.402 
 
144 Human trafficking, involving both nationals and foreigners, has been a long -standing issue in The 
Gambia and has not yet shown a clear sign of abatement.403 As of 2018, no conviction has been made 
under the Trafficking in Persons Act 2007,404 and the reported cases of human trafficking and forced labor 
according to the government has been less than20 per year for the period of 2011 -2016.405 Concerning 
mostly women and girls, some are trafficked abroad, while others are subjected to sex trafficking and 
forced labor in street vending and domestic work.406 Although boys are involved to a lesser extent, the 
number of boys exploited in sex trafficking  is estimated to be on the rise.407 Gambian children were found 
by NGOs in forced labor in neighboring West African countries.408 Gambian migrants attempt ing to travel 
to Europe through irregular routes are vulnerable to trafficking and abuse.409 Between January 2017 and 
October 2018, an international organization repatriated at least 3,500 Gambians from Libya, many of 
whom were at risk for trafficking.410 The National Agency against Trafficking in Persons (NAATIP) with the 
assistance of international partners such as UNICEF has organized training activities for law enforcement 
officials to build capacity in the prevention and detection of human trafficking.411 NAATIP also organizes 
sensitiz ation missions for communities around border posts  on the dangers of human trafficking.412 
 
145 Commercial sexual exploitation is said to take place in the Tourism Development Area –  around 
hotels, restaurants and nightclubs – and in densely populated and impoverished areas.413 Some corrupt 
Madrassa teachers are said to force their male students into begging, street  vending, and agricultural 
work.414 415 Children living and working on the streets and beaches, in addition to  stateless and 
undocumented children are exposed to high risks of trafficking and exploitation.416 So are the chi ldren 
working in family farms, in the informal sector,  in petty trading a nd in domestic work at home, a s well as  
children forced to work in the farm s of marabout417 (religious teacher). There is no comprehensive data 
regarding  children on the streets .418 
 
402 ibid.  
403 U.S. Department of State, 2020. “2020 Trafficking in Persons Report: The Gambia.”  
https://www.state.gov/reports/2020 -trafficking -in-persons -report/gambia/ (accessed February 2020). 
404 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2021. “End of mission statement of the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, Maud de Boer -Buquicchio, on her visit to The Gambia (21 - 29 October 
2019).”  
https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=25235&LangI D=E (accessed February 2021).  
405 United Nations, 2018. “List of issues in the absence of the second periodic report of the Gambia, Addendum: Replies of the 
Gambia to the list of issues.” Human Rights Council, 123rd Session, 2 -27 July 2018. CCPR/C/GMB/Q/2/Ad d.1 
406 U.S. Department of State, “2020 Trafficking in Persons Report: The Gambia.”  
407 ibid.  
408 ibid.  
409 ibid.  
410 ibid.  
411 United Nations, “List of issues in the absence of the second periodic report of the Gambia, Addendum: Replies of the Gambia 
to the list of is sues.”  
412 ibid.  
413 Office of the United Nations High Commi ssioner for Human Rights, “End of mission statement of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, Maud de Boer -Buquicchio, on her visit to The Gambia (21 - 29 October 2019).”  
414 U.S. Department of State, “2020 Trafficking in Persons Report: The Gambia.”  
415 Office of the United Nations High Commi ssioner for Human Rights, “End of mission statement of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, Maud de Boer -Buquicchio, on her visit to The Gambia (21 - 29 October 2019).”  
416 ibid.  
417 ibid.  
418 ibid.


---
*Page 198*
---

58 
 4.2.6 Decision Making  and Autonomy  
146 Overall:  Men are by default the  heads of households, about 84% of the h ouseholds in The 
Gambia.419 According to focus group discussions and interviews with community leaders , women and 
youth are  consulted in decisions related to their work, but they do not have the same decision making 
power as adult men .420 In case the parents are involved  in the same work  as the youth, the parents  speak 
for all.421 At home,  women make decisions on day -to-day issu es422 423 and are consulted for  bigger family  
matters such as inheritance , but the husband is the ultimate decision maker  of each household.424 In 2013, 
close to 40% of women aged 15 -49 participated in making decisions on all of: own health care; major 
househ old purchases; and visiting family.425 
 
147 Income: Women keep the income obtained through their own economic activities , and some in 
the urban areas use the income to hire a worker to take care of the household work.426 The husbands give 
a portion of their incomes to wives, who  use the money and their own income to purchase food as well 
as clothes for themselves and the children.427 Some put their children through school with their income, 
especially in the urban areas.428 It is common that the everyday needs of the household is met mainly by 
the wives’ income with husban ds’ supplementing as they wish . 
 
148 In con trast to cattle, income from the sale of small ruminants  is mainly managed by women 
owners.429 It was reported that a 2019 qualitative study on gender and intra -household allocation in The 
Gambia showed that 58% of respondents, which included women and men, preferred husbands to receive 
cash transfers.430 When a group of women establishes a bank account to keep their funds, it is  commonly 
a man  who  is assigned the role of signatory of the accounts .431 According to another survey published in 
2019, between 75% and 90% of women were  the sole decision  maker on how to use their savings, loans, 
and remittances , and most of them did not access formal loans .432 For formal loans, a guarantor is 
required, but not restricted to a male person. In sum, women are mostly in control of their own earnings, 
but tend to shy away from assuming control when it involves official institutions, implying that it is the 
 
419 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
420 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling and interviews with community leader, Banjul, Tambi, 
Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kenteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
421 Interview with community leader, Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021  
422 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
423 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13 2021.  
424 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling and interviews with community leader, Banjul, Tambi, 
Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kenteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
425 World Bank, 2021. “ Women participating in the three decisions (own health care, ma jor household purchases, and visiting 
family) (% of women age 15 -49) – Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.DMK.ALLD.FN.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
426 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
427 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling and interviews with community leader, Banjul, Tambi, 
Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kenteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
428 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
429 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natur al Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
430 Bah, T., 2020. “From the smiling coast of Africa to the world: What The Gambia can teach us about women and household 
empowerment .” World Bank Blogs.  
https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/smiling -coast -africa -world -what -gambia- can-teach -us-about -women -and- household-
empowerment (accessed March 2021).  
431 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
432 UNCDF, 2019. “PoWER assessment of Women’s Economic Empowerment in The Gambia.” 
https://www.uncdf.org/Download/AdminFileWithFilename?id=9423&cultureId=127&filename=091019 -wee- thegambia -
powerpdf  (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 199*
---

59 
 widespread illiteracy among women that is preventing them from taking advantage of formal financial 
services.  
 
149 Assets: The Constitution of  The Gambia 1997 declares that women and men have equal rights but 
also incorporates the customary law and shari’a, wh ich are not necessarily compatible with the provision 
of equal rights . It has been observed that  the political will is not strong enough to repeal the provisions of 
Section 33(5) of the 1997 Constitution and the like  in oth er laws, such as the Women’s Act, which allows  
personal law  to supersede  and renders  discrimination laws inapplicable to adoption, marriage, burial and 
devolution of property on death.433 
 150 Land tenure systems are governed by statutory norms and customary practices, and the latter  
prevails in the rural areas .
434 Under the customary tenure arrangements, heads of lineages and 
households tightly control the use, lending, rental and inheritance of land.435 436 Inheritance is governed 
mostly by shari’a and customary law ; qur’an allocates daughters half the share of their brothers , and  
customary law excludes women from land inheritance, while for widows inheritance of her husband’s 
property is possible through remarrying  a member of her husband’s family.437 The focus group discussions 
indicat ed that the Inheritance issues are discussed by the family but the husbands make the final 
decisions .438 Women may establish bank accounts to keep their funds, but it is the men who become the 
signatories of the accounts, partly because of higher prevalence  of illiteracy among women.439 Women 
own the tools and equipment that they bought for their own trade, commonly except for boats .440 
 
151 Farming : Men are mainly responsible for physically demanding work  (e.g.,  land preparation ), and 
women fo r work that requires dexterity (e.g., groundnut shelling), but some tasks (e.g., rice harvesting ) 
are done by both. M en may become involved in processing441 if it has a clear possibility of bringing in cash. 
There are women’s crops and animals, as well as men’s crops and animals to designate which group has 
the ultimate control . Men’s crops and animals usually  generate more income , whereas the women’s 
receive less attention and investment.442 Although vegetables are considered mostly women’s crops, men 
are r eady to engage in it thanks to the assistance by the donors and the earning that the products  bring.443 
 
152 Health: About two -fifths of women of reproductive age had decision -making power over their 
own reproductive health, but wives viewed sexual relations as som ething that husbands were justly 
entitled to . Nearly  40% of women aged 15 -49 in 2013 participated in making decisions on all of: own 
health care; major household purchases; and visiting family.444 Over 40% of the same age group of women 
 
433 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).”   
434 FAO, 2021. “Gambia.” Gender and Land Rights Database.  
http://www.fao.org/gender -landrights -database/country -profiles/countries -list/land -tenure- and- related -
institutions/en/?country_iso3=GMB (accessed March 2021).  
435 ibid.  
436 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
437 Wikigender,  “Africa for Women’s Rights: Gambia.”  
438 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling and interviews with community leader, Banjul, Tambi, 
Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kenteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
439 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
440 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling and interviews with community leader, Banjul, Tambi, 
Bintang, Njoben, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kenteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
441 Orr et al., “What do we mean by ‘women’s crops’? Commercialisation, gender, and the power to name.” 
442 UNCTAD, “ The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
443 Focused group discussion with youth, Njoben, March 12 , 2021.  
444 World Bank, 2021. “ Women participating in the three decisions (own health  care, major household purchases, and visiting 
family) (% of women age 15 -49).”


---
*Page 200*
---

60 
 made their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use and reproductive health 
care.445 In the same year, 44.7% of women believed that a husband is justified in be ating his wife when 
she refuses to have sex with him.446  
 
153 Violence: It was estimated in 2020 that a bout  one in three women in The Gambia experience 
sexual or physical violence in their lifetime, similar to the global prevalence rate.447 In 2013, 7.3% of 
Gam bian women aged 15 -49 subjected to physical or sexual violence in the last 12 months.448 Sexual and 
gender -based violence is thought to have become a common practice at households, community and 
state levels.449 Men see their ability to provide, food, shelter and clothing for their households as the 
source of their legitimacy as an authority over their household.450 The latest pandemic has led to loss of 
jobs and possibility of questioning the authority, which is  likely to drive men to violence in order to ensure 
that they continue to exert power and authority over their wives and households.451 The incidents are  
largely unreported due to impunity, silence, stigma and fear.452 
 
154 In 2018, 75 .7% of girls and women aged 15-49 had undergone female genital mutilation (FGM) .453 
The practice was more prevalent in the urban areas (77.3%) than in the rural areas (71.1%) and so was 
the opinion among women that it should be continued (44.6% of urban women versus 42.5% of rural wom en).
454 Women who were aware of the law prohibiting FGM were 93.1% and 89.2% in the urban and 
rural areas, respectively, and those against FGM were 47.7% and 52.0% in the urba n and rural areas, 
respectively.455 Each age group of women were approximately  evenly split between for and against 
FGM.456 The majority of women who had no FGM experience thought it should be discontinued (86.0%), 
while the majority with the experience thought it should be continued (55.7%).457 Among the ethnicities 
comp ared (Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, Jola, Sarahule and other ethnic groups), Mandinka (95.3%) and 
Sarahule (94.0%) women aged 15 -49 were most likely to have gone through FGM, while Wolof women of 
 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.DMK.ALLD.FN.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
445 World Bank, 202 1. “Women making their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use and 
reproductive health care (% of women age 15 -49) - Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.DMK.SRCR.FN.ZS?locations=GM  (accessed March 2021).  
446 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she refuses sex with him (%) - 
Gambia, The”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.REFU.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
447 The Commonwealth, 2020. “The Gambia announces plans to launch national ‘NO MORE’ campaign against domestic 
violence.”  
https://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/gambia -announces -plans- launch- national -%E2%80%98no- more%E2%80%99 -
campaign -against -domestic -violence (accessed March 2021).  
448 World Bank, 2021. “Proportion of women subjected to physical and/or sexual violence in the last 12 months (% of women 
age 15 -49).” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.1549.ZS?locations =GM (accessed March 2021).  
449 Institute for Human Rights and Development i n Africa and the Gambia Center for Victims of Human Rights Violations, 2020. 
“Sexual and Gender -Based Violence in The Gambia: A Handbook.” 
https://www.ihrda.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Handbook- on-SGBV -in-The- Gambia-FINAL.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
450 UNFPA, 2020. “ The Parallel Pandemic: Domestic and Gender Based Violence during COVID -19 in The Gambia.” 
https://gambia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-
pdf/Policy%20Brief%20on%20The%20Parallel%20Pandemic_%20Domestic%20and%20Gender%20Based%20Violence%20durin
g%20COVID- 19%20in%20The%20Gambia.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
451 ibid.  
452 The Commonwealth, “The Gambia announces plans to launch national ‘NO MORE’ campaign against domestic violence.”  
453 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Surv ey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
454 ibid.  
455 ibid. 
456 ibid. 
457 Ibid.


---
*Page 201*
---

61 
 the same age were much less likely (13.7%).458 The second less likel y Gambian group was other smaller 
ethnic groups at 49.4%.459 In terms of wealth, it was  the least approved by the poorest and the richest 
quintiles (slightly over 40%) and most approved by the middle quintile at 63.4%.460 
 
155 Child marriage remains common; in 2018, 9.5% of women aged 15- 49 were married before 
turning 15, and the rate was 12.9% in th e rural areas.  By contrast, only 0.3% of men aged 15 -49 were 
married before the age of 15 in the same year.461 Most marriages are not officially registered and many 
instances of forced marriage are not reported.462 
 
156 In 2015 and 2016, t he Women’s Act and Children’s Act were revised to legally prohibit FGM and 
child marriage.463 Various organs were  also established in the recent years in relation to violence against 
women: a gender unit in 2014 by the Attorney General’s Chambers to train police officers, pro secutors 
and law enforcement on gender and sexual and gender -based violence; Ministry of Women, Children and 
Social Welfare in 2019; National Human Rights Commission in 2019; community child protection 
committees; and youth neighborhood watch groups.464 Effective enforcement of these laws is weak due 
to: lack of awareness of the existence of these laws with ensuing penalties; lack of adequate human, 
technical financial and administrative capacity to oversee and respond to reported cases, including child -
friendly services and as sistance to victims.465 The fear or concern that girls may engage in premarital sex 
is considered the main reason for FGM and early marriage.466 Where one of the two is common, the other 
is practiced less, indicating interchangeable natur e.467 The culture favors informal settling of problems 
and sees sex as a taboo subject between generations, deterring children from reporting their 
experiences.468 As of 2019, no alleged perpetrator of sale, sexual abuse/exploitation or human trafficking 
was known to have been prosecuted or convicted.469 
 
157 Nearly a quarter of mothers and caretakers of children aged 1 -14 believed in 2018 that physical 
punishment is required to raise and educate a child properly, and the rate was slightly higher in  rural than 
in urban areas.470 The rate decreased with the mothers’ and caretakers’ education to about 20% and a 
similar trend was seen for the wealth level. 471  
 
158 Women think that violence inflicted by the husbands is justified when the wife neglects the 
children (35.3% in 2013  and 34.6% in 2018),472 when she burns the food (10.6% in 2013  and 11.8% in 
 
458 ibid. 
459 ibid. 
460 ibid. 
461 ibid.  
462 Tahirih Justice Center, “Forced Marriage Overseas: The Gambia.”  
463 UN Women and Commonwealth Secretariat, Towards Reversing Discrimination In Law . 
464 Office of the United Nations High Commi ssioner for Human Rights, “End of mission statement of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, Maud de Boer -Buquicchio, on her visit to The Gambia (21 - 29 October 2019).”  
465 ibid.  
466 Lowe et al., “ Social and cultural factors perpetuating early marriage in rural Gambia: an exploratory mixed methods study.”  
467 ibid.  
468 Office of the United Nations High Commi ssioner for Human Rights, “End of mission statement of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, Maud de Boer -Buquicchio, on her visit to The Gambia (21 - 29 October 2019).”  
469 ibid.  
470 Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
471 ibid.  
472 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she neglects the children (%) -  
Gambia, The”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.NEGL.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “ The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”


---
*Page 202*
---

62 
 2018),473 when she argues with him (24.1% in 2013  and 22.1% in 2018 ),474 when she goes out without 
telling him (42.0% in 2013  and 31.8% in 2018 )475 and when she refuses to have sex with him (44.7%  in 
2013 and 36.5% in 2018 ).476 Nearly 60% of women in 2013 and 50% in 2018 were of the opinion  that any 
of these five reasons was justified in beating the wife.477 In 2018, women in the poorest quintile in wealth 
were most approving of beating by the husband (52.1%) and the approval rate diminished with increasing 
wealth (11.8% for the richest).478 Among the ethnicities compared (Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, Jola, Sarahule 
and other ethnic groups), Sarahule women (59.2%) were most likely to approve of beatings, while Jola 
women much less likely (14.8%).479 Such condonation of violence from the husbands may be partly 
explained by women’s desire to maintain their marr iage and their belief that the key is to keep the 
husband content by  allowing him have his way.  
 159 The men themselves were much less likely to think that beating was justified for any of the above 
reasons (Table  11). The attitude of men mirrored that of women of the s ame ethnicity, but at a much 
lower level of approval of domestic violence; 26.6% for Sarahule men and 5.6% for Jola men.
 480 The 
younger the men were, the more likely to be approving of violence, although the rate saw a small 
resurgence for the age group 35 -39. 481 The attitude among women was more stable among various age 
groups. 482 
 
Table 11: Attitude toward Domestic Violence483 
 
 Percentage of persons aged 15 -49 who think believe a husband is justified in beating his wife if she:  
 neglects the 
children  burns the food  argues with him  goes out 
without telling 
him refuses to have 
sex with him  Any of the five 
reasons  
Year  2013  2018  2013  2018  2013  2018  2013  2018  2013  2018  2013  2018  
Women  35.3  34.6  10.6  11.8  24.1  22.1  42.0  31.8  44.7  36.5  58.4  49.9  
Men  n.a. 15.4  n.a. 3.7 n.a. 8.8 n.a. 12.1  n.a. 12.3  n.a. 26.3  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2019) and World Bank (2021).  
 
473 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she burns the food (%) -  Gambia, 
The.”  
 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.BURN.ZS?l ocations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
474 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she argues with him (%) -  Gambia, 
The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.ARGU.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
475 World Bank, 2021. “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she goes out without telling him (%) 
- Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.GOES.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gambia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
476 World Bank, 2021. ‘Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife when she refuses sex with him (%) -  
Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.REF U.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
Gambia Burea u of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
477 World Bank, “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife (any of five reasons) (%) -  Gambia, The.”  
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey  Findings Report.”  
478 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
479 ibid. 
480 ibid. 
481 ibid. 
482 ibid. 
483 World Bank, “Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife (any of five reasons) (%) -  Gambia, The.”  
Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”


---
*Page 203*
---

63 
 4.2.7 Conflict Resolution  
160 Community : All community leaders interviewed, be it the landing -site user communities or 
villages, emphasized the importance of dialogues in conflict resolution and not escalating the case to the 
formal court.484 The landing- site community manager at Banjul added that dialogues are important for 
unity among the members, which is a moral lesson to be bequeathed to the future generation. 485 The 
leader in Jahally reported gri evance resolution by  the Village Development Committee – which is required  
by the government to have at least  30%  female members  – before resorting to the formal system .486 In 
Medina Lamin Kanteh, a council of elders were in charge of conflict resolution fo r most cases, including 
those related to aid projects, but a committee of Muslim elders, involving  elders from other communities, 
made judgements on more weighty issues, such as land conflict.487 The leaders were all male and asserted 
that both women and youth are consulted in the decision making process.  
 
161 Household: When asked who in the family is responsible for material needs, women tend to 
answer that it is the husband, as did the women in Jahally.488 In practice, it is the women who spend their 
income for daily family needs supplemented by whatever proportion of the ir own i ncome that husbands 
give to the wives . Women are consulted on decisions regarding assets, inheritance and marriage, but it is 
the husbands who have the final say. Women allow men to have such power, because they know that 
otherwise men may be di scontented and create problems for  the marriage and the household . If women  
are diss atisfied  with a donor’s project, they are willing to go to the officials t hemselves to have them 
resolved as long as it does not inconvenience their husbands.  
 
4.3 Access to  Resources and  Services  
4.3.1  Land, Crops, Animals, Equipment and Infrastructure  
162 As discussed above, women do not own or inherit land, but have access to land through their 
male family members and shoulder a fair share or more  of the agricultural work. 489 The land in the rural 
areas is customarily controlled by the traditional chiefs ( alkalo ) who allocates parcels within the village 
boundaries to villagers according to their needs; conflicts erupt when outsiders gain access . The so -called 
women’s crops are mainly non -cash crops, but vegetables are an exception to the rule. Women’s  animals 
are also small ruminants and poultry, which tend to bring in less cash  and whose ownership belonged 
overwhelmingly to men in 2011/2012. 490 
 
163 Women are often allotted the least attractive units of infrastructure, which tends to receive less 
attention and investment.491 Equipment and related infrastructure may be donated explicitly for women, 
but since the users are not sufficiently consulted, they may turn out to be inconvenient or not properly functional to the extent that they are aban doned by the intended users.  In Tambi, for example, the 
donated oyster roasters are not in use, as the distance between the flame and the oysters cannot be adjusted to consume less fuel.
492 The smoking facility constructed by a donor in Bintang does not have 
 
484 Interviews with communit y leaders, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
485 Interview with community leader, Banjul landing site, March 9 -10, 2021. 
486 Interview with community leader, Jahally, March 17, 2021. 
487 Intervie w with community leader, Medina Lamin Kanteh , March 1 8, 2021. 
488 Focused group discussions with women involved in rice farming , Jahally, March 17.2021.  
489 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
490 Republic of The Gambia, “Report of the Agricultural Census of The Gambia, 2011/2012: Volume 1:  Background and 
Methodology.”  
491 UNCTAD,  “The fisheries sector in the Gambia: trade, value addition and social inclusiveness, with a focus on women.” 
492 Focused group discussion with women involved in oyster harvesting  and processing , Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021


---
*Page 204*
---

64 
 appropriate ventilation mechanism, putting women’s health at risk.493 Some of the smoking ovens have 
disintegrated from use over the years, but women do not have the capacity to repair th em.494 Women 
own instruments needed for harvesting and processing oysters495 as well as fish processing,496 497 but not 
the boats which are necessary for oyster harvesting.498 
 
4.3.2 Extension Services  
164 Fishery : The Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources provides extension services in fishery and 
aquaculture through its Department of Fisheries.499 In 2010, the Department had 33 extension staff, 
coverin g about 25,000 rural households.500 The female  processors/sellers  at the Banjul  and Bintang  
landing site s report ed that they are trained by the extension workers of the Department of Forestry on 
management and fish handing.501 502 The processors /sellers  in Bintag indicated that any important issue 
related to their work is also communicated to them by the extension workers.503 Those in Banjul  saw 
halting the overexploitation of small fish by industrial fishermen more important to their livelihoods than trainings.
504 
 165 Food and Agriculture Sector Development Project (FASDEP), a F AO project funded by the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program  (GAFSP), contained technical assistance on aquaculture, but the 
content was not reported.
505 The farmers involved had ponds created under the project, but the 
sustainability of their aquaculture activities is yet to be seen, as the interviewed farmers did not seem to have clear ideas on how to proceed without the inputs from the project.
506 
 
166 Agriculture : Agricultural extension workers and services have been widely acknowledged as 
scarce and inadequate in the country by all stakeholders.507 508 The Ministry of Agriculture counted 829 
extension officers, which meant one officer per 1,000 farmers, according to a report in 2019.509 The 
 
493 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling and interview with community leader , 
Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
494 ibid. . 
495 Focused group discussion with women involved in oyster harvesting and processing, Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021  
496 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling and interview with community leader, 
Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
497 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
498 Focused group discussion with women involved in oyster harvesting and processing, Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021  
499 Qamar, M. K., 2014. “Gambia.” Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services.  
https://www.g -fras.org/en/world -wide- extension -study/africa/western -africa/gambia.html#extension -providers (accessed 
March 2021). 
500 ibid.  
501 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
502 Focused group discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Bintang landing site, March 13, 2021.  
503 ibid.  
504 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
505 FAO, 2020. “ Technical Assistance Component of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme in The Gambia, the 
Gambia Project: Findings and Recommendations.”  
https://www.gafspfund.org/sites/default /files/inline -files/GAM029GAM -FinalVersZZ_0.pdf (accessed April 2021).  
506 Interview with FASDEP beneficiaries in Nyaniberreh and Lamin, April 8, 2021.  
507 The Point, 2013. “Extension services key to agriculture.”  The Point.  23 July 2013. 
https://thepoint.gm/africa/gambia/article/extension -services-key -to-agriculture (accessed March 2021).  
508 Adaptation Fund Board, 2019. “Proposal for The Gambia.”  
https://www.adaptation- fund.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/AFB.PPRC_.26.b.7- Prop osal-for-The-Gambia.pdf (accessed 
March 2021). 
509 FAO and ECOWAS Commission, 2019. “National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods – The Gambia.” Banjul: 
FAO.


---
*Page 205*
---

65 
 activities of the Communication, Extension and Education Services Unit  of the Ministry included: printing 
of leaflets, booklet, post ers, etc.; design and facilitation of the training -of-trainers; planning and 
coordination of sensitization programmes and national farmer training programmes with regional 
offices .510 The topics covered by the service were: agricultural inputs ; soil and water management ; food 
and nutrition management ; horticulture ; training ; and  monitoring and evaluation (M&E).511 
 
167 The lackluster performance of the extension system was attributed in 201 7 to: inadequate 
training on outreach activities on a continuous basis; inadequate resources ; large extension worker/famer 
ratio; limited knowledge and skills of so me extension workers  in sustainable agricult ural production ; and 
lack of robust mobility sys tem that enables  timely and effective delivery  of the services .512 Around 2019, 
the Ministry of Agriculture identified three constraints  in the sector , one of which was insufficient 
extension services , and the Department of Community Development of the Mini stry of Lands and Regional 
Government indicated that their community engagement skills need to be updated to meet the 
differential needs of women, the youth, the disabled and so on.513 
 168 Around 2020 , the Planning Support Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture p ointed to the low number 
and inadequate organization of extension workers as well as lack of transportation means.
514 One NGO 
stated that the extension workers have university degrees but without practical experiences, and another NGO reported that the extension workers who originate from the area are suited  to the job .
515 An 
international NGO working in The Gambia has its own extension workers.516 A National Extension Services 
Policy, a first of its kind for the country, was drafted and reviewed in 2019,517 but has not  been finalized 
as of February 2022 . An Adaptation Fund (AF) project which includes an activity to train extension officers, 
along with women and the youth, on climate change adaptation was under review by the AF’s 
Project/Programme Review Committee as of March 2021.  
 169 Historically and around the world, extension services have been geared toward men, and women 
have constituted a very small fraction of all recipients of extension services, as low as 5%.
518 Although 
data and other information on extension services and women in The Gambia are not readily available, it is known that most of the extension workers are men and that services are mostly meant for male -
dominated activities, such as production of ca sh crops .
519 It has been noted that extension workers i n 
horticulture (which concerns mainly women) and livestock ( which concerns women, except for cattle 
raised in the open) subsectors are less strong than in other subsectors.520 Little extension services geared 
 
510 ibid.  
511 ibid.  
512 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natur al Resources Po licy 2017- 2026.”  
513 Adaptation Fund Board, 2019. “Proposal for The Gambia.”  
https://www.adaptation- fund.org/wp- content/uploads/2019/09/AFB.PPRC_.25.21- Proposal -for-the-Gambia.pdf (accessed 
March 2021).  
514 ibid.  
515 ibid.  
516 ibid.  
517 FAO, 2019. “ The first ever Extension Policy draft in the history of The Gambia receives support from FAO experts from 
Rome.” FAO i n Gambia. 
http://www.fao.org/gambia/news/detail -events/en/c/1206661/ (accessed March 2021).  
518 FAO, undated. “Women, agriculture and food s ecurity.” http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsummit/english/fsheets/women.pdf 
(accessed March 2021).  
519 FAO and ECOWAS Commission, “National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelih oods – The Gambia.”  
520 ibid.


---
*Page 206*
---

66 
 toward women is considered one of the factors contributing to low productivity of women in 
agriculture.521 
 170 The National ANR Policy
522 stated in 2017 that training of extension workers on gender sensitivity 
will be necessary if they are to encourage wom en to form groups and enable them to bargain their selling 
price. It implies that the current state of extension services is inadequate when it comes to female 
operators in the sector and  that female extension workers are probably very few in number, if they exist. 
The Policy also envisions women’s working  with potential buyers – who are commercial producers –   as 
contract farmers , for which  the extension workers are expected to help assur e compliance with the 
demands of the commercial partners. Although the youth received little attention then, the government has been appealing lately to the youths to take up agriculture.  
 4.3.3  Climate Information Services  
171 The Third World Conference of Ministers and Heads of State of the World Meteorological 
Organization ( WMO) launched a process in 2009 to create  a Global Framework for Climate Services, and
 
an Intergovernmental  Council on Climate Services was established to oversee the implementation of th e 
framework .523 The Council in turn urged  WMO Member States to establish national frameworks; The 
Gambia responded in 2018 to formulate a National Framework for Clima te Services (NFCS -GAM), which 
is a framework for exchange between experts “in producing information on weather, climate and water 
(in this case Department of Water Resources) and other experts in the sectors concerned, but also with end-users.”
 524 The other main institutional stakeholders include: National D isaster Management Agency , 
National Environment Agency (NEA),  Ministry of Agriculture , Department of Health Services, Department 
of Ener gy, Action -Aid The Gambia , Gambia Civil Aviation Authority, Departm ent of Fisheries, and Ministry 
of Tourism.525 The overarching goal of the NFCS -GAM is ”[t]o enable better management of the risks of 
climate variability and change at all levels, through development and incorporation of science based 
climate information  and prediction services into planning, policy and practice .”526  
 
172 The NFCS -GAM  and the Action Plan (2020 -2024) analyze  that “the drivers of rural vulnerability 
include the absence of capacity to overcome the impacts of climate  change, particularly the increasingly 
shortening of the growing period with late onset and early  cessation of rains; the growing migration flux 
of young people, the main workforce, towards the urban  centres and abroad, enlarging the number of 
women  headed households [,]” “and the deficient  technical  support to adopt adaptive options that would 
enhance resilience to the shortening of the growing  period. ” It also notes that “[g]ender has not been 
significantly main -streamed into the existing ANR policy’s sub -sector policies and strategies tho ugh 
female -headed households are the main work -force in agriculture and should be a key focus of ‘rural 
resilience’ efforts.” It adds that “[t]his is a significant departure from the Gender and Women 
Empowerment Policy 2010 -2020 which calls for the effective mainstreaming of gender perspectives into 
emerging crises such as climate change, disaster management and food crises.” Under the section devoted to “Priority Activities to be Undertaken to Reduce Gaps and Meet User Needs,” the NFCS -GAM 
identifies as a key challenge the “last mile” of an early warning system, “i.e., in reaching the most remote 
 
521 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
522 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natur al Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
523 Republic of The Gambia, undated. “The Gambia National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS -GAM) and Implementation 
Action Plan (2020- 2024) .” 
https://gfcs.wmo.int/sites/default/files/NFCS_GAM -June_2019.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
524 ibid.  
525 ibid.  
526 ibid.


---
*Page 207*
---

67 
 and vulnerable population with timely, meaningful, and actionable warning information and in integrating 
a gender perspective into” the system. It adds that “gaps persist due to  weak coordination among the 
actors and agencies concerned, limited public awareness and participation as well as insufficient political commitment.”  
 173 Gender differentiated needs for climate information have  been documented in Africa : by content 
and means of access in Senegal (stronger demand among women for information on the onset of rainy 
season, through radio and less through SMS)
527 and by means of access in Ghana (men had higher access 
as their larger financial resources allowed them to purchase phones).528 Gender differences are also noted 
elsewhere in the world; a Cambodian commune, where literacy rate is lower at 59% for women compared 
to 76% for men, 52% of female -headed households did not trust and ac t on early warnings on climate 
compared to 38 % of male -headed households.529 While the perception of the climate change did not 
seem to differ in Ghana,530 gender differences in perception of weather impacts on crops and in how they 
receive, share, understa nd, and act upon weather -related information were observed in Vietnam.531 
While the NFCS -GAM alludes to such differences between women and men, the accompanying Action 
Plan 2020 -2024 does not include direct reference to women or gender.  
 174 The NFCS -GAM analyz es the state of the youth in Gambia, citing the unemployment rates among 
the youth in 2012, which was 38% against 30% for the overall population.
532 It adds that female youth are 
less likely to be employed or in education: 31% of female youth neither employ ed or in school against 27% 
of male youth in the same situation. The resulting high rate of exodus to Europe among the young, together with low labor productivity, high poverty and fertility rates, are identified as factors contributing to an “extremely ch allenging development context.” A  project in The Gambia of the  United Nations 
Environment Programme  financed by the Global Environment Facility on an early warning system is said 
to have given hope to the youth and encouraged them to stay in the rural a reas.
533 The Action Plan 2020 -
2024 does not have reference to the youth.  
 4.3.4 Credit  
175 Both women and men in the informal sector face constraints in accessing financial services, 
especially credit.
534 The principal providers of finance are the twelve commercial banks and microfinance 
institutions, but their interest rates are high and unsuited  for smallholders.535 Most financial service 
providers rely on their branches in the urban areas as the  main delivery channel, and the number of  field 
 
527 Diof, N.S. et al., 2019. “ Factors influencing gendered access to climate information services for farming in Senegal .” Gender, 
Technology and Development.  Vol. 23, Issue 2. https://doi.org/10.1080/09718524.2019.1649790 (accessed March 2021).  
528 Partey, S.T. et al., 2019. “Gender and climate risk management: evide nce of climate information use in Ghana .” Climatic 
Change . No. 158, 61– 75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584- 018- 2239- 6 (accessed March 2021).  
529 Clingeleffer, K., 2020. “Gender Learning Report: ‘Strengthening Climate Information and Early Warning Systems in C ambodia 
to Support Climate Resilient Development and Adaptation to Climate Change’ project.” 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/cambodia_ciews_project_gender_learning_report_final_september_20
20.pdf (accessed march 2021).  
530 Partey et al., “Gender and climate risk management: evidence of climate information use in Ghana .” 
531 Duong, T.M.  et al., 2017. Gender -differences in Agro -Climate Information Services.” CIGAR.  
https://cgspace.cgiar.org › rest › bitstreams › retrieve (accessed March 2021).  
532 Republic of The Gambia, “ The Gambia National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS -GAM) and Implementation Action 
Plan (20 20-2024).”  
533 United Nations Environment Programme, 2018. “Sowing Hope in the Gambia.”  
https://www.unep.org/new s-and-stories/story/sowing- hope- gambia (accessed March 2021).  
534 Touray, “Review of the Livestock/Meat and Milk Value Chains and Policy I nfluencing Them in The Gambia.”  
535 ibid.


---
*Page 208*
---

68 
 officers and agents is insufficient to reach the underserved  communities and women.536 Very few financial 
products target women.537 Although the situation is improving for women, the barriers remain higher for 
them due t o higher  illiteracy, cultural attitudes and practices.538 Even when women have access, they may 
not control the credit, particularly in the rural areas.539 In a survey published in 2019, the d istance to bank 
branches was the most  frequently cited barrier by respondents when asked about the main challenges to 
accessing savings products at formal financial institutions.540 
 
176 The women in the focus group discussions indicated that when in need of money  they resort to 
funds pooled among them ( osusu ) or borrow from their family and friends .541 542 The processors in Banjul 
expressed the need of capital to: construct fish drying platform and drying area; and to purchase a boatful 
of fish directly from the fishermen and not from the middlemen, whose presence allows purchase in smaller quantities  but w ith markups .
543 Collective purchase of fish by the boat used to be practiced  in 
Banjul , but no longer, most likely due to disputes among the members. 544 The Ministry of Fisheries and 
Water Resources launched a fund of GMD 11,000,000545 (whose sources are  fees on  fishing rights, 
licenses, etc. ) to support women and youth in the  sector in January 2021;  five individuals, three of whom 
are women , have received  funds  as of March 2021 . 546  
 4.3.5 Mobile Phone , Computer and Internet  
177 According to the 2013 Census on information and communication technology (ICT) , nearly 80% of 
both female and male Gambians had access to a mobile phone  (Table 12).
547 The proportion of population 
with access was around 90% for male aged 20 -69. For women, n o age group marked the 90% access rate, 
but it was above 88% for age group 20 -49.548 The mobile ownership exhibited a much larger gender gap 
than access (Table 13), indicating that more women with access to mobile phones do not own the phones 
than men with access . The gender gap in access to computer wa s much higher and most p ronounced for 
the age groups with  the highest access, indicating  that women were being left behind not only in 
traditional literacy, but also in digital literacy in 2013  (Table 14); the high access rates to mobile phones 
among women do not indicate their literacy, even when they have 3G phones or higher, since they use 
the phones primarily for making calls through Whatsapp.  Mobile cellular prescription has increased from 
94.2 per 100 persons in 2013 to 139.5 in 2018.549 
 
   
 
536 UNCDF, “PoWER assessment of Women’s Economic Empowerment in The Gambia.”  
537 ibid.  
538 Ministry of Women’s Affairs, “The Gambia National Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
539 ibid.  
540 UNCDF, “PoWER assessment of Women’s Econo mic Empowerment in The Gambia.”  
541 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
542 Focused group discussion with women involved in oyster harvesting and processing, Tambi, March 9 and 10, 2021  
543 Focused group discussion with women involved in processing/selling, Banjul landing site, March 9 and 10, 2021.  
544 ibid.  
545 Interview with the Acting Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources, Banjul, March 12, 2021.  
546 ibid.  
547 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Access to ICT . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
548 ibid.  
549 World Bank, 2021. “Mobile cellular subscriptions –  Gambia, The.” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.CEL.SETS.P2?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 209*
---

69 
 Table 12: Access to Communication Technology in 2013550 
 
Proportion of Population with Access (%)  
Mobile Phone  Landline Phone  Computer  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
78.5  79.7  4.8 5.1 8.8 13.2  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013).  
 
Table 13: Mobile Phone Ownership  in 2013551 
 
Proportion of Population  Who Owns Mobile Phone (%) 
Female  Male  
Total  Rural  Urban  Total  Rural  Urban  
49.4  36.8  58.6  58.0  46.1  65.7  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013).  
 
Table 14: Access to Computer by Age Group in 2013552 
 
Age Group  Proportion of Population  
with Access to Computer (%)  
Female  Male  Rural  Urban  
15-19 12.4  13.6  3.6 19.5  
20-24 15.3  21.1  5.5 24.7  
25-29 12.4  21.3  4.9 22.9  
30-34 9.9 19.8  4.2 20.3  
35-39 8.4 18.0  3.9 18.3  
40-44 7.6 16.8  3.6 17.6  
45-49 7.2 15.7  3.6 16.6  
50-54 6.1 12.8  2.6 14.6  
55-59 6.7 12.4  2.8 14.9  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013).  
 
178 Access to mobile phone was higher in the urban (81.3%) than in the rural areas (76.1% ), and 
so were  ownership of mobile phones ( 58.0% and 49.4% for urban and rural areas, respectively) and 
access to computer (16.4% and 3.0% for urban and rural areas, respectively).553 As with the gender 
gap, the rural- urban gap in access t o computer was much higher than that for mobile phones and most 
pronounced for the age groups with the highest access ; the rural areas were left behind in traditional and 
digital literacy in 2013  (Table 14). 554 
 
179 The proportion of the total Gambian populati on with access to internet has been steadily 
increasing and reached nearly 20% in 2017  from 14% in 2013.555 The 2013 Census indicated that persons 
 
550 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Access to ICT . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
551 ibid.  
552 ibid.  
553 ibid.  
554 ibid.  
555 World Bank, 2021. Individuals using the Internet (% of population) -  Gambia, The.” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).


---
*Page 210*
---

70 
 with internet access were most likely to access either daily or weekly , both in the rural (65.1%) and urban 
areas (83.6%).556 
 
4.3.6 Traditional  Sources of Information  
180 Access to the traditional  media – newspaper, radio and television – was much better represented 
among both female and male populations in the country, except for newspaper , in 2013. 557 The most 
popular was the radio , reflecting the rates of literacy and poverty; access to newspaper is limited by 
illiteracy and that to television by economic means to purchase a television set.558 The same pattern 
persisted five years later, but barring differences in methodologies employed by two surveys, access 
overall seemed decreasing except for men’s access to television. Access  is further constrained in the rural 
areas because of low circulation of newspaper and magazines and unavailability of electri city needed for 
television .559 The gender gap was thus the largest for newspapers and magazines.560 The access to  
newspapers and magazines was 5.9% in the rural areas versus 21.3% in the urban areas, while that for 
radio was 88.8% in the rural areas versus 8 4.6% in the urban areas .561 
 
Table 15: Acc ess to Information Media562 
 
Proportion of Population with Access (%)  
Year  Newspaper/Magazine563 Radio  Television  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
2013  11.9  18.3  87.3  86.9  67.6  68.9  
2018  5.8 14.8  60.1  72.7  61.8  70.2  
Source: Gambia Bureau of Statistics (2013, 2019).  
 181 The women processors who participated in the focus discussion groups also named radio and 
television as their sources of information, including news on weather.
564 Other major information sources 
are family and friends and may include extension workers.565 The women  reported that there is no 
organized information that is diffused related to their work and that they lear n what sells, why and when 
by observing.566 The women in Jahally do not have enough  information on how to grow quality vegetables, 
which results in consumer s’ turning to imported product s.567 They also lack information on how 
oversupply, leading to low selling prices, could be avoided.568 The lack of business information is often 
cited as one of the important impediments to economic empowerment of women.569  
 
 
556 World Bank, 2021. Individuals using the Internet (% of population) -  Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
557 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Access to ICT . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
558 ibid. . 
559 ibid.  
560 ibid.  
561 ibid.  
562 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2013. 2013 Population and Housing Census: Access to ICT . Banjul: Republic of Gambia.  
Gambia Bu reau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
563 For 2018, newspaper only.  
564 Focused group discussions with harvesters/processors/sellers, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin Kanteh and 
Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
565 ibid.  
566 ibid.  
567 Focused group discussion with women involved in rice farming, Jahally, March 17 , 2021.  
568 ibid. 
569 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”


---
*Page 211*
---

71 
 4.3.7 Environmental Awareness : Climate Change and Ecosystems  
182 The w omen who participated in focused group discussions had first -hand  experiences in climate 
change: dwindling number and q uantity of fish species in the ocean and river; loss of oyster habitat near 
the coast; low crop harvests; changes in weather in general and in ambient temperature.570 They heard  
the topic quite often on the television and radio, but did not know what was ca using the changes.  The 
women in Jahally were involved in reforestation (mangroves on the coast and other trees inland) as 
climate change mitigation/adaptation strategy through a government’s project.  The women were willing 
to start aquaculture if the fish stocks kept on shrinking due to climate change and if a development partner 
wants to introduce the practice.  
 
183 On the one hand , women in fishery knew that mangroves are important for the lives of fish and 
oysters and hence for their livelihoods . They knew  that their grandchildren would not have as much 
mangroves as their grandparents did. On the other hand, many  appeared to continue harvest ing the 
mangroves  as fuel and roofing material despite the fine imposed by the government in such instances.  
The p rocessors at the Banjul site use charcoal from inland areas for their smoking and drying, but 
sometimes husks from coconuts and groundnuts.  
 
184 The availability of drinking water at home was not completely satisfactory; many expressed 
problems such as out -of-order pumps, insufficient number of water points in the village, lack of water 
source in the compound and insufficient quantity of water avai lable.  At the same time, they suggested 
water for the new project of aquaculture to come from the same or new boreholes and were willing to 
take the opportunity to engage in an activity which serves as an alternative source of income.  
 4.3.8 Access to Mark ets 
185 Women do not have access to products  and markets with high return, due to gender -based  
division of crops and anima ls as well as markets , which allocates women the less profitable.  This division  
is accentuated by little attention and investment devoted to what is considered female products or 
markets. Higher profits are found in markets abroad or locations further away from the prod uction site, 
which  puts women at a great disadvantage as they are without capital and cannot afford prope r storage 
facilities or long -distance transportation . They are also without connection with dealers in foreign 
markets , who are most likely men. The Gambian diaspora who visited the country served as a pseudo 
foreign market for smoked and dried fish of the  kind processed by women, but the travel restrictions 
imposed by the latest pandemic has greatly diminished this outlet.  
 186 No organized market information was available to women who participated in the focused 
discussion groups , but they did not seem to tak e it as a disadvantage as they have always coped by making 
direct observations themselves.  Whereas markets for fish and oyster products were not an issue, those  
for vegetables were considered insufficient  in size  by women farmers.
571 This was partly caused by foreign 
products of higher quality which become available during certain times of the year, crowding out the 
vegetables of inferior quality grown in the country. The women indicated that they did not know how to 
find markets for their products and appea red unaware of possible solutions: acquisition of quality seeds; 
diversification of crops; collaboration with the tourist industry which imports vegetables, and so on. In 
 
570 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
571 Focused discussion groups with women involved in vegetable farming, Njoben and Medina Lamini Kanteh, March 12, 18, 
2021.


---
*Page 212*
---

72 
 general, t he low investment that the society accords its women  in terms of  literacy  appears to be 
compounding their disadvantaged situation.  
 
4.3.9 Other Professional Needs  
187 The common unmet needs expressed by women and community leaders concerned 
infrastructure, equipment and tools for their work: jetty, canoes,  smoking and storage facilities for women 
in fishery and land, ploughs/tractors for those in crop agriculture.572 Women whose inputs were fish 
indicated that middlemen who bought boatfuls of fish from fishermen and sold to the women in smaller quantities wi th markups were one of the biggest problems, but the issue was not raised by the landing -
site community leaders, who were otherwise informed about the plight of women working at the sites.  
Women at the landing sites also indicated that lack of toilets and drinking water at the sites was a problem, another angle overlooked by the community leaders.  
 188 Lack of capital as one of the largest obstacles was mentioned by women at all three landing sites 
visited , in addition to the community leader of the Banjul site . They did not appear to be aware that their 
chances of obtaining capital would increase by many folds if they became functionally literate. When 
asked about the major challenges in their work, women invariably added that the problems would be 
overcome wit h the support of development partners. The smoking facility in Bintang was built by a donor 
a couple of decades ago, but two of the ovens are out of order and have not been repaired; the community 
is waiting for a new facility to be built by a donor.  At th e same time, women engaged in farming were 
willing to take up a new project, such as poultry and aquaculture, if a donor would give them an opportunity.  Many women are astute and know well how to run their small business, but insufficient 
ownership of past  aid projects seemed to have deprived them of the capacity to plan strategically , which 
is likely exacerbated by their illiteracy, lack of formal education and patriarchal culture.  
 
4.4 Water and Sanitation  
189 Water : According to the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018,573 90.4% of the population had 
access to an improved source of water, such as piped water, tube well, borehole, protected well and bottled water. The access rates for the poorest and richest quintiles in wealth were 76.6% and 99.9%, 
respectively, and for the rural and urban areas were 86.9% and 92.2%, respectively.
574 The time r equired 
to an improved drinking- water source was 30 minutes or more for the households in the rural areas: 66.8% 
reported up to 30 minutes and 12.9% more  than 30 minutes.575 Over 60% of urban households reported 
that improved drinking water was available on premises, while 27.5% need ed to spend 30 minutes to 
reach a source.576 Almost all households of the richest quintile in wealth had water on premises (98. 1%), 
but for more than half of the households in the three poorest quintiles up to 30 minutes of travel was required.
 577 It was overwhelming ly women  over 15 years of age who collected water: 85.1% in the country 
and 90.5% and 77.8% in the rural and urban a reas, respectively. 578 
 
 
572 Focused  group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintan g, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
573 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
574 ibid.  
575 ibid.  
576 ibid.  
577 ibid.  
578 ibid.


---
*Page 213*
---

73 
 190 Overall, the proportion of households which had access to an improved drinking-water source 
located on premises, free of E. coli and available when needed was low at 33.8%: 49.8% in urban areas 
and 1.9% in rural areas. 579 While sufficient amounts of drinking water was mostly available (87.3% overall, 
82.2% in rural and 89.8% in urban areas), the unavailability of sources affected more than 10% of the rural 
households.580 The quality of drinking water measured by E. coli  count per 100ml was alarming; 92.1% 
and 63.5% of rural and urban households, respectively, drank water that contained the bacteria.581 About 
70% and 4 0% of the drinking water of rural and urban households, respectively, ind icated high (between 
11 and 100 per 100ml) o r very hig h (over 100 per 100ml) contamination. 582 The great majority of the 
households did not treat water: 71.3% in the rural areas and 86.9% in the urban areas. 583 
 
191 Sanitation: Almost  all households in the country had so me kind of handwashing facility .584 
Improved sanitation – flush toilets, pour- flush toilets, ventilated improved pit latrine and pit latrine with 
slab – was observed less among rural households (36.6%) than among urban households (73. 9%).585 Open 
defecation was obs erved among 2.0% of  rural households and 0.6% of urban households.586 Improved 
sanitation facilities tended to be shared, especially in rural settings;  28.7% and 55.9% of rural and urban 
households, respectively, did not share improv ed facilities .587 The situation of not sharing was reversed 
for unimproved facilities: 43.9% (rural) and 17.6% (urban).588 Unsafe disposal of excreta from on -site 
sanitation facilities was observed among less than 1% of households,589 which suggests that another type 
of drinking water contamination is responsible for the high level of contamination observed . Safe disposal 
of children’s stool is not complete, which is a likely contributing factor; 83.1% of children had their last stools  disposed of safely in the rural areas and 74.1% of the same in the urban areas.
590 
 192 Approximately 95% of women in the country used appropriate menstrual hygiene materials with 
a private place to wash and change while at home, and the rate was higher at 98.0% for rural women .
591 
The National Development Plan 2018 -2021 aspires to increase the proportion of population with access 
to safe drinking water to 100%, improve sanitation facilities to 75%, and become open defecation free by 2021.
592 
 
4.5 Energy 
193 Only 1.2% of households in 2019 relied primarily on clean fuels and technology for cooking in The 
Gambia, all in the urban areas.593 The vast majority used solid fuel, little over half using three stone stove 
or open fire.594 The poorer the household, the more likely it used these devices; 94.1% of the poorest 
 
579 ibid.  
580 ibid.  
581 ibid.  
582 ibid.  
583 ibid.  
584 ibid.  
585 ibid.  
586 ibid.  
587 ibid.  
588 ibid.  
589 ibid.  
590 ibid.  
591 ibid.  
592 Africa Finance Ministers’ Meeting, 2020. “The Gambia Country Overview.”  
https://www.sanitationandwaterforall.org/sites/default/files/2020 -12/2020%20Country%20Overview_The%20Gambia.pdf 
(accessed March 2021).  
593 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
594 ibid.


---
*Page 214*
---

74 
 wealth quintile an d 2.9% of the richest quintile.595 In contrast, the use of manufactured solid fuel stove 
increased with wealth: 4.9% among the poorest to 88.0% among the richest.596The fuel was primarily 
woo d (71.3%) and charcoal (24.6%) .597 In the  rural areas, it was 98.1% wood ;598 the women who 
participated in focused group discussions reported charcoal use for cooking in Banjul, Tambi and Njoben 
and wood  elsewhere, collected by men .599 As for lighting, more than half had access to electricity, and the 
next most common was battery -powered at 24.6 %.600 
 
194 Fish smoking and drying as well as oyster boiling, the major occupations of women in the fishery 
sector , consume a great amount o f fuel; fuel consumption by artisanal smoking and drying of fish of about 
6,600 tonnes was estimated larger than the rest of the sector in 2014 -2018  and inefficient in terms of fuel 
use per landed fish .601 For wood as fuel for processing, it appeared that women themselves procure from 
the forests, if not buying from men in the trade.602 Since the national government has prohibited cutting 
of mangroves for their protection, the main source  for processors  is non-mangrove wood from inland.603 
The pressure has simply shifted from the coast to inland,  as the Department of Forestry, Minist ry of 
Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources  has expressed strong concerns about 
overexploitation of non -mangrove forests.604 
 
4.6 Health 
4.6.1 General Health  
195 Overview: In 2018, l ife expectancy at birth for Gambian women was at par with the Sub -Saharan 
average at 63 years and it was also the case  for Gambian male at 60 years ; about ten years shorter than 
the world average for both gender (Table 1 6). The mortality rates for adults w ere lower than the Sub -
Saharan average for both female and male, although higher than the world average in 2018.  The gap 
between the Gambian and world rates were slightly larger for women.  
 196 More than half of the deaths were caused by communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and 
nutrition conditions, and about two -fifths by non -communicable diseases; n on-communicable diseases 
are considered under -diagnosed and underreported as a cause of illness and deaths.
605 While the 
proportion of deaths by communicabl e diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions in The 
Gambia was somewhat lower than that for the Sub -Saharan average and has decreased significantly from 
64.2% in 2000,606 it is well above the world average of 18.4%; it indicates high prevalenc e of deaths from 
 
595 ibid.  
596 ibid.  
597 ibid.  
598 ibid.  
599 Focused group discussions with harvesters/processors/sellers and youth, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, Jahally, Medina Lamin 
Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
600 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster S urvey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
601 Avadí  et al. , “Fisheries Value Chain Analysis in The Gambia. Report for the European Union, DG -DEVCO. Value Chain Anal ysis 
for Development Project.”  
602 Focused Groups Discussion with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Kartong landing site,  March 20, 2021.  
603 Focused Groups Discussions with women involved in harvesting/processing/selling, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang and Kartong, March 
9, 10, 13 and 20, 2021.  
604 Interviews with  officials the Depart ment of Forestry, Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources , March 
8, 2021. 
605 Sine, J. et al ., 2019. “Assessment of the Health System in the Gambia: Overview, Medical Products, Health Financing, and 
Governance Components.” Washington, D.C.: USAID.  
606 World Bank, 2021. “Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions (% of total) - 
Gambia, The.”


---
*Page 215*
---

75 
 preventable diseases and hence unsatisfactory health system in the country. Nonetheless, the country is 
much less afflicted by major diseases than the average of Sub -Saharan Africa, most of whose countries 
post higher GDP than The Gambia ( Table 17).  
 
Table 1 6: Basic Health Statistics607 
 
Indicator  Year  Female  
(The Gambia/  
Sub-Saharan 
Africa/World)  Male  
(The Gambia/  
Sub-Saharan 
Africa/World)  
Life expectancy at birth  (years)  2018  63/63/74  60/60/70  
Mortality rate, adult (per 1,000 adults)  2018  224/243/121  280/303/175  
Death by communicable diseases and maternal, 
prenatal and nutrition conditions (% of total 
deaths)  2019  52.2/53.6/18.4  
Death by non -communicable diseases (% of total 
deaths)  2019  37.1/36.4/73.6  
Death by injury  (% of total deaths)  2019  10.7/10.0/8.0  
Source: World Bank (2021).  
 
Table 1 7: Prevalence of Major Diseases608 
 
Indicator  Year  The 
Gambia  Sub-
Saharan 
Africa  
Incidence of HIV, ages  15-49 (per 1,000 uninfected population ages 15 -49) 2019  1.62  1.77  
1990  0.38  5.49  
Adults (ages 15 -49) newly infected with HIV  2019  1,900  n.a. 
Incidence of HIV, ages 15 -24 (per 1,000 uninfected population ages 15 -24) 2019  0.89  1.58  
Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15 -24) 2019  0.6 1.8 
Prevalence of HIV, male (% ages 15 -24) 2019  0.2 0.8 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)  2019  158 226 
Tuberculosis treatment success rate (% of new cases)  2018  88 82 
Tuberculosis detection rate (%, all forms )  2019  71 57 
Incidence of malaria (per 1,000 popul ation at risk)  2018  66 219 
Source: World Bank  (2021)  
 197 The proportion of the population affected by Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) has been 
historically very low compared to other countries in Sub -Saharan Africa, and many more women of age 
15-24 are infected than their male counterparts as is the case in Sub -Sahara. However, it was report ed 
that 54% of women and 46% of men live with HIV/AIDs around 2007.
609 With respect to tuberculosis, both 
the detection and treatment are at higher success rates than the average of Sub -Saharan Africa. The 
incidence of malaria is also quite contained compared to Sub -Saharan average.  
 
 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.DTH.COMM.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
607 World Bank, 2021. “ Data on health .” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ (accessed March 2021).  
608 World Bank, “Data on health.”  
609 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The G ambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”


---
*Page 216*
---

76 
 198 Food Security and Nutrition: The country produces only half of its food consumption needs 
today;610 food sufficiency  has declined since 2011/12 when it depended 37.9% of its staple food to import s 
and 8.6% to external food aid.611 Self-sufficiency in rice – the country’s staple crop – has fallen from about 
50% in 2011/12612 to less than 10%.613 The poverty rate has been stable at 48% in the last five years, but 
food insecurity rate has risen  from 5% to  8% of total population .614 In 2016, 0.6%of households  were 
severely food insecure, 7.4 % moderately food insecure, 29.1%  marginally food secure and 62.8% food 
secure.615 The majority of the food insecure households were mostly in the rural areas of Central River, 
Upper River, North Bank and Lower River regions.616 Female -headed households were more food secure 
than male -headed  ones (68.7% and 61.7%, respectively), and there were proportionately less severely 
food insecure households headed by women than those by men (0.0% and 0.8%, respectively).617 
 
199 A third of the total population had food intake  short  of minimum energy require ments , with 
cereals contributing 53% of the total energy supply, animal products  6%, added oils 20% and fats 2% 
around 2010.618 Approximately  two in every three households had a highly diverse diet and the urban 
households enjoyed higher diversity than the rural ones in 2016 .619 The households with lower diversity 
were in Upper River Region North and Central River Region  North .620 Women are believed less 
nutritionally  secure  at household level compared to men.621 The prevalence of undernourishment was 
11.9% in The Gambia, while it was 17.5% in Sub -Saharan Africa and 8.9% in the world in  2018; the rate 
has been consta ntly below  the Sub -Saharan average and the gap is widening.622 Micronutrient 
deficiencies (iron, vitamin A and iodine) were considered widespread and affected women and under -five 
children most. 623 It was estimated that the cost of undernutrition to the economy through health, 
education and labo r productivity in 2018 was  equivalent to 5.1 % of GDP.624 
 
200 Children : The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018 indicates that under- five mortality was 57, 
infant mortality  41, and neonatal mortality 31, all per 1,000 live births 625 and all considerably above world 
average rates of 39, 29 and 18, respectively, in 2018.626 The rates were higher in the rural areas than in 
urban areas, except for neonatal mortality rate.627 Mother’s education did not seem to influence  neonatal 
 
610 FAO, 2021. “the Gambia.” FAO in emergencies.  
http://www.fao.org/emergencies/countries/detail/en/c/148707 (accessed March 2021).  
611 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natur al Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
612 ibid.  
613 FAO, “the Gambia.” FAO in emergencies.  
614 World Food Programme, “Gambia.”  
615 World Food Programme  et al., 2016. “ Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis, The Gambia.”  
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/e na/wfp290335.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
616 ibid.  
617 ibid.  
618 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natur al Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
619 World Food Programm e et al., “ Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis, The Gambia.”  
620 ibid.  
621 Minist ry of Women’s Affairs, “The Gambia National Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
622 World Bank, 2021. “Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population) - Gambia, The, Sub -Saharan Afr ica.” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SN.ITK.DEFC.ZS?locations=GM -ZG (accessed March 2021).  
623 African Union Commission et al. , 2018. “The Cost of Hunger in Africa: The Gambia.”  
https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP -0000119677/download/?_ga=2.163304895.2073215127.1616498648-
1289744897.1614764057 (accessed March 2021).  
624 ibid.  
625 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report .” 
626 World Bank, 2021. “ Data related to child mortality. ” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ (accessed March 2021).  
627 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”


---
*Page 217*
---

77 
 and infant mortality rates.628 The rates for boys exceeded or were equal to those for girls,629 indicating 
natural patterns.  Among the West African countries which are known for high under -five mortality, 
Gambia was one of the countries with lower rates of deaths by eight common infectious diseases in 2015: 
pneumonia (14% of all under -five deaths); sepsis (9 %); tetanus (0%); diarrhea (9%); malaria (4%); AIDS 
(2%); measles (0%); and meningitis (2%).630 In 2019, 23.9% of  children under five years old had an episode 
of fever in the 12 months preceding the survey and 23.7% an episode of diarrhea in the same period . 631 
 
Table 1 8: Basic Statics of Child Health632 
 
Indicator  Year  The 
Gambia  Sub-Saharan 
Africa  World  
Mortality rate, infant, female (per 
1,000 live births)  2019  32 47 26 
Mortality rate, infant, male (per 
1,000 live births)  2019  40 57 30 
Immunization, measles (% of 
children ages 12 -23 months)  2019  85 69.6  85.7  
Immunization, DPT (% of children 
ages 12 -23 months)  2019  88 73.5  85.7  
Prevalence of anemia among 
children (% of children under 5)  2016  75.7  59.9  41.7  
Prevalence of severe wasting, 
weight for height (% of children 
under 5)  2018 – The Gambia  
2019 – Sub-Saharan 
Africa  1.3 1.7 n.a. 
Prevalence of wasting, weight for 
height (% of children under 5)  2018 – The Gambia  
2019 – Sub-Saharan 
Africa  6 6.8 n.a. 
Source: World Bank (2021).  
 201 Immunization rates for children were close to or even exceeded the world average, while the 
prevalence of wasting was slightly lower and anemia among children much higher than the Sub -Saharan 
average (Table 18). Stunting of children under five years old was greatly reduced from 24.5% in 2013 to 
15.7% in 2018.
633 Similarly underweight under five fell to 10.6% from 16.2% and wasting to 5.8% from 
11.5% in the same period.634 The country was evaluated medium by the World Health Organization (WHO) 
Classification of malnutrition for stunting (15.7% of children under age  five) and for wasting (5.8% of the 
same), while high for underweight (10.6% of the same) in 2018.635 The proportion of children wasted or 
underweight was slightly higher in the rural areas and for boys.636 The rural- urban and female -male gaps 
 
628 ibid.  
629 ibid.  
630 Sanyang, Y,  2019. “ Prevalence of under -five years of age mortality by infectious diseases in West African region.” 
International Journal of Africa Nursing Sciences . Volume 11 , 100175.  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214139119300198 (accessed March 2021).  
631 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Surv ey 2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
632 World Bank, “Data on health. ” 
633 African Union Commission et al. , “The Cost of  Hunger in Africa: The Gambia.”  
634 ibid.  
635 ibid.  
636 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”


---
*Page 218*
---

78 
 were larger fo r stunting.637 Mother’s education was most positively related to stunting and less to 
underweight.638 It did not show a clear relationship to wasting.639 
 
4.6.2 Reproductive Health  
202 Unlike diseases prevalence  and various mortality rates among the general population , the 
maternal mortality ratio in 2017 remained higher than the Sub -Saharan average at 597 and 534, 
respectively , per 100,000 live births (Table 1 9).640 
 
Table 1 9: Reproduction related Mortality641 
 
Indicator  Year  The 
Gambia  Sub- 
Saharan 
Africa  World  
Maternal mortality ratio  (modeled estimate, per 100,000 
live births)  2019 597 534 211 
Mortality rate, under -5 (per 1,000 live births)  2019  51.7  75.8  37.7  
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)  2019  35.9  51.7  28.2  
Mortality rate, neonatal (per 1,000 live births)  2019  27.1  27.5  17.5  
Source: World Bank (2021).  
 203 Fertility: The overall fertility rate declined from 6.4 in 1983 to 5.9 in 2013
642  and further to 4.4 in 
2018.643 The adolescent fertility rate expressed as number of births per 1,000 women aged 15 -19 also 
declined from 200 in 1983, 86 in 2013,644 and to 67 in 2018 ,645 but well above  the world average of 42 .646 
The number was quite high in the rural areas at 108, compared to 51 in the urban zones. 647  
 
204 Sexual behavior : The percentage of women aged 15 -24 who had ever had sex in 2018 was 39.3% 
for the country.648 More women in the rural areas were engaged in sexual activities than in the urban 
areas (52.2% versus 34.0%), but  rural women were more likely to be in monogamous relationships; 1% 
and 16% of rural and urban women, respectively, had more than one sexual partner in the past 12 months.
649 For over half of both groups, the partners were more than ten years older.650 The higher the 
educational level attained, the less women aged 15 -24 engaged in sex; for those with pre- primary or no 
education, the percentage was 71.5%, while for those with secondary education or higher, it was 25.6%.651 
In addition, women aged 15 -24 from the  poorest households engaged more  in sex  (51.6%) than women 
 
637 ibid.  
638 ibid.  
639 ibid.  
640 World Bank, 2021. “Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) - Gambia, The, Sub- Saharan Africa”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
641 World Bank, “Data on health. ” 
642 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . 
643 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
644 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report . 
645 Gambia Burea u of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster S urvey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
646 World Bank, 2021. “Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19).” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT (accessed March 2021). 
647 Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
648 ibid.  
649 ibid.  
650 ibid.  
651 ibid.


---
*Page 219*
---

79 
 of the same age group but from wealthier households .652 Sexual activities diminished progressively with 
wealth to 2 6.1% for the richest wealth quintile.653 About 9% of women aged 15 -24 had engaged in sex 
without ever being married or in a union. 654 
 
205 The male counterpart s were less sexually active than the women  in 2018 , as was the case in 
2005,655 and there was no large difference in the proportion of those who were active in  the rural and 
urban areas.656 The percentage of 15 -24 year old males who ever had sex in the country, the rural and 
urban areas were: 35.7%, 36.0% and 34.3% respectively.657 Men of the same age groups were more likely 
to have multiple partners, especially in the urban areas; 55% of the sexually active 15 -24 year old had 
multiple sexual partners in the past 12 months, compared to 14% of the same in the rural areas.658 The 
level of education attained or ho usehold wealth did not clearly affect the behavior as they did for 
women.659 Rather, men’s engagement in sex slightly increased with education level.660 It was the highest 
for those from the richest households, although the poorest was the second highest and  the percentages 
were in the range of 30 -40% for all wealth quintiles.661 Together with the profile for women of the same 
age group, the statistics suggest that young women’s sexual activities are related to economic necessities 
and men’s mostly to economic luxury . 
 
206 Over 95% of both women and men aged 15 -49 had heard of HIV and over 70% of them had good 
knowledge of what would prevent  its transmission, but less had the correct knowledge on exact 
pathways.662 Women tended to be marginally more knowledgeable  than men , and urban inhabitants 
more than the rural counterparts.663 Education and wealth  levels  were positively related to knowledge  for 
both women and men.664 Only 22.7% of women and 19.7% of men aged 15 -24 were judged to have 
comprehensive knowledge on HIV/AIDS .665  
 
207 The percentage of women who have had a live birth or were pregnant with their first child 
constituted 12.0% of women aged 15 -19 in 2018, while 0.0% of men of t he same age had fathered a 
child.666 Nearly all women aged 15 -49 had access to a provider of antenatal care of some  kind.667 Close to 
90% of the group reported having received post -natal health checks for the newborns  and the same 
percentage  for checks for the mother .668 The government recognizes that d elayed pregnancy indicates 
improved education and career opportunities as well as later marriage in life: women’s empowerment .669 
 
 
652 ibid.  
653 ibid.  
654 ibid.  
655 Minis try of Women’s Affairs,  “The Gambia Nat ional Gender Policy 2010 -2020.”  
656 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
657 ibid.  
658 ibid.  
659 ibid.  
660 ibid.  
661 ibid.  
662 ibid.  
663 ibid.  
664 ibid.  
665 ibid.  
666 ibid.  
667 ibid.  
668 ibid.  
669 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Population and Housing Census: Gender Report .


---
*Page 220*
---

80 
 208 Contraception: Use of contraception amon g women of reproductive age (15 -49) is very low at 
16.8%, although almost all uses employ a modern method.670 Male condom is used by 0.1% of the same 
group. 671 The proportion increased with education and the number of living children in the family, but 
bare ly with wealth.672 Less than half of the women who were of reproductive age and married (or in a 
union)  expressed the need for contraception, and less than one- third claimed that their need for family 
planning was unmet.673 Among women of the same age group,  but not married or in a union, more than 
90% desired contraception and over 60% reported that their needs were not met; 674 unsafe abortion is 
considered a major factor in  the high maternal mortality rate . 675 In 2014, 41% of women aged 15- 49 made 
their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use and reproductive health 
care.676 
 4.6.3 Health  System  
209 The government’s health expenditure per capita, in purchasing power parity terms, was USD 24.7  
in 2018, very low compared to the average of Sub -Saharan Africa or  of the world , which  were USD 84.8 
and 846.8, respectively.
677 The current health expenditures as percentage of GDP in 2018 were 3.1% (The 
Gambia), 5.1% (Sub- Saharan Africa) and 9.85% (the world).678 Together with the high immunization rates 
among children, these statistics suggest strong dependence on external aid in the health sector; the 
external h ealth expenditure679 was considerable at 35.1% of the current health exp enditure in 2018 in The 
Gambia (against 12.3% of the same for Sub -Saharan Africa in 2018 ), although it had  more than halved in 
proportion in less than two decades .680 
 
210 In 201 4, public health care services were provided through: seven public hospitals at the tertiary 
level; six major health centers and 41 minor health centers at the secondary level; 40 community  clinics 
and 634 Primary Health Village at the primary level.681 Over 60 health care providers of other types – 
private, NGO and community managed – complemented the system; most of the private and NGO actors 
were located in Banjul and its environs.682 Priva te pharmacies exi sted in a large number and provided 
health services as did traditional healers.683 
 
670 Gambia Bureau of Statistics,  “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
671 ibid.  
672 ibid.  
673 ibid.  
674 ibid.  
675 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow R eport on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW ).” 
676 World Bank, 2021. “Women making their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use and 
reproductive health care (% of women age 15 -49) - Gambia, The.” 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.DMK.SRCR.FN.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
677 World Bank, 2021. “ Domestic general government health expenditure per capita, PPP (current international $) - Gambia, 
The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.GHED.PP.CD?locations=GM -ZG (accessed March 2021).  
678 World Bank, 2021. “Current health expenditure (% of GDP) - Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.CHEX.GD.ZS?locations=GM (accessed March 2021).  
679 Direct foreign transfers and foreign transfers distributed by government, encompassing all financial inflows into the nationa l 
health system from outside the country.  
680 World Bank, 2021.” External health expenditure (% of current health expenditure) - Gambia, The.”  
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.EHEX.CH.ZS?locations=GM  (accessed March 2021).  
681 Republic of The Gambia, 2014. “ National Master Plan for Neglected Tropical Diseases 2015-2020.” 
https://espen.afro.who.int/system/files/content/resources/GAMBIA_NTD_Master_Plan_2015_2020.pdf (accessed March 
2021). 
682 ibid.  
683 ibid.


---
*Page 221*
---

81 
 211 The number of hospital beds  per 1,000 people is small, the  latest available data indicating  1.1 
(2011).684 There were fewer community health workers in 2008,  0.73 per 1,000 people, which showed a 
small decline from the previous year.685 In 2018, t he caregivers of well over one -third of  children , who 
were  aged less than six  and with diarrhea in the last two weeks , did not seek advice or treatment, wi th 
slightly higher proportion for  girls (39.8%) than boys (38.0%). The behavior was not related to the mothers’ 
level of education , and the richer tended to seek less advice or treatment. 686 The result was similar fo r 
acute respiratory infection, w hile slight ly higher percentage of no advice or treatment for boys and in the 
urban areas  was observed .687 No relation  was found to the mothers’ educ ation or household wealth level 
with respect to advice/treatment of acute respiratory infection.688 The percentage of th e same for fever 
was higher at above 40% for both girls and boys, regardless of residential area.689 Care -seeking slightly 
increased with the mothers’ education, but not with wealth.690 Almost all women , who had a live birth in 
the two years preceding the 20 18 survey , took intermittent preventive treatment (IPTp) for malaria during 
pregnancy , regardless of residence area, education or wealth.691 
 
212 The Gambia’s health care sector is characterized by emphasis on the tertiary level, which received 
nearly half of the national health budget in 2014; it came at the expense of the rural areas, w hich received 
20% of the budget.692 As a result, the health and nutrition services are mostly accessed by the better off 
in the urban and coastal areas.693 Services related to maternal and child health and nutrition was said to 
be of poor quality.694 The country lacks a comprehensive and feasible strategy for human resources in the 
sector  to recruit, train, deploy, maintain and monitor a satisfactory number of providers in health facilities 
and communities; the attrition of skilled workers is high and  the geographical distribution of provid ers is 
inadequate .695 
 
213 Equipment, med icines, fuel, and commodities are inadequately or inconsistently supplied to  both 
health facilities and in communities .696 Such items run from electricity, safe water, cold storage capacity 
to delivery kits, growth reference charts, service m anuals, birth control consumables, transportation for 
supervision, emergency evacuation plans and needs forecasting.697 Some of the prevailing health 
practices are harmful and result in  delay ed treatment and ineffective  contact with the professiona l in 
mode rn medicine . The health services are also underutilized by the adolescents.   
  
  
 
684 World Bank, 2021. “ Hospital beds (per 1,000 people) -  Gambia, The.”  
 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.MED.BEDS.ZS?locations=GM- ZG (accessed March 2021).  
685 World Bank, 2021. “ Community health workers (per 1,000 people) -  Gambia, The.”  
https://data.wo rldbank.org/indicator/SH.MED.CMHW.P3?locations=GM&view=chart (accessed March 2021).  
686 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2 018: Survey Findings Report.”  
687 ibid.  
688 ibid.  
689 ibid.  
690 ibid.  
691 ibid.  
692 Republic of The Gambia, “ National Master Plan for Neglected Tropical Diseases 2015 -2020.”  
693 ibid.  
694 ibid.  
695 ibid.  
696 ibid.  
697 ibid.


---
*Page 222*
---

82 
 4.7 Coping with Negative Shocks  
214 Social Protection: Various s ocial protection projects, schemes and programmes  exist in The 
Gambia, 698 but l imitations in fiscal, monetary  and financial buffers do  not allow the country to  establish 
a full- fledged system of social safety nets .699 The most notable gaps are: long- term cash  transfer to the 
extreme poor that is predictable, comprehensible in reach and adequate in amount ; unemployment 
insurance and maternity benefits for the employees in the formal sector; national health insurance 
programme; crop insurance;700 and programmes targeting the fishery sector.  
 215 The percentage of women aged 15 -49 with health insurance in 2 018 was a meagre 2.4%, and it 
was the employers who provided the insurance to 93.2% of them.
 701 The coverage was somewhat better 
for men of the same age group at 3.9% with 92.6% of them covered by their employers.702 In other words, 
the vast majority of the population who work in the informal sector do not have any health insurance.   
 
216 Informal Social Protection : The practice of informal social protection is based on the time -
honored tradition of kinship -support through cash or in -kind transfers.703 All women who participated in 
focused group discussions depend ed on information social protection, which consisted  of borrowing 
money from the extended family  and friends , 704 although the custom is said to be in decline.705 More 
structured , but still informal , mechanisms are also in place, such as kafo , osusu (both are types of revolving 
funds) and zakat (charitable giving by the Muslim better- off),706 but kafo and osusu  appeared not as 
widely used as simple borrowing.707 Although the extended family is likely to be hit by the same economic 
shocks, people always find ways to cope by relying on the kins.708 
 217 Two exceptions among the seven discussion  groups were Njoben and Ka rtong. In Njoben, women 
had access to the Social Development Fund, a national NGO which operates as a microfinance institution with reasonable rates, but relied also on  borrowing from  families  and friends.
709 At Kartong landing site, 
the self -formed profess ionals’ association operated revolving funds for the members , while having access 
to microfinance.710 
 
218 Sources of Negative Shocks : The female and youth participants in the focused group discussions 
asserted that catch  from the sea  was diminishing, which red uced the volume of their merchandise and 
 
698 Government of The Gambia, undated. “The Gambia National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025.” 
https://www.unicef.org/gambia/ media/606/file/The- Gambia- National -Social -Protection -Policy -2015-2025.pdf (accessed March 
2021). 
699 World Bank, “The World Bank in Gambia: the Overview.”  
700 Government  of The Gambia, “The Gambia National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025.” 
701 Gam bia Bureau of Statistics, “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  2018: Survey Findings Report.”  
702 ibid.  
703 Government of The Gambia, “The Gambia National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025.”  
704 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021. 
705 Government of The Gambia, “The Gambia National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025.” 
706 Governmen t of The Gambia, “The Gambia National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025.” 
707 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021. 
708 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021. 
709 Focused group discussions with women involved in farming, Njoben, March 12, 2021.  
710 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling, Kartong, March 20, 2021.


---
*Page 223*
---

83 
 directly affected their livelihoods.711 They were aware that climate change was one of the important 
factors, but were unaware of the cause of climate change.712 Some also pointed to overfishing by 
industrial fleets  as a major detrimental factor.713 The most often cited economic hardship by the 
participants in the discussions were ceremonies, such as  weddings, which required large cash payments 
in a short period.714 
 
4.8 Aspirations of  the Youth  
219 In the rural areas  around the world , female youth often belong more to the group of women,  
instead of to the youth, and that is also the case in The Gambia. The youths who participated in the 
focuse d group discussions were aged 15 -35, whose occupations were : fishing, fish s elling and boat 
building at landing sites; both fishing and farming in Jahally ; and farming at other villages .715 Some 
identified th e current work as the ideal  for them, while the others were of the opinion that better 
opportunities existed  in the urban areas and abroad. The  former group was comprised of those involved 
in fishery, and the  latter included those in Njoben, Jahally and Medina Lamin Kanteh, which were further 
inland and away from the capital than others, in addition to  Kartong o n the coast.  The Bintang youths 
pointed out that their profession allows attainment of food security . 
 
220 The youths who worked in fishery had noticed the diminishing amount of catch, which they 
attributed to insufficient policing of the fishing activities an d climate change.  They did not expect the 
climate change to be reversed and the plenty of the previous times would return. They were also of the 
opinion that their lives were at the whim of the changing weather over which they do not have control. The Banj ul youths asserted that the measures taken so far to combat climate change were ineffective and 
unsustainable.  The youths who worked at landing sites  were willing to try their hand at new types of 
livelihoods; the youth in Banjul preferre d something related to fishery.  
 
221 For the youth,  economic hardships were caused by celebrations, e.g., wedding. Th e youths in 
Kartong thought such events should be controlled in one way or another , as they  took place  sometimes 
on a weekly basis , whereas the youth in Bingtang thought they were infrequent . On such occasions, they 
borrowed money from the extended families.  The economic hardships were more directly related to the 
climate change by the youths engaged in farming in Jahally, but the youths in Njoben and Medina Lamin  
Kanteh  – both  farmin g communities  – were less informed about climate change. Youth farmers mentioned 
engaging in petty trade, construction work and migrating to the urban areas in the times of economic distress , unlike their fishery counterparts who borro wed money from their relatives.  
 
222 The youths in both sectors were aware that they have more livelihood options than  their parents . 
Some mentioned that they had access to more information. Many believed that self -employment through 
small enterprises was  the way to improve their lives  and mentioned acquiring skills (e.g. carpentry, 
tailoring, restaurant operation), while the fisher youth preferred fish related activities and skills. For 
training and capital for such endeavors, donor support was expected. Prosp erity was the social goal  for 
 
711 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang and Kartong, 
March 9 -20, 2021.  
712 ibid.  
713 ibid.  
714 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021.  
715 Focused group discussions with youths, Banjul, Bintang, Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 
2021.


---
*Page 224*
---

84 
 them , who did not m ention peace, harmony, equity and equality, or balance between livelihoods and 
ecology . 
 
 
5. SOCIAL PARTICIPATI ON OF RURAL GAMBIAN  WOMEN  
5.1 Rural Women’s Voice in Politics  
223 Women’s voice is  heard increasingly  more in The Gambia . The country has a good number of 
female lawyers in practice, the most celebrated case being the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, who is a former Attorney General and Minister of Justice.
716 Among  the 12 new judicial 
appointments to the superior courts of The Gambia  a few years ago , five judges we re women.717 Of the 
newly re -constituted Gambia Court of Appeal, four out of the seven Justices of appeal we re women  in 
2018.718 A women was named a Justice of the Supreme Court of The Gambi a, the highest court in the 
country .719 The Association of Non -Governmental Organizations , the Gambia National Olympic 
Committee and the Gambia Christian Council have enshrined in their Constitut ions that in case the 
President is a man, the Vice -President should be a woman.720 The remarkable progress concerns primarily 
the upper tier of the society  at the national level ; in the early 2000s and in 2015, women were much less 
represe nted at lower leve ls (Table 20).  
 
Table 20: Women’s Representation in Governance721 722 
 
Position  Percentage of Women  
Early 2000s  2015  
Cabinet Ministers  33.0  20.0  
National Assembly Members  10.0  9.3 
Regional Governors/ Mayors  0 14.3  
District Chiefs  0 0 
Local Ward Councilors   n.a. 1.3 
Mediators of Alternative Dispute Resolution Secretariat, Ministry of Justice  13.6  n.a. 
Village Chiefs  0.3 n.a. 
Source: Republic of The Gambia (2012). The Association of Non -Governmental Organizations, Women’s Rights Organ izations and 
Civil Society Organizations (2015).  
 224 All of five Regions and eight Local Government Administrations (Area Councils and Municipalities), 
39 Districts were headed by men, including one paramount Chief in the early 2000s.
723 Marginal 
improvement in gender balance was seen in 2015,  as a women was chosen as one of the Regional 
Governo rs/Mayors.724 The Local Government Act 2002 calls for gender equality in village and ward 
 
716 Republic of the Gambia,  “The Gambia National Action Plan o n United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 .” 
717 United Nations, “List of issues in the absence of the second periodic report of the Gambia, Addendum: Replies of the Gambia 
to the list o f issues.”  
718 ibid.  
719 ibid.  
720 Republic of the Gambia,  “The Gambia National Action Plan o n United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 .” 
721 ibid. 
722 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report o n the Convention on the Elimination o f All Forms o f Discrimination a gainst Women (CEDAW).”  
723 ibid.  
724 The Association of Non -Governmental organizations, Women’s Rights Organizations and Civil Society Organizations, “The 
Gambia Shadow Report o n the Convention on the Elimination o f All Forms o f Discrimination a gainst Women (CEDAW).”


---
*Page 225*
---

85 
 development committees, but since the Area Councils  – whose role is  to address the social needs of the 
population  – are male dominated, the rural women’s voices a re still not effectively heard.725 Of 1,873 
villages, five women assumed the role of alkalo  (traditional village head ) in the early 2000s.726 Women 
were represented much less than men in the formal private sector, with less than one -third of employees 
and less than one -fifth of managers .727 The Alternative Dispute Resolution Secretariat under the Ministry 
of Justice had three female meditators out of 22 in the countr y.728 
 
225 Gender inequality is  said to be  manifestation of social stratification  on a larger scale  in the 
Gambian society , which  assigns jobs and functions to particular families and gender as well as renders 
family and community structures hierarchical.729 Social stratification excludes the selected segments of 
the society , including women,  from taking part in public discussions and decisions to impede  the country 
from making the b est use of its human resources and to slow its development. 730  
 
5.2 Harvester /Processor/Seller and Farmer  Organizations  
226 As of 2017, it was reported that 60 years of co operative development efforts in The Gambia did 
not succeed in institutiona lizing viable economic groups .731 The key constraints identified were:  
involvement of the government in excess to harness the collective strengths for political ends; lack of 
evolution of farmer groups into producer cooperatives; and lack of sustainable financing mechanism for the groups’ investments.
 732 
 227 The professionals working at each site , including not only women  and but also men who work as 
fishermen, middlemen, etc., has a common leader,
733 uniting the landing- site users under one  informal 
organizat ion. Whereas Land Site Managers, who are officials o f the Ministry of Fishery and Water 
Resources, did not consider women as part of the community defined by landing sites and lacked 
information on female users of the sites,734 the community leaders were well aware of the hardships that 
women face and their material needs, such as canoes.735 Their concerns did not include w hat may require 
negotiations with men, such as the presence of middlemen  at landing sites, as reported by women as one 
of the biggest problems for them at all three landing sites visited. Th e leader in Banjul cited  the working 
capit al, however,  as one of the needs of women and hence made an indirect reference to the middlemen 
issue . The problems  of women and the youth  were not always distinguished by the community leaders, 
but some differenti ated them by needs (Kartong and Bintang landing sites and Medina Lamin Kanteh).  
 
228 The fish and oyster harvesters, processors and sellers, who participated in the focused group 
discussions for the proposed project preparation, invariably belonged to a local association comprised of 
 
725 Republic of the Gambia , “The Gambia National Action Plan o n United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 .” 
726 ibid. 
727 ibid. 
728 ibid. 
729 Republic of the Gambia, “ The Gambia National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325.”  
730 ibid. 
731 The Republic of Gambia, “The Agricultural and Natural Resources Policy 2017 -2026.”  
732 ibid.  
733 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling at Banjul, Bintang and Kartong landing 
sites, March 9 -20, 2021.  
734 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling at Banjul and Bintang landing sites, March 
9-13, 2021.  
735 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling at Banjul, Bintang and Kartong landing 
sites, Mar ch 9-20, 2021.


---
*Page 226*
---

86 
 women of the same profession.736 These associations were formed among themselves and officially 
registered; the advocacy of donors to create such organizations is thought to have had positive impact. 
Fees are collected from th e members, and some associations use the fees collected for equipment 
purchase (e.g., canoes for oyster harvesters) and also as revolving funds.737 In case a harvester who is not 
a member wishes to use the canoe, s/he must pay a fee to the association . Such  active use of member 
dues was not universal among the women participated in the discussions.  
 229 The President and the Secretary of these associations were women, but that of the Treasurer was 
often assume d by a man, owing to illiteracy among women in the pr ofession. Rice or vegetable growers  
too belonged to a local growers’ association, which included a few men as  members , unlike the 
associations for landing sites . For these associations, it was usually a male member who became the 
President.  
 230 TRY Oyster Wom en’s Association is an organization on the coast that was established in 2007 with 
50 women as a community organization.
738 It grew in a few years into  one involving 500 members and 15 
communities , attracting  the funds of USAID739 and Global Environment Faci lity.740 The activities include 
trainings on fishery management, oyster cultivation techniques  and conflict resolution between oyster 
harvesters and other resource users741 as well as  planting of mangrove seedlings over seven hectares of 
coastal areas .742 The members also participate in community meetings to learn their roles in and 
responsibilities for managing the fishery  and in develop ment of co -management plans.743 In 2012, it was 
awarded the Equator Prize of the United Nations Development Programme for its  outstanding community 
efforts to reduce poverty through the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.744 The strength of 
the organization is that of the female members, but the leadership and fundraising accomplished by the Association leader appears to be equally crucial, if not more .
 745 Funds pooling will allow smokers and 
dryers at the Banjul landing site to purchase fish in bulk, skipping the middlemen who do not add value  
but price margin. The processors/sellers are well aware of the benefits of such pooling and it was practiced some years ago, but problems among members arose  and the women have not been resumed it since.
746 
  
6. RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RURAL WOMEN  FACING CLIMATE CHANGE  
231 Livelihood Skills : The women in the fishery sector are mostly illiterate and acquired the skills to 
harvest and process marine products by helping their mothers who also worked as  harvesters and 
 
736 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/selling and farming, Banjul, Tambi, Bintang, 
Jahally, Njoben, Medina Lamin Kanteh and Kartong, March 9 -20, 2021. 
737 Focused group discussions with women involved in proc essing/harvesting/selling at Kartong landing site, March 20, 2021.  
738 US AID, 2013. “TRY Association Aims High to Improve The Lives Of Gambian Oyster Women.”  
https://www.usaid.gov/global -waters/may -2011/try (accessed March 2021).  
739 ibid.  
740 Global Environmen t Facility, 2012. “TRY Oyster Women’s Association Celebrates Receiving the UNDP Equator Prize 2012.”  
https://www.thegef.org/news/try -oyster -women’s -association -celebrates-receiving-undp -equator -prize- 2012 (accessed March 
2012). 
741 US AID,  “TRY Association A ims High to Improve The Lives Of Gambian Oyster Women.”  
742 Global Environment Facility, “TRY Oyster Women’s Association Celebrates Receiving the UNDP Equator Prize 2012.”  
743 US AID,  “TRY Association Aims High to Improve The Lives Of Gambian Oyster Women.”  
744 University of Rhode Island, undated. “Ba Nafaa: Gambia -Senegal Sustainable Fisheries Project.”  
https://www.crc.uri.edu/stories_page/try -oyster -womens -association -of-the-gambia- wins -equator -prize/ (accessed March 
2021). 
745 US AID,  “TRY Association Aims High to Improve The Lives Of Gambian Oyster Women.”  
746 Focused group discussions with women involved in processing/harvesting/ selling at Banjul landing site,  March 9 and 10 , 
2021.


---
*Page 227*
---

87 
 processors. As they have clearly noticed, the primary input necessary for their profession is decreasing, 
but they do not have a concrete strategy for the future. The youth facing a similar situation dream of 
acquiring skills that would enable them to become self -employed in trade, such as carpentry and tailoring. 
The government has promoted vocational training, which has reached as far as regional capitals.  
 232 With climate change reducing the amount of fish available, at least some of the wom en currently 
engaged in harvesting, professing and selling wild oysters and fish will need to engage in new activities. Aquaculture could help the women and youth in the fishery sector to make use of the knowledge and 
skills that they have already.  
 
233 Empow erment and Decision Making Power : Most women in the fishery sector earn more than 
their husbands and many put their children through school with their income alone, but their economic 
empowerment has not been accompanied by more equal decision -making power between wives and 
husbands . The women may be consulted on strategic issues, such as purchase and sale of assets, 
inheritance and marriage, but the final decisions are made by men. Women allow such arrangements to continue, since marriage is important to t hem and wish not to create trouble s in the family. Such 
sentiment is reflected in the fact that a  significant proportion of women themselves think that men are 
justified in beating their wives if they neglect their children, go out without telling their hu sbands, etc. 
Domestic violence is rarely reported.  When it comes to problems related to their work, but not directly 
with the family, women do not hesitate to go to the officials to lodge t heir complaints.  
 
234 If women are to take up new activities under the project, household members who are not 
participating in household chores and caregiving must shoulder some of the women’s share to give them  
the time to devote to additional activities. If the country is to make the best use of its human resources, 
all mus t be given decision -making power  regardless of gender, in particular equal power between wife 
and husband. Given the gender -based assignments of work, crops and animals, women and men work 
mostly independently of each other, while they help the other at certain gender -determined stages of 
production. A s a result, resources are not used efficiently at the household level; the a vailabilit y of some 
equipment  for “men’s” crop or animal does not necessarily mean that it will be available for “women’s” 
crop or an imal, even in the same household. Open dialogues between wife and husband to construct a 
common vision for the family  will help understand  the roles, responsibilities and contributions of each 
household member and guide them  to more equitab le participation  in family life.  
 
235 The project personnel may be tempted to engage in sexual exploitation, abuse or harassment 
(SEAH), or even gender based violence (GBV) , as they acquire new power from being associated with the 
project . The engagement of women in new activit ies and their acquisition of additional skills may tilt the 
prevailing  gender -based power -division in favor of women and provoke SEAH and GBV  by men at home 
and in the community . Men may perceive so  even if that is not the ca se and  interpret the cha nges as a 
threat to their identity , driving them to resort to SEAH and GBV . For prevention of such incidents , the 
project trains project -related personnel on the subject , including some of their supervisors who have 
stronger decision -making power compared to the personnel directly involved in the project. FAO 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be strengthened through training of GRM respondents and 
linkage to GBV referral pathways so that SEAH and GBV related grievances are adequately managed in 
inclusi ve, survivor -centred and gender -responsive ways. GBV pathways will be established and 
operationalized to provide timely services and redress to survivors. The issue of unequal gender relations will be approached using a household methodology, whose unit is  a household, at the community level. 
Additional mitigation measures against risks outside their homes include: sensitization and involvement


---
*Page 228*
---

88 
 of community gatekeepers; and gender training of project personnel (including some of their supervisors) 
and profe ssionals along the GBV referral pathways.  
 
236 Community Gatekeepers : Men assume the role of landing site managers, who belong to the 
Ministry of Fishery and Water Resources. Although they oversee the entire landing sites, they do not regard women who work on the sites as part of the site community. The informal landing -site community 
leaders and alkalo are much more aware of the obstacles that women face, but reported only material 
related difficulties and not the low prices of the products that women handle c ompared to men. 
Sensitization of community gatekeepers will be necessary for them to understand the soft  issues that 
prevent women from achieving their full potential. Sensitization is also required if they are to approve equal distribution of decision- mak ing power between wives and husbands; equal distribution would not 
be fully achieved without the consent and encouragement  of the gatekeepers.  
 
237 Literacy and Numeracy : Many  women are astute and know how to run their small business  well 
enough to generate more income than their husbands. They are limited by lack of literacy and numeracy skills, especially when it comes to financial matters, leaving them vulnerable to men who wish to take advantage of their inability. Women may fill the posts of President and Secretary of their local professional associations , but often the role of Treasurer  is given to a man, because of their illiteracy. Women are said 
to be reluctant to expand their successful small business and enter the formal sec tor, reasoning that it is 
a men’s world. Since paperwork is the norm in the formal sector, their great disadvantage in, if not 
incapacity of, navigating in settings ruled by documents and paperwork must also be playing a role.  
 238 Women have conducted business with information obtained through  direct observing and 
exchange d among themselves, that is without receiving structured periodical information on markets. 
Their business acumen could be further sharpened with more information, but that i s unlikely if written 
informa tion is off- limits to them.  
 239 The lack of decision -making opportunities at a strategic level at home, coupled with lack of literacy 
and numeracy skills , appears to have deprived the women of the capacity to make strategic planni ng with 
respect to their livelihoods , e.g., finding new markets  and adapting to climate change . It may have been 
exacerbated by insufficient ownership of past aid projects . Without long -term visions accompanied by 
strategic thinking, it will be difficult t o adjust their livelihoods to climate change which is increasingly 
exerting negative effects.   
 
240 Negotiation Skills: Negotiation skills are often mentioned as an important skill set that most 
women in the primary sector lack and impede their economic achiev ement. While rare in the rural 
areas,747 the most affected in the fishery sector are women who are heads of households and do not have 
a male relative to supply them the fish that they process or trade. They are dependent on men outside the family and are o ften given less fish than they could have obtained if they were competent in 
negotiating.  
 
241 Female Youth: The female youth are very often subsumed under the larger category of women, 
and their distinguishing qualities (e.g., higher literacy and numeracy) are not highlighted unlike  the male 
youth who are differentiated from older men . Meaningful employment for female youth is rare; t he 
unemployment rate for female youths  with intermediate level of education is higher than for other levels 
or for male youths.  Teenage pregnancy rate is high in the rural areas. Poverty and patriarchy pose high 
risk of their falling victim to violence and of being deprived of opportunities fo r self -fulfillment. Young 
 
747 World Food Programme, 2016. “Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis.”


---
*Page 229*
---

89 
 rural women could be engaged in work that makes good use of their strength: higher literacy and 
numeracy skills compared to that of rural women of older generations.  
 
242 Ownership and Sustainability : As has been noted by the National  Environment Agency and the 
Department of Forestry, the knowledge and skills on the ground have not been sufficiently integrated in 
many of the aid projects, leading to unsatisfactory and unsustainable results. Women and alkalo  in 
Bintang pointed out the i nsufficient ventilation of a smoking structure built by a donor, which appears to 
be partly caused by their use that is more frequent than prescribed as a result of population increase since 
the construction. Women in Tambi reported that they abandoned the new oyster boiling stoves provided 
by the donor, because it required more fuel than they could afford.  
 243 Involvement of women users in location selection, design, installation and maintenance of 
equipment to be introduced will not only improve ownership and sustainability of the equipment, but also empower women by equipping them with the knowledge and skills related to the tools of their trade.  
 
244 Safeguarding  the Environment : Women who participated in the focused group discussions knew 
that climat e was cha nging and that it would not revert to what it was before. They were also aware that 
the mangroves were important habitats for fish and oysters, on which their livelihoods depend ed. 
Knowing these facts , they did not discontinue  using mangroves for roofing and fish drying, and did not 
expr ess, at least explicitly, concern s about their conflicted interests with respect to mangroves.  
 245 They described unsatisfactory situations with respect to drinking water at home; out -of-order 
pumps, insufficient number of wate r points in the village, lack of water source in the compound and 
insufficient quantity of water available. At the same time, they were willing to engage in aquaculture if a 
donor is to propose an aquaculture project, with the assumption that water will be  found and pipes laid 
by the donor. Smoke generated when smoking fish is a health hazard, but women did not seem aware that it can also repel insects, including mosquitoes. In sum, women do not think they are responsible for safeguarding the environment, which will limit the sustainability of their actions.  
  
7. PRINCIPLES OF PROJECT FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION  
7.1 Principles of Project Formulation  
7.1.1 Enabling Women for Strategic Decision Making  
246 Climate change is a social challenge profound enough that it does not allow leaving human capital 
underutilized  as it has been to date. It demands both women and men to make strategic decisions at all 
levels so that their livelihoods are well adapted to the changes. Women, however,  have not had the 
experience or given the power to make such decisions. The proposed project strengthens the capacity of women so that they will  be able to effectively and strategically plan for the future.  Empowerment of 
women needs to be accepted at home and in the community; men and community gatekeepers will be sensitized on the issue and will take part in gender empowerment for their acceptance and ownership.  
 7.1.2 Enabling Women for Strategic Actions  
247 Climate change requires strategic decision making, which leads to strategic actions for livelihoods. 
Women are savvy enough to have survived and even flourished without literacy and numeracy, but also have been limited to the i nformal sector and low -productivity products with meagre  profit margins. Some


---
*Page 230*
---

90 
 of the crucial factors that enable women to go beyond these limits are  their access to formal information 
and systems  and acquisition of negotiation skills  
 
7.1.3 Female Youth as Agents of Change  
248 The f emale youth are not recognized as a distinct group among women or the youth, and their 
particular vulnerability as well as strengths are hardly  taken into a ccount in planning at any level . Focusing 
on the high unemployment among female youth with intermediate education, the proposed project will 
integr ate this social segment  more clearly into the society  by taking advantage of their literacy, both 
traditional and ICT ( information  and communication  technology ), and numeracy to help their mothers 
and aunts obtain the skills.  They will also be trained on the environment and part icipate in environmental 
management , together with the older generation . The project also makes use of the characteristics of the 
youth that they are more motivated than the older generations to transform  the society for the better.  
 
7.1.4 Ensuring Sustainability through Ownership  
249 Not only the needs of women, but also their knowledge and skills  are often insufficiently  
considered  in various kinds of projects, generating little ownership among targeted women.  Without 
ownership, projects are seen as gifts and hence a one -off activity, after which the pre -project condition 
prevails . Women do not have good knowledge of the environment, which prevents the m from sustainably 
managing  it and that to their advantage ; they do not have ownership of the environment . The proposed 
project will integrate women’ s inputs , and at the same time, equip them with knowledge necessary to 
assume full ownership of the equipme nt and the environment that are essential to their livelihoods.  
 
7.2 Principles of Project Implementation  
250 Based on the above project formulation principles, the project activities will be implemented as 
below  to enhance the participation of women  and femal e youth in fishery  with decision -making power. 
All activities and mitigation measures will be  in accordance with FAO and Green Climate Fund Policies on 
gender and related issues: FAO Accountability Policy (2014); FAO Whistleblower Protection P olicy 
(Administrative  Circular N°2019/06) ; GCF Policy on the Protection of Whistleblowers and Witnesses 
(2018); FAO Policy on Gender Equality 2020 -2030; GCF Gender Policy (2019); FAO Protection from S exual 
Exploitation and S exual Abuse (PSAE) N° 2013/27; FAO Polic y on the Prevention of Harassment, Sexual 
Harassment and A buse of Authority N° 2015/03 (2015); GCF Revised Policy on the Prevention and 
Protection from Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment  (2021); FAO Policy against 
Fraud and other C orrupt Practices N° 2015/08 (2015) ; and GCF Policy on Prohibited Activities (2019) . A 
gender and social inclusion expert will be a member of the project’s Technical Advisory Committee. The  
aspects conc erning women  and youth of the project  will be  monitored ac cording to the indicators in the 
Gender Action Plan . 
 7.2.1 Building on  and Enhancing  the Strengths of Women  
251 The project will fully integrate inputs from women and engage  them  as much as possible  in 
activities that are related to equipment and facilities  for processors . The beneficiaries and the 
procurement/installation team will discuss  site-specific needs, including what is the best time, location 
and work sequence for installation, and the bene ficiaries will be allowed to observe  the team’s  work on 
the site and be updated on the progress on a weekly basis.  Women will be consulted on  various aspects 
of aquaculture, such as types of fish, location and dimensions of aquaculture waterbodies. Any t raining


---
*Page 231*
---

91 
 with female participants  will involve them  from the planning stage and allow instructors and beneficiaries 
to jointly  define the content for enhanced effectiveness of the training and alignment of expectations.  
 
7.2.2 Investment in Women  
252 To make full use of the human capital  in the country , the proposed project will compensate for 
the investment that the society had the tendency to neglect; it will provide literacy and numeracy trainings 
to femal e beneficiaries. The skills will encourage women to  venture into the formal se ctor and capture 
the market segments that are more profitable , as they are already equipped with some business acumen . 
In the long term, the  empowerment of women through these fundamental skills is expected to lead to 
transformati on of the domestic market, whose sellers and consumers are overwhelmingly wome n, into 
one with higher productivity and profits.  
 
253 Women will be  thoroughly consulted beforehand for organizatio n/logistics – including childcare 
and transportation needs and timing of activities – and content  of all activities , as they have many more 
house -bound obligations than men and their needs and strengths are more than often set aside . All 
trainings and consultations under the proposed project will have slots reserved for women , including 
those on : rights and obligations  of community forest tenure; technical, O&M and organizational aspects 
of equipment  and fish handling facilities ; and fish-feed production . Women will be involved in review and 
agreement preparation related to community forest tenure . They will be invited to take part in  dredging 
for expansion of the Banjul landing site  and aquaculture  to encourage experiencing  tasks commonly 
restricted to men . Training on  sustainable management of clam and oyster culture as well as  on quality 
standards, marketing, export rules, etc . for artisanal fish processors  will specifically target women.  In 
order to accommodate the women’s needs for extension information, e -extension service will have a 
voice -over  version.  
 254 Trainings for government officials and technicians  will similarly consult women officials and 
technicians and include female youth  participants.  All will also be trained on gender issues so that they 
can more effectively accompany the process of gender empowerment.  
 
7.2.3 Female Youth as a Distinct Group  
255 The female youth will be recognized as a distinct group with its own strengths and weaknesses. 
Their strength in traditional and ICT literacy  and numeracy  will be tapped to empower their mothers’ 
generation who constitute the main actors in fish processin g/selling and oyster harvesting/processing/  
selling. Given that girls with satisfactory numeracy skills comprised only 1.9% of the age group 7 -14 years 
in the rural areas, the female youth will be trained on numeracy and pedagogy , in addition to 
environmental management . 
 256 All trainings and consultations as well as activities for women under the proposed project will 
have slots reserved for female youth , in addition to slots for youth -led establishment of fish -feeding units . 
The government officials and technicians who are female youths will be given opportunities in a similar 
manner.  By contributing to women’s empowerment in this manner,  the female youth  will be better 
integrated in the society.  
 7.2.4 Social Acceptance of Gender E mpowerment  
257 Culturally  prescribed roles along gender lines drive women and men to pursue different 
household strategies, often disjointed. The household methodology shifts our focus from what women


---
*Page 232*
---

92 
 do not possess to what the family members aspire to, in particular, what they want to become, what they 
want to be engaged in and how they can achieve these goals. The methodology’s objective is for family members to create a common vision for the household through guided dialogues among them, which allow women and men to understand a nd challenge gender norms and their connection to poverty. The 
methodology facilitates reflection, behavioral change and household planning through gender -sensitive 
participation . The topics discussed will include sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) and 
gender -based violence (GBV), where appropriate.  The project proposes application of household 
methodology to the beneficiaries involved in aquaculture, whose needs for gender equality at home will be greater than other female beneficiaries.  
 258 The important last mile in ensuring sustainable behavioral change is that the community 
gatekeepers and other key figures give a stamp of approval to the changes that have taken place, especially among men, who need to be assured that they have not been em asculated and that the changes 
are welcome to  the entire community.  The community leaders will be sensitized on the positive effects of 
gender empowerment at the household and community levels so that they may effectively endorse the 
changes in behavior.  How effective these measures will be in terms of gender empowerment depends on 
the interest of the targeted groups and the skills of the trainers/facilitators to suscitate the interest and to guide them over time.  
 
7.2.5 Sexual Exploitation, Harassment and Abuse and Gender -Based Violence  
259 Gender empowerment is not complete if there is no effective mechanism that transmits the 
message that Sexual Exploitation, Harassment and Abuse ( SEAH ) and Gender -Based Violence ( GBV ) would 
not be condoned, while t he project introduces additional possibilities of SEAH/G BV. The project personnel 
may use their power related to the project and engage in SEAH/GBV. The involvement of women in new 
activities and their acquisition of new skills may upset the prevailing gender -based power -division and 
provoke SEAH and GBV by their male family members and other men in the community.  It is widely 
accepted that SEAH and GBV occur due to the aggressor’s desire to assert his/her supremacy over the 
victim. The trigger for SEAH and GBV can be anything that the perpetuator perceives as a threat to his/her 
power over the ones whom he/she thinks is, or should be, inferior to him/her. In other words, there is no situation without risk of SEAH/GBV, and much will depend on the thinking /mentality of the potential 
aggressor (i.e., his/her perception of threat, or non -existence thereof, to his/her supremacy).  This includes 
prostitution in which the client assumes that he/she is free to use the other’s body as he/she wishes with money, a ty pe of supremacy over the service provider.   
 260 It is also well known  that some socially respected persons  or organizations can be perpetuators. 
In other words,  SEAH/GBV can occur anywhere, anytime and in any way; what matters is the perception 
of the potenti al perpetuator.  In recognition of this characteristics of SEAH and GBV, t he proposed pr oject 
integrates the household methodology, which includes re -examination of power relationships between 
gender, generation, etc., based on dialogues, the time- honored m ethod of conflict resolution in The 
Gambia. The project will implement this methodology at the community level so that women are 
protected also from men who are not their family members  (Activity 3.2.3) . Community gatekeepers who 
tend to set the tone for t he community men are sensitized and involved in community -led measures 
against SEAH and GBV  (Activity 3.2.3) . 
 
261 The project  also acknowledges that the understanding of SEAH and GBV by the Gambian society 
and the international community does not neatly ove rlap. While the conflicts at community levels are 
resolved in an inclusive manner through dialogues among the members, the prevailing norm with respect 
to SEAH and GBV  may be based on patriarchal traditions. According to the Gambia Multiple Indicator


---
*Page 233*
---

93 
 Cluster Survey 2018 ,748 close to half of the women believe that husband’s beating his wife is justified when 
she neglects the children, argues with him, goes out without telling him, etc., despite the economic 
achieve ment by many women . The same survey found that 75.7% of girls and women aged 15 -49 had 
undergone female genital mutilation. The practice was more prevalent in the urban areas (77.3%) than in 
the rural areas (71.1%) and so was the opinion among women that it should be continued (44.6% of urban 
women ver sus 42. 5% of rural women) . It is neither effective n or culturally sensitive to work according to 
the definition of SEAH/GBV of the international community without agreeing with the local population what constitutes SEAH/GBV.   
262 For these reasons, the pr oject tackles the issues at their root to change the mentality of potential 
aggressors /victims  and emphasizes prevention, which is a more effective mitigation measure than after-
event management.  The household me thodology, based on dialogues , is adopted  to allow the 
beneficiaries to examine which of their attitudes/behaviors/actions could be considered aggression/  
unwelcome by the victims and why such attitudes/behaviors/actions should be changed.  In the event that 
SEAH takes place, the project will, as after- incident management (the other type of mitigation), convene 
gatekeepers of the relevant communities for analyzing and finding the best way to prevent similar 
incidents by the same aggressor/ s and others in the communities:  first with the FAO Gender F ocal Points 
and ESS/Gender Specialist for the project; and later with the community members, one with women alone 
(excluding gatekeepers and project management members in case they are men), another with men alone and finally with the entire community memb ers. This method respects the Gambian culture which gives 
great weight to dialogues. In case of GBV, the victim will be immediately put in contact with the professionals along the GBV referral pathway in the relevant district, followed up by the same after-management as for SEAH.  
 
263 The risk of SEAH/GBV starts at home; gender -based domestic violence was raised as a major issue 
by t he Women’s Bureau of The Gambia , but not harassment/violence by strangers /acquaintances , 
implying the gravity of the former compared to the latter.  Men in  the family are not necessarily supportive 
of empowermen t of their own women; the household methodology is used to sensitize men on gender 
and gender empowerment . Once the men in the family gain better understanding of the issue, th e family 
can come up with strategies to overcome the threats that women may face at workplace and on the road. 
For most women under the project, the main place of work is the landing/mangrove site, which is use d 
by the entire community. The household metho dology, consisting of dialogues between women and men 
and across generations , is applied with a household as a unit and at a community level.  
 
264 The FAO Gambia’s Ethics Focal Point and Alternate Focal Point, Project Management Unit and 
other executing agencies – Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries, Water Resources and National 
Assembly Matters  – will be trained on the subject in line w ith the GCF and  FAO policies on SEAH and 
GBV,
749 and will participate in the community dialogues as needed. The Grievance Redress Mechanism 
(GRM) of FAO will be strengthened so that SEAH and GBV  incidents are properly managed; GRM 
 
748 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, 2019. “The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018: Survey Findings Report.” 
https://mics -surveys-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/MICS6/West%2 0and%20Central%20Africa/Gambia/2018/Survey%20findings/The%20Gambia%20201
8%20MICS%20Survey%20Findings%20Report_English.pdf (accessed March 2021).  
749GCF, 2021. “Revised Policy on Prevention and Protection from Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse and Harassment. ” 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/seah -policy.pdf (accessed March 2022).  
FAO, 2013. “Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (PSEA).” Administrative Circular, 2013/27.  
FAO, 2015. “Policy on the Prevention of Harassment, Sexual Harassment, and Abuse of Authority.” Administrative Circular, 
2015/03.  
FAO, 2019. “Policy on Prevention of Sexual Harassment.” Administrative Circular, 2019/01.


---
*Page 234*
---

94 
 respondents will be trained and the GRM will be linked to GBV referral pathways . The country offices of 
FAO and UNFPA in The Gambia are drafting an agreement to collaborate on establishing operational 
referral pathways and making Post -Exposure Prophylaxis  (PEP) kits available. Professionals who would be 
involved in operationalizing referral pathways –  such as the police, medical doctors, psychologists, lawyers 
and social workers –  will be trained on GBV and campaigns will be carried out to inform the general 
population about GBV and the referral pathways. The project will ensure that GRM and GBV pathways 
take an inclusive, survivor- centered and gender -responsive approach.  
 
7.2.6 Integration of the Environment in Business  
265 Awareness on the environment among women and female youth will be raised to make their 
decisions on business and household management  sustainable by taking the environmental impacts into 
account.  Trainings on the subject  will build on the knowledge that women already possess, supplementing 
it with western science. It will focus on enhancing their ability to observe nature, monitor and respond 
with climate change in mind. The importance of educating children on the environ ment will also be 
emphasized. As with the trainings related to equipment  and facilities , female beneficiaries will be involved 
from the planning stage and allow instructors and beneficiaries to jointly define the content and align expectations.  Women will also part icipate in mangrove restoration  and conservation  activities , including 
site selection , monitoring and evaluation  and related campaigns.  They will also serve as forest 
management committee members  and contribute to citizen monitoring of fishery sec tor and associated 
ecosystems.


---
*Page 235*
---

 
 8. FIELD CONSULTATION : PARTNERS AND QUESTIONS  
8.1 Consultation Partners  
Date  Local 
Government 
Area  District  Village /City  Type of Stakeholders  Participants  
Female  Male  
March 9 -10, 2021  Banjul  n.a. Banjul  Fish smokers and driers working at the Banjul landing site  23 0 
Youths aged 17 -34 working at the Banjul landing site  0 8 
Community leader of the Banjul landing site  0 1 
March 9 -10, 2021  Brikama  Kombo 
North/ Saint Mary  Tambi  Oyster harvesters/processors/sellers  4 0 
Community leader of the Tambi oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers  1 0 
March 12, 2021  Kuntaur  Niani  Njoben  Vegetable farmers in Njoben  9 0 
Youths aged 25 -34 0 8 
March 13, 2021  Brikama  Foni Bintang 
Karenai  Bintang  Fish Smokers and  oyster  harvesters /processors working at the 
Bintang landing site  7 0 
Youths aged 18 -35 working at the Bintang landing site  0 4 
Alkalo (traditional chief) of BIntang  0 1 
March 17, 2021  Jajanbureh  Niamina East  Jahally  Rice farmers in Jahally  23 0 
Youths aged 20 -30 in Jahally  0 8 
Representative of Alkalo  of Jahally  0 1 
Head of Jahally Development Association (informal CBO)  0 1 
March 18, 2021  Kuntaur  Niani  Medina Lamin 
Kanteh  Vegetable farmers in Medina Lamin Kanteh  6 0 
Youths aged 15 -35 in Medina Lamin Kanteh  0 7 
Alkalo (traditional chief) of Medina Lamin Kanteh  0 1 
March 20, 2021  Brikama  Kombo South  Kartong  Fish smokers and oyster harvesters/processors/sellers at the 
Kartong landing site  6 0 
Youth aged 17 -25 working at the Kartong landing site  1 6 
Community leader of the Kartong landing site  0 1 
April 8, 2021  West Coast  Kombo Central  Nyaniberreh  Farmers involved in Food and Agriculture Sector Development 
Project of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program  
(GAFSP)  1 3 
Kombo North  Lamin  0 1


---
*Page 236*
---

96 
 Date  Local 
Government 
Area  District  Village /City  Type of Stakeholders  Participants  
Female  Male  
Total  81 51 
 
 
Date  Location  Institution  Persons Consulted  Name  Description  
March 5, 2021  Banjul  National Environment Agency 
(NEA) , Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and Natural 
Resources  Government body to promote, 
coordinate and propose  environmental 
policy to the National Environ mental 
Management Council . Lamin Komma (Programme Officer, Coatal and 
Marine Services)  
+220 9939748  
komma16@yahoo.com  
 
Modou Sanneh (Programme Officer, Agriculture 
and Natural Resources)  
+220 9922215  
modoun.Sanneh@gmail.com  
 
Lamin Camara (Senior Programme Officer, 
Environment Impact Assessment)  
+220 9821995  
blmncamara64@gmail.com  
 
Alhagie Sarr (Senior Programme Officer)  
+220 9866975  
alagiesarr42@gmail.com  
March 8, 2021  Banjul  Department of Forestry, Minist ry 
of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources  Government body to involve all residents 
in forest protection  and to promote 
participatory forest protection and 
management . 
 Sisawo Sabally  (Assistant Unit Head, Participatory 
Forest Management Unit ) 
+220 7974907  
sisawo90@gmail.com  
 
Modou C olley  (Senior Forest Ranger)  
+220 3600939  
colleymodou23@yahoo.com  
 
Malang Jatta  (Data Management Officer)


---
*Page 237*
---

97 
 Date  Location  Institution  Persons Consulted  Name  Description  
+220 3150442  
mjatta04@yahoo.com  
 
Gherno Gaye  (Unit Head, Participatory Forest 
Management Unit )  
chernogaye71@yahoo.com  
March 9, 2021  Banjul  Women’s Bureau  Government body responsible for giving 
policy guidance and proposals to the 
Gambia Government on issues affecting 
women.  Siaka Marong  (Assistant Di rector Projects and 
Programmes)  
+ 220 9969889  
smarong2@yahoo.co.uk  
 Sainey  Cham (Assistant Monitoring and Evaluation 
Officer)  
+220 9992937  
chamdemba73@yahoo.co.uk   
March 9 -10, 2021  Banjul  Ministry of Fishery and Water 
Resources  Government body responsible for fishery, 
including aquaculture, and water 
resources.  Babou C ham  
(Landing Site Manager ) 
+220 7335479  
March 12, 2021  Banjul  Ministry of Fishery and Water 
Resources  Government body responsible for fishery, 
including aquaculture, and water resources.  Omar S. M. Gibba  
 (Acting Permanent Secretary)  
+ 220 7050000  
gibbaosm97@gmail.com  
March 13, 2021  Bintang  Ministry of Fishery and Water 
Resources  Government body responsible for fishery, 
including aquaculture, and water 
resources.  Momodou Gassama  
(Landing Site Manager ) 
+220 7703413  
March 22, 2021  Banjul  Ministry of Agriculture  Government body responsible for 
agriculture, including livestock. Bintou Gassama  
(Deputy Permanent Secretary)  
+ 220 9815564  
bintougjammeh@gmail.com  
March 24, 2021  Banjul  Department of Parks and Wildlife Management, Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change and 
Natural Resources  Government body responsible for 
protect ing and conserving  the country’s  
wild fauna as well as their natural 
enviro nment.  Lamin Saine  
(Park Manager)  
+220 9069090  
sainelamin98@gmail.com  
Dawda Jallow


---
*Page 238*
---

98 
 Date  Location  Institution  Persons Consulted  Name  Description  
(Assistant Park Manager) 
dawdabjallow@gmail.com  
Isatou Njie  
(Park Ranger)  
+220 7660083  
ishan9705@gmail.com  
Essa Jallow  
(Park Ranger)  
+220 7710794  
March 24, 2021  Banjul  Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Affairs  Government body respon sible for setting 
the national government’ s overall 
economic policy objectives and the legal 
and institutional framework for achieving 
the objectives . The National Designated 
Authority of the proposed project.  Maria Azzi Tambedou  
(Principal Economist)  
+ 220 7704440  
missmazzi@yahoo.com  
April 1, 2021  Banjul  Agency for the Development of Women and Children  
 National n on-government body for 
improving the quality of life of vulnerable 
people, in particular, women and 
children . Masamba Joof  
(Executive Director)  
+220 9915217  
msjoof2014@gmail.com  
April 7, 2021  Banjul  Action Aid International  A global federation working for a world 
free from poverty and injustice, in 
particular to achieve social justice and 
gender equality and to eradicate poverty.  
 Sarjo camara  
(Empowering Children Project Coordinator)  
+220 9929214  
Sarjo.Camara@actionaid.org  
 Fanta Jatta Sow  
(Head of Programms and Policy)  
+220 7901234 fantajatta.sowe@actionaid.org


---
*Page 239*
---

99 
 8.2 Consultation Questions  
8.2.1. Core Consultation Questions for Institutions  
Gender, ethnic minorities and youth  
• Understanding of gender /youth issues, including legislations, regulations and international 
conventions  
- Are you aware of the international agreement commitments made by the government 
pertaining to equal rights, access to resources and opportunities?  
- Are you aware of the  National Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan ? 
- Which components of the National Gender Policy and Action Plan  does your office support?  
- Does your work take various policies, regulations and international conventions into account?  
- Do you make specific  efforts to co nsider issues faced by gender/ youth?  
• Knowledge of formal rights, laws, regulations, and commitment of  the country to international 
conventions and agreements  
- The country has policies, laws and regulations to safeguard the rights of all persons, regardless 
of gender, belief and age , including National Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan. Are you 
aware of them?  
- Which components of the National Gender Policy and Action Plan does your work support?  
• What are the problems that rural women face in Gambia today?  
• Do you have information indicating that women’s conditions and needs are different from 
men’s?  
• Do you promote your gender concerns at meetings, internal and external, including these 
objectives?  
• How do you encourage private commercial entities to consider the needs of women at all stages of their operation?  
• Do you consider gender aspects when assessing and  monitoring your programmes by 
differentiating the impacts on women and men?  
• Do your publications clearly state your focus, priorities and activities on women and youth?  
• Have the objectives led to improved situations for women and youths?  
 
Governance and grievance resolution  
• What is the mechanism for the community members to communicate the problems under your 
jurisdiction?  
• Do you think the community members are well aware of the relevant laws and your mandate?  
• How are the problems brought t o you solved?  
• How do you monitor whether the solutions that you provide are well implemented?  
 8.2.2 Core Consultation Questions for Female  Harvesters/ Processors/Sellers  Farmers  
Roles and responsibilities in production and livelihood systems  
• Types of livelihoods: fishery, fish -landing related, processing/marketing, oyster (or other 
mangrove related), agriculture, livestock  
- What is the main livelihood of your household?  
- What is your work?  
- What is the work of other household members?  
- What is the biggest problems related to your work?  
- Are you part of producers’ groups or cooperatives?


---
*Page 240*
---

100 
 - What are the benefits of being part of producers’ groups/cooperatives? Drawbacks?  
-  [for coastal communities ] What may be the benefits? Drawbacks? Obstacles?  
• Management of various natural resources : responsibilities and resultant social status  
- What are the crops cultivated  for consumption at home ? For sale?  
- Which livestock is raised  for consumption at home ? For sale?  
- Who is responsible for drinking water, inclu ding animals?  
- Who is responsible for fuel?  
- Are mangroves important for day -to-day?  
- Do you think you have the same amount of mangroves/fish/shellfish as your grandparents 
did?  
- Do you think your grandchildren will have the same amount of mangroves/fish/shell fish as 
your grandparents did?  
• Food security and other basic needs (to clothe, etc.): financial and procurement responsibilities  
- Who is responsible for finding/purchasing food? Who pays for it?  
- Who is responsible for finding/purchasing clothes? Who pays for it?  
 
Access to and control of resources  
• Productive and household assets : ownership, a cces s and control  
- What are the assets that are used to generate income (e.g., boat, fishing gear, hatchery, 
drying oven/rack, land, livestock)?  
- Who owns those assets?  
- Should each asset belong to one family?  
- What are the benefits of operating assets/facilities (e.g., fishing/drying/smoking gear) co -
owned by all households in the village? If owned by several villages?  
- What may be the difficulties? If owned by seve ral villages?  
• Income and expenditure: primary and secondary sources, items  and control  
- Who decides on how to spend income?  
• Access to resources: water  
- What is the source of drinking water (e.g., well, river, pond)?  
- Is it shared by livestock and other animals?  
- Do people and animals bathe in the water used for drinking?  
- What do you think about water quality?  
- Do you have enough water for all your needs?  
- Has the amount of available water changed?  
- Are you interested in creating a pond for raising fish?  
- Where will the pond be located?  
- Where will the water for the pond come from?  
- How will it be carried to the pond?  
- What may be the benefits from raising fish in a pond? Drawbacks? Obstacles?  
• Access to resources: fuel  
- What is the source of cooking fuel?  
- If you use char coal, which trees are used?  
- From  whom do you buy them?  
• Access to markets: purchase and sale  
- Who goes to the market for purchase?  
- Who goes to the market for sale?  
• Access to means of transportation: service frequency, cost, possibility of independent travel  
- What kind of transportation is available? For what purpose? For women/handicapped?


---
*Page 241*
---

101 
 - Is the frequency of the available transportation satisfactory?  
- Is the cost of the available transportation reasonable?  
• Access to agricultural services: exten sion, (rural) finance,  (agricultural ) marketing, etc.  
- Is extension service (agriculture, fishery, livestock) available? Is the service useful?  
- Are there credits and insurance  available for fish, shellfish, crops and livestock? Are they 
useful?  
- Is there enough information on what sells, why, and when?  
 
Skills, knowledge and information  
• Knowledge on health, sanitation and nutrition  
- Do you think there is a link between what we eat and our health?  
- Do you think eating variety of food items improves our health?  
- Do you think ther e is a link between how we keep things clean and our health?  
- Do you think there is a link between health of the animals that we keep and our health?  
- Do you think the way fish/shellfish is processed may make it not safe to eat (e.g., washing 
with unclean wa ter, smoking)?  
• Access to electronic devices for information  
- Do you have a mobile phone? A smart phone?  
- Do you have access to the internet?  
 
Decision -making and governance  
• Roles in decision -making:  home, groups, community, producer and community -based 
organizations , and local government  
- Who makes what kind of decisions at home?  
- ... in the community?  
• Nature of decision -making: income use, commons use, means of income generation, food  
distribution , marriage, number of children, inheritance , etc.  
- Who decides on purchases of goods for the entire family?  
- Who decides how to distribute food among family members?  
- Who decides on the marriage of family members?  
- Who decides who inherits what and how much?  
• Conflict resolution mechanism: among individuals and different social groups, including violence  
- How are conflicts resolved within the family?  
- When you have a problem in the community, to whom do you go?  
- Are the solutions provided satisfactory to all parties?  
- What are the differences between  problem solving by communities and formal institutions?  
- Are women/youth involved in providing solutions or mediating?  
 Living conditions  
• Main health p roblems  
- What are the main health problems?  
- What may be the causes?  
• Health services: public/private, numbe r of nurses/doctors per population, distance to nearest 
hospital, affordable medicine, number of medical specialists  
- How many public clinics/hospital are there in the vicinity?  
- How far are they from the community?


---
*Page 242*
---

102 
 Economic hardship  
• Events leading to economic hardship: frequency, cause, nature (loss/damage of house/boat/ 
landing facilities/hatchery/crops/livestock), predictability  
- What are the events that cause financial problems?  
- How frequent are they?  
• Coping mechanism: use of event- specific/all- purpose saving, borrowing from relatives/friends/  
informal lender/formal lender, monetary/non -monetary aid from charity/government/NGO, 
sale of land/house/livestock/other, premature termination of schooling, change in food intake/expenses/living arrangement/occupation, migration  
- How do you cope with financial difficulties?  
- What kind  of opportunities are good (e.g., aquaculture, craft making)?  
 
Climate change  
• Changes observed on the ground: temperature, water availability, floods/droughts,  weather 
patterns, crop flowering/maturing, insect egg -laying/hatching/maturing, non -crop plants, 
plant/animal diseases, effects on product quality/quantity  
- Has there been any change in the weather /climate  in the past years?  
- What are the effects on the fish/shellfish catch? Crop development? Animal behavior?  
- What are the effects on fish/shellfish diseases? Crop diseases? Animal diseases?  
- How is the fish/shellfish catch/production affected? Crop production? Milk/egg/meat 
production?  
• Changes learned through other sources: mass media, communication with CBO/NGO staff/local 
government officials, participation in trainings/meetings  
- Do you hear about changes in weather/climate?  
- From which sources?  
- Do you think the climate will go back to what it was during your grandparents’ time?  
• Adapted coping mechanism: alteration of practices/crop types/occupation, migration  
- How do you deal with changes in weather/climate?  
- Are the measures effective?  
- If the weather/climate keeps on changing, will that affect the availability  of food?  
 
8.2.3 Core Consultation Questions for Youths  
Vocation  
• Job opportunities  
- What kind of work do you do?  
- Is your current work is different from your ideal occupation?  
- Does the urban areas or foreign countries offer good opportunities?  
 
Economic hardship  
• Family responsibility  
- What are the events that cause financial problems  to the family ? 
- How frequent are they?  
- What is expected of you during such times?  
- Have you heard about climate change? Do you think it is affecting your livelihood?  
- Do you think climate will go back to what it was during your grandparents’ time?  
• Coping mechanism: use of event -specific/all- purpose saving, borrowing from relatives/friend s/


---
*Page 243*
---

103 
 informal lender/formal lender, monetary/non -monetary aid from charity/government/NGO, 
sale of land/house/livestock/other, premature termination of schooling, change in food 
intake/expenses/living arrangement/occupation, migration  
- How do you cope with fi nancial difficulties?  
- What makes you take up new opportunities to increase household income?  
- What kind of opportunities are good?  
 
Climate change  
• Changes observed on the ground: temperature, water availability, floods/droughts, weather 
patterns, crop flowering/maturing, insect egg -laying/hatching/maturing, non -crop plants, 
plant/animal diseases, effects on product quality/quantity  
- Has there been any change in the weather in the past years?  
- What are the effects on the fish/shellfish catch? Crop  developm ent?  
- How is the fish/shellfish catch/production affected? Crop production?  
• Changes learned through other sources: mass media, communication with CBO/NGO staff/local government officials, participation in trainings/meetings  
- Do you hear about changes in weather/climate?  
- From which sources?  
- Do you think the climate will go back to what it was during your grandparents’ time?  
• Adapted coping mechanism: alteration of practices/crop types/occupation, migration  
- How do you deal with changes in weather/ climate?  
- Are the measures effective?  
 Community and society  
• Contribution of the youth  
- Do you think the youth are very different from their parents?  
- What are the strength of youth? Weakness?  
- How can they best contribute to household/community/society?  
- What do you think is the common aspiration for Gambian male youth? Female youth?  
• Future and pathways  
- What kind of community is best for Gambia? Society?  
- What are the pathways for creating such communities? Society?  
 
8.2.4 Core Consultation Questions for Community Leaders  
Concerns and aspirations  
• What is the biggest concern of your community with respect to women?  
• … female youths?  
• … male youths?  
• Are the concerns shared by all in the community?  
• How do you think the concerns  can be resolved?  
• How do you think they  may be related to the project?  
• What is your future aspiration for the community  with respect to women ? 
• … female youths?  
• … male youths?  
• Are the aspirations share by all in the community?  
• How do you think they  can be ac hieved?


---
*Page 244*
---

104 
 • How do you think they  may be related to the project?  
 
Governance and grievance resolution  
• Are women involved in community decision making?  
• If not, what will be the benefits from involving them?  
• Are youths involved in community decision making?  
• If not, what will be the benefits from involving them?  
• How are the grievances in the community solved?  
• Are the decisions different if the case is solved in the community or brought to the local official court?  
• What are the benefits of each one?


---
*Page 245*
---

105 
 PART II: GENDER ACTION PLAN 
1. INTRODUCTION  
266 The day -to-day implementation of the Gender Action Plan for the project  will be led by a  full-time 
Environmental/Social Safeguards and Gender Specialist , who will be recruited  by the project , an 
arrangement which will strengthen integration of gender aspects in safeguards ; experiences on the 
ground indicate unsatisfactory gender mainstreaming when the responsibilities of overall safeguards are 
given to one professional and those on gender to anoth er. The Specialist  will work as part of the Project 
Management and Implementation Unit (P MIU), and thus under the direct supervision of the  Project 
Coordinator. The Specialist  will closely collaborate with other p roject -recruited staff responsible for the 
implementation  of project activities at national and village  levels  The Specialist  will also collaborat e with 
the Technical Advisory Committee  to ensure adequate integration of gender -differentiated needs as well 
as those  of youth into the compl ementary su pport that the Entities provide  for the project.  The Specialist 
will be responsible for the m onitoring and quarterly reporting of the indicators under the Gender Action 
Plan  and for adaptive management , as well as informing GCF of the project’s environment al and social 
performance as part of FAO’s reporting to GCF . 
 267 FAO Ethics Focal Point, Ethics Alternate Focal Point , Gender Focal Point  and Gender Alternate 
Focal Point  and other project -related personnel at executing agencies will be trained to ensure that the 
proposed project will prevent and deal with sexual exploitation , abuse and harassment as well as gender-
based violence that may be and have been triggered by the p roject  implementation. FAO Gambia is in 
discussion with UNFPA Gambia to secure their assistance in GBV related issues, e.g., establish ment and 
operationalization  of referral path ways. Trainings will involve mediation skills to effectively participate in 
community level dialogues for conflict resolution.  Technical Advisory Committee will include as member s 
a gender and social inclusion expert , the representatives of the Ministries of Women’s Affairs, Youth and 
Sports and of female professional associations related to the project, such as oyster harvesters and 
lawyers . 
 268 For organization /logistics and content of all activities, female beneficiaries will be consulted 
sufficiently prior to the event so that their  household ob ligations, needs and strengths, which are 
numerous and  essential in the lives of all, but  often  taken lightly , would be well accommodated . Such 
matters include childcare and transportation needs and timing of activities. The budget column of the Gender Action Plan indicates the amounts that are to be spent directly on women and female youths. The 
total amount of funds that women and female youths benefit from is larger than what is shown in the 
Gender Action Plan  below.  The table that follows indicates  the timeline and milestones of activities . 
 
269 The table from the funding proposal is reproduced below to demonstrate how gender  and youth 
are mainstreamed  in the entire proj ect proposal.  The indicators in the Gender Action Plan have separate 
targets for women overall and female youths.  
 
Table B-1 [From Funding Proposal] Summary of the adaptation barriers and the project’s response interventi ons  
 Adaptation barriers  How the project will address the identified barriers  Inform
ation 
barrier
 Very limited data and analysis on CC 
impacts and weak knowledge on adaptation 
measures  Under Output 3.1 , the project will disseminate the comprehensive climate analysis 
study done as part of the project preparation and will train public sector experts on climate change and adaptation and mitigation measures.


---
*Page 246*
---

106 
 Ambiguous separation between CC impacts 
and fisheries over -exploitation issues  Under Output 3.1 , the project will also support the country’s capacity for 
monitoring fish stocks and landings, data collection on water parameters, mangrove 
cover and degradation to better document and separate human action effect s and 
climate change impacts.  
Lack of systematic information relay 
mechanisms to reach fisher folk  Under Output 3.1 , the project will introduce an e -extension for the fisheries sector, 
using automated text messaging. In addition, investments will be made  in 
strengthening the linkages between the MoFWRNAM and the community fisheries committees in terms of information dissemination and data collection.  In addition, 
fisherfolk, farmers and project beneficiaries will receive dedicated training, capacity 
development and knowledge transfer to ensure strengthening their capacities in 
relation to technology transfers and adaptation to climate change (in Output 2.1  
and Output 2.2).  
Widespread lack of literacy and numeracy 
skills among women  Under Output 3.2 , rural women in the fishery sector will be trained on literacy and 
numeracy skills.  Technical barriers  Limited knowledge about technologies 
proven successful  The range of investments in coastal infrastructure and equipment ( Output 2.1 ) and 
in aquaculture ( Output 2.2) has been designed based on the best available practices 
and technologies in the West Africa region and beyond. Each investment is 
complemented by a series of trainings for producers (e.g. Fisheries/Aquaculture 
Field Schools (FFS) with technical , operation and maintenance, marketing modules).  
Under Output  2.2, public sector agents will be trained in these practices and 
technologies.  
Mixed past experience with improved 
fisheries and aquaculture technologies  Site selection of aquaculture activities under Output 2.2  will be done in consultation 
with the local communities and after a full technical assessment, in particular in terms of water access and quality.  
Insufficient availability of quality inputs for 
aquaculture production  Under Output 2.2 , the project will support the upgrading of the Jahally Aquaculture 
Centre’s fingerling production capacity and the scaling of fish feed production at four mills.  
Lack of extension services tailored to 
women’s needs and capacities  Under Output 3.1 , rural women in the fishery sector will be consulted on their needs 
and be provided with voice- over e -extension services addressing these.  
Infrastructure for women’s business 
receives less attention and finance  Under  Outputs 1.1, 2.1 and 2.2 , infrastructure investments will be made for rural 
women in the fishery sector; mangroves for both women and men (Output 1.1), landing sites improvement for both women and men (Output 2.1), fish smoking and 
drying equipment for wo men (Output 1.1), aquaculture related infrastructure for 
both women and men (Output 2.2).  
Under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2, public service personnel and technicians will be 
sensitized on gender issues. Under Output 3.2, roundtable discussions on private investmen t will aim to discuss investment for women at least 40% of the time and  
rural women in the fishery sector will be trained on literacy and numeracy skills.


---
*Page 247*
---

107 
 
Financial barriers  No disposable income for investing and 
weak access to credit  Recognising the financial difficulties that a matching grant approach would impose 
on beneficiaries, the project will fully finance the adaptation packages under Output 
2.2. The four aquaculture and fisheries packages have been carefully designed with 
a focus on ensuring sufficient working capital and profitability and most suitable and 
interested farmers750 will be engaged by the project. In addition, platforms to 
facilitate market access and linkages with subsequent segments of fisheries value chains will be facilitated in Output 3.2.  
Similarly, the investments under Output 2.1, which mostly represent communal 
equipment, will also be financed fully by the project. Completing these investments, the group trainings will focus on strengthening the local commi ttees’ capacity for 
fee collection and maintenance and replacement savings.  
Under Output 3.2 strengthening beneficiaries’ financial literacy for improved access 
to finance if suitable financial products and system will be made available. 
Moreover, Output 3 .2 will include dedicated public -private policy dialogue and 
capacity strengthening of public and private sector including financial institutions aimed at de -
constraining the inclusive value chains development, thereby 
improving the availability of appropr iate financial services for smallholder 
producers and their organizations. Under Output 3.1 policy dialogue will be active 
to stimulate policy and regulations reforms needed also to improve financial inclusion.  
Financial leeway for women is much smaller 
than for men  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and the roles 
they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as sensitization on the women’s responsibilities, needs and strengths and creates understanding of gender issues by men. The youth members in the family will be encouraged to participate 
for their empowerment and strategic mapping of their lives.  Market barriers  Poor quality standards for fish products and 
insufficient linkages between fish value 
chain actors (producers) and buyers  Under Output 2.1 , the project will invest in improved fish processing equipment, 
designed to both reduce losses and to improve the quality of the products. Similarly, 
the improved water access will ensure that fresh fish is so ld in more hygienic 
conditions. Fisher folk will also be trained in quality standards (including for export) 
under Output 2.1 and Output 3.2, as well as supported to organize themselves into 
common interest groups/cooperatives. In addition, linkages with t he buyers 
(especially in the tourism and catering sectors) will be promoted under Output 3.2.  
Gender -based segregation of markets  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and the roles 
they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as sensitization on the 
women’s responsibilities, needs and strength and creates understanding of gender 
issues by men. The youth in the family will be encouraged to take part for 
reexamining their role in the family and life plan. Sexual expl oitation, abuse and 
harassment will also be discussed. As mentioned above,  Under Outputs 3.1 and 
3.2, public service personnel and technicians will be sensitized on gender issues, and 
roundtable discussions on private investment will aim to discuss investment for 
women 40% of the time.  
Entreched patriarchal norms among all in 
the society.  Under Output 3.2 , women and men will examine their goals as a family and the roles 
they would play in reaching those goals, which serves as sensitization on the women’s responsibilities, needs and strength and creates understanding of gender issues by men. The y outh in the family will be encouraged to take part for 
reexamining their role in the family and life plan.  Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment will also be discussed.  Early marriages for girls borne by lack of 
viable life alternatives in rural are as 
 
750 Beneficiaries selection will be done also in collaboration with co -financier ROOTS  project (IFAD), which has a strong focus on 
the poorest and most vulnerable households.


---
*Page 248*
---

108 
 
Institutional barriers  Insufficient capacity for natural resource 
management  Under Output 3.1 , the project will finance the identified capacity development 
activities to boost the ability of the public sector to better manage Gambia’s natural 
resources, while integrating climate change in its policies and  regulations, including 
climate -resilient construction standards for fish landing sites and related 
infrastructure.  
In addition, under Output 1.2 , the communities involved in the mangrove (fis heries 
habitat) restoration will be equipped to engage in sustainable ecosystem 
management at local level, with support from national institutions.  
Lack of systematic inter -sectoral 
coordination  As part of its coordination and implementation arrangements , the project will 
create a multi- stakeholder Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Technical Advisory 
Committee (TAC). The meetings and activities of these two bodies will be financed 
by the Government’s in -kind contribution. The project will propose the gradual 
transformation of these two bodies into permanent inter -sectoral coordination 
mechanisms.  
Target beneficiaries and formulators of 
policies, plans and interventions  Under Outputs 3.1 and 3.2 , public service personnel and technicians will be 
sensitized on gender issues, including sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment.  
Under Output 3.2, roundtable discussions on private investment will aim to discuss 
investment for women at least 40% of the time.


---
*Page 249*
---

109 
 2. GENDER ACTION PLAN 
Expected Result751 Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
Fund -level impacts  
GCF core indicator  Core indicator 2 : direct and indirect beneficiaries reached.  
 
Direct:  
Baseline: 0  (0 women; 0 men)  
Target: 25,000 ( 42.0%  women , including  female  youths; 58% men, including 
male youths ) 
Indirect:  
Baseline: 0  (0 women; 0 men)  
Target: 2.1 million ( 50.4% women , including  female youths ; 49.6% men, 
including male youths ) By end of 
Project Year 6 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), particularly:  
- Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Specialist.  Included in 
budget . 
Number of direct beneficiaries relative to total population.  
 
Direct:  
Baseline: 0%  (0% of total women; 0% of total men)  
Target: 1.1 % (0.92% of total women , including  female youths ; 1.29% of total 
men, including male youths ) 
Indirect:  
Baseline: 0%  (0% of total women, 0% of total men)  
Target: 8.9 % ( 8.9% of total women , including  female youth s; 8.9% of total 
men, including male youths ) By end of 
Project Year 6 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), particularly:  
- Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Specialist.  Included in 
budget.  
ARA 1 : Most vulnerable people 
and communities  Supplementary indicator 2.1 : Beneficiaries (female/male) adopting improved 
and/or new climate -resilient livelihood options  
 
Baseline: 0  
Target: Sustainable ecosystem management: 2,160 women and 2,370 men by 
Year 3;  6,524 women and 5,926 men by Year 6  
Climate -proofed coastal infrastr ucture: 24,178 women and 21,963 men by 
Year 3; and 60,455 women and 54,908 men by Year 6  
Aquaculture development:  4,871 women and  4,425  men by Year 3; and By end of 
Project Year  3 
and 6 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), particularly:  
- Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Specialist.  Included in 
budget.  
 
751 Note:  All rows in the Gender Action Plan shaded in green include indicators and targets that are included in the overall project logframe. These constitute the high er-level results 
to which the actions in the Gender Action Plan will contribute. Progress in achieving these results will be assessed by the Project Monitoring Specialist. Rows that are not shaded in 
green include indicators and targets that are specific t o the Gender Action Plan. The Environmental/Social Safeguards and Gender  Specialist will bear overall responsibility for 
delivering the Gender Action Plan, including: (i) working with other project -recruited staff and partners to ensure gender considerations and support are integrated into project 
support in a manner that enables achievement of the targets included in this plan; and (ii) monitoring progress against these targets and reporting to the  PMIU (and Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist in particular).


---
*Page 250*
---

110 
 12,178 women and 11,062 men by Year 6,  
 
Improved climate adaptation capacities : 3,479 women and 3,161 men by Year 
3; and 8,968 women and 7,902 men by Year 6.  
 
ARA 2: Health, well -being, food 
and water security  Supplementary 2.2: Beneficiaries (female/male) with improved food security  
 
Baseline: 10,000 households (83,000 individuals, of which 43,492 women)  
Target: 14,139 households (117,354 individuals, of which 61,493 women, and 
equivalent to 70% of beneficiary households) by Year 3  
18,178 households  (150,887 individuals, of which 79,065 women, and 
equivalent to 90% of benef iciary households ) by Year 6  By end of 
Project Year s 
3 and 6  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), particularly:  
- Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Specialist.  Included in 
budget.  
Project/Programme Co -Benefit 
Indicator  
Intra -households and societal 
gender based discriminations are 
reduced    Percentage of women who first marry or enter marital union before age 15 in rural areas87 
Baseline: 12.9%  
Target:  12% by Year 3 and 10%  by Year 6  By end of 
Project Year 3 
and 6.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), particularly:  
- Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Specialist.  Included in 
budget.  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
Component 1: Strengthening restoration capacity and community management of artisanal fisheries habitats  USD 
1,593,675  
Output  1.1: Mangrove ecosystems sustainably restored in fisheries priority areas752 USD  
1,186,850  
Activity 1.1.1 : Reforestation of 
1,100 ha of degraded mangrove 
areas in key fisheries hotspots  
 
Sub activities  
1.1.1.1 Select planting sites 
within targeted mangrove areas  
1.1.1.2 Supporting the 
sensitization and training of 
communities surrounding the 
man grove reforestation sites on 
mangrove conservation and 
sustainable utilization of Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
1.1.1.1 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) consulted for planting site selection.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20% of stakeholders consulted  
 
1.1.1.2 -1.1.1.5 Proportion o f female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of stakeholders consulted  All b y end of : 
Project Year 2, Quarter 1 for the first 
200ha;  
PY3 Q1 for 
the following 
300ha; PY4, 
Q1 for the following 
300 ha; and 
PY5, Q1 for the last 300 
ha. 
 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/ 
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist. USD  
671,250  
 
752 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 251*
---

111 
 resources (co-financed and 
executed by FAO)  
1.1.2.3 Mobilize local 
communities (identify and train 
planting teams ) and determine 
planting plan  
1.1.1. 4 Equip participating 
communities with restoration 
toolkits in each reforestation 
area  
1.1.1. 5 Community -led planting 
campaigns  
1.1.1. 6 Monitor, evaluate and 
replace dead plants  
 
Deliverables  
10 degraded mangrove areas 
restored through a mix of 
reforestation and a ssisted 
natural regeneration, for a total 
of 2,250 ha   
1.1.1.2 -1 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
training content, including use of mangroves and other goods and services 
from mangrove ecosystems.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80% /80% of stakeholders consulted  
 
1.1.1.2 -2 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders participating in 
sensitization and trainings on mangrove reforestation and conservation.  
Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20% of participants  
 
1.1.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth planting team members.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of planting team members  
 
1.1.1.4 Proportion of women/female youth among restoration toolkit 
recipients . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20% of toolkit recipients in each reforestation area  
 1.1.1.5 Proportion of women/female youth involved in planning and 
execution of community -led campaigns.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20% of all community members involved in planning and 
execution of community -led campaigns.  
 
1.1.1.6 Proportion of women/female youth involved in monitoring, 
evaluation and replacement of dead mangroves.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20% of community members involved in monitoring, evaluation 
and rep lacement of dead mangroves.   
Activity 1.1.2 : Support assisted 
natural regeneration (ANR) on 
1,250 ha of moderately 
degraded mangroves in key 
fisheries hotspots  
 Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
1.1.2.1  Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) consulted for All  b y end 
of: Project 
Year 2, 
Quarter 1 for 
the first 
200ha;  
PY3 Q1 for FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
515,600


---
*Page 252*
---

112 
 Sub activities : 
1.1.2.1 Identify ANR sites and 
site-specific ANR measures 
within targeted mangrove areas  
1.1.2.2 Support the sensitization 
and training of communities 
surrounding the mangrove ANR 
sites on mangrove conservation 
and sustainable utilization of 
resources (co-funded and 
executed by FAO)  
1.1.2.3Mobiliz e local 
communities (identify, train and 
equip work teams ) and 
determine work plan  
1.1.2. 4 Equip participating  
communit ies with restoration 
toolkits in each ANR  area  
1.1.2. 5 Community -led ANR 
campaigns  
1.1.2. 6 Monitor, evaluate and 
replace dea d plants  
1.1.2. 7 Joint planning and 
execution of mangrove 
restoration ( co-funded and 
executed by MoA )  
 
Deliverables : 
10 degraded mangrove areas 
restored through a mix of 
reforestation and assisted 
natural regeneration, for a total 
of 2,250 ha  natural regeneration site selection.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of stakeholders  
 
1.1.2.2 -1.1.2.5 Proportion of female/female  youth stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of stakeholders consulted  
 
1.1.2.2 -1 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
training content, including use of mangroves and other goods and servi ces 
from mangrove ecosystems.  
Baseline: 0  
 Target: 80% /80% of stakeholders consulted  
 
1.1.2.2 -2 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders participating in 
sensitization and trainings on mangrove reforestation and conservation.  
Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20% of participants  
 
1.1.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth work -team members.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20% of work members.  
 
1.1.2.4 Proportion of women/female youth among restoration toolkit 
recipients  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20% of toolkit recipients in each ANR area  
 
1.1.2.5 Proportion of women/female youth involved in planning and 
execution of ANR campaign.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in planning and 
execution of ANR campaign  
 1.1.2.6 Proportion of women/female youth involved in monitoring, 
evaluation and replacement of dead mangroves.  
 Baseline: 0 the following 
350ha; PY4, 
Q1 for the 
following 350 ha; and 
PY5, Q1 for 
the last 350 
ha.


---
*Page 253*
---

113 
  Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in monitori ng, evaluation 
and replacement of dead mangroves 
 
1.1.2.7 -1 Proportion of women/female youth involved in joint planning and 
execution of mangrove restoration.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in joint planning of 
mangrove restora tion.  
 
1.1.2.7 -2 Proportion of women/female youth involved in execution of 
mangrove restoration.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in execution of mangrove 
restoration.  
Output  1.2: Local communities equipped for sustainable ecosystem management753 USD 
406,825  
Activity 1.2.1 : Capacity 
development for local 
communities  
 
Sub activities : 
1.2.1.1 Provide trainings on 
mangrove monitoring, 
conservation and sustainable 
resource use  
1.2.1.2 Establish  community 
forest management committees 
(CFMCs) at each intervention  site 
 
Deliverables : 
CFMCs established at each 
intervention site  half of whose 
members are female.  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
1.2.1.1 -1 Proportion of women/female youth consulted on the training 
content and participation logistics of mangrove monitoring, conservation 
and sustainable resource use.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of women/female youth of the mangrove community.  
 
1.2.1.1-2 Proportion of women/female youth trained on mangrove 
monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members trained on mangrove 
monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use  
 
1.2.1.2 Proportion of female/female youth forest management committee members.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of forest management committee members  1.2.1.1  
By end of : 
Project Year 
1, Q4 for one 
training; PY2 
Q4 for another 
three 
trainings; 
and PY3 Q4 
for the last 
three trainings.  
1.2.1.2  
By end of PY6.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
30,000  
 
753 The target gr oup of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 254*
---

114 
 Activity 1.2.2 : Support the 
establishment of community 
forest status (where applicable) 
for the interventions sites and 
the transfer of tenure to the 
local communities  
 
Sub activities : 
1.2.2.1 Review forest situation, 
determine boundaries and 
establish community forest 
status  
1.2.2.2 Prepare and enact forest 
tenure agreements  
1.2.2.3 Conduct awareness 
raising workshops for 
communities on rights and 
obligations  
 
Deliverables : 
Transfer of tenure for 10 
community forests  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
1.2.2.1 -1.2.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of stakeholders consulted  
 
1.2.2.1 Proportion of women/female youth involved in review.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in review  
 
1.2.2.2 Proporti on of women/female youth involved in preparation and 
enactment of forest tenure agreements.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in preparation and 
enactment of forest tenure agreements  
 1.2.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth part icipants in awareness raising 
workshops.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community member participants in awareness raising 
workshops on rights and obligations  
 
 All b y end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist. . USD  
48,125  
Activity 1.2.3 :  Provide technical 
support to the execution of the 
mangrove restoration activities 
and ensuring environmental and 
social safeguards  
 
Sub activities : 
 
1.2.3.1 Supervision and 
extension for fisheries 
activities (co-funded and 
executed by MoFWRNAM)   Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 1.2.3.1 Proportion of women/female youth involved in identification of site -
specific priority needs.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth landing site users  
 1.2.3.2 -1 Proportion of women/female youth consulted for the content of 
capacity development and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 All except 
1.2.3.3 -2 by 
end of 
Project Year 
2 Quarter 2 for one site; 
PY3 Q2 for 
another 
three sites; 
PY4 Q2 for another three sites; 
and PY5 Q2 
for the last FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
328,700


---
*Page 255*
---

115 
 1.2.3.2 Provision of capacity 
development to local 
communities on NRM / 
Mangrove forestry   
1.2.3.3 Supervise and ensure the 
correct application of 
environment and soci al 
safeguards  (ESS)  
Deliverables : 
 Communities in 10 degraded 
mangrove areas receiving 
support and technical expertise   Target: 80%/80%  of female/female youth of participants.  
 
1.2.3.2 -2 Proportion of women/female youth participating in capacity 
development.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of female/female youth of participants.  
 
1.2.3.2 -3 Proportion of capacity development time spent on women’s 
activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of capacity devel opment time.  
 1.2.3.3 -1 Proportion of environmental and social safeguards items 
considered for compliance and directly related to women’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50% of safeguard items  
 
1.2.3.3 -2 Proportion of women in the targeted communities who diversify 
their livelihoods using non -timber forest products of mangroves . 
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 20% of women in the targeted communities..  three sites.  
1.2.3.3.- 2 by 
Project Year 
6.  
Component 2: Climate resilient fisheries infrastructure and aquaculture  development  USD  
12,288,800  
 Output 2.1: Fisheries communities are equipped  with climate -proofed and improved critical small scale fisheries infrastructure (artisanal fish 
landing sites) and with climate -smart fish processing equipment (solar dryers and improved ovens)754 USD 
5,992,300  
Activity 2.1.1 : Environmental 
and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA ), detailed 
design and supervision for all 
sites  
 
Sub-activities:  
2.1.1.1 Conduct ESIA for all 
sites  
2.1.1.2 Detailed design of all 
construction works  
2.1.1.3 Supervision of Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
2.1.1.1 Proportion of female landing site users consulted for each site on 
possible environmental and social impacts.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.1.2 Proportion of female landing site users consulted  for each site on 
design of construction works.  
 Baseline: 0 By end of 
Project Year 4 
Quarter 2.  FAO (as 
Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmenta
l/Social 
Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
351,200  
 
754 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 256*
---

116 
 construction works  
2.1.1.4 Provision of capacity 
development on 
environmental and social 
safeguards for artisanal 
fisherfolk, including on their 
role in implementing the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Framework 
(ESMF).   Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.1.3 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn  about the construction 
process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/50%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.1.4 -1 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for content 
of capacity development and participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.1.4 -2 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users participating 
in capacity development.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.1 .4-3 Proportion of capacity development time spent on women’s 
activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of capacity development time  
Activity 2.1. 2: Expand the Banjul 
landing site to accommodate 
loss of capacity at other climate 
impacted sites  
 
Sub activities : 
2.1.2.1 Mobiliz ation and 
dredging  
2.1.2.2 Piling works  
2.1.2.3 Installation of 4 new 
pontoons for fish landing  
2.1.2.4 Installation of shore 
facilities for fish handling  
 
Deliverables : 
Operational, expanded 
landing coastal site  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do not require additional funding.  
 
2.1.2.1 Proportion of women/female youth invited to take part in dredging 
to encourage crossing the task division line defined by g ender.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/20%  of community members involved in dredging  
 2.1.2.2 -2.1.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth Banjul landing site users 
periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the 
construction process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/50%  of female/female youth Banjul landing site users  
 
2.1.2.4 Proportion of female Banjul landing site users consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 All b y end of 
Project Year 
3, Quarter 3.  FAO (as 
Executing Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social 
Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
1,347,500


---
*Page 257*
---

117 
  Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Banjul landing site users  
 
 
Activity 2.1. 3: Introduce climate -
proofed equipment for fish 
smoking and drying at the 
Brufut, Tanji and Gunjur  landing 
sites  
 
Sub activities : 
2.1.3.1 Installation of improved 
fish smoking units  
2.1.3.2 Installation of improved 
solar fish driers  
2.1.3.3 Installation of solar -
powered sea water fish rinsing 
lines  
 
Deliverables : 
Four operational, climate -
proofed coastal landing sites  (all 
smoking and drying units are for 
women)  This activity targets professionals who smoke and dry fish; they are as a rule 
women.  
To ensure sufficient involvement of women at all stages, the following is proposed.  
 2.1.3.1 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users consulted to 
reflect user perspectives.  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Brufut/Tanji/Gunjur landing site 
users  
 2.1.3.2 Proportion of female/female youth landing sit e users consulted to 
reflect user perspectives.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Brufut/Tanji/Gunjur landing site 
users  
 
2.1.3.3 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users consulted to reflect user perspectives.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Brufut/Tanji/Gunjur landing site 
users  All b y end of 
Project Year 
3, Quarter 1 for one site; 
PY3 Q2 for 
the second 
site; and PY3 
Q3 for the 
third site.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
1,724,000


---
*Page 258*
---

118 
 Activity 2.1. 4: Develop flood -
proof measures and introduce 
climate -proofed equipment for 
fish smoking and drying at the 
Kartong landing site  
 
Sub activities : 2.1.4.1 Platform 
level raising works  
2.1.4.2 Piling works and 
installation of floating pontoons  
2.1.4.3 Installation of improved 
solar fish driers  
2.1.4.4 Installation of improved 
fish smoking units  
2.1.4.5 Installation of solar -
powered sea water fish rinsing 
lines   
 
Deliverabl es: 
One operational, climate -
proofed coastal landing site  (all 
smoking and rinsing units are for 
women)  This activity targets professionals who smoke and dry fish; they are as a rule 
women.  
To ensure sufficient involvement of women at all stages, the following is 
proposed.  
 
2.1.4.1 -2.1.4.5 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users 
periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the 
construction process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/50%  of female/female youth Kartong lan ding site users 
 
2.1.4.3 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Kartong landing site users 
 
2.1.4.4 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Kartong landing site users 
 
2.1.4.5 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Kartong landing site users 
  All b y end of 
Project Year 4, Quarter 1.
 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
1,253,300  
Activity 2.1. 5: Develop flood -
proof measures at the Bintang 
landing site  (Package 4)  
 
Sub activities :  
2.1.5.1 Road level raising works  
2.1.5.2 Piling works and 
installation of floating pontoons  
 
Deliverables : 
One operational, climate -
proofed river landing site  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
2.1.5.1 -2.1.5.2 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users 
periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the construction process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of female/female youth Bintang landing site users 
 
 All b y end of 
Project Year 
3, Quarter 3.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
348,800  
Activity 2.1.6 Capacity 
development for the Community 
Fisheries Centers (CFCs ) Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do All by end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/SoUSD 
375,000


---
*Page 259*
---

119 
  
Sub-activities:  
2.1.6.1 Trainings on equipment 
and technologies use, on 
organisational arrangements for 
equitable use and for user fee 
collection, on maintenance and 
repairs  
2.1.6.2 Provisio n of capacity 
development for post harvest 
equipment management and 
maintenance (co -funded and 
executed by FAO)  
2.1.6.3 Capacity development for 
the CFCs - organisational, O&M 
marketing  including negation 
skills  
 
Deliverables : 
At least 7 CFCs received capacity 
development , half of which is for 
women  not require additional funding.  
 
2.1.6.1 -1 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for 
training content and participation logistics related to equipment and technology use, etc.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 2.1.6 .1-2 Proportion of female/female youth site users participating in 
training on equipment and technology use, etc.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 70%/70%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.6.1 -3 Proportion of training time spent on equipment, tec hnologies, 
organizational arrangement, maintenance and repair related to women’s 
activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of training time  
 
2.1.6.2 -1 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for content 
of capacity development and participatio n logistics  on post -harvest 
equipment.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80% /80% of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.6.2 -2 Proportion of female/female youth landing site users participating 
in capacity development on post -harvest equipment.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.6.2 -3 Proportion of training time spent on equipment related to 
wom en’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50%  of training time  
 2.1.6.3 -1 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for 
training content and participation logistics related CFCs.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 and 5.  cial Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.


---
*Page 260*
---

120 
 2.1.6.3 -2 Proportion of female/female youth participating in training on 
CFCs.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
2.1.6.3 -3 Proportion of training time spent on capacity development related 
to women’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of training time  
Activity 2.1.7 Introduce energy 
efficient technologies for fish 
handling and processing in 10 
mangrove management 
communities   
 
Sub-activities:  
2.1.7.1 Identify site specific 
priority needs of the mangrove 
communities to reduce firewood 
use and fish losses  
2.1.7.2 Provide and i nstall the 
necessary equipment  
2.1.7.3 Install additional 
equipment (co -funded and 
executed by FAO)  
2.1.7.4 Capacity devel opment for 
(technical, O&M and 
organizational, including 
negotiation skills ) 
 
Deliverables : 
Energy efficient technology 
packages in 10 communities , all 
of which are used by women  This activity targets professionals who smoke and dry fish; they are as a rule 
women.  
To ensure sufficient involvement of women at all stages, the following is proposed.  
 2.1.7.1 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for location 
selection and periodically invited to the construction site to examine and 
learn ab out the construction process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 70%/70%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 2.1.7.2 -2.1.7.3 Proportion of female/female youth site users consulted for 
design and installation of equipment to be introduced and periodically  
invited to the site to examine and learn about the installation process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 70%/70%  of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 2.1.7.4 -1 Proportion of female/male youth site users consulted on content 
of capacity development and  participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of female/female youth users of each landing site  
 2.1.7.4 -2 Proportion of female/female youth participants in capacity 
development activities related to technical, O&M and organizational aspects of equipment.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 60%/60% of female/female youth users of each landing site  All b y end of 
Project Year 
2 Quarter 2 
for one site; PY3 Q2 for 
another 
three sites; 
PY4 Q2 for 
another 
three sites; and PY5 Q2 
for the last 
three sites.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
592.500  
Output 2.2: Aquaculture activities introduced as adaptation measures for livelihood improvement of 2,800 smallholder rural households  755 USD 
6,296,500  
 
755 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 261*
---

121 
 Activity 2.2.1 : Expand the Jahally 
Aquaculture Center  
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.1.1 Upscale the fingerling 
production capacity (additional 
ponds, scale -up inputs)  
2.2.1.2 Develop a training centre 
and a demonstration pond  
 
Deliverables : 
Operational Aquaculture Centre 
capable of progressively meeting 
fingerling, and training demand  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
2.2.1.1 Proportion of female/female youth beneficiaries of aquaculture 
consulted on type of fish, etc. before the activity commences.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20% of community members consulted  
 2.2.1.2 Proportion of female/female youth beneficiaries consulted on location and dimensions of ponds, etc.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20% of community members consulted  
 2.2.1.1  
By end of 
Project Year 
2 
2.2.1.2  
By end of Project Year 
1 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
45,000  
Activity 2.2.2 : Promote the 
increase of fish feed production 
through four manufacturing 
units  
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.2.1 Provide additional inputs 
for the full operationali zation of 
existing units  
2.2.2.2 Finance the creation of 
two additional, youth -led units  
2.2.2.3 Provide training and 
quality control for fish feed 
production , including business 
aspects  
 
Deliverables : 
Four active fish feed units 
capable of progressively meeting 
feed demand  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
2.2.2.1 Proportion of female/female youth oyster/fish 
harvesters/professors/sellers consulted on the effects of fish feed 
production on their livelihoods before and during the activity.  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 50%/20% of community members consulted  
 
2.2.2.2 Proportion  of female youths involved in creation of new units.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50% of youths involved in creation of new units  
 2.2.2.3 -1 Proportion of women/female youth consulted on training content 
and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of women/female youths of each community consulted  
 
2.2.2.3 -2 Proportion of women/female youth trained on fish feed 
production and its business.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/30% of training participants  All b y end of 
Project Year 
2, Quarter 2  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
70,000  
Activity  2.2.3 : Integrate catfish The following measures that ensure that all beneficiaries are women as All b y end of FAO (as Executing USD


---
*Page 262*
---

122 
 production in fish tanks in 30 
communal vegetable gardens 
(aquaculture package 1 ) 
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.3.1 Construction and 
infrastructure works  (co-funded 
and executed by MoA)  
2.2.3.2.Provide fish tanks, 
smoking ovens, shelters and 
start -up kits (tools and inputs)  
2.2.3. 3 Provide training and 
supervision for fish production 
and smoking, and use of water 
with fish excrements as fertilizer 
in horticulture and negotiation 
skills  
 
Deliverables : 
30 producer groups equipped 
and trained for fish  production 
in tanks, integrated with 
vegetable production , all of 
which are for women  stipulated by co -financier IFAD.  
 
2.2.3.1 Proportion of women/female youths invited to periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the construction process.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of female/female youth of each community involved  
 2.2.3.2 Proportion of women/female youths receiving equipment and inputs.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 100%/40% of equipment and input recipients.  
 2.2.3.3 -1 Proportion of women/female youths consulted on training 
content and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80% of female/female youths in each community involved  
 
2.2.3.3 -2 Proportion of women/female youths receiving training and 
instructions.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 100%/40% of training/instructions recipients  
 Project Year 
2, Quarter 4 
for five 
producer groups; PY3 
Q4 for the 
next 10 POs; 
PY4, Q4 for another 10 
POs; and PY5 Q4 for 
the last 5 
POs.  Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  3,704,900  
Activity  2.2.4 : Introduce 
integrated rice -fish culture in 
300 ha  of new irrigated schemes 
(aquaculture package 2 ) 
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.4.1 Contribute to the works 
of developing new irrigated 
schemes (top -up for additional 
cost of works)  (co-funded and 
executed by MoA)  
2.2.4.2 Provide technical 
assistance for developing the 
adjusted design  and technical The following measures that ensure that half of the beneficiaries are 
women.  
 
2.2.4.1 Proportion of women/female youths involved in developing new irrigated schemes (design, construction, operation, maintenance, etc.).  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in irrigation schemes  
 
2.2.4.2 Proportion of women/female youths consulted on the specifications 
of irrigation schemes.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in specification  
  
2.2.4.3 Proportion of women/female youth recipients of start -up kits  All b y end of 
Project Year 
1, Quarter 4 
for 50 ha; 
PY2 Q4 for 
the next 150 
ha; and PY3 Q4 for the last 100 ha.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/ 
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
1,510,450


---
*Page 263*
---

123 
 specifications for the integration 
of fish cultivation in the irrigated 
schemes  
2.2.4.3 Provide start -up kits to 
the beneficiaries  (tools and 
inputs)  
2.2.4.4 Provide technical training 
and supervision for the 
beneficiaries of integrated rice -
fish production and negotiation 
skills  
 
Deliverables : 
Adjusted technical specifications 
for rice -fish irrigated schemes  
 
600 rice producers (half of which 
are women) equipped and 
trained to produce fish in their 
irrigated fields, reducing the use 
of chemicals (fertilizers and 
pesticides)   Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in irrigation schemes  
 
2.2.4.3 -1 Proportion of women/female youths consulted on training 
content and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of community members involved in irrigati on schemes  
 2.2.4.3 -2 Proportion of women/female youths receiving training and 
instructions.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in irrigation schemes  
 
Activity  2.2.5 : Fund the 
development of fish culture in 60 
earthen ponds ( aquaculture 
package 3 ) 
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.5.1 Improve water access 
and provide lining for 10 existing 
ponds  and 
execute the works and provide 
equipment for 50 new ponds  
2.2.5. 2 Provide start -up kits to 
the beneficiaries (tools and 
inputs)  
2.2.5. 3 Provide  technical training 
and supervision for fish pond The following measures that ensure that half of the beneficiaries are 
women.  
 2.2.5.1 -1 Proportion of women/female youths consulted on selection of 
ponds, water access, etc.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in pond 
improvement/creation  
 2.2.5.1 -2 Proportion of women/female youths involved in pond 
improvement/creation work.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/20%  of community members involved in pond 
improvement/creation work  
 2.2.5.2 Proportion of women/female youth recipients of start -up kits.  
 Baseline: 0 All b y end of 
Project Year 
1 Quarter 4 for four 
ponds; PY2 
Q4 for the 
next 14 
ponds; PY3 
Q4 for another 17 
ponds; PY4 
Q4 for 
another 15 
ponds; and 
PY5 Q4 for the last 10 
ponds.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
262,450


---
*Page 264*
---

124 
 aquaculture, and negotiation 
skills to the beneficiaries  
 
Deliverables : 
60 producers  (half of which are 
women)  equipped and trained in 
pond production   Target: 50%/2 0% of community members involved in aquaculture using 
improved/new ponds  
 
2.2.5.3 -1 Proportion of women/youths consulted on training content and 
participation logistics.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80/80%  of women/female youths in each community of pond.  
 
2.2.5.3 -2 Proportion of women/female youths receiving training and 
instructions.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members involved in aquaculture using 
improved/new ponds  
Activity  2.2.6 : Promote 
sustainable clam and oyster 
culture in 40 communities 
(aquaculture package 4 ) 
 
Sub activities : 
2.2.6.1 Train 30 women’s groups 
in clam and cockle culture on 
mudflats  and t rain 10 women’s 
groups in oyster culture  and 
negotiation skills  
2.2.6.2 Provide necessary inputs 
for clam rearing on mudflats 
(cultivation beds) ,canoes  
, necessary material  and 
motorized canoes  
 
Deliverables : 
40 women groups equipped and 
trained in sustainable clam and 
oyster cult ure This activity targets professionals who harvest clams and oysters; they are 
as a rule women.  
To ensure sufficient involvement of women at all stages, the following is 
proposed.  
 
2.2.6.1 -1 Proportion of women and female youths consulted on training 
content and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90% of women/female youths in each community.  
 
2.2.6.1 -2Proportion of female youth participants in training.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 35%  of participants  
 
2.2.6.2 Proportion of female youths receiving inputs.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 35%  of participants  
 
  All b y end of 
Project Year 
1 Quarter 2 
for seven groups; PY2 
Q2 for the 
next 14 
groups; PY3 
Q2 for 
another 14 groups; PY4 
Q2 for the 
last five 
groups.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
305,000  
Activity 2.2.7 Provide technical 
support to the execution of the 
aquaculture activities and 
ensuring environmental and 
social safeguards  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for  women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 All by end of 
each Project 
Year 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5 and 6.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  USD 
398,700


---
*Page 265*
---

125 
  
Sub-activities:  
2.2.7.1 MoFWRNAM’s provision 
of supervision and extension 
expertise for aquaculture 
activities (co -funded and 
executed by MoFWRNAM)  
2.2.7.2 Provision of technical 
assistance and guidance of 
aquaculture activities by a 
dedicated Specialist for the full 
implementation period of the 
project  
2.2.7.3 Supervise environmental 
and social safeguards and 
monitor implementation of the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Framework  
 2.2.7.1 -1 Proportion of women/female youth in the community consulted 
on which safeguards issues are important to them and why.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/90% of women/female youths in each community.  
 
2.2.7.1 -2 Proportion of supervision time spent on women’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of supervision  time  
 2.2.7.1 -3 Proportion of extension expertise tailored to women.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of extension content  
 2.2.7.2 Proportion of technical assistance and guidance tailored to women.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of assistance and guidance content  
 2.2.7.3 Proportion of supervision time spent on safeguard issues related to 
women.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of supervision time  
 Specialist . 
Component 3:  Improved climate change adaptive capacities  
 USD  
2,424,025  
Output 3.1: Public services strengthened to facilitate local community capacity to prepare for and respond to climate change risks 756 USD 
643,475  
Activity 3.1.1 : Strengthen the 
sectoral institutions and policies 
and develop additional capacity 
to respond to climate risks  
 
Sub activities : 
3.1.1.1 Short -term speciali zed 
trainings on climate risks, climate 
analysis and mainstreaming 
climate change in national 
policies and strategies  The following measures that ensure that at least 30% of the direct 
beneficiaries are women (due to low proportion of female technical 
professionals).3.1.1.1 Proportion of female/female youth participants in trainings on climate science and mainstreaming.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participants  
 3.1.1.1 Proportion of training time spent on women specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of training time  
 3.1.1.1  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1, 3 and 
5. 
 
3.1.1.2  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1, 2 and 
3. 
 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/ 
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.   USD  
81,000  
 
756 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 266*
---

126 
 3.1.1.2 Develop ment of  updated 
curricula on fisheries, 
aquaculture and ecosystem  
management, integrating 
climate change, in partnership 
with local education institutions  
3.1.1.3 Design climate change 
content for Diploma/Advanced 
Diploma training for fisheries 
technicians  
3.1.1.4 Support for climate 
related sectoral studies and 
subsequ ent revision of national 
policies and strategies  
3.1.1.5 Organize institutional 
collaborations and facilitate 
interaction and decision making 
through policy and knowledge 
sharing 
 
Deliverables : 
50 technical staff (30% of which 
are women) trained  
 
5 technical staff (30% of which 
are women) obtaining 
speciali zed Diplomas/Advanced 
Diplomas from partner local 
education institutions  
 
2 national policies/strategies 
revised to include climate risk 
analysis and mitigation and 
adaptation directions  3.1.1.2 Proportion of female/female youth experts/practitioners consulted.  
 Base line: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participants  
 
3.1.1.3 Proportion of female/female youth experts/practitioners consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participants  
 3.1.1.4 Inclusion of detailed analysis on and proposed strategies for women, including necessary data collection.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40%  of lengths of main texts  
 3.1.1.5 Inclusion of analysis on and strategies for women, including 
necessary data collection.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40%  of lengths of meeting time  
 3.1.1.3  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 3, 4 and 
5. 
 
3.1.1.4  
By end of 
Project Year 
4. 
 
3.1.1.5  
By end of 
Project Year 
4.


---
*Page 267*
---

127 
 Activity 3.1.2:  Improve public 
sector capacities to monitor the 
fisheries sector and its 
associated ecosystems and 
integrate climate risks  
 
Sub activities : 
3.1.2.1 Organi se a Frame Survey 
with a strong climate 
vulnerability assessment 
component  (co-funded and 
executed by MoFWRNAM)  
3.1.2.2 Support the expansion of 
monitoring capacities for Gambia 
river water parameters  
3.1.2.3 Strengthen  major coastal 
CFCs to monitor and report 
fishin g efforts and catches  (co-
funded and executed by 
MoFWRNAM)  
3.1.2.4 Establish regular 
monitoring mechanism for 
mangrove forest cover and train 
relevant government staff  
3.1.2.5 Organize trainings and on 
the job learning opportun ities to 
national insti tutions on 
georeferen ced monitoring  
 
Deliverables : 
Up-to-date fisheries, water 
resources and mangrove status 
information available  Since the activity benefits the entire community, half of the budget is 
considered for women.  
The following measures that ensure sufficient involvement of women do 
not require additional funding.  
 
3.1.2.1 Proportion of survey that concerns women’s vulnerability to climate 
change.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50% of survey questions  
 3.1.2.2 Proportion of female/female youth citizens involved in monitoring.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants  
 3.1.2.3 Proportion of female/female youth citizens involved in monitoring 
and reporting.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants  
 
3.1.2.4 Proportion of female/female youth citizens and female/female youth government staff involved in data collection.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% /20%  of citizen participants and 30/15% of government staff  
 3.1.2.5 Proportion of female/female participants in training and on -the-job 
training on georeferenced monitoring.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participants  
 3.1.2.1  
By end of 
Project Year 
1 
 
3.1.2.2  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 4 
(training) 
and PY2 
(equipment).  
 
3.1.2.3  
By end of each Project Year 1 
(training) 
and PY2 
(equipment)  
 3.1.2.4  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5 and 6  
 3.1.2.5  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1, 2 and 
3. FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
286,225  
Activity  3.1.3 : Establish an e -
extension /out -reach  system for 
fisheries and aquaculture  
 
Sub activities : The following measure ensure that women benefit as much as men.  
 
3.1.3.1 Proportion of women/female youths consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members consulted  3.1.3.1  
By end of 
Project Year 1. 
 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social Safeguards 
and Gender  USD  
276,250


---
*Page 268*
---

128 
 3.1.3.1 Prepare the feasibility 
study and technical parameters 
for the system  
3.1.3.2 Set -up and test the 
system  
3.1.3.3 Registration of fisherfolk 
and other value chain actors  
3.1.3.4 National rollout  
3.1.3.5 Continuous operation 
and refinement  of e-extension 
system  (co-fund ed and executed 
by MoFWRNAM)  
 
Deliverables : 
Operational e -extension system , 
including one voice -over version 
for illiterate women   
3.1.3.1 Existence of voice -over version for illiterate women.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: One that covers all the contents available in written form . 
 
3.1.3.2 Proportion of women/female you ths consulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of community members consulted  
 3.1.3.3 Proportion of women/female youths registered.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of female/female youth community members surveyed  
 3.1.3.4 Proportion of women/female youths registered and find the service 
useful.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 60%/60%  of female/female youth community members registered  
 3.1.3.5 National rollout of written and voice versions for women’s activities 
in the fishery sector.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: Two rolled out at the same time  
 3.1.3.6 Proportion of women/female youth cons ulted.  
 Baseline: 0 
Target: 50%/20%  of community members consulted  3.1.3.2  
By end of 
Project Year 
2. 
 
3.1.3.3  
By each of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4, 
5 and 6.  
 
3.1.3.4  
By end of 
Project Year 
4. 
 
3.1.3.5  
By end of 
Project Year 4. 
 3.1.3.5  
By end of 
Project Year 
5 and 6.  Specialist . 
Output 3.2: Local communities, groups and HHs capacities to implement market driven adaptation measures are strengthened 757 USD  
1,780,550  
Activity 3.2.1 : Capacity 
development for field fisheries 
and forestry officers to support 
fisheries, aquaculture and 
mangrove investment  
 
Sub activities : 
3.2.1.1 Trainings on aquaculture 
production ( facilities and The following measures that ensure that at least 30% of the direct 
beneficiaries are women (due to low proportion of female technical 
professionals).  
 3.2.1.1 -1 Proportion of female/female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participating officers  
 
3.2.1.1 -2 Proportion of training time spent on women specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  All b y end of 
Project Year 
1, 2 and 6  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
82,500  
 
757 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 269*
---

129 
 logistics ) (co-funded and 
executed by MoFWRNAM)  
3.2.1.2 Provision of expertise for 
trainingson fisheries and 
aquaculture  
3.2.1. 3 Trainings on mangrove 
monitoring, restoration and 
sustainable management  
3.2.1. 4 Provision of technical 
equipment for effective 
monitoring of implementation  
 
Deliverables : 
80 technical officers (30% of 
which are women) trained and 
equipped   Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of training time  
 
3.2.1.2 -1 Proportion of female/female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of parti cipants  
 3.2.1.2 -2 Proportion of training material on women’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50% of training material  
 3.2.1.3 -1 Proportion of female/female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participating officers  
 
3.2.1.3 -2 Proportion of training time spent on women specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of training time  
 
3.2.1.4 Proportion of female/female youth officers consulted on selection 
(accuracy, utility of data generated, operation, maintenance, budget, etc.) 
of equipment.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 30%/15%  of participating officers  
Activity 3.2.2 : Support to private 
investment, value addition and 
integration with other sectors  
 
Sub activities : 
3.2.2.1 Organize yearly Invest in 
Fisheries roundtables with 
private and public participation  
(co-funded and executed by 
MoFWRNAM)  
3.2.2.2 Support the organization 
of fisheries actors into 
cooperatives/producer The following measures ensure that women benefit as much as men.  
 
3.2.2.1 -1 Proportion of female/female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants.  
  
3.2.2.1 -2 Proportion of roundtable time spent on women specific activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of roundtable time  
 3.2.2.2 Proportion of female/female youth beneficiaries.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of beneficiaries  
 
3.2.2.3 -1 Proportion of female/female youth processors consulted on 
training content and participation logistics.  3.2.2.1  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4, 
5 and 6.  
 3.2.2.2  
By end of each Project Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  
 
3.2.2.3  
By end of each Project Year 3, 4, 5 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
388,450


---
*Page 270*
---

130 
 organizations  (co-funded and 
executed by MoFWRNAM)  
3.2.2.3 Train artisanal fish 
processors on quality stan dards, 
marketing, export rules, etc.  (co-
funded and executed by 
MoFWRNAM)  
3.2.2.4 Promote partnerships 
between fisheries actors and the 
tourism sector  
3.2.2.5 Organize platforms of 
discussion between artisanal 
fisherfolks and private 
entrepreneurs (processors, 
markets, ...)  including 
development of productive 
alliances  
3.2.2.6 Providing training 
(technical and entrepreneurial) 
to youth groups in production of 
fish feed  
3.2.2 .7 Facili tating evidence 
based dialogue and sensitization 
on financial inclusion (including 
RuralInvest or other tools to 
support financial institutions)  
3.2.2.8 Providing capacity 
development to artisanal 
fisheries actors on development 
of entrepreneurial and business 
opportunities within the value 
chain , including  negotiation 
skills.   
3.2.2.9 Supervise and ensure 
environment and social 
safeguards  
 
Deliverables :  Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of female/female youth processors at each landing site.  
 
3.2.2.3 -2 Proportion of female/female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 90%/35%  of participants.  
 3.2.3.4 Proportion of female/female youth in fishery and tourism involved.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of fishery participants and 40/10% of tourism.  
 3.2.2.5 -1 Proportion of female/female youth processors consulted on the 
content and participation logistics of discussion on linking production and 
business.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target:  80%/80%  of female/female youth processors at each landing site.  
 
3.2.2.5 -2 Proportion of female/female youth participants in discussions on 
linking production and business.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants.  
 
3.2.2.6 -1 Proportion of female you th processors consulted on training 
content and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%  of female youth processors at each landing site.  
 
3.2.2.6 -2 Proportion of female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%  of participants.  
  
3.2.2.7 Proportion of female/female youth participants in dialogue and 
sensitization on financial inclusion.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants.  
  
3.2.2.8 -1 Proportion of female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/pr ocessors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) consulted for 
consulted on content of capacity development and participation logistics.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 80%/80%  of female youth processors at each landing site.  and 6.  
 
3.2.2.4  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  
 
3.2.2.5  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 and 5.  
 
3.2.2.6  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  
 
3.2.2.7  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  
 
3.2.2.8  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4 
and 5.  
 
3.2.2.9  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4, 
5 and 6.


---
*Page 271*
---

131 
 5 Invest in Fisheries roundtables  
 
100 artisanal fish processors  (all 
of which are women) trained   
3.2.2.8 -2 Proportion of female/female yout h participants in capacity 
development.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/20%  of participants.  
 
3.2.2.9 Proportion of environmental and social safeguards items considered 
for compliance and directly related to women’s activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50% of safeguard items 
Activity 3.2.3 : Support to gender 
and youth empowerment 
through the application of the 
Household Methodology  
 
Sub activities : 
3.2.3.1. Household Methodology 
Training of trainers  
3.2.3.2 Household Methodology 
large scale training (c o-funded 
and executed by FAO ) 
3.2.3.3 Facilitation of Household 
Methodology meetings with the 
project beneficiaries , 
sensitization of community 
gatekeepers prior to Household 
Methodology facilitated 
meetings  on gender and 
community -led support 
measures against SEAH and GBV  
 
Deliverables : 
3-year gender  and youth  
empowerment process  for 600 
households  3.2.3.1 Proportion of female/female youth/male youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 50%/35%/35%  of participants.  
 3.2.3.1 - 3.2.3.3 Number of households meetings facilitated.  
Baseline: 0 
 Target: 10 households per session, four sessions a month, five months a 
year for three years for a total of 600households ( 200 households facilitated 
for five months in Project Year 2, 400 for five months in PY 3, 600 for five months in PY4, 400 for five months in PY5 and 200 in PY6)  
 3.2.3.3 -2 Number of community gatekeepers  (from the community of 
training) separately sensitized prior to the training per trainer.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 2 community gatekeepers per session, four sessions a month, five 
months a year for three years.  
 3.2.3.3 -3 Proportion of communities where more than half of the women 
agree that the community gatekeepers are leading support measures against SEAH and GBV.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target:  40% in Project Year 3 and 60% in Project Year 5 of the communities 
whose gatekeepers are sensitized.  
 3.2.3.3 -4 Differ ence in h ours spent per week engaged in household chores 
and caregiving by women and men . 
 Baseline: To be surveyed at the outset of the Activity implementation.  
 Target : 50% reduction in difference for each household . 
 3.2.3.1  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 4.  
 
3.2.3.2 -1 and 
3.2.3.2  
200 households facilitated 
for five 
months in 
Project Year 
2, 400 in PY 
3, 600 in PY4, 400 in 
PY5 and 200 
in PY6 (total 
3 years of 
facilitation 
for 600 households).
 
 3.2.3.3 -2 
By end of 
end of each 
Project Year 
2, 3, 4, 5 and 
6. 
 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
Environmental/Social Safeguards 
and Gender  
Specialist.  USD  
929,600  
(including FAO TCP 84,000 USD)


---
*Page 272*
---

132 
 3.2.3.3 -5 Proportion of women who think their husbands’ beating is 
unjustified under any circumstance . 
Baseline: To be surveyed at the outset of the Activity implementation.  
 Target : 50% reduction in each community targeted by the Activity.  
 3.2.2.3 -3 
By end of 
Project Year 
3 and 5.  
 
3.2.2.3 -4 and 
3.2.2.3 -5 
By end of 3 -
year programme for each 
household  
(200 each in 
PY 4, 5 and 
6). 
Activity 3.2.4 : Implement a 
functional literacy and numeracy 
programme targeted to project 
female beneficiaries  
 
Sub activities : 
3.2.4.1 Identification of 
participants and definition of 
approach  (including TRY women 
groups  involved in oyster 
production ) 
3.2.4.2 Training of trainers 
(younger, literate women in the 
community)  
3.2.4.3 Functional literacy and 
numeracy classes  
 
Deliverables : 
1,500 women completing the  
programme  3.2.4.1 Proportion of female experts/practitioners involved.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 80% of participants.  
 
3.2.4.2 Proportion of rural female youth participants.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 80%  of participants.  
 3.2.4.3 -1 Number of rural women completing the  3-year  programme.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 1,500 (500 each in Project Year 4, 5 and 6)  
 3.2.4.3 -2 Number of male treasurers of female professional organizations in 
the fishery sector replaced by women . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 50% of male treasurers  
 3.2.4.1  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 3  
 
3.2.4.2  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 3  
 
3.2.4.3 -1 
By end of 
Project Year 
4, 5 and 6.  
 
3.2.4.3 -2 
By end of Project Year 6 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: Environmental/  
Social Safeguards 
and Gender 
Specialist.  USD  
260,000  
Activity 3.2.5 : Train executing -
agency personnel on gender in 
general, SEAH, establish and 
operationalize referral pathways 3.2.5.1-1 Proportion of male professionals at executing agencies involved in 
the project management directly or indirectly participate in each SEAH 
training . 
 Baseline: 0  3.2.5.1 -1 
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 3.  FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: Environmental/  
Social Safeguards USD  
120,000


---
*Page 273*
---

133 
 for GBV and strengthen FAO 
GRM  
 
Sub activities : 
3.2.5.1 Training of professionals 
from executing agencies, 
including strengthening of FAO 
GRM in handling SEAH and GBV 
incidents  
3.2.5.2 Training of professionals 
along referral pathways  
3.2.5.3 Establishment and 
operationalization of referral 
pathways  
3.2.5.4 Com munication of GBV 
and referral pathways to public  
 
Deliverables : 
60 persons at executing 
agencies trained  
20 professionals along each GBV 
referral pathway trained  
1 GBV pathway each established 
and operationalized for each 
target district   
  Target: 80% of male professionals . 
 
3.2.5.1-2 Proportion of professionals at executing agencies involved in the 
project management indirectly as supervisors participate in each SEAH training . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 15% of participants.  
 3.2.5.1-3 Proportion of SEAH and GBV incidents reported through FAO GRM 
correctly identified as s uch by the GRM personnel  
 Baseline: TBD  
 Target: 75%  (Project Year 2) and 95%  (Project Year 4)  
 3.2.5.2-1 Proportion of male professionals along the referral pathways 
participate in each SEAH and GBV training . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 80%  of male professional s. 
 3.2.5.2-2 Proportion of supervisors of professionals along the referral 
pathways participate in each SEAH and GBV training . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 15% of participants.  
 3.2.5.3 Number of referral pathways established and operationalized with 
trained professionals, PEP kits and a complete list of contact information along each pathway . 
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 1 per each target District (2 pathways in each Project Year 1 and 2 
and 3 pathways in Project Year 3).  
 3.2.5.4 Number  of information campaigns organized for the public on GBV 
and referral pathways.  
 Baseline: 0  
 Target: 1 per each target District per Project Y ear 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 .  
3.2.5.1 -2 
75% of 
supervisors by end of 
Project Year 
2 and 95% of 
supervisors 
by end of 
PY4.  
 
3.2.5.2  
By end of 
each Project 
Year 1 and 3.  
 3.2.5.3  
By end of Project Year 
3. 
 
3.2.5.4  
1 per target 
District by 
each Project 
Year 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6.  and Gender 
Specialist.  
Environmental and Social Management  USD  
120,500  
  Gender   Training of FAO Ethics Focal Point, Ethics Alternate Focal Point, Gender Focal 
Point and Gender Alternate Focal Point on sexual exploitation and abuse, 
gender -based v iolence and mediation skills –  part of training under 
Environmental and Social Safeguards  Framework Each year 
until the end 
of Project 
Year 5 FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: 
Environmental/So
cial Safeguards 
and Gender USD  
2,500/year  
(total 
12,500)


---
*Page 274*
---

134 
 Specialist.  
Engagement of an Environmental/Social Safeguards and Gender Specialist  Each year 
until the end 
of Project 
year 6  FAO  USD  
18,000/year 
(total 
108,000)  
Grand Total   USD  
16.427,000


---
*Page 275*
---

135 
 3. TIMELINE AND MILESTONES  
3.1 Component 1: Strengthening Restoration Capacity and C ommunity Management of A rtisanal Fisheries Habitats  
3.1.1 Output 1.1: Mangrove Ecosystems Sustainably Restored in Fisheries Priority Areas758 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1  Project Year 2  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.1.1 : 
Reforest ation 
of 1,100 ha of 
degraded 
mangrove 
areas in key 
fisheries 
hotspots      Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish 
processors/sellers) consulted for planting site selection.  
 Target: 50% /20% of stakeholders consulted for the 
first 200 ha  
 
Female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of stakeholders consulted  
 Female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
training content, including use of mangroves and other goods and services from mangrove 
ecosystems.  
 Target: 80% /80% of stakeholders consulted  
 Female/female youth stakeholders participating in 
sensitization and trainings on mangrove 
reforestation and conservation.  
 Target: 50% /20% of participants  
 
Women/female youth receiving restoration toolkits . 
 Target: 50% /20%  of planting team members for the 
first 200 ha.  
    
 
758 The targe t group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 276*
---

136 
 Women/female youth among restoration toolkit 
recipients.  
 Target: 50% /20% of toolkit recipients  for the first 
200 ha.  
 
Women/female youth involved in planning and 
execution of community -led campaigns.  
Target: 50% /20% of all community members 
involved in planning and execution of community -
led campaigns for the first 200 ha.  
 
Women/female youth involved in monitoring, 
evaluation and replacement of dead mangroves.  
Target: 50% /20% of community members involved 
in monitoring, evaluation and replacement of dead 
mangroves for the first 200 ha.  
Activity 1.1.2 : 
Support 
assisted 
natural 
regeneration 
(ANR) on 1,250 
ha of 
moderately 
degraded 
mangroves in 
key fisheries 
hotspots  
     Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish 
processors/sellers) consulted for natural 
regeneration site selection.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of stakeholders for the first 200 ha  
 
Female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80% of stakeholders consulted  
 
Female/female youth stakeholders consulted for 
training content, including use of mangroves and 
other goods and services from mangrove 
ecosystems.  
 Target: 80% /80% of stakeholders consulted  
 Female/female youth stakeholders participating in 
sensitization and trainings on mangrove  restor ation 
and conservation.  
 Target: 50% /20% of participants  
 
Female/female youth planting team members.


---
*Page 277*
---

137 
  Target: 50 %/20%  of planting team members  
 
Women/female youth among restoration toolkit 
recipients.  
 Target: 50% /20% of toolkit recipients in each 
reforestation area for the first 200 ha  
 
Women/female youth involved in planning and 
execution of ANR campaign.  
Target: 50% /20%  of community members involved 
in planning and execution of ANR campaign for the first 200 ha
 
 
Women/female youth involved in monitoring, 
evaluation and replacement of dead mangroves.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of community members involved 
in monitoring, evaluation  and replacement of dead 
mangroves for the first 200 ha  
 Women/female youth involved in joint planning and 
execution of mangrove restoration.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of community members involved 
in joint planning of mangrove restoration for the first 
200 ha.  
 
Women/female youth involved in execution of 
mangrove restoration.  
Target: 50% /20%  of community members involved 
in execution of mangrove restoration for the first 
200 ha.  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3  Project Year 4  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4


---
*Page 278*
---

138 
 Activity 1.1.1 : 
(continued  PY3 
and 4)  
Reforest 1,100 
ha of degraded 
mangrove 
areas in key 
fisheries 
hotspots  The same 
milestones for 
the next 300 ha, 
which involves 
different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area covered 500 ha)
    The same 
milestones for 
the next 300 ha, 
which involves 
different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area covered 800 ha)
    
Activity 1.1.2 : 
(continued  PY3 
and 4)  
Support 
assisted 
natural 
regeneration 
(ANR) on 1,250 
ha in key 
fisheries 
hotspots  The same 
milestones for the next 350 ha, which involves 
different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area 
covered 550 ha)     The same 
milestones for 
the next 350 ha, which involves 
different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area 
covered 90 0 ha)     
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5  Project Year 6  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.1.1 : 
(continued PY5)  
Reforest 1,100 ha of degraded 
mangrove 
areas in key 
fisheries 
hotspots  The same 
milestones for 
the last 300 ha, 
which involves different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area 
covered 1,100 
ha)


---
*Page 279*
---

139 
 Activity 1.1.2 : 
(continued  
PY5) 
Support 
assisted 
natural 
regeneration 
(ANR) on 1,250 
ha in key 
fisheries 
hotspots  The same 
milestones for the last 350 ha, 
which involves 
different 
communities.  
(Cumulative area covered 1,250 
ha)        
 
3.1.2 Output 1.2: Local Communities Equipped for Sustainable Ecosystem Management759 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1  Project Year 2  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.2.1 : 
Capacity 
development 
for local 
communities     Women/female youth 
consulted on the training 
content and participation logistics of mangrove monitoring, conservation and 
sustainable resource use.  
Target: 80%/80%  of 
women/female youth of the 
mangrove community  
 
Women/female youth 
consulted on the training content and participation logistics of mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
women/female youth of the 
mangrove community.     The same milestones for the next 
three trainings, which involve 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of training 4)  
 
759 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 280*
---

140 
  
Women/female youth trained 
on mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable resource use.  
Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members trained on mangrove monitoring, conservation and sustainable 
resource use for one training  
Activity 1.2.2 : 
Support the 
establishment 
of community 
forest status 
(where 
applicable) for 
the 
interventions 
sites and the 
transfer of 
tenure to the 
local 
communities  
        Female/female youth 
stakeholders consulted for 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of 
stakeholders consulted  
 
Women/female youth involved 
in review.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved 
in review  
 Women/female youth involved 
in preparation and enactment 
of forest tenure agreements.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members inv olved 
in preparation and enactment 
of forest tenure agreements  
 Female/female youth participants in awareness raising workshops.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of community 
member participants in 
awareness raising workshops on 
rights and obligations  
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1  Project Year 2


---
*Page 281*
---

141 
 Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.2.3 : 
Provide 
technical 
support to the 
execution of 
the mangrove 
restoration 
activities and 
ensuring 
environmental 
and social 
safeguards       Women/female youth involved 
in identification of site -specific 
priority needs with a focus on 
NRM/mangrove forestry issues.  
Target: 90%/90%  of 
female/female youth of site users  
 
Women/female youth 
consulted for the content of capacity development and participation logistics.  
Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth of 
participants.  
 
Women/female youth participating in capacity development.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
female/female youth of participants.  
 Capacity developme nt time 
spent on women’s activities.  
 Target: 50%  of capacity 
development time.  
 Environmental and social 
safeguards items considered for compliance and directly 
related to women’s activities.  
 Target: 50% of safeguard 
items    
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3  Project Year 4  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4


---
*Page 282*
---

142 
 Activity 1.2.1 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Capacity 
development 
for local 
communities     The same milestones for the last 
three trainings, which involve 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of training 7)      
Activity 1.2.2 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Support the 
establishment of community 
forest status 
(where 
applicable) for 
the 
interventions 
sites and the 
transfer of 
tenure to the 
local 
communities     The same milestones as in PY2, 
which should be met in each PY of 
the activity     The same milestones as in PY2, 
which should be met in each PY of the activity  
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.2.3 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Provide 
technical 
support to the 
execution of 
the mangrove 
restoration 
activities and 
ensuring  The same milestones for another 
three sites.  
(Cumulative number of sites 4)     The same milestones for another 
three sites.  
(Cumulative number of sites 7)


---
*Page 283*
---

143 
 environmental 
and social 
safeguards  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5  Project Year 6  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 1.2.1 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
Capacity 
development 
for local 
communities  
        Female/female youth engaged as 
forest management committee members.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of fore st 
management committee 
members  
Activity 1.2.2 : 
(continued PY5)  
Support the 
establishment 
of community 
forest status 
(where 
applicable) for 
the 
interventions 
sites and the 
transfer of 
tenure to the local    The same milestones as in PY2, 
which should be met in each PY of the activity


---
*Page 284*
---

144 
 communities  
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5 Project Year 6 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 1.2.3 : 
(continued 
PY5)  
Provide 
technical 
support to the execution of 
the mangrove 
restoration activities and 
ensuring 
environmental 
and social 
safeguards   The same milestones for the last 
three sites.  
(Cumulative number of sites 10)       Proportion of women in the 
targeted communities who 
diversify their livelihoods using non-timber forest products of 
mangroves . 
Target: 20% of women in the 
targeted communities..  
 
3.2 Component 2: Climate Resilient Fisheries Infrastructure and Aquaculture Production


---
*Page 285*
---

145 
 3.2.1 Output 2.1: Critical Small Scale Fisheries Infrastructure Climate -Proofed and Improved 760 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.1.1 : 
ESIA, detailed 
design and 
supervision for 
all sites          
Activity 2.1. 2: 
Expand the Banjul landing 
site to 
accommodate 
loss of capacity 
at other 
climate 
impacted sites          
Activity 2.1. 3: 
Introduce climate -
proofed 
equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Brufut, 
Tanji and 
Gunjur landing 
sites          
Activity 2.1. 4: 
Develop flood -
proof 
measures and         
 
760 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 286*
---

146 
 introduce 
climate -
proofed 
equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Kartong 
landing site  
Activity 2.1. 5: 
Develop flood -
proof 
measures at 
the Bintang 
landing site  
         
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1  Project Year 2  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3  Quarter 4  
Activity 2.1.6 
Capacity development 
for the CFCs
        Female/female youth site users 
consulted for training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 Female/female youth site users 
participating in training on equipment 
and technology use, etc.  
Target: 70%/70%  of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 Training time spent on equipment, 
technologies, organizational 
arrangement, maintenance and repair related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50%  of training time  
 
Female/female youth site  users 
consulted for content of capacity


---
*Page 287*
---

147 
 development and participation logistics 
on post -harvest equipment.  
 Target: 80% /80% of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 
Female/female youth participating in 
training on post -harvest equipment.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 Training time spent on equipment, technologies, organizational 
arrangement, maintenance and repair 
related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50%  of training time  
 
Female/female youth site users 
consulted for training content and participation logistics related CFCs.  
 Target: 90%/90%  of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 
Female/female youth participating in 
training on CFCs.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of female/female 
youth users of each landing site  
 
Training time spent on capacity development related to women’s 
activities.  
Target: 50%  of training time  
Activity 2.1.7 
Introduce 
energy 
efficient 
technologies 
for fish 
handling and 
processing in      Female/female youth site 
users consulted for 
location selection and periodically invited to the construction site to 
examine and learn about 
the construction process.  
 Target: 70%/70%  of 
female/female youth


---
*Page 288*
---

148 
 10 mangrove 
management 
communities  users of landing site  
 
Female/female youth site users consulted for design and installation of 
equipment to be 
introduced and periodically invited to the site to examine and learn about the installation 
process.  
 Target: 70%/70%  of 
female/female youth 
users of landing site  
 
Female/male youth site 
users consulted on 
content of capacity 
development and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of 
female/female youth users 
of each landing site  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in capacity 
development activities 
related to technical, O&M and organizational aspects 
of equipment.  
 Target: 60%/60% of 
female/female youth users 
of each landing site  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 289*
---

149 
 Activity 2.1.1 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
ESIA, detailed 
design and 
supervision for 
all sites       Female landing site users 
consulted for each site on 
possible environmental and 
social impacts.  
 Target: 90%/90%  of 
female/female youth users of 
each landing site  
 
Female landing site users consulted for each site on design 
of construction works.  
 Target: 90%/90%  of 
female/female youth users of 
each landing site  
 
Female/female youth landing site users periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn about the 
construction process.  
 Target: 50%/50%  of 
female/female youth users of 
each landing site  
 
Female/female youth site users 
consulted for content of capacity 
development and participation 
logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of 
female/female youth users of each landing site  
 
Female/female youth landing site users participating in capacity development.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
female/female youth users of 
each landing site  
 
Capacity development time


---
*Page 290*
---

150 
 spent on women’s activities.  
 Target: 50%  of capacity 
development time  
Activity 2.1. 2: 
(continued PY3 
and 4) Expand 
the Banjul 
landing site to 
accommodate 
loss of capacity at other 
climate 
impacted sites
   Women/female youth involved 
in dredging.  
Target: 30%/20%  of community 
members involved in dredging  
 
Female/female youth Banjul landing site users periodically 
invited to the construction site 
to examine and learn about the 
construction process for piling works and pontoon installation.  
Target: 50%/50%  of 
female/female youth Banjul 
landing site users for each 
operation  
 
Female Banjul landing site users 
consulted.  
Target: 90%/90%  of 
female/female youth Banjul 
landing site users       
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 291*
---

151 
 Activity 2.1. 3: 
(continued PY3 
and 4) 
Introduce 
climate -
proofed 
equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Brufut, 
Tanji and 
Gunjur landing 
sites  Female/female youth 
landing site users 
consulted on installation of 
improved fish smoking 
units , improved solar 
fish driers, and solar -
powered sea  water fish 
rinsing lines  to reflect 
user perspecives.  
 Target: 90/90%  of 
female/female youth 
of the first site users for each device  
 The same milestones for 
the second landing site.  
(Cumulative number of 
landing sites 2)  The same milestones as 
for the last landing site.  
(Cumulative number of landing sites 3)       
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 
Activity 2.1. 4: 
(continued PY3 
and 4) Develop 
flood -proof 
measures and 
introduce 
climate -
proofed 
equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Kartong 
landing site   
    Female/female youth landing site users periodically 
invited to the construction site to examine and learn 
about the process of p latform level raising works , piling 
works and in stallation of floating pontoons  
Target: 50%/50%  of female/female youth Kartong 
landing site users for each operation  
 Female/female youth landing site users periodically invited to the construction site to examine and learn 
about the construction process of improved solar fish 
driers , improved fish smoking units and solar -powered 
sea water fish rinsing lines  
Target: 50%/50%  of female/female youth Kartong 
landing site users for each device  
 
Female/female youth landing site users consulted on 
installation of improved solar fish driers , improved fish 
smoking units and solar -powered sea water fish rinsing 
lines  
Target: 90%/90%  of female/female youth Kartong 
landing site users for each device


---
*Page 292*
---

152 
 Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.1. 5: 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Develop flood -
proof measures at 
the Bintang 
landing site    Female/female youth landing site users 
periodically invited to the construction 
site to examine and learn about the 
pilling works and installation of floating pontoons  
 Target: 50%  of female/female youth 
Bintang landing site users for each 
operation       
Activity 2.1.6 
(continued PY3 
and 4) 
Capacity 
development 
for the CFCs     The same 
milestones as 
in PY2, which 
should be met 
in each PY of 
the activity.     The same 
milestones as in 
PY2, which should 
be met in each PY 
of the activity.  
Activity 2.1.7 
(continued PY3 
and 4) 
Introduce 
energy 
efficient 
technologies 
for fish 
handling and 
processing in 
10 mangrove 
management 
communities   The same 
milestones as 
in PY2 Q4 for 
each of three 
sites  
(Cumulative 
number of 
sites 4)     The same 
milestones as 
in PY2 Q4 for 
each of three 
sites  
(Cumulative 
number of 
sites 7)    
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5 Project Year 6 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 293*
---

153 
 Activity 2.1.1 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
ESIA, detailed 
design and 
supervision for 
all sites          
Activity 2.1. 2: 
(continued PY5 
and 6) Expand 
the Banjul 
landing site to accommodate 
loss of capacity 
at other 
climate 
impacted sites          
Activity 2.1. 3: 
(continued PY5 
and 6) 
Introduce 
climate -
proofed equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Brufut, 
Tanji and  
Gunjur landing 
sites          
Activity 2.1.3 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6) Develop 
flood -proof 
measures and introduce 
climate -


---
*Page 294*
---

154 
 proofed 
equipment for 
fish smoking 
and drying at 
the Kartong 
landing site   
Activity 2.1.4 : 
(continued PY5 and 6)  
Develop flood -
proof measures at 
the Bintang 
landing site          
Activity 2.1.6 
(continued PY5 
and 6) Capacity 
development 
for the CFCs     The same 
milestones as in 
PY2, which should 
be met in each PY 
of the activity.      
Activity 2.1.7 
(continued PY5 
and 6) 
Introduce 
energy 
efficient 
technologies 
for fish 
handling and 
processing in 
10 mangrove 
management 
communities   The same 
milestones as in PY2 Q4 for each 
of three sites  
(Cumulative 
number of sites 
10)       
 
3.2.2 Output 2.2: Aquaculture activities introduced as adaptation measures for livelihood improvement761 
 
761 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 295*
---

155 
 Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.2.1  
Expand the 
Jahally 
Aquaculture 
Center     Female/female youth 
beneficiaries consulted on 
location and dimensions of ponds, etc.  
Target: 50%/20% of 
community members 
consulted     Female/female youth 
beneficiaries of aquaculture consulted on type of fish, etc. before the activity commences.  
Target: 50%/20% of community 
members consulted  
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.2.2 : 
Promote the 
increase of fish 
feed 
production 
through four 
manufacturing 
units   Female/female youth oyster/fish 
harvesters/professors/sellers consulted on the effects 
of fish feed production on their livelihoods before and during the activity.  
Target: 50%/20% of community members consulted  
 Female youths involved in creation of new units.  
 Target: 50% of youths involved in creation of new 
units  
 Women/female youth consulted on training content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of women/female youths of each 
community consulted  
 Women/female youth trained on fish feed production and its business.  
Target: 50%/30% of training participants        
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 296*
---

156 
 Activity  2.2.3 : 
Integrate 
catfish 
production in 
fish tanks in 30 
communal 
vegetable 
gardens 
(aquaculture 
package 1 )   
      Women/female youths invited to periodically invited 
to the construction site to examine and learn about 
the construction process.  
Target: 80%/80%  of female/female youth of each 
community involved  
 
Women/female youths receiving equipment and 
inputs.  
Target: 100% /40% of equipment and input recipients  
for the first five POs.  
 
Women/female youths consulted on training content 
and participation logi stics.  
 Target: 80%/80% of female/female youths in each 
community involved  
 Women/female youths receiving training and 
instructions.  
Target: 100% /40% of training/instructions recipients  
for the first five POs.  
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2  Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity  2.2.4 : 
Introduce 
integrated 
rice-fish 
culture in 300 
ha of new 
irrigated 
schemes 
(aquaculture 
package 2 ) 
    Women/female youths 
consulted on the specifications 
of irrigation schemes.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved in specification for the first 50 
ha 
 Women/female youths involved in developing new irrigated schemes (design, construction, operation, maintenance, etc.).  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved in irrigation schemes for the 
first 50 ha     The same milestones for the 
next 150 ha which involves different communities.  
(Cumulative area 200 ha)


---
*Page 297*
---

157 
  
Women/female youths 
consulted on training content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
community members involved in irrigation schemes   
 Women/female youth recipients of start -up kits  
Target: 50%/20%  of community 
members involved in irrigation schemes for the first 50 ha  
 Women/female youths 
receiving training and 
instructions.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved 
in irrigation schemes for the 
first 50 ha.


---
*Page 298*
---

158 
 Activity  2.2.5 : 
Fund the 
development 
of fish culture 
in 60 earthen 
ponds 
(aquaculture 
package 3 ) 
    Women/female youths 
consulted on selection of 
ponds, water access, etc.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved in pond improvement/creation 
for the first 4 ponds  
 Women/female youths involved in pond improvement/creation work.  
 Target: 30%/20%  of 
community members involved 
in pond improvement/creation 
work for the first 4 ponds  
 
Women/youths consulted on training content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
women/female youths in each commu nity of pond  
 Women/female youth 
recipients of start -up kits.  
Target: 50%/20%  of community 
members involved in 
aquaculture using 
improved/new ponds for the 
first 4 ponds  
 Women/female youths receiving training and instructions.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members involved in aquaculture using improved/new ponds for the 
first 4 ponds     The same milestones for the 
next 14 ponds which involves different communities.  
(Cumulative number of ponds 18) 
Timeline


---
*Page 299*
---

159 
 Activity  Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity  2.2.6 : 
Promote 
sustainable 
clam and 
oyster culture 
in 40 
communities 
(aquaculture 
package 4 )  The activity is for women only.  
 
Women and female youths 
consulted on training content 
and participation logistics.  
 Target: 90%/90% of 
women/female youths in each 
community.  
 
Female youth participants in 
training.  
Target: 35%  of participants for 
the first 7 groups  
 Female youths receiving inputs.  
Target: 35%  of participants for 
the 7 first groups  
    The same milestones for the 
next 14 groups which involves 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of groups 
21)   
 Timeline  
Project Year 1  Project Year 2  
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity  2.2.7: 
Provide 
technical 
support to the 
execution of 
the 
aquaculture 
activities and 
ensuring 
environment 
and social 
safeguards     Women/female youth in the 
community consulted on which 
safeguards issues are important to them and why.  
 Target: 90%/90% of 
women/female youths in each community.  
 Supervision time spent on women’s activities.  
 Target: 40% of supervision  
time  
 Extension expertise tailored to 
women.  
 Target: 40% of extension 
content     The same milestones as in PY1.


---
*Page 300*
---

160 
  
Technical assistance and 
guidance tailored to women.  
Target: 40% of assistance and 
guidance content  
 
Supervision time spent on safeguard issues related to women.  
Target: 40% of supervision time  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.2.1  
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Expand the Jahally 
Aquaculture 
Center     The same milestones for the next 
10 POs.  
(Cumulative number of POs 15)     The same milestones for the next 
10 POs.  
(Cumulative number of POs 25)  
Activity 2.2.2 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Promote the 
increase of fish 
feed 
production 
through four 
manufacturing 
units


---
*Page 301*
---

161 
 Activity  2.2.3 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Integrate 
catfish 
production in 
fish tanks in 30 
communal 
vegetable 
gardens 
(aquaculture 
package 1 )         
Activity  2.2.4 : 
(continued PY3 and 4)  
Introduce integrated rice -
fish culture in 
300 ha of new 
irrigated schemes 
(
aquaculture 
package 2 )    The same milestones for the 
next 100 ha which involves 
different communities.  
(Cumulative area 300 ha)      
Activity  2.2.5 :  
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Fund the 
development 
of fish culture 
in 60 earthen 
ponds 
(aquaculture 
package 3 )        The same milestones for the 
next 17 ponds which involves 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of ponds 35) 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 302*
---

162 
 Activity  2.2.6 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Promote 
sustainable 
clam and 
oyster culture 
in 40 
communities 
(aquaculture 
package 4 )  The same milestones for the 
next 14 groups which involves 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of groups 35)    The same milestones for the 
next 5 groups which involves different communities.  
(Cumulative number of groups 
40)   
Activity  2.2.7: 
Provide technical 
support to the 
execution of 
the 
aquaculture 
activities and 
ensuring 
environment and social 
safeguards     The 
same 
milestones as in 
PY1.     The 
same 
milestones as in 
PY1.  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5 Project Year 6 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4  
Activity 2.2.1  
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
Expand the 
Jahally 
Aquaculture 
Center


---
*Page 303*
---

163 
 Activity 2.2.2 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
Promote the 
increase of fish 
feed 
production 
through four 
manufacturing 
units          
Activity  2.2.3 : 
(continued PY5 and 6)  
Integrate 
catfish 
production in 
fish tanks in 30 
communal 
vegetable 
gardens 
(aquaculture 
package 1 )    The same milestones for the last 5 
POs.  
(Cumulative number of POs 30)      
Activity  2.2.4 : 
(continued PY5 and 6)  
Introduce 
integrated rice -
fish culture in 
300 ha of new 
irrigated 
schemes 
(aquaculture 
package 2 )


---
*Page 304*
---

164 
 Activity  2.2.5 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
Fund the 
development 
of fish culture 
in 60 earthen 
ponds 
(aquaculture 
package 3 )    The same milestones for the 
next 15 ponds which involves 
different communities.  
(Cumulative number of ponds 50)     The same milestones for the 
next 10 ponds which involves different communities.  
(Cumulative number of ponds 60) 
Activity  2.2.6 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Promote 
sustainable 
clam and 
oyster culture 
in 40 
communities 
(aquaculture 
package 4 )         
Activity  2.2.7: 
Provide technical 
support to the 
execution of 
the 
aquaculture 
activities and 
ensuring 
environment 
and social 
safeguards      The same milestones as in PY1.     The same milestones as in PY1.  
 
3.3 Component 3: Improved Climate Change Adaptive Capacities


---
*Page 305*
---

165 
 3.3.1 Output 3.1: Public Services Supported to Analyze, Anticipate and Respond to Climate Risks 762 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 
Activity 3.1.1 : 
Strengthen the 
sectoral 
institutions 
and policies 
and develop 
additional capacity to 
respond to 
climate risks  
    Female/female youth 
participants in short -term 
speciali zed trainings on climate 
risks, climate analysis and 
mainstreaming climate change in 
national policies and strategies . 
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY1  
 
Training time spent on women 
specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 Target: 40% of training time in 
PY1 
 Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted 
on updated curricula on 
fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management  
Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants   in PY1     Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted on updated curricula on 
fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management  
Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants   in PY2  
 
Activity 3.1.2:  
Improve public 
sector 
capacities to 
monitor the 
fisheries sector 
and its 
associated 
ecosystems    Climate vulnerability survey 
that concerns women’s 
vulnerability to climate change.  
 Target: 50% of survey questions  
 
Female/female youth citizens 
participating in training for 
river monitoring.  
Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY1     Female/female youth citizens 
equipped with river monitoring device.  
Target: 50%/20%  of recipients  
 Female/female youth citizens 
equipped with device for 
coastal fishery monitoring and reporting.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of recipients  
 
762 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 306*
---

166 
 and integrate 
climate risks  
  
Female/female youth citizens 
and female/female youth government staff participating in training for coastal fishery monitoring and reporting.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of citizen 
participants and 30/15% of government staff  
 
Female/female youth citizens 
involved in data collection of 
mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of citizen 
participants and 30/15% of government staff in PY1  
 
Female/female participants in 
training and on-the-job 
learning on georeferenced monitoring  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY1   
Female/female youth citizens involved in data collection of mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2  
 Female/female participants in training and on -the-job learning 
on georeferenced monitoring  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY2  
Activity  3.1.3 : 
Establish an e -
extension 
system for 
fisheries and 
aquaculture  
    Women/female youths 
consulted on feasibility study 
and technical parameters for the system . 
Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members consulted  
 
Existence of voice -over version 
for illiterate women.  
Target: One that covers all the 
contents available in written 
form.  
    Women/female youths 
consulted on the voice -over 
version.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
community members consulted  
 
Women/female youths 
registered for the system  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth community members surveyed 
in PY2  
 
Women/female youths registered.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth


---
*Page 307*
---

167 
 community members surveyed 
in PY2  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 308*
---

168 
 Activity 3.1.1 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4)  
Strengthen the 
sectoral 
institutions 
and policies 
and develop 
additional 
capacity to 
respond to 
climate risks  
    Female/female youth 
participants in short -term 
speciali zed trainings on climate 
risks, climate analysis and mainstreaming climate change in 
national policies and strategies  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY3  
 
Training time spent on women 
specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 Target: 40% of training time in 
PY3 
 Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted 
on updated curricula on 
fisheries, aquaculture and ecosystem management  
Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants   in PY3  
 
Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted Diploma/Advanced Diploma training for fisheries 
technicians  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY3     Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted 
Diploma/Advanced Diploma training for fisheries technicians  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY4  
 Inclusion of detailed analysis on and proposed strategies for 
women, including necessary 
data collection.  
Target: 40%  of lengths of main 
texts of climate related sectoral 
studies and subsequent 
revision of national policies and 
strategies  
 Inclusion of analysis on and strategies for women, including necessary data collection.  
 Target: 40%  of length s of 
meeting time related to knowledge sharing  
Activity 3.1.2:  
(continued PY3 
and 4) Improve 
public sector 
capacities to 
monitor the 
fisheries sector 
and its 
associated    Female/female youth citizens 
involved in data collection of 
mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY3  
 
Proportion of female/female participants in training and on -
the-job learning on 
georeferenced monitoring     Female/female youth citizens 
involved in training for river monitoring.  
Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4  
 
Female/female youth citizens 
involved in data collection of mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of


---
*Page 309*
---

169 
 ecosystems 
and integrate 
climate risks   Target: 30/15%  of participants 
in PY3  
 participants in PY4  
 
Activity  3.1.3 : 
(continued PY3 
and 4) 
Establish an e -
extension 
system for 
fisheries and 
aquaculture  
    Women/female youths 
registered.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth 
community members surveyed in PY3     Women/female youths 
registered.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth community members surveyed in PY4  
 
Women/female youths registered and find the service useful.  
 Target: 60%/60%  of 
female/female youth community members registered  
 
National rollout of written and voice versions for women related subjects.  
Target: Two rolled out at the 
same time   
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5 Project Year 6 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4


---
*Page 310*
---

170 
 Activity 3.1.1 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)  
Strengthen the 
sectoral 
institutions 
and policies 
and develop 
additional 
capacity to 
respond to 
climate risks  
    Female/female youth 
participants in short -term 
speciali zed trainings on climate 
risks, climate analysis and mainstreaming climate change in 
national policies and strategies  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY5  
 
Training time spent on women 
specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 Target: 40% of training time in 
PY5 
 Female/female youth 
experts/practitioners consulted 
Diploma/Advanced Diploma training for fisheries technicians  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY5  
     
Activity 3.1.2:  
(continued PY5 
and 6) Improve 
public sector 
capacities to 
monitor the 
fisheries sector 
and its 
associated 
ecosystems and integrate 
climate risks
    Female/female youth citizens 
involved in data collection of 
mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY5  
 
    Female/female youth citizens 
involved in data collection of 
mangrove cover.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY6  
 
Activity  3.1.3 : 
(continued PY5 
and 6)    Women/female youths 
registered.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of    Women/female youths 
registered.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of


---
*Page 311*
---

171 
 Establish an e -
extension 
system for 
fisheries and 
aquaculture  female/female youth 
community members surveyed 
in PY5  
 female/female youth 
community members surveyed in PY6  
 
3.3.2 Output 3.2: National Capacities Developed to Support the Implementation of Adaptation Measures 763 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 1 Project Year 2 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 
Activity 3.2.1 : 
Capacity 
development 
for field 
fisheries and 
forestry 
officers to 
support 
implementa -
tion    Female/female youth 
participants in trainings on 
aquaculture production 
(including field visits to neighboring countries) . 
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participating officers in PY1  
 Training time on aquaculture 
production spent on women 
specific strengths and weaknesses.  
 Target: 40% of training time  in 
PY1 
 
Female/female youth 
participants in training for trainers.  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participants in PY1  
 
Training material for trainers 
on women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of training 
material in PY1  
    The same milestones for PY2  
 
763 The target group of women includes female youths.


---
*Page 312*
---

172 
 Female/female youth 
participants in trainings on 
mangrove monitoring, 
restoration and sustainable management  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participating officers in PY1  
 Training time on mangrove monitoring, restoration and 
sustainable management  spent 
on women specific strengths and weaknesses.  
 Target: 40% of training time  in 
PY1 
 Female/female youth officers consulted on selection (accuracy, utility of data generated, operation, maintenance, budget, etc.) of equipment for effective 
monitoring of implementation  
 Target: 30%/15%  of 
participating officers in PY1  
Activity 3.2.2 : 
Support to 
private 
investment, value addition 
and 
integration 
with other 
sectors         Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2  
  
Roundtable time spent on women specific activities.  
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time  in PY2  
 
Female/female youth 
beneficiaries of support to professional organization  
 Target: 50%/20%  of


---
*Page 313*
---

173 
 beneficiaries in PY2  
 
Female/female youth in fishery and tourism involved in partnership establishment.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of fishery 
participants and 40/10% of tourism in PY2.  
 Female/female youth 
processors consulted on the 
content and participation logistics of discussion on linking production and business.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth 
processors at each landing site 
in PY2.  
 
Female/female youth participants in discussion on linking production and 
business.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2.  
 
Female youth processors 
consulted on fish feed training 
content and participation 
logistics.  
 Target: 80%  of female youth 
processors at each landing site in PY2.  
 
Female youth participants in 
training on fish feed for youths.  
 Target: 50%  of participants in 
PY2.  
  
Female/female youth


---
*Page 314*
---

174 
 participants in dialogue and 
sensitization on financial 
inclusion.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2.  
 Female/female youth 
participants in dialogue and 
sensitization on financial inclusion.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2.  
 
Female/female youth 
stakeholders ( oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) consulted for consulted on training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of female 
youth processors at each 
landing site in PY2.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in business 
capacity development.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY2.  
 Environmental  and social 
safeguards items considered 
for compliance and directly related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of safeguard items 
in PY2.


---
*Page 315*
---

175 
 Activity 3.2.3 : 
Support to 
gender and 
youth 
empowerment 
through the 
application of 
the Household 
Methodology     Female/female youth 
participants in training of 
trainers.  
 Target: 80%/35%  of 
participants in PY1.     Household meetings facilitated.  
Target: 200 in PY2.  
 Community gatekeepers (from the community of training) 
separately sensitized prior to 
the training per trainer.  
 Target: 40 community 
gatekeepers in PY2. 
Activity 3.2.4 : 
Implement a 
functional literacy and 
numeracy 
programme 
targeted to 
project female 
beneficiaries     Female experts/practitioners 
involved in identification of 
participants and identification of approach  
 Target: 80% of participants in 
PY1.  
 Rural female youth participants 
in training of trainers  
 Target: 80%  of participants in 
PY1.     Rural women enrolled in  the 3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 500 in PY2  
 
Activity 3.2.5 : 
Train 
executing -
agency personnel on 
gender in 
general, SEAH, establish and 
operationalize 
referral 
pathways for 
GBV and 
strengthen 
FAO GRM     Male professionals at executing 
agencies involved in the project 
management directly or indirectly participate in each 
SEAH training . 
 Target: 80% of male 
professionals from executing 
agencies in PY1.  
 Professionals at executing agencies involved in the project management indirectly as supervisors participate in each 
SEAH training.  
 Target: 15% of participants.  
 
Male professionals along the referral pathways participate in each SEAH and GBV training . 
Target: 80%  of male    SEAH and GBV incidents 
reported through FAO GRM correctly identified as such by the GRM personnel  
 Target: 75%  
 Referral pathways established and operationalized with 
trained professionals, PEP kits 
and a complete list of contact information along each pathway.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District, 2 Districts  
(Cumulative number pathways 
4) 
 
Information campaigns organized for the public on GBV 
and referral pathways.


---
*Page 316*
---

176 
 professionals in PY1.  
 
Referral pathways established and operationalized with trained professionals, PEP kits 
and a complete list of contact 
information along each pathway.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District, 2 Districts  
  Target: 1 per each target 
District in PY2  
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 3 Project Year 4 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 
Activity 3.2.1 : 
Capacity 
development 
for field 
fisheries and 
forestry 
officers to 
support 
implementa -
tion    Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY3  
  
Roundtable time spent on 
women specific activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time  in PY3     Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4  
  
Roundtable time spent on 
women specific activities.  
 Baseline: 0 
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time  in PY4  
Activity 3.2.2 : 
Support to 
private 
investment, value addition 
and 
integration 
with other 
sectors     Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY3 
  
Roundtable time spent on women specific activities.  
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time in PY3  
 
Female/female youth beneficiaries of support to 
professional organization.     Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4  
  
Roundtable time spent on women specific activities.  
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time  in PY4  
 
Female/female youth beneficiaries of support to 
professional organization


---
*Page 317*
---

177 
  Target: 50 %/20%  of 
beneficiaries in PY3  
 
Female/female youth processors consulted on 
training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80%  of 
female/female youth processors at each landing site 
in PY3.  
 Female/female youth 
participants in t raining for 
artisanal fish processors  Target: 90% /35%  of 
participants in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth in fishery 
and tourism involved in partnership establi shment.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of fishery 
participants and 40/10% of 
tourism in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth processors consulted on the 
content and participation logistics of discussion on linking 
production and business.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth 
processors at each landing site in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in discussion on linking production and business.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of  Target: 50%/20%  of 
beneficiaries in PY4  
 Female/female youth processors consulted on 
training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth processors at each landing site 
in PY34.  
 Female/female youth 
participants in t raining for  
artisanal fish processors  Target: 90%/35%  of 
participants in PY4.  
 
Female/female youth in fishery 
and tourism involved in partnership establishment.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of fishery 
participants and 40/10% of 
tourism in PY4.  
 
Female/female youth processors consulted on the 
content and participation logistics of discussion on linking 
production and business.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth 
processors at each landing site in PY4.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in discussion on linking production and business.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of


---
*Page 318*
---

178 
 participants in PY3.  
 
Female youth processors consulted on fish feed training content and participation 
logistics.  
 Target: 80%  of female youth 
processors at each landing site 
in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in dialogue and sensitization on financial inclusion.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in dialogue and sensitization on financial inclusion.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY3  
 Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) 
consulted for consulted on 
training content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80%  of female 
youth processors at each landing site in PY3.  
 
Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) 
consulted for consulted on participants in PY4.  
 Female youth processors consulted on fish feed training content and participation 
logistics.  
 Target: 80%  of female youth 
processors at each landing site 
in PY4.  
 
Female youth participants in 
training on fish feed for youths.  
 Target: 50%  of participants in 
PY4.  
  
Fema le/female youth 
participants in dialogue and 
sensitization on financial 
inclusion.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4.  
 
Female/female youth 
participants in dialogue and sensitization on financial inclusion.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4.  
 Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster harvesters/processors/sellers and fish processors/sellers) consulted for consulted on 
training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of female 
youth processors at each landing site in PY4.


---
*Page 319*
---

179 
 training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80%  of female 
youth processors at each 
landing site in PY3.  
 Female/female youth participants in business capacity development.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY3.  
 
Environmental  and social 
safeguards items considered 
for compliance and directly related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of safeguard items 
in PY3.  Female/fe male youth 
participants in business capacity development.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY4.  
 Environmental  and social 
safeguards items considered for compliance and directly related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of safeguard items in PY4.  
Activity 3.2.3 : 
Support to 
gender and 
youth 
empowerment 
through the 
application of 
the Household 
Methodology     Household meetings facilitated.  
Target: 400 in PY3.  
 
Community gatekeepers (from 
the community of training) 
separately sensitized prior to the training per trainer.  
 Target: 80 community 
gatekeepers in PY3. 
 
Communities where more than 
half of the women agree that 
the community gatekeepers are leading support measures against SEAH and GBV.  
Target: 4 0% of the 
communities whose 
gatekeepers are sensitized     Female/female youth 
participants in training of 
trainers.  
 Target: 80%/35%  of 
participants in PY4.  
 Household meetings facilitated.  
Target: 600 households in PY4.  
(200 households completing 3 -
year course)  
 Difference in hours spent per week engaged in household chores and caregiving by 
women and men.  
Target: 50% reduction in 
difference for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity.  
 
Proportion of women who think their husbands’ beating is 
unjustified under any


---
*Page 320*
---

180 
 circumstanc e. 
Target: 50% reduction in 
proportion for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity.  
 
Community gatekeepers (from 
the community of training) separately sensitized prior to the training per trainer.  
 Target: 160 community 
gatekeepers in PY4. 
(Cumulative 40 gatekeepers 
completing 3 -year course)  
Activity 3.2.4 : 
Implement a 
functional 
literacy and 
numeracy 
programme 
targeted to 
project female 
beneficiaries     Female experts/practitioners 
involved in identification of 
participants and identification of approach  
 Target: 80% of participants in 
PY3.  
 
Rural female youth participants 
in training of trainers  
 Target: 80%  of participants in 
PY3.  
 
Rural women enrolled in  the 3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 1,000 in PY3  
    Rural women enrolled in  the 3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 1,500 in PY4  
 
Rural women completing the  3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 500 in PY4  
 
 
Activity 3.2.5 : 
Train 
executing -
agency 
personnel on 
gender in 
general, SEAH, 
establish and 
operationalize 
referral 
pathways for    Male professionals at executing 
agencies involved in the project 
management directly or indirectly participate in each 
SEAH training . 
 Target: 80% of male 
professionals from executing 
agencies in PY3.  
 Male professionals along the 
referral pathways participate in    SEAH and GBV incidents 
reported through FAO GRM correctly identified as such by the GRM personnel  
Target:  95%  
 Information campaigns organized for the public on GBV 
and referral pathways.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District in PY4


---
*Page 321*
---

181 
 GBV and 
strengthen 
FAO GRM  each SEAH and GBV training . 
Target: 80%  of male 
professionals in PY3.  
 
Referral pathways established 
and operationalized with 
trained professionals, PEP kits and a complete list of contact information along each pathway.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District, 3 Districts  (Cumulative number pathways 7) 
 
Information campaigns 
organized for the public on 
GBV and referral pathways.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District in PY3  
(Cumulative number of 
campaigns 2 per target 
District) . (Cumulative number of 
campaigns 3 per target District) . 
 
 
 
Activity  Timeline  
Project Year 5 Project Year 6 
Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4 
Activity 3.2.1 : 
Capacity 
development 
for field 
fisheries and 
forestry 
officers to 
support 
implementa -
tion        The same milestones for PY6


---
*Page 322*
---

182 
 Activity 3.2.2 : 
Support to 
private 
investment, 
value addition 
and 
integration 
with other 
sectors     Female/female youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY5 
  
Roundtable time spent on 
women specific activities.  
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time in PY5  
 
Female/female youth beneficiaries of support to 
professional organization.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
beneficiaries in PY5  
 
Female/female youth processors consulted on 
training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80%  of 
female/female youth processors at each landing site 
in PY5.  
 Female/female youth 
participants in t raining for 
artisanal fish processors  Target: 90% /35%  of 
participants in PY5.  
 Female/female youth in fishery and tourism involved in partnership establi shment.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of fishery 
participants and 40/10% of 
tourism in PY5.  
 
Female/female youth    Female/female  youth 
participants in Invest in 
Fisheries roundtable  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY6  
  
Roundtable time spent on 
women specific activities.  
 Target: 40% of roundtable 
time  in PY6  
 
Female/female youth beneficiaries of support to 
professional organization  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
beneficiaries in PY6  
 
Female/female youth processors consulted on 
training content and 
participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth processors at each landing site 
in PY6.  
 Female/female youth 
participants in t raining for  
artisanal fish processors  Target: 90%/35%  of 
participants in PY6.  
 Environmental  and social 
safeguards items considered for compliance and directly 
related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of safeguard items 
in PY6.


---
*Page 323*
---

183 
 processors consulted on the 
content and participation 
logistics of discussion on linking production and business.  
 Target: 80%/80%  of 
female/female youth 
processors at each landing site 
in PY5.  
 
Female/female youth participants in discussion on linking production and 
business.  
 Target: 50%/20%  of 
participants in PY5.  
 
Female youth processors consulted on fish  feed training 
content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80%  of female youth 
processors at each landing site in PY5.  
 
Female youth participants in 
training on fish feed for youths.  
 Target: 50%  of participants in 
PY5.  
  
Female/female youth 
participants  in dialogue and 
sensitization on financial 
inclusion.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY5.  
 
Female/female youth participants in dialogue and sensitization on financial 
inclusion.


---
*Page 324*
---

184 
  Target: 50 %/20%  of 
participants in PY5.  
 
Female/female youth stakeholders (oyster 
harvesters/processors/sellers 
and fish processors/sellers) consulted for consulted on training content and participation logistics.  
 Target: 80% /80%  of female 
youth processors at each 
landing site in PY5.  
 
Female/female youth participants in business capacity development.  
 Target: 50% /20%  of 
participants in PY5.  
 Environmental  and social 
safeguards items considered for compliance and directly 
related to women’s activities.  
Target: 50% of safeguard items 
in PY5.  
Activity 3.2.3 : 
Support to 
gender 
empowerment 
through the 
application of 
the Household 
Methodology     Household meetings facilitated.  
Target: 4 00 households in PY5. 
(Cumulative 4 00 households 
completing 3 -year course)  
 
Difference in hours spent per 
week engaged in household 
chores and caregiving by 
women and men.  
Target: 50% reduction in difference for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity  
(Cumulative 400 households).  
    Household meetings facilitated.  
Target: 200 households in PY5.  
(Cumulative 600 households completing 3 -year course)  
 
Difference in hours spent per 
week engaged in household chores and caregiving by women and men.  
Target: 50% reduction in difference for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity  
(Cumulative 600 househol ds).


---
*Page 325*
---

185 
 Proportion of women who 
think their husbands’ beating is 
unjustified under any circumstance.  
Target: 50% reduction in 
proportion for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity  
(Cumulative 4 00 households).  
 
Community gatekeepers (from 
the community of training) separately sensitized prior to the training per trainer.  
 Target: 8 0 community 
gatekeepers in PY5.  
(Cumulative 8 0 gatekeepers 
completing 3 -year course)  
 Communities where more than half of the women agree that 
the community gatekeepers 
are leading support measures against SEAH and GBV.  
Target: 60% of the communities whose 
gatekeepers are sensitized  Proportion of women who 
think their husbands’ beating is unjustified under any circumstance.  
Target: 50% reduction in 
proportion for each  of 200 
household ending the Activity  
(Cumulative 600 households).  
 
Community gatekeepers (from the community of training) separately sensitized prior to 
the training per trainer.  
 Target: 40 community 
gatekeepers in PY6. 
(Cumulative 120 gatekeepers 
completing 3 -year course)  
 
Activity 3.2.4 : 
Implement a 
functional 
literacy and 
numeracy 
programme 
targeted to 
project female 
beneficiaries     Rural women enrolled in  the 3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 1,000 in PY5  
 
Rural women completing the  3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 500 in PY5  
(Cumulative 1,000 completing the programme)     Rural women enrolled in  the 3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 500 in PY6  
 Rural women completing the  3-
year  programme.  
 Target: 500 in PY6  
(Cumulative 1,500 completing the programme)  
 
Number of male treasurers of female professional organizations in the fishery 
sector replaced by women .


---
*Page 326*
---

 Target: 50% of male treasurers  
Activity 3.2.5 : 
Train 
executing -
agency personnel on 
gender in 
general, SEAH, establish and operationalize 
referral 
pathways for GBV and 
strengthen 
FAO GRM  Information campaigns 
organized for the public on 
GBV and referral pathways.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District in PY5  
(Cumulative number of campaigns 4 per target District) . Information campaigns 
organized for the public on GBV and referral pathways.  
 Target: 1 per each target 
District in PY6  
(Cumulative number of campaigns 5 per target District) . 
__________