=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210914075253+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/ModDate: D:20210914081718+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  XIII 
Funding proposal package for FP 181 
 GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13 
14 September 2021  Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 October  202 1 
Virtual meeting  
Provisional Agenda Item  15 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ CRAFT – Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment 
Fund for Adaptation Technolog ies in Developing Countries ” submitted by  Pegasus Capital 
Advisors (PCA) ; 
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities  or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and s ocial report(s) d isclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “CRAFT – Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment 
Fund for Adaptation Technolog ies in Developing Coun tries” submitted by  Pegasus Capital Advisors 
(PCA) ; is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board 
Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive 
information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.13  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                            1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)                 59  
Environmental and s ocial report(s) disclosure                      71 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           74  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                87 
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                    89


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  CRAFT – Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund 
for Adaptation Technologies in Developing Countries  
Countr y(ies):  Bahamas, Brazil, Mexico,  Rwanda,  South Africa,  Trinidad & 
Tobago  
Accredited Entity:  Pegasus Capital Advisors  
Date of first submission:  2021/02/26   
Date of current submission  2021/ 09/12 
Version number  V.010


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 58 
 1 Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities sho uld ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 58 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Private   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate  which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separat e template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of th e percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:     
☐ Low-emission transport:      
☐ Buildings, cities , industries and appliances:    
☐ Forest ry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions:   
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:      
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  
 
See D1: Impact potential for additional information.  
 GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
 
 
45% 
30% 
25% 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact   Indicate t CO2eq over 
lifespan  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact   Over 39 million individuals  
N/A – global strategy  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  400 million  USD   
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  100 million  USD  
For multi -country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8 .  
☐ Grant  Enter number   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☒ Equity   100 
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  12 years  
(10 years +2 years 
potential extension)   A.12. Total lifespan  ~10 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.  
9/7/2021  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS 
Standards  to assess your FP 
category.  
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 58 
 A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc .)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  If not the Accredited Entity, please i ndicate the full legal name of the Executing 
Entity (ies) and provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there 
can be more than one Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the 
National Designated Authority. Refer to the definition of Executing Entity in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement.  
 
Executing Entities:  
- Lightsmith Climate Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF  
- Lightsmith Climate Resilience GP S.à r.l.  
- Lightsmith Climate Resilience Management LLC  
- Lemanik  Asset Management S.A. (AIFM management company)  
- GCF CRAFT Holdings, LP, a Delaware limited partnership  
- GCF CRAFT Holdings GP  LLC, a Delaware limited liability company  
- Pegasus Capital Advisors, the AE, for its role in managing GCF CRAFT 
Holdings, LP  
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages )


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 58 
 Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:  
1. Climate change problem  
2. Proposed interventions   
3. Climate impacts /benefits   
 
Climate Change Problem  
Climate change is already  increasing humanitarian tragedy and economic damage globally and will continue to do so 
even if global warming can be held to 1.5°C. Worldwide, natural disasters in 2020 alone produced losses of over $210 
billion, significantly hig her than $166 billion in 2019 (MunichRe 2021). Climate change is affecting water availability and 
quality, the agriculture and food sectors,  energy production, infrastructure, and health through multiple direct and 
indirect pathways . In short, the risks and impacts increased by climate change are substantial, complex, and growing.  
It has been estimated that up to $300 billion per year would be needed for climate adaptation in developing countries 
alone by 2030 (UNEP, 2014),  but adaptation receives only 5% of all climate finance – and less than $500 million of  
private investment  (GCA/ CPI, 2021). While adaptation has been traditionally considered as a public good and a service 
to be provided from public funds, mobilizing private sector in adaptation ho lds significant potential to accelerate the 
pace of adaptation worldwide while also helping local economies transition to more resilient pathways.  
 
The private sector plays a critical role in climate adaptation in several ways: First, the private sector g enerates 
adaptation technologies and solutions that can be used by businesses, communities, and governments. Private sector investors can also provide finance flows and business guidance to help accelerate the growth of companies building a 
more climate- resilient future. Third, the private sector plays a key role in encouraging broader adoption and upscaling 
of adaptation technologies and practices by demonstrating their profitability and economic viability.  
 
The demand for adaptation technology exists in all markets, and a growing number of users demonstrate an ability to 
pay for such technologies.  In 2018, $170 billion was estimated to have been spent on climate  solutions globally. That 
spending is expected to more than double to $380 billion by 2022.  There is an urgent need to mobilize both private 
sector capital and innovative technology to upscale adaptation in developing countries . In January 2021, UN Secretary 
General Antonio Guterres called for 50 per cent of all climate finance to be allocated to adaptation in developing 
countries.  If capital is rapidly deployed into companies who are proposing viable adaptation solutions, vulnerable 
developing countries wi ll rapidly  become more resilient, because access to cost -efficient, proven adaptation 
technologies  will be accelerated in response to demand.  
 
Proposed Intervention  
 
This Funding Proposal recommends that GCF commit up to $100 million of catalytic capital to scale- up ambition in 
adaptation finance by catalyzing the Climate Resilience and Adaptation Finance and Technology -transfer facility 
(“CRAFT” or the “Fund”), the fi rst private investment fund for climate resilience and adaptation. CRAFT addresses the 
“Adaptation Gap” by mobilizing capital to scal e up technologies for climate resilience and adaptation and applying them 
in developing countries  using a south- south technology transfer mechanism. CRAFT employs an innovative blended 
finance structure, including a Junior concessional layer that mitigates downside risk for Senior non- concessional 
investors. Having achieved first close in 2019 with a combination of public, pri vate, and philanthropic investors, CRAFT 
has been securing additional Junior and Senior capital, but its mobilization has been impacted by the effects of COVID -
19. CRAFT has mobilized over $125 million of public, private, and philanthropic investor commitm ents into the Fund 
and $108 million of non- concessional capital into CRAFT’s first investment. GCF’s catalytic capital would help to scale 
investment into private sector adaptation in developing countries by mobilizing up to $1 36 of additional Senior non-
concessional capital.  
 The Fund has identified multiple market segments and  technologies, products, and services to manage climate 
variability and weather volatility , reduce physical disruption and damage from climate extremes , and reduce  resource 
scarcity (particularly water and food) .  
 
A $100 million commitment of catalytic capital from GCF would allow CRAFT to scale- up ambition in adaptation finance 
and accelerate development, application, and transfer of critical private sector adaptation and climate r esilience 
technologies in developing countries, particularly in the context of promoting green recovery from COVID -19. GCF’s 
finance could mobilize capital in two ways: 1) encourage up to $1 36 million of additional Senior capital at the fund level 
to scale up CRAFT  to its maximum size of $400 million and 2) unlock $800 million or more in co- financing at the portfolio 
company level . It is expected that GCF’s engagement and expertise would accelerate CRAFT’s impact by aligning its 
investments and applications with developing countries’ national climate action plans and accelerating the scaling up 
of adaptation and climate resilience technologies and solutions.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 5 OF 58 
  
CRAFT is focused on developing count ries in which private capital mobilizat ion is broadly more challenging. These 
challenges are exacerbated by COVID -19, which has increased potential investors’ perceived risk of new investment 
strategies, particularly those aimed at developing countries . GCF’s catalytic capital commitment mobilizes capital by 
overcoming that perceived risk, enabling CRAFT to achieve substantially greater mobilization and impact in the post -
COVID -19 environment. In addition, COVID -19 has had dramatic human health impacts and increased the fragility of 
society and the economy, particularly in the most vulnerable developing countries, further increasing the strain on global 
systems that are already susceptible to the physical risks and impacts of climate change. Additional analy sis on COVID -
19 and its link to climate resilience can be found here.1 
 
Climate Adaptation Benefits  
 
CRAFT generates measurable adaptation benefits in developing countries by mobilizing technologies that enable the 
reduction of exposure to climate hazards through improved access to resilient infrastructure, resilience intelligence 
applications and knowledge, and other risk -reducing  assets, as well as by deploying technology that leverages stronger 
adaptive capacity in the key vulnerable sectors. CRAFT supports investments in six categories of technologies: (1) 
Catastrophe Risk Modeling and Weather Forecasting, (2) Agricultural Analy tics, (3) Supply Chain Analytics, (4) 
Geospatial Imaging and Mapping,  (5) Water Harvesting and Efficiency and (6) Resilient Food Systems . CRAFT’s 
Impact Measurement System (IMS) measures the impact of each investment on climate adaptation, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), economic development, and gender.  
 
 
1 The Global Center on Adaptation, Adaptation Finance in the Context of COVID -19, 2021. https://gca.org/wp -
content/uploads/2021/01/GCA -Adaption- in-Finance- Report.pdf


---
*Page 9*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 58 
 6  
2. UN FAO, The impact of disasters on agriculture and food security , 2015. www.fao.org/3/a -i5128e.pdf  
3 IPCC, Global Warmi ng of 1.5° C  - Summary for Policymakers , 2018. www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/summary -for-policy -makers   
4 UNEP, Adaptation Gap Report , 2016. www.unep.org/adaptationgapreport/sites/unep.org.adaptationgapreport/files/documents/agr2016.pdf  
5 Only $22 billion of $410 billion of global climate finance in 2015- 2016 went to adaptation, and the vast majority was public finance. Climate 
Policy Initiative, Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2017. https://climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp- content/uploads/2017/10/2017- Global -
Landscape- of-Climat e-Finance.pdf  
6 Global Center on Adaptation, Adaptation Finance in the Context of Covid- 19. https://gca.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/01/GCA -Adaption-
in-Finance- Report.pdf   Climate Policy Initiative, Updated View on the Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2019. 
https ://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/updated- view-on-the-global -landscape- of-climate -finance- 2019/  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages )  
Climate change problem : Describe  the climate change problem  the pro posal  is expected  to addres s. Describe the  
mitigation  needs (GHG emissions profile)  and/or  adaptation needs  (climate hazards and associates risks based on 
impacts, exposure, and vulnerabilities)  that the proposed interventions  are expected to address . Also d escribe the 
most likely scenario ( prevailing conditions  or other alternative) that would remain or continue i n the absence of the 
proposed interventions . Include baseline information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including 
the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be included in the feasibility study .  
Context : In describing the mitigation and/or  adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/ area of the proposed 
interventions  including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.  
Related projects/interventions : Also  describe any recent or ongoing projects /interventions that are related to the  
proposal from other domestic or international sources of funding, such as the Global Environment Facility , Adaptation 
Fund, Climate Investment Funds , etc.,  and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling 
up, replication, etc.) . Please identify current gaps  and barriers  regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate 
further how this project/programme complements or addresses these.  
Climate change problem  
Climate change is already increasing humanitarian tragedy and economic damage around the world.2 Even if global 
warming is limited to 1.5 °C above pre- industrial levels, climate -related risks and impacts will increase, with substantial 
loss and damage to food and agriculture, water, energy, global supply chains, the built environment, and human and 
animal health (IPCC, 2018).3 Given that limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees  is itself increasingly challenging, it is 
becoming all the more urgent to accelerate the pace of adaptation.  
CRAFT ’s Approach  to the climate change problem  
It has been noted that by 2030, up to $300 billion per year would  be needed globally for climate adaptation in developing 
countries alone (UNEP, 2017)4, but adaptation receives only 5% of all climate finance –  and less than $500 million of 
private investment . (GCA/ CPI, 2021)5. GCF investment into adaptation projects has thus far for the most part 
concentrated on public -sector driven initiatives.  In 2020, the level of GCF contribution to adaptation was $ 535 million 
USD . Total global adaptation finance (including from entities such as AF, GEF and bilateral/multilateral donors)  
approached $30 billion in 2019.  6 
Traditional approaches to financing adaptation are inadequate because they rely solely on development and aid 
budgets, which have proven slow to mobilize.  According to the Global Commission on Adaptation (GCA) and Climate 
Policy Initiative, less than $500 million of private investment can be ascribed to adaptation and climate resilience (GCA / 
CPI, 2021).  There is an urgent need to mobilize private sector capital and innovation to enable climate adaptation in 
developing countries  (UNEP, 2014).  
CRAFT works by accelerating the development of private sector driven technologies and services in the following in-
demand areas:  
• Agricultural analytics:  enhance the adaptive capacity and resiliency of agriculture beneficiaries by better 
predicting crop planting patterns in vulnerable geographies and advising farmers on best practices around the 
optimal use of natural resources and agricultural inputs;  
• Water harvesting and irrigati on: improve access to year -round, clean drinking water for individuals in areas 
of high or extreme water stress; use irrigation technology to increase agriculture productivity and protect against 
climate -related crop failures;


---
*Page 10*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 58 
   
 • Resilient food systems:  adopt  drought tolerant seeds and trees to increase resilience in areas with degraded 
land and high salinity;  
• Geospatial mapping and imaging: enable the quantification of climate pressures  and changes which are 
massive in both geographic scope and timeline; satellite technology can rigorously characterize change and 
develop models based on historical data to forecast change to inform adaptive decision- making ; 
• Catastrophe risk modeling/ disaster risk management: reduce exposure to climate related hazards by 
informing strategic planning, decision- making and investment to build climate resilience for physical and natural 
assets through climate risk assessments.  
• Supply chain analytics:   enhance the adaptive capacity of companies, employees, goods and services across 
supply chains by incorporating weather and other parameters to support demand forecast, inventory and end-to-end management.  
CRAFT is focused on investing in and scaling up adaptation solutions for developing countries that have a combination 
of climate vulnerabilities and an enabling environment for private investment ( i.e., a history of successful private equity 
investment).  CRAFT’s investments in companies in developing countries that produce adaptation solutions will support 
their scaling up and the deployment of their adaptation solutions into developing countries.  Presently, adaptation 
solutions companies face multiple barriers to securing c apital to scale up and deploy their technologies, such as limited 
access to finance as SMEs in developing countries and a lack of understanding that their adaptation solutions can be 
applied in other developing countries that will face similar challenges b ecause of climate change.  These challenges 
have been compounded by the COVID -19 global pandemic, which in 2020 resulted in an estimated 40% reduction in 
foreign direct investment into developing countries (GCA/CPI , 2021) and increased fragility and challe nges for SMEs 
in developing countries.   
These developing countries  - in which adaptation solutions companies are located and will deploy their technologies  - 
face both increasing chronic risks such as water stress, sea level rise, flooding, wildfire, and land degradation as well 
as increasing frequency and severity of extreme weather events (IPCC , 2019). CRAFT’s investment in scaling up and 
applying adaptation and climate resilience solutions in these developing countries will build private s ector capacity for 
adaptation and climate resilience. Moreover, by catalyzing a global market, CRAFT supports the broader application of 
adaptation technologies to other developing countries, including Low Income Countries (LICs) and Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS) (i.e., as a global market for adaptation technologies is scaled up, and becomes more 
affordable, other developing countries will also benefit from those technologies in the future). CRAFT includes country 
concentration limits to maintain ri sk diversification and focuses on a range of technology areas to promote portfolio 
diversification.  CRAFT’s investment of GCF funding will be targeted at the countries of focus, but may well have a 
longer term benefit for other developing countries  as wel l. 
CRAFT’s criteria for developing country selection include a close examination of each country’s  (a) income level, (b) 
climate vulnerability , and ( c) private investment environment .  To achieve higher potential impact on climate resilience 
and adaptation, the Fund evaluated developing countries for climate vulnerability across several different metrics 
(vulnerability rankings, historical losses, projected hazards, etc.). Analysis was b ased on several sets of climate 
vulnerability rankings (e.g., Germanwatch CRI, ND -GAIN Index, CPI analysis, IPCC discussion of regional climate risk 
and adaptation needs).  Please see Annex 24 for a country -by-country vulnerability assessment and CRAFT’s al ignment 
with each country’s climate policies and plans.  As part of this process, CRAFT  consulted each country’s NDC and 
existing climate policies (e.g., NAPs) to assess what each country identified as its most pressing climate vulnerabilities.  
CRAFT’s six  initial focus areas, which include agricultural analytics, water harvesting and drip irrigation, resilient food 
systems, geospatial mapping and imaging, supply chain analytics and catastrophe risk modeling, overlap with the 
technology need of all  6 NOL countries identified in this proposal. By deploying capital into companies that offer these 
solutions, CRAFT’s potential climate impact address es the vulnerabilities below . 
 CRAFT builds on and complements the GE F supported  Adaptation SME Accelerator P roject (ASAP).  The ASAP project 
was targeted to  enhancing the availability and uptake of climate adaptation solutions by identifying, engaging and 
empowering SMEs providing such solutions in developing countries.  The ASAP project contributed to the identi fication 
of Adaptation SMEs worldwide and the development of an “adaptation solutions  taxonomy” on which this project is 
based.  The ASAP project also linked to national and regional level SME incubators to encourage the emergence of 
private sector in adaptation relevant sectors and markets.  
 
CRAFT also supplements the Adaptation Fund, LDC F and the Climate Investment Funds by scaling up private sector 
adaptation investment and capacity in developing countries. In all beneficiary countries, CRAFT investments will be  
consistent with national government programs, as well as relevant climate f inance programs and projects, to ensure 
complementarity of approaches and maximization of benefits.  Market evaluation conducted prior to investment in 
portfolio projects will include baseline assessments to understand any past lessons from adaptation prog ramming in


---
*Page 11*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 58 
   
  
7 USAID, Rwanda Climate Risk Profile. 2019. https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2019_USAID -ATLAS- Rwanda-
Climate -Risk-Profile.pdf  
8 Frontiers in Earth Science, Climate Change in Rwanda: The Observed Changes in Daily Maximum and Minimum Surface Air 
Temperatures during 1961– 2014. 2021. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/feart.2021.619512/full  the country, end -user ability to pay and the sustainability/profitability of investments, and an analysis of public and 
private sector customers and value chains to assess demand and demand growth.  
 
CRAFT’s programme interventions occur through its investments in companies that offer products, services or 
technologies that  reduce or remove an identified hazard, threat or impact of climate change.   (Note that the table below 
provides a n illustrative and non-exhaustive set of hazards, threats, and programme interventions.  As climate change 
continues to unfold, the scale, frequency, and type of hazards and impacts are expected to change as will the 
programme interventions to reduce or remove them and the context in which those interventions will occur, such as 
recovery from the COVID -19 global pandemic (GCA/CPI , 2021).)  
Eligibility criteria for programmatic adaptation projects  
Region  Country  Hazard  Impac t Programme interventions  
Eastern 
Province  Rwanda  More frequent violent 
storms with torrential 
rains  
Drought in 2016 in the 
Kayonza,  Kirehe, and 
Nyagatare districts  left 
44,000 households  
(some 225,000 people) 
food insecure7 
Warmest average 
annual temperatures in 
the country of 20- 21°C8 
Publication s: 
USAID – Rwanda 
Climate Change Risk 
Profile7 
Climate Change in 
Rwanda: The Observed 
Changes in Daily 
Maximum and Minimum 
Surface Air 
Temperatures during 
1961 –20148 Crop damage or total 
crop destruction and 
thus yield reduction.  
Increased flooding and 
landslides destroying 
crops cultivated on 
vulnerable/fragile areas 
such as valleys and 
steep slopes.  Provision of data and analytics to 
be used for risk transfer , 
includ ing agriculture insurance  
Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resilient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.), including solutions that 
make the supply chain more 
resilient; target knowledge 
transfer in areas such as 
improved soil management 
practices  
Water: Investment in companies 
offering water harvesting 
solutions or drip irrigation  
Risk Management and Analytics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling and 
other climate intelligence 
services to effectively monitor 
and predict extreme weather 
events such as floods  to ensure 
citizen livelihood and reduction in 
supply c hain disruptions  
South -
western 
Region  South 
Africa  Increasing temperature, 
heat waves; probability 
of summer  heat waves 
has increased 
dramatically over the last 
2 decades of the 20th 
century compared to 
1961 to 1980  (Lyon, Reductions in crop 
yields, pressure on water resources  
Damage to infrastructure due to extreme heat and 
other extreme events  Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resilient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.), including solutions that


---
*Page 12*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 58 
   
 2009)  leading to 
increased frequ ency of 
fires 
Water shortages 
projected due to 
increased water withdrawals for irrigation 
in the Breede River 
 
(Steynor et al., 2009)  
Under low mitigation scenarios, temperature 
to increase more than 
6°C 
Maize- based systems 
are particularly vulnerable to climate 
change and are 
projected to result in 
yield losses of 30%+ in 
South Africa
 (Schlenker 
and Lobell, 2010)  
Publications: National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, 
IPCC Report -  Africa  Cholera outbreaks are 
associated with heavy 
rainfall in the region and 
may be influenced by El 
Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (de Magny et 
al., 2007, 2012;  
Mendelsohn and 
Dawson, 2008 ) 
 
Publications: National 
Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy, 
IPCC Report -  Africa  
 make the supply chain more 
resilient  
Water: Investment in Companies offering water harvesting 
solutions, the safe disposal of 
wastewater effluent and strategies that minimize outflows 
into the marine environment  
Risk Management and Analytics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling and 
other climate intelligence 
services to effectively monitor 
and predict hurricanes to ensure citizen livelihood and reduction in 
supply chain disruptions; 
provision of data and analytics to be used for risk transfer  
Health:  Strategies focused on 
medical diagnostics (i .e., with 
test kits), research on alternative medicine  
 
Northern 
Mexico  
 
 
 
Southeast  
Mexico  Mexico  Droughts, precipitation 
and temperature, 
heatwaves, and disease 
transmission  
Precipitation declines of 
0 to 30%  are projected 
over Mexico by 2040, 
with the most acute 
declines in northwestern 
Mexico, the primary 
region of irrigated grain 
farming (IPCC North 
America)  
Ocean temperature 
increases, accelerated 
sea level rise, greater 
frequency and intensity 
of extreme weather 
events, increase in the 
incidence and spread of 
diseases caused by 
vectors, alterations to 
agroclimatic systems 
and fishing (USAID 
2017).   
 
 
Decreasing agricultural 
and livestock yields  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increasingly exposed 
infrastructure, 
settlements and assets  
 
Publications:   
Estrategia Nacional 
Visión  de Cambio 
Climatico  Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resilient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.), including solutions that 
make the supply chain more 
resilient; target knowledge 
transfer in areas such as 
improved soil management 
practises  
Water: Investment in companies 
offering water harvesting 
solutions or drip irrigation  
Risk Management and Analyt ics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling and 
other climate intelligence 
services to effectively monitor 
and predict changing rainfall 
patterns and heat stress; monitor 
to reduce supply chain 
disruptions; provision of data and


---
*Page 13*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 58 
   
  
9 USAID, Mexico Climate Risk Profile . 2017. 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile_Mexico.pdf  
10 Drought As sessment in Zacatecas , Mexico. 2016. https://www.mdpi.com/2073- 4441/8/10/416  
11 Extreme climate events and adaptation: an exploratory analysis of drought in Mexico.  2009. 
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/environment -and-development -economics/article/ abs/extreme -climate -events -and-adaptation- an-
exploratory -analysis -of-drought -in-mexico/834769A864777E5D8560DC97D90899C9  Extreme e vents with 
significant damage to 
infrastructure;  in 2013, 
two powerful storms 
simultaneously hit both 
coasts within a 24-hour 
period resulting in $5.7 
billion in damages.9 
1.4-2.0°C increase in 
temperature by 20509 
In ten years, Zacatecas 
has lost 478 mil lion US 
dollars due to drought. 
2005, 2009, and 2011 
were the most critical 
years, with 47%, 39%, 
and 63% losses in 
agricultural income . 10 
Publication: IPCC - North 
America  
USAID – Mexico Climate 
Risk Profile9 
Drought Assessment in 
Zacatecas, Mexico10 
Extreme climate events 
and adaptation: an 
exploratory analysis of 
drought in Mexico11 analytic s to be used for risk 
transfer  
 
Southern 
Islands  Bahamas  Rainfall deficiency and 
subject to drought  
During wet season from 
June to November, 
islands are subject to flooding and hurricanes 
(i.e., Andrew in 1992, 
Bertha in 1996, Lili in 
1996, Floyd in 1999,  
Michelle in 2001, etc .) 
Publications:  
National Policy for the  Adaptation to Climate 
Change 2005  Leads to decreasing 
productivity in crop 
yields  
Soil is vulnerable to 
salinization due to flooding and sea level 
rise 
Loss of soil fertility and 
degradation due to 
increased precipitation 
and flooding  
Hurricanes can cause 
massive damage to 
infrastructure including power and 
telecommunication grids, Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resilient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.), including solutions that 
make the supply chain more 
resilient  
Water: Investment in Companies 
offering water harvesting 
solutions, the safe disposal of 
wastewater effluent and 
strategies that minimize outflows 
into the marine environment


---
*Page 14*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 58 
   
 docks, roadways, 
homes, schools and 
medical facilities. The 
cost to replace damaged 
infrastructure du e to 
Hurricane Joaquin in 
2015, was estimated to 
be more than 80 million 
Bahamian dollars  (INDC 
2015).  
Publications:  
First National 
Communication on 
Climate Change  
IPCC Report on Small 
Islands  
INDC – November 2015  Risk Management and Analytics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling a nd 
other climate intelligence services to effectively monitor 
and predict hurricanes to ensure 
citizen livelihood and reduction in 
supply chain disruptions; 
provision of data and analytics to 
be used for risk transfer  
 
Tobago  Trinidad & 
Tobago  Between 196 1-1990, 
average ambient 
temperature increased 
by 0.6  °C but the rate of 
warming has picked up 
to an increase of 1.7 °C 
over the period 1961-
2008  (National Climate 
Change Policy  2011).  
Increased potential to be 
hit by tropical storms  
Increased frequency and 
intensity of hurricanes 
and hillside erosion .12 
Intensifying coastal 
erosion and need for 
nature- based solutions .12 
Datasets and Models:  
Providing Regional 
Climates for Impacts 
Studies (PRECIS) 
system from the Hadley 
Centre Coupled Climate 
Model (HADCM) global 
model  
NOAA Research  
Publications:  
National Climate Change 
Policy  2011  Increased aridity of soils 
and decreased crop 
yields due to the 
decreased availability in 
water for irrigation and 
tolerance of crop 
varieties  
Soil is vulnerable to 
salinization due to 
flooding and sea level 
rise 
Less available surface 
water due to increased 
evapotranspiration  
Reduced percolation and 
recharge of groundwater 
reserves in aquifers  
Publications:  
IPCC AR4 – Impacts of 
Climate Change to the 
Caribbean Region  
National Climate Change 
Policy  Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resil ient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.), including solutions that 
make the supply chain more 
resilient  
Water: Investment in Companies 
offering water harvesting 
solutions, the safe disposal of 
wastewater effluent and 
strategies that minimiz e outflows 
into the marine environment  
Risk Management and Analytics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling and 
other climate intelligence 
services to effectively monitor 
and predict hurricanes to ensure 
citizen livelihood and reduction  in 
supply chain disruptions; 
provision of data and analytics to 
be used for risk transfer


---
*Page 15*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 58 
   
  
12 Met Office UK. Coastal Engineering in the UK –  The Need for Climate Predictions.  2019. 
https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/binaries/content/a ssets/metofficegovuk/pdf/business/international/coastal_engineering.pdf  Coastal Engineering in 
the Carib bean12 
Amazon 
Region  Brazil  Increased temperatures ,  
1.7°C – 5.3°C increase 
in temperatures by 2085;  
Potential effects of 
climate change in Brazil 
suggest changes of  4–
4.5°C in surface 
temperature as a result 
of increased CO2 
concentrations (de 
Siqueira et al., 1994, 
1999)  (IPCC  2014).  
In southern and southeastern Brazil, 
long-term tendencies for 
air temperature, from the 
beginning  of the 20th 
century, have indicated 
warming tendencies  
(Sansigolo et al., 1992)  
(IPCC 2014).  
During the past decades, 
patterns of precipitation 
have changed 
significantly and 
temperatures have risen 
by 0.5°C  (IPCC 2014).  
Droughts that  led to 
forest fires were 
detected during the very 
strong ENSO  events of 
1911 –1912, 1925– 1926, 
1982 –1983, and 1997–
1998.  Extreme droughts 
also occurred during 
these years in northeast  
Brazil  (IPCC 2014).  
In sub- tropics, 
precipitation  exhibits a 
long-term change, with a 
sharp increase in the 
period 1956 –1990 after  
a dry period along 1921–
1955 (Castañeda and  Increased  desertification 
and forest fires  
Decrease in biodiversity  
Reduced availability of 
freshwater, increased 
flooding and coastal 
erosion  
Increased food insecurity 
Reduced crop yields  
Decreased available 
arable land, driving 
continued deforestation  
Erosion and depletion of 
nutrient rich soil  
Reductions in rainfall 
would affect not onl y 
Amazonia but also 
Brazil’s central -south 
region, where most of  
the country’s agriculture 
and silviculture are 
located  
Risk of water supply 
shortages for cities, 
hydropower generation, 
and agriculture  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Publications: 
ClimateLinks, USAID Risk Management and Analytics: 
Geospatial, weather monitoring, 
catastrophe risk modeling and 
other climate intelligence 
services to effectively monitor 
and predict hurricanes to ensure 
citizen livelihood and reduction in 
supply chain disruptions; 
provision of data and analytics to 
be used for risk transfer  
Agriculture: identification and 
investment into strategies that 
enhance food security and 
sustainable food production 
using agricultural analytics 
and/or resilient food products 
(e.g., climate resistant seeds, 
etc.) 
Water: Investment in companies 
offering water harvesting 
solutions or drip irrigation


---
*Page 16*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 58 
   
  
13 Climate change and agricultural productivity in Brazil: future perspectives.  2016. https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/environment -
and-development -economics/article/climate- change -and-agricultural -productivity -in-brazil -future -
perspectives/0BD4A1035BC0ED1B3399DC5782D10CB0 
14 Modelling climate change effects in southern Brazil.  2013. https://bioone.org/journals/journal -of-coastal -research/volume- 65/issue-
sp2/SI65- 327.1/Modelling- climate -change- effects -in-southern- Brazil/10.2112/SI65- 327.1.short  Barros, 1996)  (IPCC 
2014).  
Brazil will experience an 
increase of 1.43°C in the 
average temperature 
and a reduction of 1.44 per cent in rainfall in the 
period from 2030 to 
2049, which simulations 
suggest will red uce the 
agricultural productivity by 18 per cent .
13 
In order to forecast 
coastal response to the 
effects of climate change 
at these sites over 
several time horizons 
(2030 –2070– 2100), 
model simulations using 
the DRanSTM (Dilating 
Random Shoreface 
Translation Model) were 
performed. Simulation 
results have 
demonstrated t hat 
Cassino sector is 
particularly vulnerable to 
such effects, and 
therefore presents 
extremely high recession 
distances (102– 103 
m).14 
Publications:  
IPCC - Latin America  
Climate change and 
agricultural productivity in Brazil: future 
perspectives
13 
Modellin g climate 
change effects in southern Brazil
14 
Climate change impacts 
on heat stress in Brazil —
Past, present, and future 
implications for Climate Risk Profile 
Brazil  
IPCC - Latin America


---
*Page 17*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 58 
   
   
 
15 Climate change impacts on heat stress in Brazil —Past, present, and future implications for occupational heat exposure.  2020. 
https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/joc.6877  
16 Climate change evidence in Brazil from Köppen's climate annual types frequency.  2018. 
https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/joc.5893  occupational heat 
exposure15 
Climate change 
evidence in Brazil from 
Köppen's climate annual 
types frequency16 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram )


---
*Page 18*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 58 
   
  
17 The World Bank, Enabling Private Investment in Climate Adaptation and Resilience. 2021. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35203/Enabling- Private -Investment -in-Climate -Adaptation- and-Resilience -
Current -Status -Barriers -to-Investment -and-Blueprint -for-Action.pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y  
18 IFC, MSME Finance Gap.  2017. https ://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/03522e90- a13d- 4a02- 87cd- 9ee9a297b311/121264- WP-PUBLIC -
MSMEReportFINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=m5SwAQA  Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway towards a 
low-emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change (approximately 1 page).  
The theory of change should include any barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, 
ecological, institutional, etc., as relevant) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of inputs, activities, outputs, 
outcomes, and impact statements, and identify the how and why of causal relations to deliver the project's expected 
results.  
The CRAFT initiative is based on the premise that i f capital was  rapidly deployed to support SME -led adaptation 
solutions, developing countries and communities worldwide would become less vulnerable more rapidly  because they 
would have increased access to cost -efficient, locally tailored, demand driven, technologically proven adaptation 
technologies . In an  ideal scenario, the adaptation finance gap would be reduced and developing countries could face 
the impending climate changes with more preparedness, without relying on donor funding.  However, several  barriers 
need to be addressed before this solution is  fully met.  
Barriers  
Barrier 1 – Insufficient local, actionable information about climate risks, impacts and adaptation options.   
The companies offering these solutions do not call themselves "climate resilience" companies, and many do not realize their potential to address climate- related risks.   Adaptation has historically not been well-defined and can take many 
forms . By identify ing the “tools ” that can be used for adaptation and resilience, CRAFT can help narrow the gap and 
accelerate the development of climate adaptation intelligence. In addition, many companies with these tools do not 
serve the sectors and geographies where they are most needed.  
CRAFT applies the ASAP Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy (Annex 27) and can invest in and support Adaptation SMEs 
identified through ASAP. ASAP’s findings constitute an effective marketing/feasibility study which has identified 
Adaptation SMEs that are potential investments for CRAFT. By mapping climate resilient companies and matching 
them against the key vulnerabilities in each geography, CRAFT has the potential to deliver impact where it  is and will 
be most needed as climate change continues to unfold.  
Barrier 2 - Limited access to technologies to manage climate risks.  
Many developing co untries are limited by the inadequate infrastructure and lack of resources, including climate 
intelligence, to enhance their  communities’ capacity to adapt to climate change. By investing in the best climate resilient 
solutions for developing countries, and by directly supporting the Fund’s portfolio companies in expanding their offerings 
and footprints globally, CRAFT supports technology transfer for climate resilience. Through the international expansion of portfolio companies’ co mmercial activities, CRAFT can embed technology, knowledge, and capacity for climate 
resilience within businesses, governments, and communities in developing countries.  
Barrier 3 – Low risk appetite of commercial investors  to invest in  adaptation technolog ies companies in 
developing countries  leading to insufficient finance for adaptation  SME growth.  
By 2030, it is expected that the cost of adaptation will reach $140- $300 billion per year. However,  as of 2019, only $30 
billion was deployed.17  GCA/CPI reports that private investment in adaptation remains limited to less than $500 million 
as of January 2021 (GCA/CPI , 2021), with FDI into developing countries declining by 40% in 2020 in the context of  
COVID -19.  SMEs in general face substantial barriers to accessing finance in developing countries, with the World 
Bank reporting that 40 percent of MSMEs in 128 countries are credit constrained (IFC , 2017).  The challenge of SME 
access to finance in devel oping countries is further compounded for SMEs involved in adaptation and climate resilience 
(CPI, 2018).18 Commercial investors are often hesitant to take on risk for new strategies, especially in developing 
markets . CRAFT employs an innovative blended fi nance structure, with a Junior concessional layer that mitigates 
downside risk for Senior non- concessional investors, which encourages adaptation -finance investment. The Fund sees 
adaptation investing as an opportunity to generate returns while delivering impact.


---
*Page 19*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 58 
   
  
19 Some key climate vulnerabilities include: (a) water stress, water scarcity, and drought affecting both urban and rural popul ations in 
regions such as Southern and Eastern Africa; (b) declining agricultural productivity from drought, aridification, and heat st ress in regions 
such as Southern and Eastern Africa and North Africa; (c) supply chain disruption affecting manufacturing, logistics, and industry globally; 
(d) physical damage to homes, buildings, and infrastructure from storms and floods in regions such as coastal South and Southeast Asia; 
and (e) harm to human and animal health from the spread of disease vectors in regions such as Latin America, the Caribbean, and Sub-
Saharan Africa. IPCC: www.ipcc.ch/assessment -report/ar5  COVID 19 – challenges and opportunities:  The need for adaptation technologies and solutions is even greater and 
more urgent than before due to the humanitarian and economic impact of COVID -19 on developing countries , which 
has further constrained public investment into adaptation- related sectors and constricted adaptive capacity of many 
communities.  This is  compounded by accelerating physical climate risk s and hazards ; yet the risk appetite of most 
private investors for first time strategies  – such as climate adaptation investment  for emerging markets – has been 
dramatically impacted as well.  GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment would help to overcome that perceived investment 
risk and to scale up finance for adaptation and climate resili ence solutions for developing countries in the recovery from 
COVID -19. 
CRAFT Theory of Change  
 
 
CRAFT invest s in technologies that help communities, businesses,  and governments assess , reduce and  manage 
climate vulnerabilities , which are defined as significant risk of loss, damage, or harm to specific populations, sets of 
physical assets, or economic or ecological systems resulting from physical phenomena that have a significant 
contribution from climate change.19 CRAFT accomplishes this by investing in climate resilience "tools" (technologies, 
products, and services) that can help assess and manage climate risks, resulting in:


---
*Page 20*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 58 
   
 Direct impacts  
CRAFT directly reduces  climate vulnerabilities for beneficiaries by scaling up access to: (a) localized, asset -specific 
information on climate- related risks and impacts, and (b) physical products and services to manage those risks and 
impacts. CRAFT also make s measurable contributions toward several SDGs, gender  equality and social inclusion, as 
well as to GHG emissions reductions and economic development.  Furthermore, the accelerated development of 
developing country SME in sectors where demand is sure to grow would deliver multiple economic benefits in addition 
to helping countries transition t o a more sustainable economic model.  
CRAFT’s Impact Measurement System (IMS) measures , track s, and report s on these using both ex ante and ex post 
benefits reporting.  This will feed into the identification of next -generation adaptation investments.   
Indirect market -level impacts.   
CRAFT create s indirect impacts by catalyzing the development of markets for climate resilience solutions. By identifying 
concrete examples of technologies, products and services that can support climate resilience, CRAFT has the potential 
to create a demonstration effect, encouraging more public and private actors to use climate resilience solutions, more 
entrepreneurs and innovators to adapt their existing tools to offer these solutions (or to develop new ones), and more 
investors to finance them. CRAFT expects to harness GCF’s catalytic capital to create much greater market -level 
impacts through learning and market development.  
Furthermore , the information, products, and services scaled up by CRAFT will enable the development of a pipeline of 
investable adaptation projects (e.g., resilient infrastructure)  by demonstrating the technical feasibility, economic viability 
and profitability of adaptation solutions , thereby catalyzing much larger private finance flows to these investments in 
the future.  Beyond the direct and indirect impacts from its investments, CRAFT expects to have catalytic market -level 
impacts in several ways:  CRAFT can unlock adaptation action and investment that will continue beyond the scope and 
duration of the fund itself. Moreov er, CRAFT's focus on information – analytics, modeling, forecasting, and engineering 
– as a key set of tools for resilience can yield the prere quisite data and insights needed for broader climate adaptation 
action and investment , including public sector adaptation finance.  
Given (1) the increased need and urgency for adaptation solutions in developing countries driven by the combination 
of the impact of COVID -19 and the ongoing effects of climate change and (2) the increased challenge to raising 
additional capital for a first -time emerging markets climate adaptation investment strategy, GCF’s catalytic capital  
commitment can have a dramatic catalytic effect in scaling up adaptation finance in developing countries.  GCF’s role 
is even more critical to overcome increased barriers created by COVID -19. 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages )  
Define the project /programme. Describe the proposed set of components , outputs and activities that lead to the 
expected Fund- level impact  and outcome results . Components should reflect the project/programme  level outcomes.  
This should be consistent  with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators 
provided in section E .5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5 . 
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of  alternative solutions 
and how the project /programme can help unlock the needed support  in a sustainable manner . Also identify trade- offs 
of the selected interventions , if applicable.  
Please note, the activities  described below will lead to the programme results  outlined in Section E.5 , which are 
expressed in terms of adaptation.  
Component 1 –  Equity Investment  
Activity 1.1 – Formation of GCF CRAFT Holdings LP and Related Entities  
The Accredited Entity will form a new Delaware limited partnership to hold the GCF’s interest in the co -investment 
vehicle (“ GCF CRAFT Holdings”).  GCF will be the sole limited partner and sole economic owner of GCF CRAFT 
Holdings.  The Accredited Entity will also form a new Delaware limited liability company to serve as the general 
partner of GCF CRAFT H oldings (“ GCF CRAFT Holdings GP”).  GCF CRAFT Holdings GP will be wholly owned by 
the Accredited Entity.  Neither GCF CRAFT Holdings nor GCF CRAFT Holdings GP will have any operations or


---
*Page 21*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 58 
   
 employees, though one or more employees of the Accredited Entity will  be officers of GCF CRAFT Holdings and GCF 
CRAFT Holdings GP with signing authority over the entities.  
Sub-Activities:  
1.1.1  Procure legal services  
1.1.2  Structure GCF investment vehicle and any related entities  
1.1.3  Close GCF into the Fund  
Indicators:  
1.1.1  Number of proposals received  
1.1.2  Investment vehicle created  
1.1.3  USD of GCF funding raised into the Fund  
Activity 1.2 – Fundraise Private Investment into Senior Tranche of CRAFT  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  enables CRAFT to continue to raise capital into the Senior layer of the fund. The main barriers 
to raising capital are the perceived risks of a new strategy for climate resilience and of investing in developing countries,  
especially during the COVID -19 pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis. If the Junior layer is completed by GCF  (a 
minimum of $80 million to a maximum of $100 million assuming a $400 million target fund size),  potential Senior 
investors (including several in discussions or in due diligence now) are expected to have the needed level of assurance 
to be able to invest.  
Sub-Activities:  
1.2.1  Conduct discussions with potential investors  
1.2.2  Negotiate with potential investors  and close on LP commitments  
Indicators:  
1.2.1  Number of meetings held with potential investors  
1.2.2  Amount of USD raised into the senior tranche; number of LPs committing to the Fund  
 
Activity 1.3 – Identify and Execute Investments in Climate  Adaptation  Companies  
GCF’s catalytic capital  is expected to enable CRAFT to deploy capital into investments at a greater scale of climate 
resilience solutions companies  in developing countries . During this process, CRAFT screens companies to ensure that 
they offer a technology, product, or service that helps its users address one or multiple key climate vulnerability /ies, 
risk(s), or impact (s) and build resilience (i.e., a “climate resilience solution”) aligned with the Adaptation Solutions 
Taxonomy . To date, CRAFT has and will continue to maintain an active pipeline of promising companies that  satisf ies 
this criteria.   
In addition to climate rationale, CRAFT also screens for whether the c ompany is able  to track ESG and impact metrics , 
and the quality of its management, among other  investment criteria. The CRAFT Fund is continuously screening and 
adding new climate resilience investment opportunities to the pipeline. High potential investment opportunities from the 
pipeline then undergo CRAFT’s  rigorous due diligence and formal investment screening process . Invest ment 
opportunities that ultimately receive approval from CRAFT’s investment committee and satisfy confirmatory due 
diligence thereafter are executed by the CRAFT Fund.  
Sub-Activities:  
1.3.1  Refine investment pipeline  
1.3.2  Perform due diligence on proposed deals  
1.3.3  Prep are documentation for Investment Committee and AIFM  
1.3.4  Execute deals  
Indicators:  
1.3.1  Number of  investments screened


---
*Page 22*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 58 
   
 1.3.2  Number of screening memos written  
1.3.3  Number of Investment Committee Memorandums written  
1.3.4  Number of equity  investments made  
 
Activity 1.4 – Manage and Report on Portfolio of Investments for Impact 
After investing in companies, CRAFT will oversee  its invest ments in accordance with industry best practices and provide 
ad hoc support to portfolio companies  (please see Annex 22 for additional detail) . CRAFT’s sub-activities in Activity 1.4 
to manage its investments will maximize  impacts, particularly for applying climate resilience solutions to address climate 
vulnerabilities in developing countries and among vulnerable populations. The activity will result in  improved climate 
adaptation outcomes (as reflected in reduced climate vulnerability experienced by beneficiaries in developing 
countries) . The CRAFT Fund will track ESG metrics including:  
 
• Number of Beneficiaries:  total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries from the CRAFT Fund’s investments; 
number of beneficiaries will be disaggregated by gender  and will indicate the portion of those beneficiaries that 
benefit from increased resilience (reduced climate vulne rabilities) as well as the portion that are low 
income/vulnerable populations.  
• Number of Organizations:  total number of organizations benefiting from enhanced capacity -building or informed 
decision -making delivered by the company’s products or services.  
• Value of Physical Assets:  total value of physical infrastructure and the built environment made more resilient 
to climate variability and change.  
 Sub-Activities:  
1.4.1  Provide ad- hoc support to investees  
1.4.2  Regularly monitor performance of investees  
1.4.3  Prepare reportin g documentation  
1.4.4  Report on ESG and impacts  
Indicators:  
1.4.1  Number of phone calls with investees  
1.4.2  Number of quarterly reports  
1.4.3  Number of quarterly reports  
1.4.4  Number of annual ESG and impact reports  
Additional KPIs are to be agreed upon deciding to move ahead with an investment.  A list of tentative indicators and KPIs (adaptation metrics) to be monitored for each type of investment is included in Annex 22. These will also be 
included in Annual Monitoring Reports submitted to GCF.  Examples of indicators are as follows:  
 
• volume of water saved;  
• # Individuals provided new water access;  
• average agricultural yield;   
• # hectares covered;  
• $ value of assets covered;  
•  # of organizations served;  
• # hectares of  land insured;  
• # farmers extended credit, insurance or other agriculture risk mitigation product or service (disaggregated by 
gender)  
 
Activity 1.5 – Exit Assets, Return Capital Plus Profit to Limited Partners, Close Out Fund  
 
CRAFT’s activities in Activity  1.5 are directed towards business success to deliver strong financial returns for its 
investors . CRAFT will  accelerate deployment of climate resilience solutions globally (especially in developing 
countries), as reflected in increased sales revenues of the CRAFT Fund’s investee companies  and attractive financial 
returns for the CRAFT Fund’s investors . This is  essential if additional private capital is to be mobilized for climate 
adaptation in the future. The CRAFT Fund will tr ack financial returns for investors, measured in dollars of capital 
disbursed back to investors; ratio of capital returned to capital invested (MOIC), and rate of return (IRR) . 
 
Sub-Activities:


---
*Page 23*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 58 
   
 1.5.1  Assess and negotiate exit strategies  
1.5.2  Perform exits  
Indicators:  
1.5.1  Number of exits performed  
1.5.2  Number of exits performed  
Please see Annex 26 for the results framework.  
 
Feasibility Stud ies 
[Describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative solutions  
Describe how the project/ programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. ] 
 The CRAFT Fund design and implementation is based on two previous feasibility studies and one ongoing feasibility study. These studies validated that:  
• private investment in climate adaptation was a tiny fraction of overall climate finance (5% or $22 billion) and of 
the amount UNEP said will be needed ($300 billion per year needed for investments in adaptation in developing 
countries by 2030);  
• there is a real opportunity to invest in cli mate adaptation solutions in developing countries  (additional mapping 
has identified hundreds of climate adaptation solutions companies in developing countries ); 
• the CRAFT Fund would be the first private sector investment fund focused exclusively on climat e adaptation 
and resilience; and  
• the CRAFT Fund should be a blended finance fund with a minimum  20% catalytic capital layer to successfully 
mobilize private investment into the new area of climate adaptation.  
 
1) Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance – Instrument Analysis ( 2017)  
 
In 2016, the Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance (the Lab) launched a call for ideas for financial instruments 
aimed at addressing climate change and which are capable of mobilizing billions of dollars in private investment for 
climate.  The CRAFT concept underwent a multistage, competitive selection process and was selected out of 175 
proposals through a process involving many G7 and EU governments (UK, US, Germany, France,  Netherlands, 
Denmark, Japan), foundations (Rockefeller, Bloomberg), MDBs (WBG, DBSA, AfDB), DFIs (FMO, BNDES), pension funds (PGGM, PensionDanmark), insurance companies (Allianz, Willis), and financial services firms (BlackRock, Bank of America, Calvert).   
 In 2017, CRAFT went through an intensive 9- month evaluation and stakeholder engagement process for innovation, 
impact, and feasibility by the Lab Secretariat (Climate Policy Initiative) and its related working group of Lab members. In September 2017, CR AFT received full endorsement of the Lab’ s government and financial institution members, and 
the Lab issued its final report, “Climate Resilience and Adaptation Finance & Technology Transfer Facility (CRAFT) –
Lab Instrument Analysis”  (Annex 2).  
 
The Lab’s report served as an initial feasibility study that:  
• Identified the need and the opportunity for investing in climate resilience solutions, including an initial 
identification of potential high priority target developing countries and sectors ; 
• Evaluated the design of other blended finance funds,  including earlier climate investment funds, and 
recommended feasible potential structures for the CRAFT Fund, including the use of a minimum 20% catalytic 
capital layer ; and 
• Defined a feasible implementation pathway and timeline.  
 
2) GEF-Funded CRAFT Project –  Final Report (2019) 
 
In 2018 and 2019, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Nordic Development Fund (NDF) funded a much more 
in-depth $1.6 million, 18- month effort to design, structure, and launch the CRAFT Fund. The project, called 
“Structuring and Launching CRAFT: the First Private Sector Climate Resilience & Adaptation Fund for Developing 
Countries”, focused on three main areas:  
 
• Investment and Impact Strategy : Defining CRAFT’s investment and impact strategy, including detailed 
research to help prioritize the 6 investment focus areas and to define detailed investment theses and impact


---
*Page 24*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 58 
   
 theses for each  (see section D.1) , and to further identify and develop the Fund’s pipeline of potential 
investments to enable it to be launched;  
• Resource Mobilization : Preparing for fundraising for the CRAFT Fund, including identifying categories of 
potentially interested investors and preparing key marketing documents and a secure data room for investor 
due diligence on the Fund;  
• Legal and Regulatory Structure : Designing the legal and regulatory structure of the CRAFT Fund, including 
selecting the appropriate domicile, legal form, and structure of the Fund to accommodate the needs of different categories of potential inve stors and defining the key legal terms.  
 The CRAFT project produced numerous deliverables in each of the three areas and issued a final report in 2019. The 
detailed work through the CRAFT project successfully enabled the Fund to reach a first close with its initial set of 7 
public - and private- sector investors at the end of 2019.  
 
3) GEF-Funded  ASAP Project –  Ongoing (2021) 
 
In 2019, GEF approved and funded –  with some initial co -financing from the Inter -American Development Bank (I ADB) 
– the Adaptation SME Accelerator Project (ASAP), an ecosystem -building initiative that seeks to broadly identify, 
integrate, and accelerate the ecosystem of small - to medium- sized companies in emerging markets across Latin 
America, Africa, and Asia with technologies and solutions that can help build resilience to the impacts of climate change (“Adaptation SMEs”). The program includes the identification of Adaptation SMEs in Latin America & the Caribbean, 
Africa, and Asia operating in sectors such as water, energy, food/agriculture, insurance, weather analyti cs, 
transportation, and infrastructure (among others) to be aggregated into a publicly searchable directory, the development of a comprehensive taxonomy to define which types of products and services are considered "climate resilience & 
adaptation solutions", a series of regional conferences and networking opportunities for participant Adaptation SMEs, 
and partnerships with existing incubator and accelerator programs to develop adaptation- , resilience - and social impact -
focused curriculum for Adaptation SME s. 
The ASAP Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy (the “ASAP Taxonomy”) was released in September 2020. The ASAP Taxonomy builds on existing sustainable finance definitions and frameworks to offer the first definition and eligibility 
criteria for identifying clima
te adaptation solutions offered by the private sector. In accordance with the ASAP 
Taxonomy, ASAP has already mapped over 300 Adaptation SMEs across the three target regions in multiple sectors and completed an adaptation solutions market study focused on Latin America. The outputs of ASAP so far have 
underscored the vast need and opportunity to scale private sector climate adaptation solutions. As ASAP activities 
continue, Lightsmith expects that additional outputs from the initiative will continue to show case the large, existing 
universe of climate adaptation companies and the opportunity to connect adaptation investment and resources to the 
companies offering solutions with significant potential to increase the climate resilience of human and physical sys tems.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500  words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams ) 
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual , institutional  and 
financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies)  (EE) 
or any third parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries .  
 
- Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) 
set to overs ee and guide project implementation.  Provide a composition of the decision- making body  and 
oversight function, particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.  
- Provide information on the financial flows  and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between 
the AE and the EE , between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will administer GCF 
funds, indicate if a Capacity Assessment has been carried out . Where applicable , summarize the results of 
the assessment . 
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and 
country/region) that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Provide  a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure , legal 
arrangements, and the flow and reflow of funds between entities . 
 
Key Entities


---
*Page 25*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 58 
   
 • Accredited Entity (AE): Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. (Pegasus)  – Pegasus  is a private, alternative asset 
management firm founded by Craig Cogut that provides strategic growth capital to middle- market companies 
focused on the sustainability and wellness sectors. Pegasus has approximately $ 900 million in assets under 
management as of 12/31/ 20, across four private equity funds, and has completed over 90  private equity 
transactions.  
• Executing Entity  (EE):  Lightsmith Climate Resilience Management LLC  (the “CRAFT Investment Advisor ”) – 
The CRAFT Investment Advisor is the Investment Advisor for the CRAFT Fund and is an affiliate of  Lightsmith 
Group, LLC (Lightsmith) , which is a private, sustainable investment firm focused on climate finance. 
Lightsmith’s co-founding senior partners are J ay Koh and Sanjay Wagle, who have over 20 years of experience 
in direct investing at The Carlyle Group and VantagePoint Capital Partners as well as in in ternational  
development and climate finance at US OPIC, IFC/World Bank, US Department of Energy, and New York 
Green Bank. As the developer of CRAFT, Lightsmith won the Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance in 
2016 (out of 175 proposals) and the International Climate Finance Accelerator (ICFA) Ambassador Award in 
2018 and founded and chairs the Global Adaptation & Resilience Investment (GARI) working group, a partner 
of UN Secretary General’s A2R Climate Resilience Initiative. Other Executing Entities will include Lightsmith 
Climate Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF (the “CRAFT Fund”), Lightsmith  Climate Resilience GP  S.à r.l. (the 
“CRAFT GP”), GCF CRAFT Holdings, LP, a Delaware limited partnership, GCF CRAFT Holdings GP, a 
Delaware limited liability company , and Pegasus Capital Advisors, the AE, for its role in managing GCF CRAFT 
Holdings, LP . 
 
Implementation Structure Overview  
 
The proposed Programme is structured as an investment fund advised by the CRAFT Investment Advisor , the 
Executing Entity. GCF’s commitment of up to $100 million to CRAFT’s junior equity layer  would be made to the CRAFT 
Fund via Pegasus Capital Advisors as the Accredited Entity to the GCF, wherein an SPV wholly owned by GCF and managed by Pegasus (“GCF CRAFT Holdings”) would become a Limited Partner (LP) into a compartment of the Fund, 
alongsid e other existing and future LPs .  
 
Pegasus will primarily serve three roles (i) administer GCF CRAFT Holdings i.e., controlling cash flows between GCF 
and CRAFT, (ii) act in an advisory capacity to CRAFT’s investment team ( a representative of the Accredite d Entity will 
be a voting member of the CRAFT  Fund’s Advisory C ommittee) and (iii) oversee the CRAFT Fund and the other EE’s  
to ensure compliance with the FAA.  To facilitate this third role, the Accredited Entity will enter into Subsidiary 
Agreements with each Executing Entity that affords the Accredited Entity with sufficient rights, in its judgment, to monitor 
and enforce co mpliance with the requirements of the FAA.  
GCF’s commitment of up to $100 million will be invested into GCF CRAFT Holdings which will then invest as a Limited 
Partner in the CRAFT  Fund ’s newly created Sub- Fund 4. Sub-Fund 4 will serve to “ ringfence”  GCF Proceeds so that 
they are invested only in NOL eligible investments . The Sub-Fund 4 ringfencing structure will be used to ensure that 
GCF Proceeds are deployed consistent with the NOL eligibility criteria outlined in Section 2(a) of Annex 14.   
GCF  Proceeds  will be invest ed as a Junior investor alongside other Junior concessional investors, in an amount subject 
to a 25% Fund concentration limit, or a maximum of 25% of the total Sub- Fund 1, 2, and 3 (Junior, Senior, Parallel) 
investors in the CRAFT Fund  plus the GCF Sub- Fund 4 amount , so that GCF’s commitment is at a 1:3 co-financing 
ratio to other CRAFT investors .   
The CRAFT Fund has held a third close, bringing total signed commitments to $132.5mm and effective commitments 
to $125.4mm. GCF’s commitment will additionally unlock $6.8mm from existing investors currently subject to Fund 
concentration limits. Taking into account the GCF’s 25% Fund concentration limit, the GCF can commit $44. 2mm based 
on the current total commitments following third close. CRAFT will be eligible for an additional up to $55.8mm from 
GCF upon securing additional  co-financing at a 1:3 ratio.  
The CRAFT Fund will make direct equity investments into priv ate companies that offer climate resilience solutions and 
technologies, thereby generating measurable climate adaptation impacts and supporting the UN SDGs. GCF funds 
may be used by the CRAFT Fund to make investments in companies that will generate substantial benefits in an NOL 
country , subject to specific NOL eligibility criteria detailed in Annex 14 ( i.e., headquarters;  majority of employees; 
majority of revenues; or 100% use of GCF proceeds for measurable impacts in NOL countries) . CRAFT ’s investment 
into a company may generate benefits in an NOL country if it is headquartered in an NOL country or has a majority of


---
*Page 26*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 58 
   
  
20 For example, a water harvesting technology company could use a substantial portion of investment proceeds 
to hire employees to develop water projects or to deploy its water technology in an NOL country, thereby 
generating measurable benefits in an NOL country, even if it is not headquartered in that NOL country.  The 
company and the Fund could track, monitor, and report on the amount of proceeds used and benefits generated in the NOL country.    
21 GCF Proceeds will be invested consistent with the country criteria to generate benefits in NOL countries.  
Benefits to NOL countries will be tracked, monitored, and reported by the CRAFT Fund.   its employees or revenues or costs in an NOL country or if it commits to spend or invest 100% of GCF proceeds to 
increase employment, development impact, or measurable climate impact in an NOL country.20   Please note that the 
GCF, through Sub- Fund 4, may invest in some of the same companies as the other investors in Sub- Funds 1, 2 and 3, 
so long as the investments meet the invest ment restrictions/country eligibility requirements outlined in Annex 14.  
The CRAFT Fund will specifically track and report adaptation benefits generated in NOL countries to the GCF.  
The specific adaptation benefits generated will be measured, tracked and reported to the GCF. Climate adaptation 
and other impacts will be measured for each investment in accordance with CRAFT’s ESMS  and IMS .21 
Accredited Entities Implementation Arrangement  
 
As noted above, Pegasus is serving as the Accredited Entity to the GCF and the Programme will be implemented 
through a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between GCF and Pegasus. Pegasus and CRAFT Investment Advisor will 
enter into an Implementation Agreement whereby Pegasus, as AE, will pass through obligations in the FAA to CRAFT 
Investment Advisor  as the Executing Entity.  
 Pegasus, as per its fiduciary agreement with GCF for Equity will be responsible for :  
• Overall implementation, oversight and coordination GCF’s commitment to the CRAFT Fund;  
• Proper use of GCF’s commitment to the CRAFT Fund;   
• Ensure compliance of CRAFT activities with the FAA ; 
• Ensure investments performed by the Fund respect GCF policies ; 
• Reporting and Accounting of the CRAFT Fund .  
 
Oversight Unit  
 
Pegasus, as Accredited Entity  (AE) for the GCF, will take on the oversight role for the Equity funds received. Pegasus 
will manage GCF CRAFT Holdings, allowing the administration of  GCF Equity funds and appropriate implementing 
arrangements with the CRAFT Fund. Pegasus will review progress as reported by the EE to determine how best to 
enhance Programme performance. Pegasus will review Programme progress against capital calls  (i.e., requests for 
disbursement) as submitted. Pegasus will also serve as a support and resource function to the EE to discuss ways to 
strengthen implementation and ensure its direction enhances likelihood of achieving outcomes and impact, and 
efficiency.  
 
Technical Implementation  
 
Organization:  
GCF’s equity commitment  will be through GCF CRAFT Holdings, an entity to be managed by Pegasus as AE, into 
Lightsmith Climate Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF  (the “CRAFT Fund”). The fund commitment would be memorialized 
and bound through the execution of the CRAFT Fund’s Limited P artnership Agreement (LPA) and Subscription 
Agreement executed by GCF CRAFT Holdings as an LP in  Lightsmith Climate  Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF . As 
governed by the LPA and Subscription Agreement, GCF’s funds would be disbursed by Pegasus into the Lightsmith 
Climate  Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF  as capital is called to pay for CRAFT Fund fees and expenses and to make 
investments. Each capital call would be requested by Lightsmith Climate Resilience GP S.à r.l , the General Partner 
(GP) of the Fund, to  GCF CRAFT Holdings , and  GCF CRAFT Holdings would then deposit requested funds into the 
CRAFT Fund’s  accounts.


---
*Page 27*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 58 
   
 The CRAFT Investment Advisor will manage the fund’s operations and investment processes, providing it s expertise 
and services for fund management, investment operations, portfolio management, and risk management services. 
These will be remunerated by advisory fees paid to the CRAFT Investment Advisor from the Fund, calculated as a 
percentage of committed funds during the Fund’s commitment period, and thereafter based on a percentage of net 
actively invested capital (as provided for in the LPA).  
During the C ommitment Period, capital called to make investments will be used to purchase equity shares in investee 
companies offering climate adaptation solutions. The CRAFT Fund would execute legal documentation (e.g., share 
purchase agreement, investor rights agreement, etc.)  which would govern each investment transaction. During the 10-
year life of the Fund, as the Fund exits investments (i.e., by selling its stakes in investee companies), funds realized 
from the exits will be returned to LPs as per the distribution waterfall  outlined in the LPA.  
Structure:  
The Fund entity, Lightsmith Climate Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF (the “ CRAFT Fund”), is structured as a 
Luxembourg- domiciled Reserved Alternative Investment Fund (RAIF). The  CRAFT Fund has engaged Lemanik  Asset 
Management S.A., a registered Alternative Investment Fund Manager (AIFM) as the licensed fund manager, which has 
appointed  Lightsmith Climate Resilience Management LLC (the “ CRAFT Investment Advisor”) as the investment 
advisory via an Investment Advisory Agreement.  The CRAFT Investment Advisor is an affiliate of Lightsmith Group, 
LLC (the “Sponsor”). Lightsmith Climate Resilience GP S.à r.l.  (the “CRAFT GP ”), which manages and controls the 
Fund, is also a Luxembourg entity that is an affiliate of Li ghtsmith Group. The Sponsor ’s commitment is contributed to 
the CRAFT Fund and any carried interest payments flow back via Lightsmith Climate Resilience Capital LP (the “Carried 
Interest Partner”).  
GCF’s equity commitment to the CRAFT Fund will be through GCF CRAFT Holdings, a newly formed company 
managed by Pegasus on behalf of GCF. The CRAFT GP  has engaged third- party service providers to provide including 
legal, accounting, fund administration, depositary, and regulatory compliance services for the CRAFT Fund . Please 
see Annex 23 for the fund structure and visual representation of the flow of funds.  
The CRAFT Fund is a Luxembourg SCSp RAIF, which currently has 3 compartments –  also known as Sub- Funds 1, 
2, & 3.  (Hereafter, these l egal compartments will be referred to as “Sub- Funds” or “compartments”).  Sub- Fund 1 and 
Sub-Fund 2 have different tax elections (as partnership or as corporation for US tax purposes), and both may include 
Junior and Senior investors.  Sub- Fund 3 is only f or a development finance institution , which is investing as a Parallel 
investor.  It is contemplated that GCF CRAFT Holdings would invest into Sub- Fund 4 as a Junior investor for up to 
the lesser of $100 million or 25% of the total amount of Sub- Funds 1, 2, and 3 plus Sub- Fund 4 (25% Fund 
concentration limit ). 
Lemanik Asset Management S.A. (Luxembourg) is a licensed alternative investment fund manager (AIFM) providing 
the Fund with a range of fund management, portfolio management, and risk management services, as required by 
AIFMD in Europe. Lemanik currently has over $30 billion in assets under management and serves as the AIFM for over 
100 fund managers.  
At Project Level:  
The selection of projects in the Beneficiary Countries will include consultations  with the NDAs of each respective 
country. Inputs from NDAs will be crucial to ensure alignment of objectives and enhance the results of the Programme and the cost -effectiveness of the GCF funding. Investments sourced, supported and deployed as described in this note 
will follow best -practice private equity investment  processes and standards, including climate, development , and 
safeguarding guidelines.  
Pegasus as the AE and the CRAFT Investment Advisor will be responsible for oversight of Programme implementation 
via its investment teams, third party service providers, and on- the-ground networks . Investments will be made as per  
the CRAFT Investment Advisor’s in vestment processes, and for any local procurement, the CRAFT Investment 
Advisor’s procurement policies and procedures will be followed during Programme implementation.  The AE will 
contractually secure from the CRAFT Fund the right to observe and consult on each investment that proposes to use GCF proceeds, specifically with respect to environmental and social standards , project level gender assessment and 
action plans,  and the assessment results of the Climate Adaptation Impact Assessment Tool, consistent with the ITAP’s 
recommendation for observer rights.  The Climate Adaptation Impact Assessment Tool will (a) identify the need for 
specific climate adaptation solutions to address climate vulnerabilities in each Host Country and (b) assess the potential


---
*Page 28*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 58 
   
 for adoption of the investee company’s technologies, products or services in each Host Country. For avoida nce of 
doubt, like all other limited partners and in keeping with industry best practices (avoiding the generation of GP liability),  
Pegasus will have no involvement in the deal -making process, due diligence, or investment committee.  
A diagram outlining th e Fund’s  structure can be found in A nnex 23.  
 
Fund Governance  
The CRAFT Fund has a Limited Partner  Advisory Committee (the “Advisory Committee”, or “LPAC”) that is comprised 
of representatives from some of the Fund’s investors selected by Lightsmith Climate Resilience GP S.à r.l. . The 
Advisory Committee is comprised of representatives from five of the Fund’s LPs, plus one LP representative as an 
observer on the Committee. The Advisory Committee (i) review s valuations of the Fund’s assets as proposed by the 
Investment Advisor; (ii) address es conflicts of interest material to the Fund and known to Lightsmith Climate Resil ience 
GP S.à r.l  ; and (iii) votes  on and advises  Lightsmith Climate Resilience GP S.à r.l   on other matters at the GP’s request 
or as provided in the Limited Partnership Agreement . The Advisory Committee meet s at least twice annually. Actions 
of the Advisory Committee generally require the approval of a majority of its members.  
 
With a $100 million commitment to CRAFT, GCF CRAFT Holdings will have the right to appoint a voting member of the 
Advisory Committee, which is contemplated to be delegated to Pegasus as the manager of GCF CRAFT Holdings.  
Pegasus will provide input and oversight of the CRAFT Fund through the LPAC with the other key investors. We believe 
that GCF CRAFT Holdings will be able to have a strong catalytic effect for  mobilizing additional capital into the F und, 
creating momentum toward the $400 million maximum and GCF CRAFT Holdings commitment to $100 million .  
 
The CRAFT Fund holds  an Annual Investor Meeting, which is typically  preceded by a meeting of the Fund’s Strategic 
Advisory Board (“SAB”), comprised of the Fund’s key industry and technical advisors.   
 
Portfolio Management  
 
Countries  accruing adaptation benefits are not limited to the country  where each Portfolio Company is headquartered. 
CRAFT’s Impact Measurement System (IMS) defines the approach to identifying and measuring certain positive 
environmental, social, and economic impacts of the Fund’s investments. The IMS defines how, for each investment, 
the CRAFT Fund will (1) identify the  climate change -related physical risks and impacts the investment will help to 
assess or manage and the theory of change for how the investment will help to reduce those vulnerabilities; (2) identify other expected positive environmental and social impacts  
of the investment, such as GHG emissions reductions, 
contributions to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , economic development impacts, and improvements in 
gender equity; (3) define impact indicators to track these benefits and identify Key Perform ance Indicators (KPIs) that 
the investee company can report; and (4) collect ESG and impact reporting information from investee companies and 
analyze and report that information to investors in an Annual ESG and Impact Report.  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Explain why the project/ programme requires GCF fund ing, i.e. Why is the project/programme  not currently being 
financed by public and/or private sector ? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any 
other domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing 
package. i.e. What  is the coherence between activities financed by grant s and th ose financed by reimbursable funds? 
How were co- financing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality  of the GCF financing compare 
to that of the co- financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing  and/or financial 
markets for similar projects/programmes.  
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial i nstrument (s) is the minimum required to make the 
investment viable.  Additionally , how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of 
minimum concessionality? Who benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider  the risk sharing structure between the public  and private sector s, the barriers to 
investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial analysis when appropriate.


---
*Page 29*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 58 
   
  
22 Preqin, “First -Time Fund Managers”, Private Equity & Venture Capital Spotlight, February 2018.  
23 Preqin, “How Important is the First Close?”, Private Equity Spotlight, May 2013.  
24 Preqin, “Private Equity in Emerging Markets,” Preqin Special Report. May 2018.  
25 Isobel Markham, “One in five LPs to slow PE commitment due to covid- 19”, Private Equity International, April 1, 2020.  
26 U.S. Global Leadership Coalition, “COVID -19 Brief: Impact on the Economies of Developing Countries,” December 2020.  
27 CPI, Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2017. Also see CPI 2016, 2015, and 2014.  
28 “CRAFT is the first private sector investment vehicle focused entirely on climate adaptation and resilience.” Global Innovati on Lab for 
Climate Finance, “Lab Instrument Analysis – CRAFT”, August 2017.  
29 EIB’s GEEREF and the Danish Climate Investment Fund both used blended finance structures to mobilize private capital for climate 
mitigation investment funds.  Ibid. GEEREF ( https://geeref.com/about/what -geeref -is.html ) and Convergence 2017.  GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment of up to $100 million to CRAFT is needed to complete the Junior concessional 
layer, support the Senior non- concessional layer, and enable mobilization of the full $250 million CRAFT target size 
fund and to scale up ambition to support the full $400 million maximum fund  size. GCF’s support is even more critical 
in the COVID -19 environment and its aftermath, where fundraising is even more difficult  and foreign direct investment 
into developing countries has collapsed by more than 40 percent in 2020 (GCA/CPI, 2021) . CRAFT achieved first close 
at about $90 million of total commitments in December 2019, and third close at about $133  million of total commitments 
in July 2021, but still faces substantial cha llenges in mobilizing the full $250 million target by an extended  December  
2021  final close deadline , let alone the higher ambition of $400 million.   
In light of the expressed interest of the GCF for up to  a potential $100 million commitment to CRAFT, the existing 
investors have agreed to a  limited  extension of the mobilization period to December 2021 deadline.  Because of the 
concern about the complexity and duration of the GCF process, it is extremely important to provide existing investors 
with a clear indication that GCF is moving forward and that an FAA and all related documentation can be completed 
immediately following the B. 30 board approval.  Without such a clear indication and a definitive commitment to sign 
and close following B. 30 board approval, securing the approval to continue mobilization  will be extremely difficult.  Full 
documentation and close must be completed by December 2021 . 
In addition to the adaptation gap, c onventional investors have failed to invest in resilience for sever al reasons:  
1. First Time Fund Risk.  Institutional investors perceive first -time funds –  such as CRAFT with its new focus on 
climate resilience –  as risky. According to Preqin, even though first -time funds on average financially outperform 
other funds, the nu mber of first -time funds achieving closings dropped by 20% in 2017, falling to the lowest 
number since 2009.22 Institutional investors are investing in a smaller number of large, established managers.23 
2. Developing Countries Risk.  Over the last several years, private investors have become less interested in 
developing country investments: funds raised for emerging markets private equity dropped 15% from 2014-
2016, and only increased in 2017 due to a few large funds in China.24 CRAFT’s developing country focus, 
essential to its impact, makes attracting capital more difficult.  
3. COVID -19 Impact . The COVID -19 pandemic has already begun to impact fundraising for private equity funds, 
with one- in-five investors expecting to make fewer commitments than their original 2020 plans and 12% 
reducing average size of commitment.12 22% of surveyed investors planned to reduce exposur e to first time 
funds, and 12% reported they would stop all investments in first time funds.25 COVID -19 has also caused over 
$100 billion of capital flight from developing countries in March 2020 alone, more than during the Global 
Financial Crisis.26 
 
As cited above, CPI reports that adaptation receives just 5% of overall climate finance.27 The 2017 Joint Report on 
Multilateral Development Banks' Climate Finance states that out of $35 billion of climate finance from the MDBs, only 
$7 billion (about 20%)  was attributable to adaptation, and only $245 million of that involved private sector recipients 
(3.3%). The Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance (the Global Lab) has concluded that CRAFT is the first and only 
private investment fund dedicated to cli mate resilience.28 
Based on prior blended finance strategies29 and discussions with over 50 private investors, CRAFT concluded that a 
20% concessional layer ($50 million of $250 million) would be sufficient to attract the remaining 80% of non-concessional investment  – under pre -COVID -19 conditions . This proposed structure was validated by the first close 
in December 2019, re-validated at second and third close, attracting an MDB, a philanthropy , institutional investor s, 
and family offices  into the Senior non- concessional layer . The Fund is in conversations with over 20 potential private 
investors for a fourth close, several of whom GCF has consulted.  Additionally, CRAFT has already identified more than 
1,000 companies representing an actionable pipeline of 8- 12 companies  that fit within the Fund’s climate resilience 
thesis.


---
*Page 30*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 58 
   
 Following the declaration of the COVID -19 pandemic in March 2020, many private investors suspended due diligence 
on CRAFT to move to remote operations and re- evaluate existing portfolios and investment risk appetite.  CRAFT has 
managed to re- engage with a number of private investors in September 2020 through the spring of 2021, but investor 
risk appetite has been clearly challenged by the pandemic.  CRAFT is moving forward with a number of potential Senior 
private invest ors, but the need for Junior concessional capital has become even more critical –  and perhaps with even 
greater flexibility.  
GCF’s commitment to the Junior layer would be on similar terms to existing Junior investors : a multilateral development 
institution, government, and private global philanthropy.  It is expected that GCF’s commitment would be made into a 
sub-compartment of the Lightsmith Climate Resilience Partners SCSp RAIF fund entity.   
The development of the terms of the targeted 20% Junior concessi onal layer was informed by the feasibility study 
completed by the Global Lab (2017) and based on similar structures like EIB’s GEEREF and the Danish Climate 
Investment Fund (DKIF), and the result of review, refinement, extensive negotiations, and acceptanc e by a range of 
public sector MDBs, DFIs, and governments as well as private sector philanthropies, institutional asset managers, 
insurance companies, and family offices.  The Global Lab analysis, the additional feasibility study conducted on 
CRAFT’s design  with the support of the GEF and NDF, and the extensive review and negotiation leading to first close 
among the full range of public sector and private sector investors demonstrate that the financial structure and proposed 
pricing fit with the concept of m inimum concessionality.   
COVID -19 demands a stronger catalytic capital response in adaptation from the GCF.  All of the analyses on CRAFT’s 
20% minimum Junior concessional layer were completed pre- COVID -19. Adaptation investment has been recognized 
as even more critical since COVID -19. Junior concessional capital is even more important to crowd in more risk -averse 
private investment capital in the COVID -19 recovery environment.   It should be noted that GEEREF – with a 50- 50% 
Junior concessional layer –  was launched in 2008 under the similarly challenging circumstances of the Global Financial 
Crisis, and that a more flexible layer of Junior concessional capital might well be considered in the COVID -19 recovery 
context.  
The Senior layer investors benefit from c oncessionality through the reduction in perceived risk of a first -time strategy 
focused on climate adaptation and resilience and exposure to investments in developing countries, which are 
considered increasingly risky and out of favor, particularly given C OVID -19. The presence of public, private, and 
philanthropic investors in both the Senior and Junior layers at first close pre- COVID -19, as well as the continued interest 
in additional private sector investors in being catalyzed into the CRAFT Fund by addit ional Junior capital during the 
COVID -19 crisis further validates the fact that an appropriate, market catalyzing, and fully negotiated risk/reward 
balance for public, private, and philanthropic investors has been achieved.   
The reports of (a) the Global Lab, (b) the CRAFT launch project supported by GEF and NDF, and (c) the ASAP project 
supported by GEF, IDB, and Conservation International are attached  for reference (Annex 2) .


---
*Page 31*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 58 
   
     
 
*GCF’s commitment of up to $100 million will be invested into GCF CRAFT Holdings which will then invest  as a Limited Partner in CRAFT’s newly 
created Sub- Fund 4. GCF will invest as a Junior investor alongside other Junior concessional investors, in an amount subject to a 25% Fund 
concentration limit or  a 1:3 co -financing ratio.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Explain how the project/programme sustainability  (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will 
be ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.   
 
Include information pertaining to the longer -term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and 
maintenance of investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements ). In case of private sector, 
please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.  
 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a 
consequence of the project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
Programme  Sustainability and Monitoring  
CRAFT’s sustainability is ensured by its long- term fund structure and will be monitored through industry standard 
Limited Partner Advisory Committee (LPAC) and reporting and audit mechanisms. CRAFT is set up to have a 10- year 
life. Now that CRAFT has exceeded its $75 million minimum threshold, with its $81 million effective commitments from 
first close in December 2019, it has enough resources to operate for a full 10 years, including the cost of monitoring 
and reporting on its activities. CRAFT will provide all investors with quarterly and annual reporting, which includes 
financial statements, valuations of CRAFT’s investments, updates on CRAFT’s portfolio company investments, and an 
annual Environment and Social Monitoring System (ESMS)  and Impact Measurement System (IMS)  report. Overseeing  
a $100 million commitment  from GCF , the AE will become a member of the Limited Partner Advisory Committee and


---
*Page 32*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 58 
   
  
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount Currency  
100,000,000  million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  0 n/a n/a  n/a  
(ii) Subordinated loans  0 n/a  n/a  n/a  
(iii) Equity  100,000,000  10+1+1  n/a Junior preferred 
equity return  
(iv) Guarantees  0 n/a  n/a n/a  
(v) Reimbursable grants  0 n/a  n/a  n/a  
(vi) Grants  0  n/a  n/a  n/a 
(vii) Results -based payments  0 n/a  n/a  n/a 
(b) Co-financing information  Total amount  Currency  
300,000,000  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  have furth er oversight over the sustainability of CRAFT . As described above, GCF’s commitment of up to $100 million 
will be invested into GCF CRAFT Holdings , which will then invest as a Limited Partner in CRAFT’s newly created Sub-
Fund 4. GCF will invest as a Junior  investor alongside other Junior concessional investors, in an amount subject to a 
maximum 25% of the total Sub- Fund 1, 2, and 3 (Junior, Senior, Parallel  plus the GCF Sub- Fund 4 amount , so that 
GCF’s commitment is at a 1:3 co-financing ratio to other CRAFT investors.    
 
Now that CRAFT has been launched, a key goal is to scale up the fund and the field of climate adaptation investment. 
Given that up to $300 billion per year will be required for adaptation in developing countries alone by 2030,  the potential 
to replicate and scale the strategy and the companies is very large.  The CRAFT investment strategy and the field of 
adaptation investment can be scaled in several ways:   
 
1. The enterprises in which CRAFT invests can scale further by attracting additional follow -on capital . 
2. The demonstration effect can build the field by disseminating information about these early examples of climate 
adaptation investment.  
3. The EE can replicate and scale the CRAFT strategy through a second fund without additional catalytic capital. 
The current 1, 000+ company map and analysis of 20 subsectors suggests that an additional $1 billion could be 
invested following CRAFT’s strategy.   
4. Other investors could apply CRAFT’s “tools” investing strategy to different sta ges or classes of investment, 
such as venture capital, PE buyouts, or public equities. The EE’s market mapping has identified early stage, 
mature buyout, and large public companies relevant to climate resilience.  
5. Other investors could apply CRAFT’s strateg y to extend climate resilience to real estate, infrastructure, fixed 
assets, and financial securities, screening each set of assets for climate risk and resilience.  
6. CRAFT’s investee companies can deploy their products (such as drip irrigation systems or w ater harvesting 
panels) in large- scale projects, attracting much greater amounts of debt and equity.  
 
Capital Repayment and Duration  
As typical for growth equity funds, the term of the CRAFT fund is 10 years, with the potential for two 1- year extensions  
with certain approvals . The term includes a 5-year investment period (with potential for one 1- year extension)  and a 5-
year return period. Typically, growth equity investments are each held for a period of 3- 5 years and are sold to strategic 
acquirors. Over the life of CRAFT, investors in CRAFT will receive distributions as investments are sold. These 
distributions to investors – including to GCF via Pegasus as AE – will be made as defined in the Limited Partnership 
Agreement. Overall, growth equ ity funds seek to return 2- 3X investors’ capital over the fund’s life.


---
*Page 33*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 58 
   
 Junior Investors  Equity  16,762,750  million 
USD ($)   10+1+1 
years  
0 years  Junior 
preferred 
equity 
return  junior  
Development Finance 
Institution  Equity  21,152,320  million 
USD ($)   10+1+1 
years  
0 years  Senior 
preferred 
equity 
return   pari passu  
Senior Investors  Equity  262,084,930  million 
USD ($)   10+1+1 years  
0 years  Senior 
preferred 
equity 
return   senior  
Please see term sheet for preferred equity return percentages.  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
$400,000,000  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)  CRAFT has reached third close , bring ing total commitments to $132.5 million USD 
and effective commitments to $125.4 million USD.  
C.2. Financing by component (For Illustrative Purposes Only)  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing.  More than one co -financing institution can fund a single component or output.  
Provide the summari sed cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget  plan as annex 4.  
 
Component  Output /Acti
vity Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
 
Project 
Component 1  
 1.1 
Formation of GCF CRAFT Holdings LP 
and Related 
Entities  750,000  750,000  Equity  0 Equity  
(1), (2)  
1.2. 
Fundraise 
Private 
Investment into Senior 
Tranche of 
CRAFT  2,500,000  616,750  Equity  1,883,250  Equity  
(1), (2)  
1.3. Identify 
and Execute 
Investments 
in Climate Adaptation 
Companies  
including opportunities  
for positive 
gender 
impact  373,830,000  92,223,861 Equity  281,606,139  Equity  
(1), (2)  
1.4. Manage 
and Report 
on Portfolio 19,000,000  5,442,325  Equity  13,557,675  Equity  (1), (2)


---
*Page 34*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 58 
   
 of 
Investments 
for Impact , 
including 
monitoring 
compliance 
with gender 
safeguards, 
reporting 
improvement
s in gender 
equity within 
the portfolio companies 
and all KPIs 
with a 
gender 
component  
1.5. Exit 
Assets, 
Return 
Capital Plus 
Profit to Limited 
Partners, 
Close out 
Fund  3,920,000  967,064  Equity  2,952,936  Equity  
(1), (2)  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  400,000,000  100,000,000  300,000,000  
(1) Junior:  A multilateral development institution, government, private global philanthropy , and GCF  
(2) Senior: A private global philanthropy, investment manager, development finance institutions, family offices, insurance companies, individual 
investors, other newly mobilized investors.  
 
Note: For illustrative purposes only.  Actual budget by component is subject to change.  GCF’s allocated financing 
amount for activities is equal to 24.7% of total indicative cost assuming GCF  commits  $100 million.  For breakdown of 
activity 1 expenses, please see Annex 4 set -up costs.  
 This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetab le.  
 
In case of a multi -country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country  in 
annex 17, if available.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☐      No ☒ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer,  please 
provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities , 
to the extent possible.  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment helps to scale- up CRAFT’s investment and impact in the extremely challenging 
COVID -19 recovery environment.  CRAFT’s theory of change is that the best way to transfer technology, knowledge, 
and capacity into developing countries is by supporting adoption of the technologies by local, in- country parties on a 
commercial basis . By investing in the best climate resilient solutions for  developing countries, and by directly supporting 
the Fund’s portfolio companies in expanding their offerings and foot prints globally, CRAFT supports technology transfer 
for climate resilience. Through the international expansion of portfolio companies’ commercial activities, CRAFT is able


---
*Page 35*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 58 
   
 to embed technology, knowledge, and capacity for climate resilience within business es, governments, and communities 
in developing countries.  
 
By providing critical support to mobilize additional Senior commitments in a post -COVID -19 environment with 
heightened climate change impact and reduced investor appetite both for new investment st rategies like adaptation 
finance and for investments in developing countries, GCF’s catalytic capital  supports and scales -up capacity building 
and technology transfer.


---
*Page 36*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 58 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result 
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the 
impact for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme cont ributes to low -emission sustainable 
development pathways. Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes 
to increased climate- resilient sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be 
consistent with section E.2 reporting GCF’s core indicators.  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment helps scale- up CRAFT’s investment capital and impact, which contributes to the 
GCF’s objectives and results areas. CRAFT’s multi -sectoral approach inv ests in tools and technologies in the following 
sub-sectors that will drive the allocation of the results in A4 through resilien t infrastructure and the built environment 
(approximately 25%) , improved food and water security (approximately 30%) and the livelihoods of people, 
communities and regions most vulnerable to climate change ( approximately 45%).   
For each investment, the CRAFT will (1) identify the climate change- related physical risk s and impacts the investment 
will help to assess or manage and the theory of change for how the investment will help to reduce those climate-
related vulnerabilities; (2) identify other expected positive environmental, social, and economic impacts of the 
investment, such as GHG emissions reductions, contributions to the relevant Sustainable Development Goals 
(“SDGs”). During due diligence, CRAFT identifies 3 to 5 Key Performance Indicators for each company that will be 
used to measure the climate resilience solutions offered by the portfolio companies . CRAFT will also complete an 
assessment of the potential adaptation impact of its investments through the CRAFT Climate Adaptation Impact 
Assessment Tool described in B.4. Implementation arrangements above.  
CRAFT  monitors both E&S risks and KPIs , including climate adaptation metrics, throughout during the holding period 
of the investment. This occurs primarily through company self -reporting with the Annual ESG and Impact Report. 
Data is measured and analysed to ensure alignment with CRAFT’s  impact objectives. Impact data related to activities 
funded through technical assistance will be incorporated into the core KPIs and captured through the annual 
reporting. Periodic site visits will be conducted to verify information contained in the annual report on both a routine 
and randomly selected basis.  
Agriculture Analytics . Agricultural analytics can help farmers and the supply chain use less energy, sequester more 
carbon, use less energy -intensive irrigation and fer tilizers – all of which both reduce GHG emissions as a co -benefit 
and increase resilience to climate change.  Can contribute to improved food and water security and enhanced livelihoods 
for people, communities and regions most vulnerable to climate change.  There could be a range of beneficiary types 
from smallholder farmers to commercial farms as well as agricult ural input companies and suppliers.  
Resilient Food Systems.  Products and Services such as drip irrigation, micro- fertilization, and drought/salinity/storm 
resistant seeds and crops, cold chain storage, and efficient food processing and distribution generate reductions in 
GHG emissions  as a co- benefit , increased and adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. Can contribute 
to improved food and water security and enhanced livelihoods for people, communities and regions most vulnerable to 
climat e change.  
Water Harvesting and Drip Irrigation . Extreme weather events and changes in water cycle patterns are making it 
more difficult to access safe drinking water. Increased pressure on safe sources of drinking water will also increase 
GHGs associated with the production of water , which requires treatment prior to use, is pumped, pressurized and 
transported. Technology must be deployed to address water efficiency of agricultural irrigation and drinking water. 
Renewably powered solar hydropanels similarly both reduce GHG emissions as a co- benefit and increase resiliency to 
increasing water stress driven by climate change. Can contribute to improved food and water security and enhanced 
livelihoods for people, communities and regions most vulnerable to climate change.  Water harvesting customers include 
bottled water brands, hotels and resorts, major grocery chains, remote communities and communities in arid locations, 
aid and disaster relief organizations, and homeowners.  
Geospatial Mapping and Imaging . Satellite technology allows for significant scalability and reliability when monitoring 
sustainability, such as land -use change and agriculture management practices. For example, community -led forest


---
*Page 37*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 58 
   
 monitoring can use satellite imagery and mobile  phone apps to rapidly detect and respond to illegal deforestation. 
Nature Based Solutions which, according to the UN, can provide over one- third of the cost -effective climate mitigation 
needed between now and 2030 to stabilize warming to below 2°C, requir e innovative tools to inform decision making 
and scale private sector solutions. Spatial data layers on biodiversity, protected areas, and sustainable development 
can provide regular consistent data necessary to mainstream nature- based solutions for reduci ng urgent climate and 
disaster risks. Can support resilien t infrastructure and the built environment and improved food and water security.  
Catastrophic Risk Modeling . The IPCC AR 5 has identified increasing extreme weather events such as tropical 
cyclones, wildfires, droughts, and windstorms. Catastrophic risk assessments can inform decision- making for 
businesses and governments and protect physical and natural assets by strengthening of awareness of climate threats 
and risk -reduction processes. Ac cording to the UNDRR, natural disasters killed 1.2 million, affected 4 billion people, 
and generated ~$3 trillion of losses 2000- 2019.  Can support resilient infrastructure and the built environment.  
Supply Chain Analytics . Increasing supply chain disruptions are harming manufacturing, trade, and livelihoods, 
especially for developing country SMEs that form part of many global supply chains. Supply chain analytics 
incorporating weather to support demand forecast, inventory and supply chain management can enhance the adaptive 
capacity of companies, employees and goods and services across supply chains, while reducing GHGs  as a co -benefit . 
Can support resilient infrastructure and the built environment and enhanced livelihoods for people, communities and 
regions most vulnerable to climate change.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact  beyond a one- off project or  programme 
investment . Describe the following, if applicable:  
• Potential for scaling up and replication  
• Potential for k nowledge sharing and learning  
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies   
• Overall contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment to CRAFT at this critical moment of COVID -19 fragility and post -COVID -19 recovery 
supports a substantial paradigm shift in climate adaptation investment and technologies.  CRAFT uses the ASAP 
Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy to establish what types  of technologies, products and services provide climate 
adaptation solutions. The first peer -reviewed set of definitions and eligibility criteria involved an extensive consultation 
and review process involving leading climate experts . The taxonomy  builds on existing definitions and is a key tool for 
identifying and engaging with adaptation compan ies, thus enabling a platform for broader investment. This allows 
investors, funders, companies, governments, and policymakers to  enhance the supply and uptake of climate adaptation 
solutions globally . 
 
This technology transfer provides innovative solutions to make individuals, communities, and businesses more resilient 
to the impacts of climate change. Expanding the availability, capability and use of the c limate solutions through new 
applications and expansion into new industries and geographies will help to develop and transform markets. CRAFT’s 
strategy can be used to extend climate resilience to real estate, infrastructure, fixed assets, and financial securities, 
screening each set of assets for climate risk and resilience. CRAFT companies —particularly in analytics —can be used 
to screen these investments.  
 
Through its support for financially sustainable climate adaptation solutions, CRAFT expected to provide several 
opportunities to efficiently scale, replicate and further catalyse private sector solutions:   
 
• Through its direct investment activities, the Fund expects to provide growth capital and strategic assistance 
necessary to scale investee enterprises to meet the resilience need and opportunity.  
• Many of the enterprises can scale further by attracting additional follow -on capital and growing organically or 
through acquisition. In addition, disseminating information about these investments may  enable other 
enterprises to replicate and scale up the application of similar technologies and solutions to climate resilience.


---
*Page 38*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 58 
   
 • As the first private equity fund focused on climate resilience and adaptation, successful execution of the 
strategy will broadl y demonstrate to other sponsors the replicability of the strategy, particularly in sector -specific 
or country -specific strategies, as the market develops.  
• CRAFT’s strategy could be adapted to different stages or classes of investment, such as venture capi tal, PE 
buyouts and rollups, or public equities. The Fund’s market mapping has identified early stage, mature buyout, 
and large public companies relevant to climate resilience.  
• The Fund can replicate and scale its strategy through a second fund without cat alytic capital. The current 
mapping of over 1,000 companies and analysis of 20+  subsectors suggest the potential for an additional $1 
billion follow -on fund.  
 
CRAFT mobilizes other relevant public and private actors through its partnerships with international development 
organizations such as Conservation International, NDF, and EIB, and through its climate resilience network from the 
GARI working group, the Global Lab, and ICFA.  GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment to CRAFT enables its full 
mobiliz ation and impact in a particularly vulnerable and challenging post -COVID -19 environment.   
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals 
and provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
• Environmental co- benefits  
• Social co -benefits including health impacts  
• Economic co- benefits  
• Gender -sensitive development impact  
 
GCF’s catalyt ic capital  commitment helps fully realize and scale up CRAFT’s benefits in relation to the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).  In addition to its climate adaptation impacts, CRAFT’s investment activities generate other 
positive economic, social and environmental co- benefits. As a cross cutting issue, climate change undermines all 17 of 
the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Impact Measurement System (IMS) focuses on measuring the 
impact of investments, including the contribution to the Sustainable Development Goals in several specific contexts: 
adaptation and climate resilience; climate mitigation co- benefits; gender; bio diversity; and economic development.  At 
the time of investment, the activities of each Portfolio Company will be assessed based on their expected contribution 
to specific Sustainable Development Goals and Targets as illustrated below:  
 
SDG  CRAFT Impact Goals  Sample Indicators  
(Sample Geographies)  
SDG 2: Zero 
Hunger  Food security and sustainable 
food systems from investments in 
resilient food, agriculture, water, 
supply chains  • Acres of farmland covered/served 
• Tonnes  of food produced (or saved from 
spoilage)  
• (South Asia, Africa)  
SDG 5: Gender 
Equality  Reducing the disproportionate 
impact of climate change on 
women and girls  • Other indicators will be disaggregated by gender  
• (Global)  
SDG 6: Clean 
Water and 
Sanitation  More resilient water systems from 
investments in distributed, data-
based, and efficient water 
technology  • Liters of water produced or saved 
• # households provided access to resilient water  
• (South Asia, Africa, Caribbean/SIDS)  
SDG 7: Affordable 
and Clean Energy  Reduced interruption and 
disruption of energy systems  • # households provided access to resilient energy  
• (Global)  
SDG 9: Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure  Investments in technology 
companies support scientific 
research and technology capacity 
in host countries  • # highly -skilled jobs created (by job function)  
• # employees trained  
• (South Asia, Africa)


---
*Page 39*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 58 
   
 SDG 10: Reduced 
Inequality  Adaptation tools applied to 
developing countries, vulnerable 
populations, LICs, SIDS  • # low-income individuals/households served  
• # jobs and $ of incomes for low -income 
individuals  
• (South Asia, Africa)  
SDG 11: 
Sustainable Cities 
and Communities  Increased resilience of 
communities, infrastructure, and 
local economies from climate 
risk/adaptation planning  • # people and area served by resilience tools 
(urban vs. rural)  
• # adaptation projects enabled by investee tools  
• (South Asia, Africa)  
SDG 12: 
Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production  More resilient and efficient supply 
chains from bet ter risk screening, 
forecasting, and planning tools  • $ value of reduced waste, disruption in supply 
chains  
• (South Asia, Africa)  
SDG 13: Climate 
Action  Investments in climate action; 
increased adaptation planning 
capacity in public and private 
sectors; GHG emissions 
reductions from more local, 
efficient, and data- based 
provision of water, food, energy  • $ Invested in climate adaptation  
• $ Invested dual -purpose (adaptation + mitigation)  
• # governments with increased adaptation 
capacity  
• # SMEs with increased adaptation capacity  
• Tonnes of GHG emissions avoided  
• (Global)  
  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups  and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc .). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Vulnerability of the country and/or speci fic vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g.  fiscal or balance of payment s gap that prevents  government  
from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital commit ment enables CRAFT to address substantial vulnerabilities in developing countries to 
the physical risks and impacts of climate change –  all of which are exacerbated by the on- going impact of COVID -19. 
CRAFT’s investment strategy enables increased adoption of innovative and transformative private- sector technologies 
that support adaptation and resilience for vulnerable countries, communities and individuals. Adaptation solutions are 
even more important in the fragile environment resulting from COVID -19. Given the current absence of financing 
directed at adaptation, CRAFT is an efficient way to mobilize capital to enable vulnerable populations’ ability to identify, 
mitigate and manage risks from climate change. To ensure visibility into how each company’s technology, product, or 
service can assess or address the specific risk or impact affected by climate change on particularly vulnerable 
populations,  at the time of screening,  the Fund will seek to identify at-risk populations, regions, and segments with a 
potential nexus to the technology, product, or service.  The Fund will assess the viability, potential impact, and 
appropriateness of technical assistance or other available donor funds to supporting vulnerable segments, engage with 
the company on the application of those funds, and monitor and report relevant data on an integrated basis.  
Gender issues intricately intersect with climate change adaptation through social, economic, ecological, physical and 
institutional dimensions that are experienced at the household, community and country levels.  Women are often 
disproportionately vulnerable to the effects to climate change and climate change can further exacerbate gender 
disparities.  However, evidence demonstrates that opportunities to incorporate gender equality into climate action 
through participation in decision making around fragile natural resources can reduce GHG impacts and improve 
resiliency for current and future generations. CRAFT maintains a gender focus lens when assessing inv estment 
opportunities and considering how its investments do and could benefit women and takes a crossing -cutting approach


---
*Page 40*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 58 
   
 to its measurement of gender using existing relevant metrics such as the number of employees, the number of 
beneficiaries, vendors or  suppliers, etc. disaggregated by gender.  
Additionally, CRAFT provides opportunities to overcome specific financing barriers:  
• Perceived lack of investible opportunities in climate adaptation, whether in technologies, companies, or 
infrastructure projects. CRAFT will help identify and establish an entire category of investments –  companies 
with climate resilience solutions –  as an attractive area for investment, potentially mobilizing billions of dollars 
of private capital for invest ment in the future.  
• Lack of operating and financing capacity for companies to expand their climate adaptation and resilience-
related business lines, including into adjacent sectors and geographies.  CRAFT will help provide needed capital 
and expertise to help companies with climate resilience solutions scale up and expand to where these solutions 
are needed most, including in lower -income countries.  
• Lack of actionable, asset -specific information about climate risks and impacts.  In order to tak e specific climate 
adaptation and resilience measures, however, companies need to be able to make a business case for how 
they will ultimately deliver financial returns . 
• Perceived risks of investing in developing countries generally, and difficulties trans ferring technologies and 
solutions from developed to developing countries, including barriers to market entry and deployment.  
COVID -19 has exacerbated many of these risks: increasing risk aversion about and distraction from investment in 
climate adaptation solutions and technologies, reducing capacity and increasing vulnerability of companies and 
individuals – including those involved in adaptation solutions —and increasing investor perceived risk concerns about 
innovative investment strategies and  developing countries.  
CRAFT ’s innovative blended finance structure, with a  Junior concessional layer that mitigates downside risk for 
Senior non- concessional investors , encourages adaptation- finance investment.  Please refer to Annex 24 and the 
climate context table in Section B.1 where we identify each country’s vulnerabilities and barriers to adaptation 
finance.  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. 
Describe the following:  
• Existing national climate strategy  
• Existing GCF country programme  
• Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
• Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
• Role of National Designated Authority  
• Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, 
women and other vulnerable groups  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment and support for CRA FT will increase its engagement and alignment with beneficiary 
countries.  CRAFT fits in with the countries’ national priorities by transferring, scaling up, and applying the technologies 
that can support the countries’ climate resilience and adaptation strategies, which most prominently feature in the NDCs 
and enhanced NDCs of t he almost  all of CRAFT’s target developing countries. CRAFT’s investments in climate 
resilience and adaptation “tools” create the capacity in developing countries to safeguard the achievement of NDCs by 
providing the information, products, and services needed to make NDCs climate resilient. CRAFT can directly contribute 
to the countries’ National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) by scaling up private sector capacity for adaptation and climate 
resilience. CRAFT is working with NDAs to identify specific priorities in the countries’ NDCs and NAPs. CRAFT has 
consulted with each of the country NDAs that has issued NOLs and plans an annual ongoing consultation process with 
NOL-issuing countries to coordinate and align with their adaptation and climate resilience needs.  
CRA FT’s strategy of scaling up and transferring private sector adaptation and climate resilience technologies to 
developing countries is aligned with countries’ climate strategies and plans, particularly their NDCs and NAPs, (IISD, 
2019), and aligns with stat ed objectives of the UNFCCC Paris Agreement and Adaptation Committee under the Cancun 
Adaptation Framework. To see a detailed country -by-country assessment, please refer to the climate context table in 
Section B.1 and Annex 24. CRAFT will consult with NDAs  and relevant country representatives to further align its 
investments with each country’s national climate strategy or plan and national adaptation plan. To date, CRAFT has


---
*Page 41*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 58 
   
 already completed  initial outreach to country NDAs and has reviewed country NDCs a nd NAPs in preparation for the 
CRAFT FP.  CRAFT will brief country NDAs when making investments in their respective countries  and will hold an 
annual consultation with country NDAs to help ensure alignment with national priorities.  
CRAFT will work to ensure that investment s may be undertaken in consultation with relevant subnational authorities so 
as to take account of  each country’s national climate strategy or plan and national adaptation plan.  The catalytic strategy 
of CRAFT can have a trans formative effect on their ability to assess and manage the impact of climate change. 
Furthermore, these geographies are characterized by specific vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change such as 
increased exposure to wildfires, droughts or hurrican es. CRAFT expects to facilitate investments to scale commercial 
solutions and support innovative technologies to better manage these risks, thereby enhancing the country’s capacity 
to execute on their climate adaptation goals. In addition to supporting exi sting national adaptation plans, the climate 
adaptation solutions supported by CRAFT will seek to provide additional tools, capacity and strategies that can help 
inform country responses and plans.  
The CRAFT strategy has been developed in consultation with civil society groups and key stakeholders, including 
targeted communities and beneficiaries, public and industry forums, climate workshops, and regional meetings in 
emerging markets; partner organizations in developing countries such as Conservation Inter national , GIZ  and NDF.  As 
part of its Environment and Social Management System (ESMS), CRAFT has a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, a 
Gender Mainstreaming Plan and a Grievance Mechanism.  GCF’s and AE Pegasus Capital Advisors ’ engagement will 
further support alignment with beneficiar y countries’ climate action plans.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to  achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the 
project is viable without crowding out private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of 
GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total 
financing and mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to 
an appropriate benchmark.  
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and witho ut the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF 
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.  
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, 
specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment of up to $100 million in  junior equity, at a 1:3 ratio to the Fund’s total commit ments  
would be an efficient and effective instrument.  Fundamentally, GCF’s catalytic capital  supports CRAFT’s well -
researched and well -designed structure.  CRAFT presents a cost -effective, efficient structure to leverage additional 
capital alongside both public and private investors, scale private sector solut ions, and ensure the long- term financial 
sustainability of the project.  Several feasibility studies by the Global Lab,  and insights at the end of the CRAFT launch 
project supported by GEF, NDF, and CI , further validate the design of the CRAFT instrument after benchmarking it 
favorably against existing blended finance strategies such as GEEREF and DKIF (see Annex  2). 
First, CRAFT’s blended structure –  including a Junior concessional layer that mitigates downside risk for Senior non-
concessional investors – enables GCF’s catalytic commitment to the Junior layer to mobilize 3X as much non -
concessional capital into the Fund. Second, by helping mobilize investment into the Fund, GCF’s catalytic capital also 
helps to unlock co- investment and follow -on investment at the company level, amounting to at least about 2X CRAFT’s 
investments, or an additional $ 800 million. Third, even larger amounts of debt and equity financing will be mobilized as 
investee companies deploy their technologies in large- scale projects, amounting to 5- 10x CRAFT’s investments, or $1-
2.5 billion within CRAFT’s life.


---
*Page 42*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 58 
   
 Moreover , the GCF commitment to the CRAFT Fund generates substantial additionality by (1) increasing the CRAFT 
Fund’s focus on and engagement with NOL countries, (2) by deepening the impact and impact measurement of the 
CRAFT Fund by implementing more structured climate adaptation impact assessment and gender empowerment 
assessment processes, and (3) by increasing the res ources for investment in NOL countries and the resources to 
support a deeper team to invest and support deployment of technology in NOL countries  
CRAFT’s commercial focus helps to ensure the long- term financial viability, sustainability, efficacy of the cl imate 
adaptation solutions supported by CRAFT.  A critical component of CRAFT’s value- add will be to capture new climate 
resilience- driven growth through the expansion of applications into new geographies and new sectors in need of 
resilience. GCF’s support  would crowd in and catalyze additional financing from a wide range of investors , including 
foundations and family offices, private investors, development banks and governments.  GCF’s catalytic commitment to 
CRAFT also demonstrates the efficient and effect ive cooperation between GCF and GEF. GEF provided initial grant 
funding to support the launch of CRAFT, and GCF can commit catalytic capital to scale up CRAFT.  
GCF’s catalytic capital  commitment is critical to achieving CRAFT’s impact efficiently and impactfully, particularly in the 
COVID -19 recovery environment.  CRAFT would simply not be able to scale up beyond $134 million to reach its $400 
million maximum without GCF support.  GCF participation and co-financing provided by the other Junior concessional 
investors goes well beyond only increasing the expected ROI of Senior investors in the CRAFT Fund; without Junior 
investment, additional Senior investment would not be catalyzed.  Further, without successful scalable investment by 
CRAFT – the f irst private investment fund for adaptation and climate resilience –  the entire market for climate 
adaptation,  resilience solutions and technologies , and private investment in such solutions  will fail to launch , as it has 
to date.  GCF participation therefore goes well beyond only increasing the ROI of Senior investors, making any 
comparison exercise very complicated.  
The best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied through the incubation and refinement 
of the CRAFT strategy through the Global Lab process in 2017, the CRAFT launch project supported by GEF, NDF, 
and CI in 2018- 2019, and the negotiation and first close of CRAFT in December 2019.


---
*Page 43*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 58 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of  any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please  select  the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
E.2. C ore indicator  targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project /programme . 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided  (mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lif etime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project  financing  _____   Choose an item.     
(b) Requested GCF amount  _____  Choose an item.  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed  
(e = b / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of  the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(g) Public source co -financed  _____   Choose an item.  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) _____   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  _____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  Over 39,000,000  
30% of female  
 
39 million individuals have enhanced their resilience becoming 
less vulnerable through increased awareness of climate threats; 
strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks and incorporate of climate information in decision making. 
This increased adaptive capacity occurs through the incorporation 
and adoption of climate adaptation solutions offered through 
agriculture analytics, water harvesting and water management, 
geospatial mapping and imaging, resilient food systems, supply 
chain management and disaster risk management solutions.  
Indirect  N/A – to be estimated at time of each investment  
Click here to enter text. % of female  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17.  
Direct  N/A – global project   (Expressed as % ) of country(ies)


---
*Page 44*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 58 
   
   E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Indirect  Click here to enter text.   (Expressed as % ) of country(ies)  
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 1 7.


---
*Page 45*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 58 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and  corresponding  
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in s ection A.4 above.  Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  KPI 
monitored 
through 
Annual ESG 
and Impact 
Report  
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementati
on of the 
Impact  
Measuremen
t System and 
Environment
al and Social 
Management 
System . 0 
 
 613,338  
(at least 
184,001 
female)  22,578,401  
(at least 
6,773,520 
female)  The market for 
climate 
adaptation 
technologies is well 
established 
with potential for growth.  
A clear market exists with 
potential 
customers who 
are willing and 
able to pay.  
No distorting subsidies or 
market barriers 
are in place in recipient 
countries.  
Governments 
establish adequate 
regulatory frameworks.  
No intellectual 
property 
disputes.  
 
E.4. Fund -level  outcomes   
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected 
per expected outcome . Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision -
making  A6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision -making in 
climate sensitive sectors  KPI 
monitored 
through 
Annual ESG 0 
493 
organization
s 1,010 
organizatio
ns See Annex 22 
for further 
assumptions


---
*Page 46*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 58 
   
   and Impact 
Report  
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -reduction 
processes  A8.1 Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate threats 
and related appropriate 
responses   KPI 
monitored 
through 
Annual ESG 
and Impact 
Report  0  
10,241,767  
(at least 
3,072,530 
female)  14,485,332  
(at least 
4,345,599 
female)  A clear market 
exists with 
potential 
customers who 
are willing and 
able to pay.  
 
** An early warning system is perceived as a composite of four dimensions: (1) knowledge on risks, (2) monitoring and 
warning service, (3) dissemination and communication, (4) response capability.


---
*Page 47*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 58 
   
 E.5. Project/programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Programme 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline*  Target * 
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
1. increased flows of 
climate finance for 
adaptation through 
private sector  # of projects and 
transactions supported, 
disaggregated by type  Quarterly 
LP Report  0 4 8  
$ amount  of 
transactions supporting 
adaptation, 
disaggregated by 
country of origin and 
receipt  Quarterly 
LP Report  0 200 mil  400 
mil Growth in 
adaptation 
demand 
continues at 
existing pace.  
$ amount of capital 
mobilized  
 Quarterly 
LP Report   $26.3 
million  
 
As of Q2 
2021 
Reportin
g $150 
million  300 
mil Mobilized co -
investments and 
follow -on 
investments in 
the portfolio 
companies from 
other investors, 
including project 
finance 
mobilized into 
projects 
deployed by the 
portfolio 
companies 
using their 
technology.  
2. Reduced risk through 
resilience intelligence 
and tailored climate 
services # of farmers, producers, 
input providers, public 
institutions or other 
individuals or 
organizations accessing 
new agricultural analytic 
products  Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRA FT 
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  
 0    
10,098,
382  
 14,48
5,332  
 There is no 
competition from 
agricultural 
analytic services 
provided for free 
through other 
projects or 
donors  
Beneficiaries 
demonstrate 
continued ability 
to pay  and 
maintain 
services post 
acquisition.  
# of producers, 
suppliers, input 
providers, public 
institutions or other 
organizations accessing 
and using geospatial 
mapping and other 
information services to Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
 
Additional 
verification 0 15 30


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 58 
   
 inform adaptation 
planning  occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  
# of males and females 
reached by [or total 
geogr aphic coverage of] 
climate -related early 
warning systems and 
other risk reduction 
measures 
established/strengthene
d Public 
governmen
t reports,  
 
Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  
 0 N/A^  
 
30% 
female 
benefici
aries  N/A^  
 
30% 
femal
e 
benefi
ciaries  Assumes 
gender 
disaggregated 
data is available 
and included in 
scope of 
assessment  
  
3. Reduced exposure 
through improved 
access to resilient 
infrastructure and risk -
reducing assets  # of asset s made more 
resilient  disaggregated 
by sector  (e.g.  school s, 
water systems, 
agricultur e) Public 
governmen
t reports,  
 
Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  
 0 169 284 Construction 
norms and 
standards for 
climate 
resilience exist  
 # of supply chains 
adapted to climate 
change impacts  Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa0 
N/A^  N/A^  Additional 
indicators may 
include $ of 
supply chain 
value analyzed; 
# supply chain 
jobs 
 
Assumes there  
is capacity 
among supply


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 58 
   
 tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  chains and 
logistics 
providers to 
analyse and 
understand 
climate risk data  
#  of individuals, 
farmers, producers, 
businesses or 
communities with 
improved access to 
water and water 
management solutions  Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  0 1,164,6
63 
 
(at least 
349,398
female)  2,599,
376 
 
(at 
least 
779,8
12 
femal
e) Calculation of 
beneficiaries 
based on actual 
liters of drinking 
water received 
from new water 
harvesting 
panels 
deployed; 
Locations 
mapped against 
WRI Aquaduct 
water stress 
index  
# of food secure 
individuals (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts ) Portfolio 
Company 
reporting to 
CRAFT  
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  
Through 
the IMS, 
relevant 
project 
activities 
will be 
mapped 
against 
independe
nt data on 
geographic 
areas of 
food 
insecurity 
such as the 
WFP 
Hunger 
Map.  0 10,241,
767 
 
(at least 
3,072,5
30 
female)  14,48
5,332  
 
(at 
least 
4,345,
599 
femal
e)  
# of food systems with 
improved resilience 
through Fund support   Portfolio 
Company 0 N/A^  N/A^  Additional 
indicators may 
include hectares


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 58 
   
  
Ha of land exhibiting 
improved resilience as 
defined through 
investment specific  KPI reporting to 
CRAFT  
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs 
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
IMS & 
ESMS.  of land made 
more resilient  
 
There are no 
limits to working 
in publicly 
owned land. 
Assumes there 
are no land 
grabs.  
 Total individuals 
(disaggregated by 
gender and income) 
benefitting from climate 
adaptation products / 
technologies / services 
throughout portfolio  KPI 
monitored 
through 
Annual 
ESG and 
Impact 
Report and 
Quarterly 
LP 
reporting  
 
Additional 
verification 
occurs  
through the 
implementa
tion of the 
Impact 
Measurem
ent System 
and 
Environme
ntal and 
Social 
Manageme
nt System  0 19,831,
555 
 
(at least 
5,949,4
66 
female)  39,66
3,109  
 
(at 
least 
11,89
8,932 
femal
e) See Annex 22 
for further 
assumptions  
*Note: Baseline set to zero for Baseline Scenario; Target represents additional impacts from Alternative Scenario.  
Outputs highlighted in section B.3 will lead to the programme results  above , expressed in terms of adaptation . 
 
^ This indicator will be estimated at the time of investment or when country and context specific information becomes 
available.  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.1. Procure legal 
services Activity to be completed 
with legal services and 
overseen by Fund 
Managers  Obtaining and retaining 
legal services based on 
value for money  Receive proposals and set 
up contracts for fund 
structuring  
1.1.2. Structure GCF 
investment vehicle and any 
related entities  Activity to be completed 
with legal serv ices and 
overseen by Fund 
Managers  Prepare and negotiate documents; send for 
external review  Legal structure of the 
entities / investment 
vehicle established


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 58 
   
  
30 The C RAFT Fund will pursue an active investment strategy and will secure an appropriate set of active 
governance and engagement rights to execute its strategy with portfolio companies, including securing Board of 
Directors member or Board observer seats and other industry standard governance mechanisms.  1.1.3. Close GCF into the 
Fund  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and 
overseen by Fund 
Managers  Prepare and negotiate 
documents; send for 
external review  GCF is closed into the 
Fund  
1.2.1. Conduct discussions 
with potential investors  Actively engage in dialogue with investors  Update fund marketing 
materials; address investor 
questions  Additional LPs in due 
diligence; meetings with 
potential investors  
1.2.2. Negotiate with 
potential investors and close on LP commitments  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and overseen by Fund 
Managers  Negotiate side letters  LP commitments raised into CRAFT’s senior 
tranche  
1.3.1. Refine investment 
pipeline  Sourcing with Fund 
resources and networks; 
initial screening vetted by the Fund’s Investment 
Committee  Researc h and identify  
companies in the Fund’s focus areas; screen high-
potenti al investment 
opportunities    A list of feasible, climate 
resilience projects with 
defined performance 
expectations  
1.3.2. Perform due 
diligence on proposed 
deals  Perform technical, legal, 
economic and impact 
review  Perform  due diligence on 
potential investee companies that pass the 
initial screening  Assumptions validated and 
investment thesis refined; 
screening memos written  
1.3.3. Prepare 
documentation for 
Investment Committee and 
AIFM  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and overseen by Fund 
Managers  Conduct detailed analysis; 
build detailed financial model; additional due 
diligence  Investment memos generated for committee  
1.3.4. Execute deals  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and 
overseen by Fund 
Managers  Negotia te and execut e 
investments into the companies that pass due 
diligence  Execution of equity investments  
1.4.1. Provide ad -hoc 
support to investees  Supervise and add value to 
companies  Support investees with 
targeted value- add Board of Directors30/ 
Conversations   with 
investees  
1.4.2. Regularly monitor 
performance of investees  Regular phone calls and site visits where necessary  Ongoing monitoring and 
supervision  Board of Directors / 
Updates from portfolio 
companies  
1.4.3. Prepare reporting 
document ation  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and overseen by Fund 
Managers  Prepare quarterly and 
annual fund reporting for 
investors  Quarterly reporting; annual reporting  
1.4.4. Report on ESG and 
impacts  Activity to be completed 
with legal services and overseen by Fund 
Managers  Prepare annual ESG and 
impacts  reporting for 
investors  Annual ESG & Impact 
Reports  
1.5.1. Assess and 
negotiate exit strategies  Activity to be completed 
with legal services , 
financial institutions such 
as investment banks  and 
overseen by Fund 
Managers   Conversations with legal and financial institutions  Possible exits contemplated  
1.5.2 Perform Exits  Activity to be completed 
with legal services , 
financial institutions such Prepare and negotiate 
documents  Exits performed


---
*Page 52*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 58 
   
  as investment banks  and 
overseen by Fund 
Manager s 
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Besides the arrangements (e.g.  annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the  
project/programme specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final 
evaluations. Describe Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and 
between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as relevant , identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. Thi s 
should relate to the frequency of reporting on project indicators, implementation challenges and financial status . 
 
Regarding the financial reporting, typically CRAFT  provides financial information to its fund limited partners on a 
quarterly basis along with a report /LP update call  that summarizes material developments at each portfolio company 
owned by the fund. CRAFT  has established valuation processes and procedures in accordance with IPEV Valuation 
Guidelines and IFRS for reporting the fair value of underlying portfolio investments . Valuations are completed on at 
least an annual basis as of December 31st.  
 
The CRAFT Fund’s Impact Management System (IMS) outlines  the processes and activities that will be implemented 
in order to manage CRAFT’s Portfolio Companies’ performance and to track progress toward desired climate, social 
and environmental objectives. These activities include determining what indicators to measure; collecting and analyzing 
data on these indicators from the Portfolio Companies; and using the results in decision- making and reporting.  The 
CRAFT Investment Advisor  monitors both E&S risks and KPIs throughout during the holding period of the investment. 
This occurs primarily through company self -reporting with the Annual ESG and Impact Report.  Periodic site visits will 
be conducted to verify information contained in the annual report on both a routine and randomly selected basis.  
 
All portfolio companies are monitored and evaluated to ensure ongoing compliance with environmental and social 
requirements, including any mitigation measures, action plans and corrective actions. Information is obtained through 
a number of internal and ex ternal channels such as formal governance structures at the portfolio company, financial 
reporting from the portfolio company to the Fund, ongoing desk -based monitoring that utilizes publicly available news 
reports, industry insights, etc. to track changes  in the operations and the local context that may affect the environment 
and social profile of the company.


---
*Page 53*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 58 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
Please describe financial, technical , operational , macroeconomic/political , money laundering /terrorist financing  
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices,  and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include a buse, conflict of i nterest, corrupt ion, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, coercive, 
collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
RISK 1 – Inability to identify appropriate investments:  
While the need for adaptation is significant, the market for adaptation and climate resilience solutions is still 
emerg ing; there is a risk that CRAFT may struggle to identify sound investments within the project timeframe.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Risk mitigation:  
(1) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor  already has identified over 1, 000 companies in its database and is engaged in 
active discussion with an actionable pipeline of 8- 12 promising climate resilience companies for potential 
investments by the fund;  
(2) The ASAP project has identified over 300 more companies and established a harmon ized taxonomy and global 
online network for identifying many more that could be investment candidates for CRAFT;   
(3) CRAFT has already completed its first investment; and 
(4) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor’s  partners have over 25 years of relevant investment and company operating 
experience directly applicable to the Fund as well as strong networks for identifying climate resilience solutions 
companies.  
These mitigation measures reduce this Risk to Low.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
RISK 2 – Failure to achieve developmental and climate resilience outcomes:  
The focus on commercially successful investment could detract from the goals of achieving developmental impact 
and greater climate resilience and adaptation in developing countries . In addition, it can be risky and difficult to 
transfer technologies and achieve successful market entry and uptake in developing countries.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 54*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 58 
   
 Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation m easures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Risk mitigation:  
(1) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor  has developed a full Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) to 
identify and manage ESG risks effectively, along with a parallel Impact Measurement System (IMS) to identify the 
climate vulnerabilities being addressed and define the theory of change for each investment and to measure and 
track 3 -5 Key Performance Indicators per investment that can help measure results and inform stakeholders of 
the developmental and climate adaptation and resilience impacts;  
(2) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor  has hired a Director of Sustainability and Impact with over 15 years of experience 
to develop the ESMS and IMS, to manage their expert review,  and to oversee their implementation;  
(3) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor  has already implemented the ESMS and IMS in CRAFT’s first investment . 
 
These mitigation measures reduce the Risk to Low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
RISK 3 – Challenges with Long- Term Governance of Multi -Stakeholder Investment Fund Vehicle  
As a 10 -year life investment instrument with diverse public, private, and philanthropic investors and stakeholders and 
a multi -sector and multi -regional investment strategy, CRAFT presents challenges of governance complexity over the 
duration, diverse interests, sectors, and geographi es of its investments.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Risk mitigation:  
(1) CRAFT is structured according to industry best practices for 10- year fund management and governance, 
including legal provisions in the Limited Partner Agreement (LPA) and side letters, monitoring and reporting 
requirements of the ESMS and IMS, and established governance requi rements for private investment vehicles . 
These legal and governance provisions and structures were developed, refined, and evaluated through the CRAFT launch project supported by GEF, NDF, and CI ; 
(2) CRAFT has industry best practice governance mechanisms, including the LPAC and limited partner gover nance 
mechanisms, which AE PCA will engage through on behalf of GCF;  
(3) EE CRAFT Investment Advisor's  team and AE PCA’s team have extensive experience managing private 
investment vehicles for public sector DFI and MDBs as well as for private institutional inv estors over 20+ year 
individual careers at leading MDB and DFIs as well as private institutional investors; and  
(4) CRAFT’s governance legal provisions and structure, governance mechanisms, and EE CRAFT Investment 
Advisor  team have been successfully operating and governing CRAFT since its first close in December 2019.  
(5) CRAFT also has a Anti-Money Laundering Policy as well as procedures for handling the Fund’s AML/KYC in the 
Compliance Manual  (Annex 21) . 
 
These mitigation measures reduce the Risk to Low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4


---
*Page 55*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 58 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
RISK 3 – Risks associated with money laundering and financial terrorism.  
During fundraising and investing, the Fund may come across potential portfolio companies or investors who are not in 
compliance with money laundering and financial terrorism regulations.  
 
Mitigation Measures  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitig ated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Risk mitigation:  
(1) CRAFT has an AML/KYC policy in place and other compliance mechanisms to mitigate the risk of money 
laundering, terrorist financing, or prohibited practices. All employees undergo compliance training annually and 
must provide an acknowledgement  of the firm ’s compliance policies. The firms also conducts rigorous due 
diligence to help prevent such activities  
(2) In conjunction with the Fund’s service providers –  including AIFM Management Co, Fund Administrator, and 
Depositary Bank –  CRAFT has also developed a detailed set of internal cash controls policies and procedures to 
prevent the Fund from being used to launder money, finance terrorist activities, and be used for personal gain.  
(3) The Fund will undertake investments only after thorough screening and diligence, including AML/KYC 
procedures. Any violations of international standards regarding anti -money laundering (“AML”), know your 
customer (“KYC”), and environmental, social, and governance (“ESG”) will be grounds to cease consideration of 
an investment. The deal team may work with third- party background screening companies to complete KYC/AML 
analysis on key management team personnel during investment consideration.  
(4) The subscription agreement requires Investors to affirmatively make representations confirming e.g., that the 
source of the capital of their investment in the fund does not come from prohibited sources.  
(5) On an ongoing b asis, any unusual and suspicious activity is flagged and a Suspicious Activity Report will be filed 
in the relevant jurisdiction  
 
These mitigation measures reduce the Risk to very Low.


---
*Page 56*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 58 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS   
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale 
for assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments 
developed for the proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc .). Provide 
a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. P resent  the key environmental and social risks and impacts 
and the measures on how t he project/programme wil l avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage 
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF ’s ESS standards . If the proposed project or 
programme involves  investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management 
plans by the E xecuting Entities  (EEs)  and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe t he capacity of the 
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. 
Include a description of the project/programme- level grievance redress mechanism , a summary of the extent of multi -
stakeholder consultations  under taken for the project/ programme, the plan of the A ccredited Entity (AE) and EEs to 
continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy
 and 
Environmental and Social Policy.  
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the 
development of  an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy .  
 Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the 
environmental and social risk category as annex  6.  
 
The CRAFT Programme has been classified as Category I -2 and will use of GCF’s funds to invest in portfolio companies 
that meet environmental and social eligibility criteria and investment guidelines as outlined in the Fund’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS).  
CRAFT’s e xisting ESMS defines its approach to integrating E&S risks management and value creation opportunities 
into investments made through the Fund. The ESMS includes processes for screening, categorizing, appraisal, 
contracting and monitoring of investments sup ported by the Accredited Entity, the Environmental and Social Exclusion 
List, regulatory requirements in the jurisdictions of operation and the application of the IFC Performance Standards 
(2012) in its review of potential portfolio companies. In addition to the ESMS, the Fund Manager also has an existing 
Impact Measurement System (IMS) for assessing and managing climate- change related impact, and translation of 
these impacts into commercial opportunities in climate mitigation and resilience. The IMS includes guidelines on impact reporting disaggregated by gender, income, and sector profiles, as applicable, for each portfolio company from initial 
investment through exit.   
All investment professionals are familiar with ESG issues and the frameworks for assess ing, managing, and reporting 
risks and impacts.  CRAFT Investment Advisor  has appointed an experienced sustainability professional, the Director 
of Sustainability and Impact, as part of the Fund’s management team responsible for day -to-day implementation of the 
ESMS and to continuously engage with and monitor portfolio companies. The Director of Sustainability and Impact has 
over 15  years of experience conducting labor, environmental, social, developmental, and human rights impact 
assessment s globally including field experience in over 40+ countries around the world as well as experience in 
stakeholder engagement with the NGO community, corporations, government agencies and Project Affected People.  
CRAFT’s investment strategy reduces the like lihood of investments in companies potentially inducing significant E&S 
risks and potential adverse impacts, including: (i) significant adverse impacts to community health and safety as a result of construction/operation of the assets; (ii) significant num
ber of serious injuries and/or fatal accidents during 
construction and/or operation of the assets; (iii) involuntary resettlement of people; and (iv) impacts on critical habitat, 
indigenous peoples and cultural resources.  
CRAFT Investment Advisor’s  ESMS p olicy adopts, as a standard for its environmental and social review process, the 
International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Performance Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability and IFC’s 
Industry Sector Guidelines and any subsequent revisions to those standards.  The applicability of each Performance 
Standard will be established during the environmental and social risks and impacts identification process. The


---
*Page 57*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 58 
   
 implementation of the actions necessary to meet the requirements of this Performance Stan dard is managed through 
the CRAFT’s  ESMS.  
As early as possible in the investment process, CRAFT Investment Advisor  screens potential Portfolio Companies to 
identify possible adverse environmental and social impacts of its business activities. This includes screening activities 
against CRAFT’s  Exclusion List to determine eligibility for investment. Categorization helps to ensure that the extent of 
the review is commensurate with the risks posed by a potential investment.  
CRAFT  categorizes potential investments based on an assessment of the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts within a project’s Area of I nfluence and the Portfolio Company’s capacity to effectively manage risks and 
impacts, including the ability to implement any required mitigation.  The CRAFT Fund will not invest in any “high risk” 
projects classified as Category A as assessed against the I FC Performance Standards.  
The CRAFT Fund will require the establishment of a portfolio company -level ESMS proportionate to the E&S risks and 
impacts of its activities and, where applicable, appropriate processes for timely disclosure of E&S information, conduct of stakeholder engagement activities, and establishment of portfolio company -level Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
(“GRMs”) to address concerns and grievances from Project -affected people. CRAFT will define these aspects in its 
investment documentation and monitor them as part of its portfolio monitoring process. CRAFT has created an  
external 
grievance  mechanism  to address views of affected people, enquiries or concerns regarding its own E&S processes 
and outcomes as well as E&S impacts and performances of the CRAFT Fund’s portfolio companies.  Stakeholders may 
raise a grievance at any time about CRAFT’s  activitie s, including the application of the  ESMS and issues related to the 
business activities of the Portfolio Companies. While the CRAFT Investment Advisor  serves as the first point of contact 
in the Grievance Mechanism, stakeholders may also contact the Director of Compliance at Conservation International. Conservation International is a U.S. -based non- profit whose conservation and advocacy work focuses on science, 
policy, and partnership with businesses and communities and responsible for responding to project -affected 
stakeholders about the grievance provisions described in the Safeguard Policies and Processes section of the CI -
ESMF. The CRAFT Investment Advisor  will make stakeholders aware of the Grievance Mechanism through their public 
website, during project  start-up workshops, and during relevant project -related meetings.  
Pegasus  will receive an annual E&S monitoring report on the E&S performance of the Fund’s portfolio companies with 
the opportunity to conduct regular monitoring of the Fund’s activities, including visits to selected portfolio companies 
where required.  
Environment &  Social Safeguards Process  
 
CRAFT recognizes that its ESG policies and processes are ongoing and dynamic in nature and the firm seeks continual improvement in ESG performance both in its own operations and at the Portfolio Companies. Information obtained 
through Portfolio Company reporting and compliance monitoring will inform strategic and operational decisions and ongoing investment activities.  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )


---
*Page 58*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 58 
   
 Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme -level gender action plan that is aligned with 
the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy . Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process 
used to deve lop both documents . Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key 
recommendations (how to address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment . Indicate if stakeholder 
consultations have taken  place and describe the key inputs integrated into the action plan , including : how addressing 
the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from funds investment ; key gender -related results to be 
expected from the project /programme with targets; implementation ar rangements that the AE has put in place to 
ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.  
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan as annex 8 .  
 Gender gaps intricately intersect with climate change adaptation through social, economic, ecological, physical and 
institutional dimensions that are experienced at the household, community and country levels.  Women are often 
disproportionately vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which can further exacerbate gender disparities.  
However, evidence demonstrates that the application of a gender -lens in approaching climate action by ensuring 
inclusive participation in decis ion-making around key natural resources can reduce greenhouse gas impacts, improve 
resiliency, and concurrently shrink gender gaps for current and future generations.  
CRAFT commits to maintaining a gender -lens when assessing investment opportunities, eval uating the impact of its 
investments, particularly among the underserved, including women. To assess and facilitate the potential for positive 
gender impact in our portfolio, CRAFT will:  
• Consider whether a portfolio company provides a new source of income for women in climate- vulnerable 
communities and facilitates employment opportunities for women, particularly those operating in traditionally 
male- dominated industries  
• Consider if a portfolio company is developing climate-  smart products or services  that are engaging women as 
key beneficiaries  
• Consider the implementation of inclusive corporate policies to increase the quantity and quality of jobs held by 
women, improve working conditions and close gender pay gaps  
• Endeavor to incorporate a gender foc us when considering technical assistance / donor funding programs  
In establishing the impact of its investments on communities, CRAFT takes a crossing- cutting approach to tracking and 
using existing relevant metrics such as: i) the number of employees, ii)  the number of beneficiaries, and iii) vendors or 
suppliers. CRAFT is committed to applying a gender -lens in delving deeper into its impact metrics by, to the extent 
possible, disaggregating its data by gender. These metrics will be incorporated during due diligence and tracked 
throughout the holding period of portfolio company and help provide granularity on the gendered impacts of its 
investments.  
With the aim of mitigating any potential exacerbation of gender disparities through its investment activities , The Fund 
commits to incorporating gender safeguards at all stages of the investment process. This includes the following:  
• Conduct an assessment to identify individuals and groups that may be directly and differentially or 
disproportionately affected by the business activity because of their disadvantaged or vulnerable status, 
including women.  
• When there are impacts on lands and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary 
use, the assessment should be gender inclusive and, speci fically, consider women’s role in the management 
and use of these resources.  
• Portfolio Companies will not make employment decisions on the basis of personal characteristics, such as gender, unrelated to inherent job requirements. The employment relationsh ip will be based on the principle of 
equal opportunity and fair treatment, and will not discriminate with respect to any aspects of the employment relationship, as recruitment and hiring, compensation (including wages and benefits), working conditions and 
terms of employment, access to training, job assignment, promotion, termination of employment or retirement,


---
*Page 59*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 58 
   
 and disciplinary practices. Portfolio Companies will take measures to prevent and address harassment, 
intimidation, and/or exploitation, especially  in regard to women.  
With regard to its own activities, Lightsmith  has developed a Gender Mainstreaming Policy to ensure that both men 
and women receive fair access to social and economic benefits; do not suffer adverse effects; and receive full respect 
for their dignity and human rights. Specific measures work towards equitable participation of women and men in the 
following aspects: i) Recruitment and Procurement; ii) Meetings and Events; iii) Project Governance; iv) Strategies and 
Plans; and v) Monitori ng & Evaluation.  
Diversity and inclusion are extremely important to Lightsmith. Accordingly, Lightsmith is an Affirmative Action/ Equal 
Opportunity Employer of minorities, women, veterans, and individuals with disabilities, and will afford equal employment 
opportunity to all employees and applicants for employment. Lightsmith  seeks to include women in decision -making 
roles within the firm.  
Lightsmith expects to engage with stakeholders and beneficiaries in a number  ways, which will mainstream gender 
considerations and will collect gender -disaggregated information from key stakeholder meetings to track gender 
participation and engagement . 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including  the financial monitoring systems,  financial 
accounting,  auditing , and disbursement structure and methods . Refer to  section  B.4 on implementation arrangements 
as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention,  e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the 
role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that 
will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. P rovide a detailed procurement plan as annex  10.  
The CRAFT Investment Advisor and the CRAFT Fund are managed in accordance with private equity industry best 
practices. The CRAFT Investment Advisor maintains an Internal Controls Policy to ensures that all financial transactions 
are properly reviewed, authorized, documented, and executed. The CRAFT  Investment Advisor also maintains a 
Compliance Manual (please refer to Annex 21) that covers recordkeeping requirements, proper promotional activities, 
insider trading restrictions , USA Patriot Act / AML policy and procedures, among others.  
EAS Accounting, a New York -based accounting firm serving other growth equity investment funds , provides accounting 
services to the CRAFT Investment Advisor . The CRAFT Investment Advisor ’s intern al controls policy has already been 
rigorously vetted by the CRAFT Fund’s existing investors. SS&C Luxembourg serves as the Fund Administrator, 
maintaining the CRAFT Fund’s books and records, providing financial reporting to investors, overseeing AML/KYC 
processes, among other typical fund administration services. Quintet Private Bank serves as the Fund Depositary, 
monitoring the CRAFT Fund’s cash position and any cash movements . The Fund is externally audited on an annual 
basis.  
All cash movements and dis bursements (e.g., for funding investments and paying fees/invoices) are subject to review 
by multiple parties and subject to specific approval thresholds and processes depending on type of disbursement. 
SS&C as Fund Administrator uses  its own electronic payment platform to execute cash payments outside of the CRAFT 
Fund, which includes controls (e.g., independent call -backs) and predefined levels of authorizations (depending on 
payment size) to approve a payment. For cash payments outs ide of the CRAFT Fund, an invoice can be created by a 
Managing Director of the CRAFT Investment Advisor or EAS Accounting and sent to SS&C. SS&C input s invoice s into 
their system, which then needs to be approved by an authorized signatory at CRAFT Investment Advisor and require 
a call -back to an independent individual at CRAFT Investment Advisor or EAS Accounting. Once the call -back is 
confirmed, then a payment may be released. Payments above EUR 10,000 are also required by Lemanik as AIFM and 
require the ap proval of two CRAFT Investment Advisor Managing Directors to be released. Payments below that 
threshold only require one. All cash movements out of the Fund require an independent call -back to be performed.  
Please see Section 6 of Annex 21 for the firm’s full Cash Management  Policies, which outlines the policies and 
procedures for each type of cash movement from the Fund.  
Please note that t he procurement policy included in the same Annex refers to the operations of the EE  (CRAFT 
Investment  Advisor ), not the AE  (Pegasus Capital Advisors) .  The Procurement Plan is being implemented by the EE


---
*Page 60*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 58 
   
 (CRAFT Investment Advisor ) and has been reviewed and accepted by CRAFT’s current investors, who include several 
multilateral development banks, sovereign governments, philanthropic and institutional investors.  The EE ( CRAFT 
Investment Advisor ) is a small -medium sized enterprise and the Procurement Plan has been accepted as appropriate 
for its operational capacity.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The I nformation Disclosure Policy (IDP)  provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour  of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portio ns that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclos ure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 61*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 58 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)   
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format    
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/ programme milestones (template provided)    
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosu re form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)     
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)    
☒ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project   
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity   
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment   
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Impact Calculations and Narrative  
☒ Annex 23  Fund structure diagram


---
*Page 62*
---

Page 59


---
*Page 63*
---

/1 /2 /3 /2 /4 /4 /5 /6 /7 /2 /7 /11 /5 /14 /5 /11 /15 /16 /17 /18 /19 /20
/21 /22 /22 /23 /24 /25 /2 /2 /24 /26 /19 /27 /26 /18 /20 /28 /20 /29 /19 /30 /27 /31 /20 /27 /33 /34 /2 /24 /26 /19 /2 /18 /20 /28 /22 /34 /20 /35 /30 /36 /20 /34 /27 /23 /21 /23 /37 /30 /18 /30 /20 /38 /36 /20 /18 /39 /29 /26 /28 /22 /20 /40 /19 /29 /23 /34 /19 /29 /19 /34 /40 /41 /26 /33 /42 /30 /18 /30 /20 /40 /20 /34 /19 /31 /26 /29 /38 /30 /34 /20 /34 /26 /40 /19 /24 /39 /30 /35 /19 /43 /30 /34 /42 /19 /36 /40 /36 /20 /18 /39 /29 /26 /28 /22 /20 /38 /5 /3 /13 /44 /14 /45 /1 /42 /19 /28 /16 /34 /46 /5 /2 /4
/47 /48 /49 /48 /50 /51 /52 /53 □ /55 /56 □ /56 /48 /49 /57 /49 /58 /59
/50 /60 /61 /62 /60 /63 /64 /62 /65 /64 /63 □ /66 /67 /62 □ /48 /68 /63 /60 /62 /68 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69 □ /57 /66 /66 /64 /65 /62 /70 □
/49 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69 □ /71 /60 /70 /65 /72 /68 /64 /63 /60 /73 □ /57 /74 /63 /75 /67 /62 /65 /63 /76 □ /66 /67 /62 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /77 /62 /60 /60 /68 □ /58 /69 /65 /78 /64 /63 /60 □ /56 /74 /68 /73
/59 /70 /79 /69 /64 /68 /64 /73 /64 □ /73 /67 /70 □ /47 /65 /68 /65 /70 /63 /80 /62 /65 /67 /70 /81 □ /82 /69 /67 /61 /67 □ /83 /81 □ /84 /85 □ /64 /68 /73 /64 /62 /81 □ /70 /64 /69 /64 □ /84 /86 /87 /88 /82
/58 /59 /83 □ /89 /90 /90 /91 /92 /88 /87 /90 /90 □ /88 □ /82 /62 /64 /70 /93 /69 /65 /64 /94 /71 /56 □ /88 □ /95 /96 /86 /97 □ /98 /91 /86 /84 /88 /84 /84 /87 /96 □ /88 □ /60 /88 /78 /64 /65 /69 □ /64 /68 /73 /99 /72 /61 /66 /100 /66 /64 /101 /60 /68 /73 /64 /99 /72 /67 /102 /99 /103 /62
□ □ □
□
/55 /56 /104 /58
/48 /55 □ /50 /59 /48 □ /49 /85 □ /92 /105 /92 /92 /91 /94 /84 /90 /84 /86 /94 /47 /59
□ □
□
/82 /62 /64 /70 /93 /69 /65 /64 /81 □ /90 /84 □ /73 /60 □ /106 /74 /68 /75 /67 □ /73 /60 □ /84 /90 /84 /86 /99
□
/47 /62 /99 □ /53 /64 /68 /68 /65 /61 /107 □ /77 /69 /60 /78 /64 /62 /60 /61
/71 /60 /79 /74 /63 /76 □ /59 /108 /60 /61 /74 /63 /65 /102 /60 □ /71 /65 /62 /60 /61 /63 /67 /62 □
/77 /62 /60 /60 /68 □ /58 /69 /65 /78 /64 /63 /60 □ /56 /74 /68 /73 □
/77 /88 /51 /67 /109 /60 /62 /81 □ /84 /91 /88 /91 □ /50 /67 /68 /72 /73 /67 /88 /73 /67 /68 /72 /81 □ /53 /60 /67 /68 /70 /74 /88 /72 /74 □
/48 /68 /61 /75 /60 /67 /68 □ /58 /65 /63 /76 /81 □ /52 /60 /79 /74 /103 /69 /65 /61 □ /67 /66 □ /110 /67 /62 /60 /64
□
/52 /60 /111 □ /112 /113 /114 /115 /116 /114 /117 □ /119 /120 /121 /119 /121 /122 /123 /124 □ /125 /121 /120 □ /126 /127 /128 □ /129 /130 /112 □ /131 /132 □ /133 /128 /117 /123 /122 /113 /122 □ /120 /128 /117 /123 /120 /115 /116 /114 /117 □ /126 /127 /128 □ /119 /120 /121 /117 /120 /123 /134 □ /135 /130 /136 /137 /112 /138 □ /139 □ /130 /123 /126 /123 /124 /132 /126 /116 /140 □ /130 /123 /119 /116 /126 /123 /124 □ /125 /121 /120
/112 /116 /120 /122 /126 □ /133 /120 /116 /141 /123 /126 /128 □ /142 /114 /141 /128 /122 /126 /134 /128 /114 /126 □ /112 /113 /114 /115 □ /125 /121 /120 □ /137 /115 /123 /119 /126 /123 /126 /116 /121 /114 □ /138 /128 /140 /127 /114 /121 /124 /121 /117 /116 /128 /122 □ /116 /114 □ /143 /128 /141 /128 /124 /121 /119 /116 /114 /117 □ /130 /121 /113 /114 /126 /120 /116 /128 /122 /135
/144 /145 /146 /145 /147 /148 /149 /150 /151 /152 /153 □ /48 /66 □ /76 /67 /74 □ /64 /68 /70 /109 /60 /62 □ /63 /75 /65 /70 □ /69 /60 /63 /63 /60 /62 /81 □ /79 /69 /60 /64 /70 /60 □ /65 /68 /73 /65 /61 /64 /63 /60 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /83 /62 /67 /61 /60 /70 /70 □ /68 /99 /85 □ /86 /84 /86 /84 /90 /99 /86 /90 /90 /86 /105 /87 /94 /84 /90 /84 /86 /88 /92 /87 /99
□
/71 /60 /64 /62 □ /47 /62 /99 □ /77 /69 /60 /78 /64 /62 /60 /61 /81
□
/86 /99 /154 /60 □ /62 /60 /66 /60 /62 □ /63 /67 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 □ /63 /65 /63 /69 /60 /73 □ /155 /58 /52 /57 /56 /51 □ /156 □ /58 /64 /63 /64 /69 /76 /63 /65 /61 □ /58 /64 /79 /65 /63 /64 /69 □ /66 /67 /62 □ /56 /65 /62 /70 /63 □ /83 /62 /65 /102 /64 /63 /60 □ /48 /68 /102 /60 /70 /63 /78 /60 /68 /63 □ /56 /74 /68 /73
/66 /67 /62 □ /57 /73 /64 /79 /63 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 □ /51 /60 /61 /75 /68 /67 /69 /67 /72 /65 /60 /70 □ /65 /68 □ /71 /60 /102 /60 /69 /67 /79 /65 /68 /72 □ /58 /67 /74 /68 /63 /62 /65 /60 /70 /155 □ /64 /70 □ /65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72 □ /79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 □ /70 /74 /103 /78 /65 /63 /63 /60 /73 □ /103 /76
/83 /60 /72 /64 /70 /74 /70 □ /63 /67 □ /74 /70 □ /67 /68 □ /47 /64 /62 /61 /75 □ /86 /86 □ /84 /90 /84 /86 /99
/84 /99 /51 /75 /60 □ /74 /68 /73 /60 /62 /70 /65 /72 /68 /60 /73 □ /65 /70 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /73 /74 /69 /76 □ /64 /74 /63 /75 /67 /62 /65 /101 /60 /73 □ /62 /60 /79 /62 /60 /70 /60 /68 /63 /64 /63 /65 /102 /60 □ /67 /66 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /50 /60 /61 /62 /60 /63 /64 /62 /65 /64 /63 □ /66 /67 /62 □ /48 /68 /63 /60 /62 /68 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69
/59 /61 /67 /68 /67 /78 /65 /61 □ /57 /66 /66 /64 /65 /62 /70 /81 □ /47 /65 /68 /65 /70 /63 /62 /76 □ /67 /66 □ /59 /61 /67 /68 /67 /78 /76 /81 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /49 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69 □ /71 /60 /70 /65 /72 /68 /64 /63 /60 /73 □ /57 /74 /63 /75 /67 /62 /65 /63 /76 □ /67 /66 □ /82 /62 /64 /101 /65 /69 /99
/98 /99 /83 /74 /62 /70 /74 /64 /68 /63 □ /63 /67 □ /77 /58 /56 □ /73 /60 /61 /65 /70 /65 /67 /68 □ /82 /99 /90 /92 /94 /86 /90 /81 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /61 /67 /68 /63 /60 /68 /63 □ /67 /66 □ /109 /75 /65 /61 /75 □ /109 /60 □ /64 /61 /107 /68 /67 /109 /69 /60 /73 /72 /60 □ /63 /67 □ /75 /64 /102 /60 □ /62 /60 /102 /65 /60 /109 /60 /73 /81
/109 /60 □ /75 /60 /62 /60 /103 /76 □ /61 /67 /78 /78 /74 /68 /65 /61 /64 /63 /60 □ /67 /74 /62 □ /68 /67 /88 /67 /103 /106 /60 /61 /63 /65 /67 /68 □ /63 /67 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 /78 /60 □ /64 /70 □ /65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72 □ /79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 /99
/91 /99 /82 /76 □ /61 /67 /78 /78 /74 /68 /65 /61 /64 /63 /65 /68 /72 □ /67 /74 /62 □ /68 /67 /88 /67 /103 /106 /60 /61 /63 /65 /67 /68 /81 □ /65 /63 □ /65 /70 □ /65 /78 /79 /69 /65 /60 /73 □ /63 /75 /64 /63 /111
/64 /97 /51 /75 /60 □ /72 /67 /102 /60 /62 /68 /78 /60 /68 /63 □ /67 /66 □ /82 /62 /64 /101 /65 /69 □ /75 /64 /70 □ /68 /67 /88 /67 /103 /106 /60 /61 /63 /65 /67 /68 □ /63 /67 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 /78 /60 □ /64 /70 □ /65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72
/79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 /157
/103 /97 /51 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 □ /64 /70 □ /65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72 □ /79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 □ /65 /70 □ /65 /68 □ /61 /67 /68 /66 /67 /62 /78 /65 /63 /76 □ /109 /65 /63 /75 □ /82 /62 /64 /101 /65 /69 /158 /70 □ /68 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69
/79 /62 /65 /67 /62 /65 /63 /65 /60 /70 /81 □ /70 /63 /62 /64 /63 /60 /72 /65 /60 /70 □ /64 /68 /73 □ /79 /69 /64 /68 /70 /157
/61 /97 /48 /68 □ /64 /61 /61 /67 /62 /73 /64 /68 /61 /60 □ /109 /65 /63 /75 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /77 /58 /56 /158 /70 □ /60 /68 /102 /65 /62 /67 /68 /78 /60 /68 /63 /64 /69 □ /64 /68 /73 □ /70 /67 /61 /65 /64 /69 □ /70 /64 /66 /60 /72 /74 /64 /62 /73 /70 /81 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 /78 /60 □ /64 /70
/65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72 □ /79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 □ /65 /70 □ /65 /68 □ /61 /67 /68 /66 /67 /62 /78 /65 /63 /76 □ /109 /65 /63 /75 □ /62 /60 /69 /60 /102 /64 /68 /63 □ /68 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69 □ /69 /64 /109 /70 □ /64 /68 /73 □ /62 /60 /72 /74 /69 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /70 /99
/105 /99 /154 /60 □ /64 /69 /70 /67 □ /61 /67 /68 /66 /65 /62 /78 □ /63 /75 /64 /63 □ /67 /74 /62 □ /68 /64 /63 /65 /67 /68 /64 /69 □ /79 /62 /67 /61 /60 /70 /70 □ /66 /67 /62 □ /64 /70 /61 /60 /62 /63 /64 /65 /68 /65 /68 /72 □ /68 /67 /88 /67 /103 /106 /60 /61 /63 /65 /67 /68 □ /63 /67 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 /78 /60 □ /64 /70
/65 /68 /61 /69 /74 /73 /60 /73 □ /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /66 /74 /68 /73 /65 /68 /72 □ /79 /62 /67 /79 /67 /70 /64 /69 □ /75 /64 /70 □ /103 /60 /60 /68 □ /73 /74 /69 /76 □ /66 /67 /69 /69 /67 /109 /60 /73 /99 □
/96 /99 /154 /60 □ /64 /69 /70 /67 □ /61 /67 /68 /66 /65 /62 /78 □ /63 /75 /64 /63 □ /67 /74 /62 □ /68 /67 /88 /67 /103 /106 /60 /61 /63 /65 /67 /68 □ /64 /79 /79 /69 /65 /60 /70 □ /63 /67 □ /64 /69 /69 □ /79 /62 /67 /106 /60 /61 /63 /70 □ /67 /62 □ /64 /61 /63 /65 /102 /65 /63 /65 /60 /70 □ /63 /67 □ /103 /60 □ /65 /78 /79 /69 /60 /78 /60 /68 /63 /60 /73
/109 /65 /63 /75 /65 /68 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /70 /61 /67 /79 /60 □ /67 /66 □ /63 /75 /60 □ /79 /62 /67 /72 /62 /64 /78 /78 /60 /99
Page 60


---
*Page 64*
---

/1 /2 /0 /3 /2 /4 /4 /5 /6 /7 /2 /7 □ /11 /5 /12 /13 /14 /13 /0 /5 □ /11 □ /15 /16 /17 /18 /19 /20
/21 /22 /22 /23 /24 /25 /2 /2 /24 /26 /19 /27 /26 /18 /20 /28 /20 /29 /19 /30 /27 /31 /20 /32 /27 /33 /34 /2 /24 /26 /19 /2 /18 /20 /28 /22 /34 /20 /35 /30 /36 /20 /34 /27 /23 /21 /23 /37 /30 /18 /30 /20 /38 /36 /20 /18 /39 /29 /26 /28 /22 /20 /40 /19 /29 /23 /34 /19 /29 /19 /34 /40 /41 /26 /33 /42 /30 /18 /30 /20 /40 /20 /34 /19 /31 /26 /29 /38 /30 /34 /20 /34 /26 /40 /19 /24 /39 /30 /35 /19 /43 /30 /34 /42 /19 /36 /40 /36 /20 /18 /39 /29 /26 /28 /22 /20 /38 /5 /3 /13 /0 /44 /14 /45 /1 /42 /19 /28 /16 /34 /46 /4 /2 /4/47 /48 /49 /50 □ /52 /53 /54 /55 /56 /57 /58 /50 /59 /60 /50 □ /61 /62 /52 /61 □ /61 /62 /63 /64 □ /58 /50 /61 /61 /50 /65 □ /57 /63 /58 /58 □ /66 /50 □ /67 /52 /59 /50 □ /68 /69 /66 /58 /63 /53 /58 /70 □ /52 /71 /52 /63 /58 /52 /66 /58 /50 □ /56 /55 □ /61 /62 /50 □ /72 /73 /74 □ /57 /50 /66 /64 /63 /61 /50 /48
□
/75 /50 /64 /61 □ /65 /50 /60 /52 /65 /59 /64 /76
□
/77 /56 /53 /69 /67 /50 /55 /61 /56 □ /52 /64 /64 /63 /55 /52 /59 /56 □ /50 /58 /50 /61 /65 /56 /55 /63 /53 /52 /67 /50 /55 /61 /50
/78 /79 /80 /81 /82 /83 /77 /84 □ /82 /83 /74 /79 /78 /77 /84 □ /72 /84 /85 /78 /86
/86 /50 /53 /65
/50 /61 /52 /65 /70 □ /87 /56 /65 □ /80 /55 /61 /50 /65 /55 /52 /61 /63 /56 /55 /52 /58 □ /78 /53 /56 /55 /56 /67 /63 /53 □ /82 /87 /87 /52 /63 /65 /64
/85 /63 /55 /63 /64 /61 /65 /70 □ /56 /87 □ /78 /53 /56 /55 /56 /67 /70 □ /56 /87 □ /75 /65 /52 /88 /63 /58
□
/89 /90 /91 /92 /93 /94 /95 /96 /90 □ /98 /99 /99 /100 /95 /98 /101 /90 □ /94 /102 /94 /96 /103 /90 /95 /100 /91 /98 /93 /94 /95 /96 /94 □ /104 /90 /103 □ /105 /106 /107 /108 /109 /110 /111 /112 □ /114 /110 /115 /106 /116 /111 /112 □ /117 /112 /118 /116 /119 /120 □ /121 /116 /122 /106 /116 /123 /124 /106 /107 /112 /125 /109 /126 □ /111 /116 □ /114 /119 /119 /127 /128 /123 /112 /119
/105 /122 /112 /128 /129 /118 /107 /122 /112 /119 □ /130 /128 /123 /116 /106 /128 /109 /122 /107 /112 /128 /109 /107 /119 /120 □ /94 /93 □ /131 /132 /133 /131 /134 /133 /135 /131 /135 /136 /120 □ /137 /99 □ /136 /138 /139 /136 /132 /120 □ /91 /90 /95 /140 /90 /103 /93 /94 □ /141 /90 /103 /142 /103 /100 /90 □ /90 /143 /91 /100 /98 /102 □ /101 /94 □ /144 /103 /98 /99 /145 /102 /100 /98 /120 □ /91 /90 /93
/140 /92 /95 /101 /98 /93 /94 /95 /96 /90 □ /95 /90 □ /98 /103 /96 /146 □ /134 /147 /120 □ /148 □ /136 /147 /120 □ /101 /90 □ /89 /94 /91 /103 /94 /96 /90 □ /95 /147 □ /149 /146 /150 /132 /138 /120 □ /101 /94 □ /149 □ /101 /94 □ /90 /92 /96 /92 /151 /103 /90 □ /101 /94 □ /135 /131 /136 /150 /146
/152 □ /98 /92 /96 /94 /95 /153 /91 /100 /101 /98 /101 /94 □ /101 /94 /99 /96 /94 □ /101 /90 /91 /92 /93 /94 /95 /96 /90 □ /104 /90 /101 /94 □ /99 /94 /103 □ /91 /90 /95 /140 /94 /103 /100 /101 /98 □ /95 /90 □ /99 /100 /96 /94
/141 /154 /104 /99 /139 /133 /133 /99 /94 /100 /146 /94 /91 /90 /95 /90 /93 /100 /98 /146 /155 /90 /156 /146 /151 /103 /133 /99 /94 /100 /133 /91 /90 /95 /96 /103 /90 /102 /98 /101 /90 /103 /157 /94 /158 /96 /94 /103 /95 /90 /146 /104 /141 /104 /159
/98 /91 /98 /90 /160 /101 /90 /91 /92 /93 /94 /95 /96 /90 /157 /91 /90 /95 /140 /94 /103 /100 /103 /161 /100 /101 /157 /90 /103 /155 /98 /90 /157 /98 /91 /94 /99 /99 /90 /157 /94 /158 /96 /94 /103 /95 /90 /160 /131 /120 □ /100 /95 /140 /90 /103 /93 /98 /95 /101 /90 □ /90 □ /91 /162 /101 /100 /155 /90 □ /156 /94 /103 /100 /143 /91 /98 /101 /90 /103 □ /163 /164 /165 /164 /166 /165 /167 /163
/94 □ /90 □
/91 /162 /101 /100 /155 /90 □ /168 /169 /168 □ /164 /170 /165 /114 /105 /171 /171 /164 /146
□
/172 /65 /56 /53 /50 /64 /64 /56 □ /55 /173 □ /174 /175 /174 /175 /176 /48 /174 /176 /176 /174 /177 /178 /179 /175 /176 /175 /174 /180 /181 /178 /48 /86 /78 /80 □ /55 /173 □ /174 /182 /181 /182 /178 /181 /176 /174
Page 61


---
*Page 65*
---

Subsecretaría  de Hacienda        
y Crédito  Público  
Unidad  de Crédito  Público  
To: The Green  Climate  Fund  (“GCF”)  
Mexico  City,  September 2nd 2021  
Re: Funding  proposal  for the GCF  by Pegasus  Capital  Advisors  regarding  CRAFT  – 
Catalytic  Capital  for First  Private  Investment  Fund  for Adaptation  Technologies  in 
Developing  Countries  
Dear  Madam, Sir,  
We refer  to the progr amme  titled  CRAFT  – Catalytic  Capital  for First  Private  Investment  
Fund  for Adaptation  Technologies  in Developing  Countries  in Mexico  as included  in the  
funding  proposal  submitted  by Pegasus  Capital  Advisors to  us on 11 March  2021.  
The undersigned  is the duly  authorized  representative  of Brenda  Pequeño  Vargas,  the 
National  Designated  Authority  of Mexico . 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have  reviewed,  
we hereby  communicate  our no-objection  to the progr amme  as included  in the funding  
proposal.  
By communicating  our no-objection,  it is implied  that:  
(a) The government of Mexico has no -objection to the progr amme  as included in
the funding proposal;
(b)The progr amme  as included  in the funding  proposal  is in conformity  with  the
nationa l  priorities, strategies and  plans of Mexico;
(c) In accordance  with  the GCF’s  environmental  and social  safeguards,  the
progr amme  as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant
national laws an d regulations.
We also  confirm  that  our national  process  for ascertaining  no-objection  to the progr amme  
as included  in the funding  proposal  has been  duly  followed.  
We also  confirm  that  our no-objection  applies  to all projects  or activities  to be  implemented  
within  the scope  of the progr amme.  
We acknowledge  that  this letter  will be made  publicly  available  on the GCF  website.  
 Kind  regards,  
Brenda  Pequeño  Vargas  
Director  General  
National  Designated  Authority  
Mexico  
Av. Insurgentes  Sur No.  1971,  Torre  III, Piso  7, Colonia  Guadalupe  Inn, Alcaldía  Álvaro  Obregón,  Ciudad  de México,  CP. 01020.  
Tel. +52 55 3688  1410  www.gob.mx/shcp  
Page 62


---
*Page 66*
---

Page 63


---
*Page 67*
---

Page 64


---
*Page 68*
---

 Private Bag X447, Pretoria, 0001, Environment House, 473 Steve Biko Road, Pretoria, 0002 Tel: +27 12 399 9000, Fax: +86  625 1042 
 
 
 
 
 
Batho pele- putting people first  
The processing of personal information by the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment is done lawfully and not excessive to 
the purpose of processing in compliance with the POPI Act, any codes of conduct issued by the Information Regulator in terms of the POPI 
Act and / or relevant legislation providing appropriate security safeguards for the processing of personal information of others. The 
processing of personal information by the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment is done lawfully and not excessive to the 
purpose of processing in compliance with the POPI Act, any codes of conduct issued by the Information Regulator in terms of the POPI Act 
and / or relevant legislation providing appropriate security safeguards for the processing of personal information of others.  
1 
Ref: EDMS 205754 
Enquiries:  Shahkira Parker 
Tel: 012 399 9240    Email: sparker@environment.gov.za  
 
 
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District  
175 Art center-daero  
Yeonsu-gu 
INCHEON 22004  
Republic of Korea 
 
Email: fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
 
Dear Sir/Madam 
 
FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY PEGASUS CAPITAL ADVISORS FOR 
THE CATALYTIC CAPITAL FOR FIRST PRIVATE INVESTMENT FUND FOR ADAPTATION 
TECHNOLOGIES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (CRAFT) PROGRAMME  
 
We refer to the programme titled Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation 
Technologies in Developing Countries (CRAFT)” in South Africa as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors  to us on 11 March 2021.  
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Department of Forestry, Fisheries, and the 
Environment, the National Designated Authority/focal point for South Africa. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of South Africa has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, 
strategies and plans of South Africa ; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in 
the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
Page 65


---
*Page 69*
---

FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY PEGASUS CAPITAL ADVISORS FOR 
THE CATALYTIC CAPITAL FOR FIRST PRIVATE INVESTMENT FUND FOR ADAPTATION 
TECHNOLOGIES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (CRAFT) PROGRAMME 
 
 
Batho pele - putting people first 
2 
 
 
We confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme. 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
 
Ms Nomfundo Tshabalala 
DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
DATE: 14/07/2021 
Page 66


---
*Page 70*
---

MINISTRY OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
OFFICE OF THE PERMANENf SECRETARY 
Level 14, Eric Williams Financial Building, Independence Square, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, WI 
Tel: 612 3000 ext. 2016/1329 Fax: 623 8123 
PD(EPPD):14/5/39 
August ti 2021
Y annick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
175 Art center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 
Republic of Korea 
Dear Mr. Glemarec 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding CRAFT­
Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation Technologies in 
Developing Countries 
We refer to the programme titled CRAFT� Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund 
for Adaptation Technologies in Developing Countries as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors to us on 23 June 2021. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Designated Authority of 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The Government of Trinidad and Tobago has no-objection to the programme as included
in the funding proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Trinidad and Tobago;
Page 67


---
*Page 71*
---

(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the programme. 
Sincerely, ��,(?/ 
l . Permanent Secretary 
�NT SfWR[TA. �V 
�TRY OF P �NO 
ANO DEVELOFM!!.tfl' 
CC: Craig Cogut, Founder and CEO, Pegasus Capital Advisors 
Page 68


---
*Page 72*
---

1From: Danielle Sookram <Danielle.Sookram@planning.gov.tt>
Sent: Friday, August 27, 2021 10:44 AM
To: Jill Xu; Jay Koh; Danielle Sookram
Cc: David Persaud; Kishan Kumarsingh; Craig Cogut; Hyejin Lee; Michael Keane; Yaenah Kim; 
susanah14@gmail.com; Brian Friedman; Ali Haider; Orville Grey; Neranda Maurice-
George; Joanne Deoraj
Subject:Re: Pegasus Capital | Green Climate Fund - CRAFT Programme
Attachments: SKM_C754e21082422040.pdf
Dear Jill, 
On behalf of the National Designated Authority of Trinidad and Tobago, Permanent Secretary Ms. Joanne 
Deoraj, I submit the letter of no-objection for this programme. We acknowledge that this letter will be 
made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Best regards, 
Danielle Sookram  
Research Analyst  
Environmental Policy and Planning Division  
Ministry of Planning and Development  
Level 7, Tower C, International Waterfront Centre  
1A Wrightson Road,  
Port-of-Spain  
Republic of Trinidad & Tobago  
E: danielle.sookram@planning.gov.tt  //W: www.planning.gov.tt 
P: 799-8043
Instagram: @eppdtt  
Blog- http://eppd-tt.blogspot.com/  
From: Jill Xu <jill.xu@lightsmithgp.com> 
Sent: Wednesday, August 18, 2021 11:23 AM 
To: Jay Koh; Danielle Sookram 
Cc: David Persaud; Kishan Kumarsingh; Craig Cogut; Hyejin Lee; Michael Keane; Yaenah Kim; susanah14@gmail.com; 
Brian Friedman; Ali Haider; Orville Grey; Neranda Maurice-George; Joanne Deoraj; Danielle Sookram 
Subject: RE: Pegasus Capital | Green Climate Fund - CRAFT Programme   
Dear Danielle,  
We trust all has been well. Thanks again for the NOL – we are looking forward to working with Trinidad and Tobago.  
We recently received a note from the GCF Secretariat asking for a re-issuance of the letter due to a missing sentence in 
the current version received. The Secretariat is requesting the re-issuance of the letter (see link below) before our Board 
publication date of 9/12/2021. The country team is also cc’d in case of any questions.  
Page 69


---
*Page 73*
---

2Link to the NOL template: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/programme-annex-1-no-objection-
letter-template.docx  
It appears the missing sentence may be “ We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme ”. 
Apologies for the inconvenience. 
Best Regards,  
Jill 
From: Jay Koh <jay.koh@lightsmithgp.com>  
Sent: Tuesday, July 20, 2021 4:01 PM 
To: Danielle Sookram <daniellesookram13@gmail.com> 
Cc: david.persaud@planning.gov.tt; kishan.kumarsingh@planning.gov.tt; Craig Cogut <cmcogut@pcalp.com>; Jill Xu 
<jill.xu@lightsmithgp.com>; Hyejin Lee <hlee@gcfund.org>; Michael Keane <mkeane@gcfund.org>; Yaenah Kim 
<ynkim@gcfund.org>; susanah14@gmail.com; Brian Friedman <bfriedman@pcalp.com>; Ali Haider 
<ahaider@gcfund.org>; Orville Grey <ogrey@gcfund.org>; Neranda Maurice-George <nmaurice@gcfund.org>; 
joanne.deoraj@planning.gov.tt; Danielle Sookram <danielle.sookram@planning.gov.tt>; Jay Koh 
<jay.koh@lightsmithgp.com> 
Subject: Re: Pegasus Capital | Green Climate Fund - CRAFT Programme 
Dear Danielle, 
Thank you very much for your kind note and the NOL. We wanted to report to you that we were informed that we were successfully approved by CIC3 and will move to ITAP for B.30 consideration. We are honored to add Trinidad and Tobago 
to the list of participant NOL countries.  
Thank you again. 
Best Regards, 
Jay 
Jay L. Koh 
Managing Director 
The Lightsmith Group 
300 Park Avenue, 12th Fl.  
NY, NY 10022 
jay.koh@lightsmithgp.com  +1-646-678-8777
On Jul 20, 2021, at 3:54 PM, Danielle Sookram < daniellesookram13@gmail.com > wrote: 
Dear Jay, 
On behalf of the NDA of Trinidad and Tobago, I am pleased to submit this no-objection letter for the 
CRAFT programme. I apologize for the delayed submission as the procedure to review the proposal and 
provide the letter was not possible within your stipulated deadline. I thank you again for considering 
Trinidad and Tobago for this opportunity. 
Best regards, 
Danielle Sookram 
Page 70


---
*Page 74*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  CRAFT – Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund 
for Adaptation Technologies in Developing Countries  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  Pegasus Capital Advisors  (PCA)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Bahamas, Brazil,  Colombia,  India, Kenya, Malaysia,  Mexico, 
Morocco,  Rwanda , South Africa, and Trinidad and Tobago .  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (N/A  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) ( N/A ) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS )  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, September 1, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Arabic, French, Malay, Portuguese,  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  These are an/the official languages of each of the target 
countries.   
Link to disclosure  Link to disclosure on PCA ’ website:  
English:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -English .pdf 
Arabic:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -Arabic.pdf  
French:  
Page 71


---
*Page 75*
---

https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -French.pdf  
Malay:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -Malay.pdf  
Portuguese:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -Portuguese.pdf  
Spanish:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/CRAFT -ESMS -Spanish.pdf  
Link to disclosure on Lightsmith’s  website  (Executing 
Entity) : 
English:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020 -.pdf 
Arabic:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020_final -arabic.pdf  
French:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020_final -french.pdf  
Malay:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020_final -malay.pdf   
Portuguese:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020_final -portuguese.pdf  
Spanish:  
https://lightsmithgp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2021/09/lightsmith -esms -14-july-
2020_final -spanish.pdf  
Other link(s)  https://www.pcalp.com/impact/  
Remarks  An ESM S consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the “Environmental and 
Social Management System (ESMS)” . 
Page 72


---
*Page 76*
---

Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (N/A)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, September 1, 2021  
Place  All National Designated Authorities were  provided the link 
to the disclosure ( www.pcalp.com/impact ), which are also 
accessible from NDA offices (see contact information here: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/countries ).  
. 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  TBD  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 4, 2021  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
________  
Page 73


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 74 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP181 
Proposal name:  CRAFT - Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for 
Adaptation Technologies in Developing Countries  
Accredited entity:  Pegasus Capital Advisors  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential          Scale:  Medium  
1.1.1 Overview  
1. Technology innovation is a critical element in addressing climate challenges, both in 
mitigation and adaptation , as recogni zed by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change . Systematically addressing these challenges needs to 
involve the private sector, as the  challenges posed by the climate crisis are now  at a scale that 
goes beyond what development finance institutions and governments can achieve on their own . 
Nevertheless, in 2019 only 6  per cent  of venture capital funding went into climate technology. 
While there is a substantial promise that more w ill be done, there is no certainty that this will 
happen.  As such, the creat ion of a dedicated fund structure in the form of CRAFT is welcomed, as 
it will help address crucial technology gaps including those faced by developing countries in 
their adaptatio n to the climate crisis.  
2. The CRAFT  Fund proposes to address adaptation challenges in 11 developing countries  
(Bahamas, Brazil, Colombia, India, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Rwanda, South Africa  and 
Trinidad and Tobago) , of which  only six (Bahamas, Brazil, Mexico, Rwanda, South Africa, 
Trinidad and Tobago ) had provided no-objection letters  (NOL)  at the time of finalising  this 
assessment . The independent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP)  notes that the rationale for 
country selection is not clear in some cases, as some of the countries targeted are  neither first 
nor second priorities of the Climate Policy Initiative study that was provided to serve as 
demonstration of feasibility, thus ra ising questions as to whether they have the absorption 
capacity for the kind of technologies CRAFT is targeting.  
3. CRAFT is expected to directly deliver close to USD 400 milion in financing for adaptation 
purposes through investments in technology  companies  with between USD  5 million and USD  
100 million annual revenue and undertake  activities in six technology areas  with potential 
climate adaptation use, including : 
(a) agricultural analytics;  
(b) water harvesting and drip irrigation;  
(c) resilient food systems;  
(d) geospatial mapping and imaging;  
(e) supply chain analytics; and  
(f) catastrophe risk modeling .


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 75 
 
 
4. The TAP notes that some of these technology categories have excessive ranges of 
coverage and could i nclud e high greenhouse gas -emitting technologies  (e.g. cold  chains based 
on fossil fuels)  and/or support maladaptive approaches  (utili zing geospatial technology for 
more aggressive water resource exploitation) . It is not clear what safeguards would be in place 
to prevent these risks from being reali zed.  
1.1.2 Eligibility criteria  
5. When acting through a structure in which GCF is several steps removed from action on 
the ground, with a wide remit both sectorally and geographically, the eligibility criteria for the 
CRAFT Fund are the crucial element s that  would allow the TAP and eventually the Board to 
assess whether the investment will be aligned with  the requirements of GCF, for example, as 
expressed in the Governing Instrument. The TAP notes in this regard that the initial submission 
of the documentation  was missing critical information on eligibility criteria, and no final agreed 
set of these criteria had  been received at the time of drafting this assessment. Noting the draft 
criteria , which were later provided  in the form of a draft term sheet  contained  in annex 14 , a 
number of challenges are observed.  
6. CRAFT will utiliz e two sets of eligibility criteria. First, companies to be selected  have to 
conform to all  three criteria set out below  in terms of their characteristics:  
(a) Increases climate resilience: Company offers a technology, product or service that helps 
its customers address a climate vulnerability, risk or impact and build resilience (i.e. a 
“climate resilience solution” aligned with the Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy ); 
(b) Growth stage: Company is at the growth stage, typically generating approximately USD 5 
million to 100 million in annual revenues with demonstrated customer adoption ; and  
(c) Environmental, social and governance ( ESG ) and i mpact metrics: Company is committed 
and able to manage ESG risks and to track and report on impacts consistent with the 
environmental and social management system  and Impact Measurement System  (IMS) 
of CRAFT.  
7. These criteria define the type of company CRAFT will consider investing in.  The TAP 
notes in this regard that , by setting the upper limit at USD  100 million in annual revenues , 
CRAFT includes such a considerable  target range that the limit is almost meaningless. For 
example, geospatial mapping company Waze had revenues of USD 37.7 million when it was 
acquired by Google for USD  1.2 billion. A lower target range would give the TAP more comfort in 
terms of the addit ionality of the GCF investment, particular ly in light of the discussion below.  
8. A second set of eligibility criteria further aims to ensure country ownership by detailing 
characteristics and add ing an activity -related element  for the companies  to be selected . 
9. The TAP understands these are draft criteria subject to further negotiation at this stage, 
and assumes that “NOL country” refers to countries eligible to receive GCF funds that have 
issued an NOL, as set out in p aragraph 2 of this assessment .  
10. Only one of the four criteria needs to be met  in order for a company to be eligible for  
CRAFT investment , and they  are provided below:  
(a) The company is headquartered in an NOL country (including subsidiaries and joint 
ventures); or  
(b) The majority (more than 50  per cent ) of the company’s revenue or cost is generated or 
incurred in NOL countries; or  
(c) The majority (more than 50  per cent ) of the company’s employees are located in NOL 
countries; or


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 76 
 
 
(d) The company commits to dedicate a substantial portion of invested GCF p roceeds to 
increase employment, development impact or measurable climate adaptation or 
mitig ation benefits in NOL countries.  
11. In a discussion on these with the a ccredited  entity (AE)  and the executing entity (EE) , 
the latter noted that there is  also  an overall investment framework that would assure the 
achievement of adaptation outcomes.  
12. In relati on to the first set of criteria, the value of the Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy is 
acknowledged as the  first filter  to confirm that a particular technology constitutes a “resilience 
technology solution” . Unlike mitigation technologies , however , adaptation technologies are 
country and location- specific and  the successful  transfer of such technologies to a developing 
country context faces a lot of barriers. It is therefore necessary to consider the context in which 
any new technology will be purch ased an d utilized. For example, a  water-efficient irrigation 
system is not in and of itself a mechan ism for adaptation. In some contexts, it might be 
purchased purely to reduce input costs.  It become s an adaptation mechanism only if utilized in 
the context of water scarcity, and only where this scarcity arises, at least in part, because of climate change (as opposed to, for example, population gro wth). By the same logic, geosynthetic 
products, while use ful in flood control mechanisms, have other purposes. Even whe n used in 
flood control, the products may be  managing a level of flooding that ha d not been observed to 
increase in recent decades and is not projected to increase in coming decades as a result of 
climate change.   
13. In relation to  point (d) in  the second set of criteria  above,  the TAP notes  that the word 
“substantial” is too vague for use in  a mea surable elig ibility criterion, especially when combined 
with the broad scope of “increase employment , development impact or measurable climate 
adaptation or mitigation benefits”.   
14. Following interaction with the AE and  the EE, we note that points (a), (b) and (c) relate 
to the investment screening process and describe conditions that must be in p lace at the time of 
selection of the company for inves tment. Point (d) , on the other hand , would relate to future 
actions, and is thus not relevant for screening. For both these reasons, t he TAP strongly suggests 
that point (d) be removed. Point (d) is also rendered irrelevant by c ovenant 17 (j) in the draft 
term sheet  (annex 14 to the funding proposal) —see paragraph 1 7 below.  
15. We also indicate  our concern  that,  based on the  current two sets of criteria, it cannot be 
assured that GCF proceeds will be utili zed to create climate adaptation benefits. In particular, 
the TAP notes that these criteria do not seem to consider the possibility that companies have 
more than one product under development or on offer, with one or more of them not climate -
related and/or that the product on offer has multiple uses, not all of which  are related to climate 
adaptation —a particular risk in geoinformation, supply chain analysis and catastrophe risk 
modelling.  
16. For example, i t is possible that a company is compliant with  the first set of criteria and , 
in terms of the second set , is based in South Africa and has most of their 
revenue/cost/employees there, but is not engaging in meaningful climate -related activities as 
their product has dual use  or they have more than one product . Another possible example is  a 
company based in the U nited Sta tes of America  that is  compliant with the first set of criteria  and 
commits to invest an undefined “substantial” amount of GCF proceeds in an NOL country—for 
example,  to build schools or invest in e-scooters —which would make it compliant with 
paragraph 10 (d) while  not deliver ing adaptation benefits.  
17. The TAP noted  earlier that  point (d) in the second set of criteria may be  effectively 
rendered null and void by c ovena nt 17(j) in the draft t erm sheet, which states that “The 
Accredited Entity covenants tha t, as from the effective date, it shall: Contractually ensure that 
the CRAFT Fund uses GCF Proceeds only makes investments in the Host Countries”. Although there is a grammatical error in the clau se, we assume the intention i s to convey that the GCF


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 77 
 
 
proceeds in the  CRAFT  Fund will only be used for investments in the h ost countr ies or , to put it 
differently, th at 100  per cent  of GCF p roceeds will be used to make inves tmen ts in the h ost 
countr ies, i.e. GCF -eligible countries that have issued NOLs . 
18. If this is th e intention, we would welcome this, since such an approach  would maximi ze 
the sustainable development co -benefits of the adaptation investment. For the purposes of this 
assessment, however, we have assumed that the two sets of crietria, including paragraph 10  (d), 
remain in place.  
19. Once the investments have been made, there are also more active ways to steer the  
actions of companies, e.g. through strong covenants on the use of GCF funds invested and/or 
through supervision executed by a company’s  Board. In this regard, t he TAP  note s that CRAFT 
only “ seek s” to obtain  a seat on the Board of investee c ompanies, as no ted by the AE in their 
response  to our questions . It is  however  our view that , in order to ensure that investments 
supported by GCF  are compliant with GCF objectives, CRAFT obtaining a seat on the Board of 
investee companies should be a non- negotiable condition for CRAFT’s investment in a 
company —through which  it would gain  access to GCF resources.  
1.1.3 Climate impact  
20. In order to make an assessment of the programme’s likely impact potential for climate 
change adaptation, the TAP has reviewed the proposed processes whereby investments will be 
selected, justified, set up to be monitored and monitored , and has found these to be positive but 
not yet rigorous enough to enable a solid climate rati onale for the programme as a whole.  
21. In response to questions from the TAP,  the AE has clarified that t he process that CRAFT 
uses to establish its “climate adaptation eligibility” is integrated into CRAFT’s formal investment process . Following the testing of alignment of a candidate company ’s technology/services/  
products with the Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy mentioned above, the process involves  an 
Investment Committee  screening note that evaluates the specific potential issues for an 
investment . A final Investment Committee  memo then  summarizes the due diligence completed, 
including a description of projected impact , with sections on “Climate Impact (hazard, exposure, 
or vulnerability addressed” and “Intervention/Action (adaptation, mitigation  [sic] benefits)”. 
Mention is also made of a “Theory of Change describing the potential climate adaptation 
impacts”. The TAP notes that the screening considering mitigation benefits is aligned with the 
eligibility criterion in paragraph 10 .(d) above, and thus does not provide in and of itself an 
additional safeguard to ensure a focus on adaptation benefits only.  
22. Following the selection of a company  for investment , the process of establishing k ey 
performance indicators (KPIs)  includes seven indicator types, of which three to five  need to be 
chosen . Following a question from  the TAP,  the EE, Lightsmith,  has reas sured us that one of 
these indicators will  be on “ Measuring Climate Change Adaptation and Climate Resilience 
Impacts” and will not be optional. Annex 25 to  the Impact Measurement System notes that 
“Lightsmith utilizes a logic model to estimate the direct climate change adaptation impacts 
derived from the availability and use of the intelligence, product or service. This model hel ps 
identify the data to be collected and the KPIs to be monitored as part of the impact 
measurement process, such as the number of units in use, the number of customers using it, or 
the extent or value of assets benefiting from the use (e.g. hectares of land under drip irrigation). 
Climate change adaptation measures should link to the specific hazard or exposure that is 
incorporated in the vulnerability assessment.“ It is unclear to which vulnerability assessment 
this refers. Lightsmith then monitors both environmental and social  risks and KPIs throughout 
the holding period of the investment, and the results of tracking the indicators are included in a 
simple table containing  “impact”, “indicator” and “value ” in the a nnual ESG and  impact reporting 
template.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 78 
 
 
23. This further detail is welcomed by the TAP a s it reflects the firm intention to select 
companies for investment that can help fulfil the GCF’s mandate to provide support to 
developing countries to adapt to the impacts of climate change, and to measure and track that 
impact effectively. We understand that , for CRAFT and Lightsmith , these processes would be 
sufficient as part of the CRAFT F und. Nevertheless,  to ensu re high impact potential that would 
justify the GCF investment, the AE will appreciate that the process in relation to adaptation 
impact will need to go further and be more comprehensive than the process for other metrics. 
We note that the AE has stated in  the responses that the EE  “welcomes technical guidance from 
the GCF as it seeks to continually refine its approach”.  
24. The TAP understands that the precise market geographies within the NOL -issuing 
countries (and beyond) cannot be known ahead of time, thus precluding the development of a detailed adaptation rationale with full scientific underpinning, detailing observed historical 
trends aligned with future projections in relation to key climate parameters, as is usually 
expected in justifying any GCF adapta tion investment. Although the Adaptation Solutions 
Taxonomy clearly identifies technologies with potential to help vulnerable communties and societies to adapt to negative climate change impacts, it is the context that turns a particular 
technology  (which could be business  as usual technology ) into an adaptation mechanism —for 
example, not the drip irrigation system per se  but the climate change- intensified drought 
context into which it is introduced.  
25. In order to provide as much rigour as possible, it would be helpful  to explore how to 
enhance the existing investment screening and KPI -planning processes already formulated by 
the AE and  the EE and/or develop an additional ex -ante assessment tool  for the climate 
adapation impact of an investment by CRAFT  that w ould enable the w eaving together of the 
elements of climate impact, the technology’s interventions and the tracking of the results . This 
could be achieved, for example, through a systematic conceptualization process like this:  
Information on company and technology     
Size, purpose and geographical location of proposed investment    
Description and geographical location of target market in NOL 
country/countries    
Outline of how climate change or  climatic  variability is affecting 
this specific technology market – focus on key climate parameters    
Summary  of observed changes or variability in these parameters 
historically in this sub -national area   
Summary  of future projections on these parameters in this sub -
national area   
Argument on how specifically these changes/variability  are having 
a negative impact on vulnerable communities/society    
Argument on how the company’s products, services or technology will help the community/society of the target market to adapt to 
these negative impacts    
Identification of what the indicators will be that the company’s 
products, services or technology have helped the customers successfully adapt to these negative impacts


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 79 
 
 
Indicator    
Baseline    
Mid and end targets    
Methodology and approach to measurement and verification    
Assumptions    
26. In the absence of such a systematic approach to selection and impact monitoring for 
adaptation specifically , it is not  possible for the TAP to be co nfident in the project’s adaptation 
impact potential to the degree routinely expected by the GCF Board. Once such an approach has 
been put in place, Pegasus should report this to GCF during the "d ue diligence " phase of any 
investment by CRAFT utili zing GCF funds.  
27. The TAP therefore suggests a set of conditio ns and covenants that will help deliver the 
climate impact.  
1.1.4 Impact potential rating  
28. Overall, in line with the discussion above and  other concerns set out below,  but 
considering the application of the proposed conditions and covenants, the  TAP considers that 
the impact potential of CRAFT is MEDIUM . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential        Scale:  Medium  
29. The paradigm shift of the programme  is expected to be derive d from  the creation of a 
fund dedicated to invest ing in adaptation technology providers. The TAP notes that while this is 
an element of paradigm shift in adaptation, it is a necessary but in sufficient condition, and the 
locali zation of such technologies needs to  be a critical element.  
30. Given the areas of investment set out above, as well as strengthened overall governance 
and robust eligibility assessments,  it is possible that, if investments focus on the climate element 
of these technology areas and the countries that have issued NOL s, paradigm shift could be 
achieved.  
31. Nevertheless, given the concerns about the governance and elig ibility criteria, the TAP 
does not have confidence that the chosen approach will deliver paradigm shift in GCF eligible 
countr ies in general and in the NOL -issuing countries in particular , unless the proposed 
conditions and covenants are applied . 
1.2.1 Risks to paradigm shift  
32. The TAP observes the following challenges with this approach  that, together,  lead to a 
weak consideration of locali zation and specific response to adaptation needs : 
(a) Weak eligibility criteria aimed more at maximiz ing investment opportunities rather 
than pursuing climate impact in NOL countries;  
(b) Weak governance arrangements  that do not guarantee any influence in ensuring that the 
direction of investments supported by GCF remains compliant with GCF  objectives ; and 
(c) Lack of a robust  ex-ante assessment of the adaptation impact potential prior to 
investment in target companies.  
1.2.2 Paradigm shift potential rating


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 80 
 
 
33. In view of the above discussion  on impact potential and balancing the overall impact 
potential and the risks , the TAP rates  CRAFT’s  paradigm shift potential as MEDIUM based on the 
available information  and if the the proposed conditions and covenants  are applied . 
1.3 Sust ainable development potential       Scale:  Medium  
34. The funding proposal was submitted without a dedicated feasibility study and without a 
full pipeline of investments. The AE, when queried, noted that “ Taken together, the prior 
feasibility studies, the demonstrated operations of the Fund, and the documentation developed for 
the Funding Proposal and its description of how it meets GCF’s Investment Criteria makes the 
completion of a separate feasibility st udy unnecessary .” The TAP cannot agree with this view , 
given the observed weakness of the description of how GCF investment criteria will be met and 
the questions around achieving climate impact.  
35. For example, the document labelled feasibility study is a G lobal Environment Facility 
project report. Section V of that document , which should contain  the key " experiences and 
lessons learned ", is empty. Annex 2b is a P owerPoint  presentation that does not appear to be 
designed to address feasibility questions for t he GCF investment . For instance, slide 10 on 
investment criteria  did not cover country ownership considerations.  
36. An additional report by  the Climate  Policy Initiative's  (CPI)  Climate Innovation Lab that 
dates back to 2017 has been provided. This report does not mention any of the countries that 
have provided signed NOLs at the time of submission of the f unding proposal to the TAP as first 
or second priority countries. It also does not consider the volume proposed here  (USD 400  
million ), instead proposing a total volume of USD 150  million  of commercial investment for the 
developing country sleeve —in th is context , focusing on markets such as China as a priority, 
which has far higher absorption capacity than the countries that have issued NOLs combined.  
37. This absence of a dedicated market study to provide a baseline for the investments to be 
supported creates substantial uncertainty about the market demand for the services to be 
provided by the companies to be invested in;  issues such as service affordability, technical 
readiness for service use, maintenance and repair issues and so forth are left open. Four of the 
six technology categori es represent relatively high -tech and costly solutions that requir e a 
supportive enabli ng environment, such as excellent rural connectivity for agricultural analytics , 
influencing the scope of potential demand.   
38. At this stage of an assessment by the TAP, we would normally discuss the co -benefits of 
the proposed GCF investments. In the absenc e of a dedicated baseline study and a detailed 
market assessment of investment potential in the NOL countries, this would be a meaningless 
exercise. The TAP notes the general information provided by the AE in section D.3 of the f unding 
proposal, and agrees  that it is possible that these co -benefits could be achieved, depending on 
which of these approaches is applied and where. It is however also possible that the CRAFT  
Fund would support greenhouse gas -emission intensive and maladaptative  investments.  
1.3.1 Sustainable Development Potential Rating  
39. In view of the above discussion on i mpact potential and balancing the overall impact 
potential and the risks, while considering the addition of the proposed conditions and 
covenants,  the TAP rates  CRAF T’s sustainable development potential as MEDIUM .


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 81 
 
 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale:  Uncertain  
40. Considering that the market for the six  adaptation  technology areas is worldwide and 
that there is a growing urgency to adapt to the climate crisis, there is no doubt that the needs of 
developing country recipients are high, as set out in t echnology needs assessments and 
technology action plans, which for esee billions of USD of investment requirement in adaptation 
technology solutions . 
41. In this regard, a private -sector driven programme explicitly focusing on build ing the 
domestic response  in developing countries to develop affordable and appropriate technology 
solutions for climate change adaptation that are designed to respond  to deteriorating local 
conditions, barriers and needs would be a highly welcome addition to the GCF portfolio. Th is 
could involve providing finance to acquir e licences to manufacture locally (real technology 
transfer)  and adapting processes to supply as many parts as possible locally and import as 
needed. Such a programme  would have many advantages, not just in terms  of value addition, job 
creation , development of indigenous small and medium -sized enterprises , preserving for eign 
exchange reserves and  ensuring affordability, but could also drive  market transformation  and 
paradigm shift  for climate change adaptation  in the developing countries themselves.  
42. Nevertheless, the TAP would refer to the discussions under  sections 1.1. and 1.5  of this 
assessment , which relate to the in ability to specifically assess the needs of recipients in the 
countries that have issued NOLs  based on the currently proposed governance and eligibility 
criteria, and the brief, high -level information provided by the AE  in annex 24  to the funding 
proposal  to establish the climate challenges in the NOL countries.  The information presented in 
the table of “Eligibility criteria for programmatic adaptation projects” in section B.1 of the 
funding proposal is purely indicative, and provides neither eligibility crit eria nor an assessment 
of actual clim ate vulnerabilities of specific groups of target c ustomers and end  users.  
43. Thus, even assuming that the range of safeguards not mandated in the funded activity 
agreement  ensure CRAFT investment in adaptation technologies only, the TAP notes that 
according to the draft term sheet the companies that will be invested in can legitimately be 
headquartered in developed countries and sell into many markets, both GCF eligible and  
ineligible, as long as they plan  to sell into NOL -issuing countries as well. However, evidence that 
markets exist in these countries for the more expensive products in particular  has not been 
shown.  
44. Another  reason for the uncertainty of the adaptation benefits serving to address the 
need of the recipients  is the fact that the second set of criteria apply only at the time CRAFT 
makes the decision to invest. A company may, at the time of receiving the CRAFT investment, be 
generating over 50  per cent  of its revenue from sales to NOL -issuing countries, but may use the 
investment to expand its sales operations into other markets in non -NOL countries and even 
non- developing countries. This is,  in the view of the TAP , a high  risk as the technolog ies targeted 
include a wide range of products —from very expensive high -tech technology like precision 
agriculture equipment and remote sensing services, which may not have a big market in the 
NOL countries, to  lower -tech technology like rainwater harvestin g, which can be (and are) 
produced more efficiently and affordably locally.  
1.4.2 Needs of the r ecipient rating  
45. As a detailed assessment at country /sector  level is not possible  at this stage , the TAP is 
currently not in a position to  rate the specific needs of the recipients in relation to the proposed 
investments by CRAFT .


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 82 
 
 
1.5 Country ownership        Scale:  Medium/Hig h 
1.5.1 Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
46. The proposed investments are fully aligned with country strategies and programmes as 
identified in the relevant policy documents such as nationally determined contribution s and 
national adaptation plan s. 
1.5.2 Capacity of accredited entities or executing entitie s to deliver  
47. Pegasus is the AE , but it is unclear what its ability to direct investments will be, as there 
is no guarantee that a qualified director from Pegasus will be appointed to the CRAFT Limited 
Partner Advisory Committee  (LPAC), and the Pegasus seat  on the Investment Committee is an 
observer one only.  
48. Lightsmith Group is the EE  managing the  CRAFT  Fund , and  has the experience and 
background to successfully deliver the operation of a fund like CRAFT .  
1.5.3 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
49. While substantial engagement has taken place at international level, in -country 
stak eholder assessment is much less clear , although the AE has clarified and expanded on their 
plans to strengthen it in response to the TAP’s questions.  This lack of clarity is not surprising, 
given the relatively open nature of the programme and the fact tha t much of the stakeholder 
consultation would have to be undertaken by investee companies, rather than the AE or EE, in order for it to be meaningful . The provision of a real -life example from a portfolio company will 
be valuable insight in this regard.  
50. Nev ertheless, in the view of the TAP, it will be important for Pegasus to ensure that full 
in-country stakeholder engagement takes place as part of CRAFT’s due diligence process ( i.e. 
prior to any investments being made ): 
(a) By CRAFT in investee companies, and  
(b) By investee companies in countries.  
51. Following this, the AE’s observing member in the Investment Committee and CRAFT’s 
member in an investee company’s board should , in the TAP’s view , not support or vote  (as 
applicable)  in favour of any inves tment unless the AE  and the EE, respectively , are comfortable 
that stakeholders have been fully consulted and that meaningful action in response to the 
consultation has taken place.  
52. The TAP would suggest that, similar to the ex -ante assessment of the impac t potential of 
investee companies, a structure and detailed reporting tool for  in-country stakeholder 
engagement could strengthen this aspect further, allowing others to assess , for instance, the 
nature and number of stakeholder contacts broken down by gender, the nature of feedback 
received and the actions taken to address such feedback.  
1.5.4 Country ownership  rating  
53. Considering the above, the TAP rates  country ownership  as MEDIUM /HIGH .


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 83 
 
 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness        Scale:  Low/Medium  
1.6.1 Overview  
54. The CRAFT  Fund  expects to raise  investments of USD 300  million  on the back of the GCF 
investment . In principle t his gives a ratio of 1: 3. 
55. It is important to note , however , that there is no guarantee that investments raised in 
this way will be utili zed in support of GCF objectives , and it may be preferable to treat this as an 
aspiration rather than a firm commitment. The AE notes in their responses to the TAP’s 
questions tha t “Because of the need for flexibility in balancing existing concentration limits and 
the number of NOL issuing countries to deploy GCF and non -GCF resources, there is no specific 
minimum level of non -GCF investment into NOL -issuing countries “.  
56.  Furthermo re, it is not even certain that the GCF funds will be used fully in support of 
GCF objectives. The TAP recalls that the G overning Instrument defines the activities of GCF in 
Article I. 1. as related to climate  while Article  V. B. 35 specif ies that all developing country 
Parties to the Convention are eligible to receive GCF funds. Neither of these two elements is, in 
the TAP’s view , appropriately reflected in the eligibility criteria of the GCF investment in CRAFT, 
as other development impacts  are eligible  and the allocation of only a “substantial” part of the 
GCF investment to NOL -issuing countries is allowed . Given t he way the criteria have been 
worded, no certainty can be derived that the GCF investment would be directed towards the 
purposes outlined in the Governing Instrument. As such, no co -financing ratio can be calculated , 
although the ambition of the AE and  the EE are noted . 
1.6.2 Governance  
57. The TAP notes  the AE response that the expectation is for Pegasus to be allowed by 
other investors to join CRAFT’s LPAC  and to be given an observer seat on CRAFT’s Investment 
Committee . Given that GCF is providing 25  per cent  of the CRAFT Fund’s capital,  the TAP is of 
the view that a non- negotiable condition of GCF’s investment should be  that the AE obtain s and 
maintain s—through out the life of the GCF investment in CRAFT —a voting seat on the LPAC and 
an observer seat on the Investment Committee , as this will en able  the AE  to observe  during the 
assessent of investments directly  with a qualified member of its staff.  
58. In relation to governance, the TAP would therefore like to note that , even if all 
substantial matters on eligibility and investee governance were to be addressed satisfactorily, of 
critical importance is the a ppointment  as observer  of a qualified senior staff member or 
nominee of the AE to the CRAFT Investment Committee  or whichever structure is carrying out 
the functions typically undertaken by an Investment Committee . The qualification of such an 
appointee would probably need to  be in climate science, adaptation or a closely related field, 
and the member should be of suffi cient experience and seniority to adequately provide 
safeguards for the GCF investment in the Investment Committee.  
1.6.3 Waterfall structure  
59. The utiliz ation of a concessional tranche to entice private sector investment and the 
creation of a waterfall structure for income distribution , which  provides the lowest income to 
the highest risk share in f und equity , is a well- established mechanism and certainly has use in 
addressing climate challenges. A successful example of such a structure is the Green for Growth 
Fund established by the European Investment Bank  and KfW Development Bank  in 2009 . 
60. The TAP notes however that the  modelling of returns may be optimistic, given the 
nature of the targeted companies, at least some of which may be at a stage in their growth


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 84 
 
 
where there is a continuing high risk of failure, and thus complete loss of the investment. This is 
not an inappro priate risk for GCF to bear.  
61. Nevertheless, the willingness to bear such risk and accept the suggested  return 
structure should in turn be met by absolute clarity on the eligibility criteria side, ensuring that 
the objectives of the provider of these funds are met in full. This is not the case a s proposed in 
the funding proposal  document and draft t erm sheet , since, as discussed in para graph  16. above, 
it is entirely possible , based on the investment criteria provided to the TAP , that little or even 
none of the  GCF funds invested in a particular company through CRAFT would be allocated to 
support the achievement of GCF objectives.  The TAP has therefore suggested a range of 
cond itions and covenants for adoption by the Board to address this.  
1.6.4 Efficiency and e ffectiveness rating  
62. In view of the above considerations, the effectiveness and efficiency of the project is 
rated as LOW /MEDIUM .


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 85 
 
 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
63. The development of the CRAFT  fund  as a vehicle for investment  dedicated  to support 
adaptation technologies through investing in early stage companies is highly welcome and , with 
the right approach to eligibility, country ownership , locali zation  and governance , this could be  
aligned with t he objectives of the GCF  and the needs of the countries in which the  CRAFT  Fund 
will invest GCF resources.  
64. The initial assessment of the TAP critically considered the question s of eligibility, 
country ownership, governance and capacity of the AE and  the EE, as well as climate rationale 
and measurement, reporting and verification  (MRV) . Based on this , a range of questions w as 
raised to the AE, to which responses were received that clarified some of the matters .  
65. The AE managed to address critical matters to the satisfaction of the TAP , but we do 
note that there is no legal certainty regarding these commitments, and we are  therefore  only in 
a position to  recommend this funding proposal for approval by the Board  with a range of 
conditions and covenants attached .  
66. The TAP remains of the view that a dedicated feasibility study, even in short form, would  
have  most likely raised many of the questions the TAP is raising in this assessment, and would 
have allowed the AE to address them prior to submission. It is hard to see how, given the critical 
importance  of the GCF’s investment in CRAFT to enable it to substa ntially scale up operations, 
the development of such a study was not considered a high priority.  
67. The aim of the following condition is to ensure that any CRAFT investment proposal 
submitted for approval by the CRAFT Investment Committee demonstrates how th e investee 
company and the use of GCF proceeds in the investee company will achieve the country 
eligibility and climate adaptation rationale.  
Condition  
(i) Prior to the execution of the funded activity agreement , the AE will submit an ex -ante 
Adaptation Im pact Assessment Tool, in form and substance acceptable to the GCF Secretariat, 
covering at least the following information:  
• Information on the company ;  
• Information on product, services and/or technology as appropriate;  
• Size, purpose and geographical location of proposed investment ; 
• Description and geographical location of target market in NOL country/countries;  
• Outline of how climate change or climatic variability is affecting this specific market – 
focus on key climate parameters ; 
• Summar y of observed changes or variability in these parameters historically in this sub -
national area;  
• Summary of future projections on these parameters in this sub -national area;  
• Argument on how specifically these changes/variability are having a negative impac t on 
vulnerable communities/society ; 
• Argument on how the company’s products, services or technology will help the 
community/society of the target market to adapt to these negative impacts ; and  
• Identification of the indicators to be used to validate that th e company’s products, 
services or technology have helped the customers successfully adapt to these negative 
impacts, including at least the following information:  
o Indicator ; and  
o For each indicator:  
 Baseline ; 
 Mid and end targets;


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 86 
 
 
 Methodology and approach to  measurement and verification ; and  
 Assumptions . 
Covenants  
(i) Contractually ensure that the CRAFT Fund utilizes GCF CRAFT Holding f unds in the following 
manner only:  
i. Investments to proceed only after the AE, representing GCF CRAFT Holdings, has been 
granted a voting seat in the LPAC  and an observer seat on the Investment Committee ; 
ii. 100  per cent  of GCF proceeds to be invested directly or through the investee company in 
the host countries ; and  
iii. Investments to be approved by the Investment Committee only if the investment due diligence has been completed, including the application of the ex -ante Adaptation 
Impact Assessment Tool, and has demonstrated that:   
(a) the chosen technology or solution has a realistic potential of adoption in the 
market in the host country and responds to a clearly identified climate 
vulnerability in the host country;  
(b) such use o f proceeds is enshrined in the underlying investment agreements with 
the investee; and  
(c) the investee company has agreed to offer a voting Board seat to CRAFT after the 
execution of the investment, to ensure appropriate governance.  
(ii) Contractually ensure  that:  
i. The AE has the right to review and comment on proposed investments through its 
observer seat on  the Investment Committee for any proposed CRAFT investment using 
GCF proceeds , and will note for each investment in writing whether  it reasonably 
believe s that any of the criteria listed under Covenant (i) iii. (a), (b) or (c) are not met; 
and 
ii. CRAFT’s regular reporting to the AE and the AE reporting to the GCF provide a detailed update on the use of GCF proceeds and their impact , including copies of the AE 
representative’s comments on investments proposed in the Investment Committee .


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 87 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  assessment 
findings  (FP 18 1) 
Proposal  name : CRAFT – Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation 
Technologies in Developing Countries  
Accredited entity : Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)  
 
Impact pote ntial 
The AE would like to thank the ITAP for its review of the impact potential of the CRAFT Programme and 
its acknowledgment of the Adaptation Solutions Taxonomy as a first filter in order to confirm that a 
particular technology constitute s a “resilienc e technology solution”.   
The AE welcomes the suggest ions to further strengthen the impact potential, including changing the word 
“substantial” in the eligibility criteria to “100%” of GCF proceeds to be spent or invested in Host Countries and the Climate A daptation Impact Assessment Tool, to further deepen and formalize the CRAFT Fund’s 
identification of specific climate vulnerabilities to be addressed in Host Countries and indicators to track 
and report on climate adaptation impacts resultin g from these in vestments.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the paradigm shift potential of the CRAFT Programme, and it welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the paradigm shift potential through refinements to the  
eligibility c riteria, governance arrangements, and ex -ante assessment methods.  
Sustainable development potential  
The AE thanks the ITAP for it s review of the sustainable development potential of the CRAFT Programme, 
and it welcomes the suggestions to fu rther strength en the paradigm shift potential through the 
implementation in each proposed investment of the Climate Adaptation Impact Assessment Tool .   The A E 
agrees  with IT AP that the Climate Adaptation Impact Asses sment Tool should (a) identify  the need  for 
specific climate adaptation solutions to address climate vulnerabilities in each Host Country and (b) 
assess the potential for adoption of the investee company’s technologies, products or services in each 
Host Country. The AE notes that baseline market studies are n ot feasible for a blind pool fund that intend 
to invest in 8 -12 investee companies with different technologies, in different sectors, in multiple Host 
Countries, especially in the new field of cli mate adaptation technology inve sting. The AE agrees th at th e 
ITAP- recommended  Climate Adaptation Impact Assessment Tool helps to formalize assessment of the 
sustainable development and climate adaptation potential in Host Countries.  
Needs of the recipient  
The AE thanks the I TAP for its review of th e needs of the  recipient in the CRAFT Programme, and it notes 
ITAP’s assessment that the needs of developing country recipients a re “high ” for climate adaptation 
technologies and solutions. The AE welcomes the suggestions to furth er strengthen the fit with  the needs 
of the recipient, and in particular the domestic applicability and fit with these needs in Host Countries, 
through the implement ation in each proposed investment of the Climate Adaptation Impact Assessment 
Tool . 
Country ownership  
The AE thanks  the ITAP for its review of the country ownership of the CRAFT Programme , and it 
welc omes the suggestions to further strengthen in -country stakeholder engagement as p art of CRAFT’s 
due diligence process.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add.13  
Page 88 
 
To further strengthen engagement with the CRAFT Fun d, the AE conf irms that i t will be granted a voting 
seat on the CRAFT F und’s Limited Partner Advisory Committee (LPAC) and will have observer and 
consultation rights for proposed investments that include use of GCF proceeds, including review of 
climate adaptation impact s in specific  Host Coun tries. 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the efficiency and effectiveness of the CRAFT Programme, and it 
welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the efficiency and effectiven ess through cl arification and 
improve ment of the eligibility criteria, governance arrangements , and Climate A daptation I mpact 
Assessment Tool . 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
The AE team would like to thank the ITAP for its review and ass essment of t he CRAFT Programme  and 
notes with thanks i ts positive reco mmendation to the GCF Board to approve the CRAFT Programme.  
The AE further confirms its agreemen t with the princip les of the recommendations of the ITAP for 
development of the CRAFT Prog ramme.   The AE recommends GCF Board app rova l condition ed on the 
following points co nsistent with the ITAP ’s recommendations:    
1. The AE confirms that it will be  granted a voting seat on the CRAFT Fund’s L imited Partnersh ip 
Advisory Committee, c onsistent with  the ITAP’ s recommendation . 
2. The AE confi rms that together with  the Secretariat and the CRAFT Fund , the AE  will ensure that 
companies that receive investment from the GCF shall c ontractually commit to spend or invest 
100% of GCF proceeds for e ligible activit ies that w ill generate i mpacts in in Host Countries , 
consistent with ITAP ’s recommendation . 
3. The AE confirms that it will contractually secure from the CRAFT Fund the right to observe and 
consult  on each inv estment that proposes to use GCF pr oceeds, specif ically with respect to 
environmental and social standards  and the asse ssment  results of the Climate Adaptation Impact 
Assessment Tool , consistent with the ITAP ’s recommendation for observ er rights . 
The AE notes that t o avoid pote ntial l egal liability  for th e GCF and  AE and  concerns of existing and 
potential inves tors, the observation and con sultation  rights  will explicitly exclude involvement in the 
investment decision -making process , consistent with industry  practice . The AE believes that th e 
observ ation  and consultation right addresses  ITAP’s concern about ensuring t hat CRAFT F und investee 
companies will use GCF proceeds to generate impact s in Host Countries while safeguarding  agai nst 
environmental and soc ial risk , without creating  legal liability exposure  for the GCF  or the AE , or 
dissuading  existing or potential inves tors  from co -financing the GCF . 
4. The AE confirms that it will contractually ensure that GCF Pr oceeds inve sted through the CRAFT 
Fund will only be invest ed in companies th at provi de the CRAFT F und with active governance 
rights , including a Board seat  or a  Board o bserver seat  and such contractual rights , repor ting 
rights, remedies , and/ or other industry standard active governance rights , consistent with the 
ITAP’ s recommendati ons ar ound C RAF T Fun d governance .  
The AE appreciates the IT AP’s recommendation tha t GCF proceeds be focused on compa nies where  the 
CRAFT Fund secures a voting Board seat  and commits to limiting  the investment  of GCF proceeds to those 
companies and other  comp anies that provi de appropriate active governance rights .  The AE note s that a 
Board seat alone would not guarantee that a CRAFT Fund investee compa ny would commit to spend or 
invest 100% of GCF proceeds in eligible activities  that generate impacts in Host Cou ntries. Instea d, the AE 
commits to ensure that the CRAFT Fund secure s the combination of active gove rnance rights (including  a 
Board seat or Board obs erver seat) appropriate to each investment  to generate the goals of the GCF .  
5. The AE confirms that it will  contractually  ensure that it has right to obtain r eporting from the 
CRAFT Fund to implement and oversee the CRAFT Programme, including obtaining updated 
reporting on the ongoing use of GCF proceeds and their impacts .


---
*Page 92*
---

Gender Assessment  
1.Overview
2.Project Sector Category Assessments
a.Agriculture  & Food Security
b.Water  Availability & Efficiency
3.Approach to Gender -Responsive Impact Measurement
4.Gender Responsive Project Design
5.Fund Application
1.Overview
The Climate Resilience and Adaptation Finance & Technology Transfer Facility ( CRAFT ) seeks to 
invest in technologies that can help communities assess and manage "key climate 
vulnerabilities", which are defined as significant risk of loss, damage, sets of physical asse ts, or 
economic ecological  systems resulting from physical phenomena , all of which have a 
disproportionate impact on women and girls . CRAFT accomplishes this by investing in climate 
resilience "tools" that can help assess and manage climate risks, particularly those resulting in  
direct impacts  for marginalized populations . CRAFT contributes to reduc ing gender gaps in 
access to climate mitigation  products and services as well as those who benefit from  enhanced 
protections against climate change. Across areas as diverse as agriculture, water, food security,  
and disaster risk management, CRAFT ’s focus on climate resiliency strives to dispr oportionately 
benefit those most at risk, including women , by supporting products and innovations  that are 
inclusive of protect ing women’s livelihoods . 
To track its impacts, CRAFT has established an Impact Measurement System (IMS) , which 
evaluates a set o f core indicators for each investment and disaggregate s impacts based on 
gender, as applicable. Impact measurement is integrated into all stages of the investment 
process: from screening, assessment, investment decision, the investment agreement, 
monitorin g and reporting and the eventual exit. The measurement process includes selecting 
indicators , collecting and analyzing data on  these  indicators from investee companies , and 
using the results in decision -making and reporting.  CRAFT measures its impact against relevant 
SDGs , including : climate mitigation,  gender,  life on land, and other social and economic co -
benefits through the identification of key performance indicators. In addition , for each 
investment, the fund estimate s the following types of dire ct and indirect beneficiaries  
disaggregated by gender , to the extent possible:  
•Employee beneficiaries (direct/indirect; full -time/part -time)  – individuals employed by
the company directly and jobs created indirectly through the company’s products or
services .
•Client / user beneficiaries (direct/indirect)  – individuals benefiting from the climate
resiliency products or services directly sold to them by the company or downstream
Page 89


---
*Page 93*
---

individuals served by a customer of the company (enabled to do so by the c ompany’s 
product or service offering) . 
 
• Organizations trained  –- organizations benefiting from capacity -building delivered by 
the company’s products or services.  Lightsmith will strive to  publish sex -disaggregated 
data on affiliated employees.  
 
Impact measurement monitoring and reporting is integrated into the Fund ’s Environmental and 
Social Management System  (ESMS)  and consolidated and reported to CRAFT’s investors in an 
Annual ESG & Impact Report . Based on the sex -disaggregated data provided by the portfolio 
companies , and pending securing the required funding to set up a parallel technical assistance 
facility, the project will enlist local consultants to conduct surveys, interviews and on -the 
ground fact finding missions encompassing company beneficiaries, which will inform an annual 
progress report on  the gendere d impacts of CRAFT’s engagements across the sub-sectors and 
countries  in which it has invested.   
 
In order to streamline and guide its approach to closing gender gaps for the purposes of this 
project, CRAFT ’s Gender Assessment  in conjunction with its Gend er Action Plan  will guide the 
progra m’s fund and portfolio level approach to  gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
and address the links between gender equality, climate mitigation and adaptation, and 
environmental sustainability. This assessment will translate its objectives at  both the fund and 
project level  through  indicators and targets to support CRAFT’s commitments t o, and 
engagement with , women, men, girls and boys, including those from marginalized 
communities. The Assessment and Action Plan are underpinned by CRAFTs Environmental 
Social Management System (ESMS)  and Impact Measurement System (IMS) as well as its 
Gender Mainstreaming Policy.  
 
The Assessment builds upon quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived from 
Lightsmith’s impact policies and procedures as well as desk review of existing literature  focused 
particularly on  the sectors targeted by CRAFT f or its investments.  The Gender Assessment and 
Action Plan are iterative guidance tools, which will be  regularly updated , particularly as the 
fund prepares for a new investment and monitors the performances of its portfolio companies.  
Given that the countr ies and companies which CRAFT may invest in have not yet been 
identified, the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan will be updated and revised  in 
conjunction with both target portfolio companies as well as subsectors and countries of 
investment.  Additi onally, CRAFT will be guided by its  own  Impact Measurement System, which 
collect s sex-disaggregated data , where possible , to inform its efforts to  close existing gender 
gaps.  
 
2. Project Sector Category Assessments:  
 
The overall purpose of the project is to catalyze the markets for climate resilience and 
adaptation solutions in developing countries and promote greater use of these solutions by 
customers. Developing the market for resilience and adaptation solutions, es pecially in 
Page 90


---
*Page 94*
---

developing countries, has a direct impact on women . Climate risks and impacts (such as 
catastrophic weather events, water scarcity, climate impacts on food and agriculture, climate -
related healthcare impact) disproportionately affect women  and girls. For example, a London 
School of Economics (2007)  study  found that five times more women than men die from 
natural disasters due to inequalities in exposure and sensitivity to risk, and especially so in 
developing countries. Through its investment th esis CRAFT will increase the availability and 
awareness of technologies, products, and solutions that can help to assess and mitigate these 
risks and impacts to which women are especially exposed. Throughout the project, Lightsmith 
will capture the gender impact through Lightsmith/CRAFT’s  impact measurement system. The 
data collected will help to build an understanding of the differentiated impact that adaptation 
technologies, products, and solutions can have on women and men.  
 
The initial core subsectors that CRAFT targets have been found to be disproportionately 
significant on women. Core subsectors in which CRAFT is seeking to invest have distinct gender 
gaps, which can be alleviated through broader access to climate risk mitigation technologies in 
the form of products, services, and data analytics:  
 
• Agricultural and Food Security (SDG 2)  - Globally, according to reports by the  
United  Nations' Food and  Agriculture  Organization (FAO), the majority of economically 
active  women  in the le ast-developed countries work in agriculture1. Similarly, the 
United Nations has reported that close to 66% of women in developing countries work 
in the agricultural sector2. 
 
• Water availability and efficiency  (SDG 6)  - A 2017 UNICEF  report found that women and 
girls are responsible for water collection  in 80 percent of households .3 Water collection 
not only represents a major source of unpaid domestic work, but also has implications 
for women’s health in terms increased frequency of injuries to the neck and spine from 
heavy workload . Girls’ development is also particularly impacted as they  carry water 
over long distances , which results in reduced  time available for education and the 
acquisition of skills . Thus, by carrying the burden of water gathering, a dolescent girls are 
also far less likely than boys to have time for  income -generating opportunities4. 
Reduc tions in time spent for water collection  responsibilities  has been found to boost 
women's economic activity , according to a recent study .5 
 
1 FAO Stat, Food and Agriculture Data, http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home  
2 “The Need for Gender Sensitive Approaches to Climate Change ”, UN, 
https://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/climate_change/downloads/Women_and_Climate_Change_Factsheet.pdf  
3 UN Women.  Turning Promises into Action: Gender E quality in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  (New York, 2018). 
Available at: < a href="https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -library/publications/2018/2/gender -equality -in-the-2030 -agenda -
for-sustainable -development -2018">https://www.unwomen.org/en/ digital -library/publications/2018/2/gender -equality -in-
the-2030 -agenda -for-sustainable -development -2018  
4 “Collecting Water is often a waste of time for women and girls”, UN Women, https://www.unicef.org/press -releases/unicef -
collecting -water -often -colossa l-waste -time -women -and-girls 
5 An Analysis of Water Collection Labor among Women and Children in 24 Sub -Saharan African Countries 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0155981  
Page 91


---
*Page 95*
---

• Resilience to extreme weather events (SDG  11) – Extreme weather events such as 
droughts and floods have a greater impact on the poor and most vulnerable – 70% of 
the world’s poor are women6. Disasters hit the poorest and most marginalized 
demographics the hardest. Women and girls are particularly exposed to climate -related 
disaster risk  and they are likely to suffer higher rates of mortality, morbidity and 
economic damage to their livelihoods7. Some evidence  suggests that  domestic and 
sexu al violence against women increases due to disaster -induced stress and chaos 
ensuing from post -event responses8. An Oxfam report suggests tha t across Sri Lanka, 
Indonesia, and India  men were three times more likely to  surviv e the 2004 
tsunami9.  The study sheds light on the reality that the additional care responsibilities 
shouldered by women, both in terms of looking after children and the elderly, ha ve an 
impact on women’s ability and time available to evacuate disaster -stricken area s and 
reduce their likelihood of survival in comparison to men. Research suggests that w omen  
are more risk -aware and at the forefront of developing innovative solutions to climate 
adaptation10, suggesting they may disproportionately benefit from the scaling of climate 
resilience focused technologies and services that help inform their behaviors.  
 
 
Sector: Agriculture  and Food Security :  
 
Data suggests that in low-income and lower middle -income countries, agriculture is still the 
most important source of employment for women .  Almost 70 percent of employed women in 
South Asia and more than 60 percent of employed women in Sub -Saharan Africa work in 
agriculture. T he high representation  of rural women in agriculture  highlights the importance of 
developing policies and programs that address the needs, interests and constraints of women 
in this sector11. 
 
Rural women play a significant role in supporting their familie s and communities in achieving 
food security, generating income, and improving rural livelihoods. Yet although rural women 
and girls  make up a significant part of the agricultural labor force, they are not only much less 
likely to own the land on which the y work to derive their livelihoods, but they also have access 
to fewer value -add assets such as human capital and the analytical tools to inform their work 
and to maximize the benefits of their labor12. In addition, as in some developing countries , 
women’s contributions to the agricultural sector exceeds 50%, they are much more likely to be 
exposed to the adverse effects of climate change .  
6 “Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development 2019 Empowering people and Ensuring Inclusiveness and Equality”, OECD, 
2019  
7 “Gender and Disaster Risk Reduction, UNDP, 2013  
8 Neumayer and Plümper, “The Gendered Nature of Natural Disasters.”  
9 “Natural Disasters and Gender Inequa lities: The 2004  Tsunami and the Case of India ”, 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41675195?seq=1  
10 “Women and Climate Change: Impact and Agency in Human Rights, Security, and Economic Development ”, 
https://giwps.georgetown.edu/wp -content/uploads/2017/09/Women -and-Climate -Change.pdf   
11 “Women, Agriculture, and Work in Africa”, World Bank, https://www.wor ldbank.org/en/programs/africa -myths -and-
facts/publication/women -agriculture -and-work -in-africa  
12 World Bank, https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/agriculture/brief/women -farmers -getting -to-equal 
Page 92


---
*Page 96*
---

 
Increasing rates of soil loss and land degradation, impacts of drought, flooding , heat waves and 
wildfires wil l only  continue to  compound the risks faced by women in the agriculture sector. 
Concurrently, demographic trends are set to increase the  demand for food and agricultural 
products , placing more pressure on a system , which provides little risk mitigation to those 
underserved13. The combination of a  threatened supply and enhanced demand is projected to  
increase the number of  pressure  points  on land  usuage  and have a detrimental impact on the 
livlihoods of women within the agricultural  sector. Additionally, climate risks add to the  already 
socio -economic and cultural  stresses  women already face; f rom the unequal distribution of 
child  and elderly care responsibilities , to extensive unpaid responsibilities  in the household , and 
less stable income -generating opportunities . For example,  jobs of rural women  employed  in the 
agricultural sector are  often  shorter -term  and less protected  by social safety nets  than those of 
rural me n14. The lack of flexible hours to accommodate family work combined with wage and 
job discrimination and limited representation of women in workers' organizations are key 
factors driving this trend . These stresses  have an acute effect  on women’s exposure to financial 
risks , which are only further compounded by the impacts of climate change on the productivity  
of agricultural lands15.  
 
Given that women are overrepresented in terms of those working in agriculture, they are 
disadvantaged in comparison to men in terms of their access to vital inputs such as seeds, 
fertilizer, finance and services such as climate risk insurance, training and  other services which 
may provide protection to their livelihoods16. By providing women with more equal access to 
input s – such as products, services, tailored insurance plans that meet the particular needs of 
women – has the potential shrink this persiste nt gender gap, but also to  increase yields on 
women -run farms by 20 – 30% , in addition to potentially  raising total agricultural output in 
developing countries by close to 4%.17 Climate change exacerbates the rate and magnitude of 
land degradation with app roximately 25% of the total global land area already affected. Each 
year, roughly 75 billion tons of fertile soil and 12 million hectares of econologically or 
agriculturally productive land are degraded through desertification and drought alone. Globally, 
2 billion people are affected by land degradation. Given that women are overrepresented in the 
agricultural sector , gender gaps ar e continually  exacerbated by land degradation processes and 
have increasingly impact ed rural communities, smallholder farmers, and the very poor , a 
majority of which are women .18 Land and forest degradation processes threaten the 
livelihoods, well -being, food, water, a nd energy security , increase the vulnerability of millions of 
13 “The Future of Food and Agriculture”, The Trends and Challeng es, FAO, http://www.fao.org/3/i6583e/i6583e.pdf 2017   
14 “Rural Women and the Millennium  Development Goals”, UN, https://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/ruralwomen/facts -
figures.html  
15 “The Business Case for Women’s Employment in Agribusiness”, IFC, World Bank Group, 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/cc22958b -7c84 -4205 -84fd -
9041d0425fb5/Women_in_Agribusiness_Report_FINAL_web.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lIlH5n9  
16 “Investing in Women Along Agribusi ness Value Chains”, IFC, World Bank Group, 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/02c5b53e -420f -4bf4 -82bb -
6f488 ff75810/Women+in+Agri+VC_Report_FINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=m0JfSbv  
17 “The State of Food and Agriculture”, FAO, http://www.fao.org/3/i2050e/i2050e00.htm  
18 United Nations Decade for Deserts: Quick Facts on Drylands, Deserts, Desertification and Land Degradation  
Page 93


---
*Page 97*
---

women and children , and in many cases cause mass migration and social unrest , further 
compounding the risks women face to their livlihoods, health and well -being19.  
Unfortunately, agricultural  production practices in many countries, particularly in emerging 
markets have  not adpated to the accelerating trends and impacts of land degradation on 
communities and those marginalized . The sector has been relatively unmalleable to  adopt ing 
new practices , not only in terms of land ownership , but also in providing  more  equal access to 
risk mitigation and climate ad aptation  tools , which would help protect the livelihoods of more 
underserved workers, particularly women . CRAFT is committed to su pporting impactful 
innovations and technologies , which will help alleviate the impacts of land degradation or other 
processes accelerated by climate change , which disrupt the livelihoods of those dependent on 
agriculture.   
An additioal example within the agricultural secot or relates to fo od security. A  2019 IPCC report 
states that climate change will precipitate severe food shortages and reduce food’s nutritional 
quality.  In addition to increasing the rate of soil loss and land degradation, impacts of dro ught, 
flooding heat waves and wildfires threaten the sector more broadly . Growing population and 
affluence will increase demand for both the quantity and quality of food and agricultural 
commodities. The combination of a threatened supply and growing deman d will put pressure 
on productive land, even while competition for that land increases from biofuels, urban 
expansion and other non -productive uses.  
CRAFT seeks to also invest in enabled physical products, such as drought -tolerant crops and 
drip irrigation systems. These types of solutions improve sustainable management of land , 
while building resilience to climate -related vulnerabilities that are reducing agricultural 
productiv ity and increasing food import dependence. As these climate resilience solutions are 
scaled up, they can be integrated as components of systemic interventions designed to 
generate additional global environmental benefits in the context of physical climate change 
risks. In addition to its investments in high -impact, innovative companies which provide the 
products, services, or access to data to equip farmers and those in the agricultural sector with 
the tools to mitigate these climate risks, CRAFT is envisio ning establishing a technical assistance 
facility (contingent upon securing the necessary funding), which w ould  take concrete steps in 
providing advisory services to companies and governments to revamp and strengthen 
extension systems to be more responsive  to and inclusive of women, addressing structural 
barriers to ensure more equitable access to productive resources, while helping companies 
better respond to the needs of rural women . This will  includ e supporting more women to 
access the  tools to protect t hemselves and their families from the ripple effects of land 
19 “A Special Report on Climate Change and Land Degradation”, The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/chapter/chapter -4/ 
Page 94


---
*Page 98*
---

degradation  on their livelihoods as well as to ensure their mobility and access to risk mitigation 
products that enable them to secure their futures20.  
Sector: Water  Availability and Efficiency:  
Women are not just underrepresented in specialized jobs, they are overrepresented in unpaid 
work , including water collection . Across Sub -Saharan Africa women are far more likely to gather 
water then men , especially in househo lds that lack piped water within the home21. For 
example, t he World Bank estimates that in Niger, each woman spends  on average  two weeks  a 
year traveling to and from a water source . In rural areas, the time spent gathering  water is 
especially high .22 In ru ral areas of Guinea, for example, women spend more than twice as much 
time collecting water per week than men, while in Malawi they spend over eight times more 
than men on the same tasks. Collectively, women from Sub -Saharan Africa spend about 40 
billion h ours a year collecting water  for their families and communities, which is equivalent to a 
year’s worth of labor by the entire workforce in France.23 Innovations which leverage 
technology to enhance climate resilience while alleviating stresses on those particularly 
burdened by water scarcity have the potential to accelerate the closing of  the gender gaps  in 
the water sector . Water harvesting , in particular , can enhance water  security  by improving 
household  health, reductions in time spent and dista nces traveled to fetch water , while also 
adapting to climate change .24  
Companies that leverage technology to provide access to low -cost w ater harvesting  tools  have 
the potential to boost the  livelihoods of women and children by reducing  the time spent on 
gathering water , and thus contribut e to closing  significant gender gaps . CRAFT inves tment 
interests  in technology -enabled physical products and services  encompass  drip irrigation 
systems and water harvesting panels. These types of solutions  have many positive effects in 
adapti ng to climate change while also  address ing SDGs focused on  clean water and sanitation, 
and gender equality . As these climate resilience solutions are scaled up, they can be integrated 
as components of systemic intervent ions designed to generate additional impact in the context 
of physical climate change risk. Ultimately, CRAFT’s investments in climate resilience solutions 
can help deliver impact , while reducing the vulnerability of people , physical assets and natural 
systems to the adverse effects of climate change.  Further, by applying the IMS, Lightsmith will 
track , to the extent possible, the gendered impact of investments to understand the 
measurable impacts firms and their products have on women and girls  and the pot ential to 
shrink sector specific gender gaps. Gi ven the outsized impact that climate risks have on women, 
20 “Investing in Women Along Agribusiness Value Chains”, IFC, World Bank Group, 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/w cm/connect/02c5b53e -420f -4bf4 -82bb -
6f488ff75810/Women+in+Agri+VC_Report_FINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=m0JfSbv  
21 “An Analysis of Water Collection Labor Among Women and Children in 24 Sub -Saharan African Countries”, The George 
Washington University, https://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4889070/  
22“ The Rising Tide: A New Look at Water and Gender”, World Bank,  
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/27949/W17068.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y  
23 “We must leverage women's voice and influe nce in water governance”, Åsa Regnér,  UN Women,  
https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2018/8/speed -ded-regner -stockholm -world -water -week  
24 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) , June 2013 . 
Page 95


---
*Page 99*
---

attention will be given to companies that will touch  women ’s lives in the implementation of the 
project.  Additionally, t he Fund will seek to ensure equitable opportunities for women to 
participate in the project across each of its targeted  sectors  as well as advocate that potential 
portfolio companies  ensure that women  are appointed  to senior leadership roles . 
3.Approach to Gender -Responsive Impact Measurement:
Sector:  Sample KPIs:  SDGs:  Applying a Gender -lens - Ex-Ante 
Investment Considerations:  Gender Responsive Approach  - 
Project Actions : 
Agriculture  Average agricultural 
yield (tonne/hectare); 
Units/ Volume 
Purchased from 
Supplier Individuals; 
Units/ Volume 
Purchased from 
Supplier 
Organizations; Land 
Directly Controlled: 
Total; Land Directly 
Controlled Sustainably 
Managed; Supplier 
Individuals: 
Smallholder  No Poverty, Zero 
Hunger, Climate 
Action, Decen t 
Work and 
Economic 
Growth, Gender 
Equality  Consider whether a potential 
investment  provides a new source of 
income for women in climate -
vulnerable communities  
Consider if a potential investment is 
developing climate - smart products or 
services that are e ngaging women as 
key beneficiaries  
Consider potential investments , 
which will have a disproportionate 
impact on climate change adaptation 
and gender equality.  
Encourage each of its portfolio 
companies to complete the Women’s 
Empowerment Principles Gender Gap 
Analysis Tool (WEPs Tool) , which is a 
joint project of the UN Global 
Compact, UN Women, the 
Multilateral Investment Fund of the 
IDB, and the Inter -American 
Investment Corporation designed to 
help companies assess gender 
equality performance across the 
workplace, marketplace, and 
community . 
Endeavor to incorporate a gender 
focus when considering technical 
assistance / donor funding programs . 
Provide dedicated advisory support to 
portfolio companies to systematically 
contri bute to shrinking gender gaps 
across each sector (contingent upon 
securing funding for CRAFT’s technical 
assistance facility).  Energy  Client Households 
Provided New Access: 
Total; Energy Savings 
from Products Sold; 
Energy Savings from 
Services Sold; Energy 
Generated for Sale; 
Greenhouse Gas 
Reductions due to 
Products Sold; 
Building Area of 
Energy Efficiency 
Improvements;  Climate Action, 
Affordable and 
Clean Energy, 
Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities  
Resilient 
Communities
/ Transport  Client Individuals 
Provided New Access: 
Total; Client 
Individuals Provided 
New Access: Female; 
Communities Served; 
Units of cargo 
containers 
transported th rough 
the road , railway , 
port/ , airport . Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities, 
Climate Action, 
Industry 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure, 
Gender Equality  Consider the implementation of 
inclusive corporate policies to 
increase the quantity and quality of 
jobs held by women ; improve working 
conditions and close gender pay gaps .  
Consider whether a potential 
investment  provides a new source of 
income for women in climate -
vulnerable communities . 
Consider if a potential investment  is 
developing climate - smart products or 
services that are engaging women as 
Page 96


---
*Page 100*
---

key beneficiaries . 
 
Consider potential investments . 
which will ha ve a disproportionate 
impact on climate change adaptation 
and gender equality.  
 
Water & 
Sanitation  Water Provided for 
Sale: Total; Clients 
Households: Provided 
New Access; Area of 
Fresh Water Bodies 
Present; Length of 
Streams Present; 
Length of Coastline  
Restored; Water 
Savings from Products 
Sold; Water Savings 
from Services Sold; 
Water Provision 
Capacity of Products 
Sold: Total; Water 
Treatment Capacity of 
Products Sold;  Clean Water and 
Sanitation, 
Climate Action, 
Gender Equality  
 Consider whether a pote ntial 
investment provides a new source of 
income for women in climate -
vulnerable communities.  
 
Consider if a potential investment is 
developing climate - smart products or 
services that are engaging women as 
key beneficiaries.  
 
 
 
Tracking climate change adaptation and resilience impact is complicated by the broad array of 
sectors , subsectors,  and geographies to which adaptation applies, as well as a lack of commonly 
agreed impact indicators given the nascence of adaptation as an investment opportun ity. The 
impact potential of each investment  in shrinking existing gender gaps is likely to differ 
depending on a number of factors, such as the  country and subsector of investment, the  acute 
vulnerabilit ies faced by women and girls in that subsector and the geographic location . 
 
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”) , which were formed in 2015, have 
been accepted as an internationally recognized set of goals, targets, and indicators to guide the 
global development agenda through 2030.  Lightsmith utilizes the SDGs to provide additional 
high -level references to anchor climate action in the broader policy sphere as well as a common 
framework for communicating other impacts . The project will engage  with the SDGs at the 
following points in its investment process:  
 
• Investment Strategy - The SDGs provide a framework to drive change through the 
investment strategy , which is fundamentally rooted in promoting SDG 13, Climate 
Action  with additional impacts  to other areas of the SDGs , including SDG 5, and Gender 
Equality.   
 
• Mapping Investments to SDGs - At the time of investment, the activities of each 
Portfolio Company will be assessed based on their expected contribution to specific 
Sustainable Development Goals , including SDG 5, Gender Equality  and Targets and 
Page 97


---
*Page 101*
---

included as part of the Investment Committee memo. The process of mapping is 
“bottom up” starting with the evaluation of portfolio companies and identifying KPIs 
that map to specific SDG g oals and targets .  
 
• Thought leadership and advocacy - Lightsmith will provide thought leadership through 
demonstrating the role that private equity can play in Climate Action (Goal #13)  as well 
as SDG 5, Gender Equality.  
 
Lightsmith will strive to include a gender -sensitive framework, articulate gender -responsive 
elements of its investments. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender -responsive 
targets and indicators to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.  
 
4. Gender Respon sive Project Design :  
 
It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without clearly 
understanding gender issues within the targeted population. The g ender -responsive design of 
the project will be guided by its Gender Action Plan and will be based on  understand ing the 
social, economic and political factors underlying climate change -exacerbated gender inequality. 
The Gender Assessment  and Action Plan will be adjusted  and updated  as the project 
progresses . Building on the safeguards and consultations, CRAFT will require prospective 
projects to establish and commit to the following mandatory, minimum gender -responsive 
requirements:  
 
• Collect, analyze  and apply sex -disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform 
gender - responsive monitoring  reporti ng, where possible.  
• Analyze  risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to 
ensure  that activities do not exacerbate existing gender -related inequalities, including 
gender -based violence, and seize opportunities to address gende r gaps and support  the 
empowerment of women .  
• Through a potential technical assistance facility  (funding would need to be 
secured) , allocate sufficient resources for specific activities,  advisory  support and/or 
other actions to improve gender equality considerations, including the meaningful 
engagement of diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries . 
 
5. Fund Application :  
 
The Assessment and Gender Action Plan provide  guidance to CRAFT ’s approach in its  
investment portfolio  and the  Fund ’s operations.  Specifically, the Assessment has been used to 
inform the following areas within the Fund:   
 
• Governance : responsibilities  that inform  CRAFT ’s Gender Mainstreaming Plan  
• Capacity to apply the G ender Action Plan  
Page 98


---
*Page 102*
---

• Additional resources requir ed to support a possible technical assistance facility, which 
would enhance CRAFT ’s gender analyses, particularly at  the portfolio level.  
• Operational procedures – at both  the Fund level and in monitoring portfolio co mpanies . 
Encompassing the  inclusion of a gender assessment as part of  the ESMS  for each 
project, and gender -responsive stakeholder consultatio n requirements and safeguards .  
• Capturing knowledge and enhancing thought leadership .  
 
Gender -related commitments  at the 
Fund level  CRAFT  Fund  Procedures   Implementation  
Gender Mainstreaming Plan  Gender Mainstreaming Plan adopted and 
applied   Active  
Update  ESMS  policy to incorporate 
gender safeguards  ESMS  is comprehensive and  includes  updated 
gender safeguards in line with IFC ’s 
Performance Standards  
 Active  
Representation of women in leadership 
positions within portfolio companies  Committed to equitable opportunities for 
women to participate in the project across 
each of the sectors its targets for its 
investments as well as advocate that potential 
portfolio companies have women in senior 
leadership roles  
 Active   
Recruitment of women in fund capacity -
building, field and monitoring teams  
 Lightsmith seeks to include women in decision -
making roles within the firm as well as in 
strategy and planning discussions for the 
project  
 Active  
Annual reporting includes reporting on 
gender  
 Commitment to publish Annual ESG and 
Impact Report  Active  
Dedicate funds to  implement th e Gender 
Policy and Gender Strategy  
 Director for Impact and Sustainability oversees 
reporting on gender and broader impact 
indicators ; Gender Mainstreaming Plan in 
place  Active  
Dedicate resources required to build and 
strengthen staff capacity related to 
knowledge management  & learning , and 
thought leadership  
 Actively fundraising to set up a technical 
assistance facility , which will enable broader 
knowledge sharing, management, and advisory 
support to portfolio companies in 
implementing gender commitments  as well as 
disseminating lessons via thought leadership 
products  
 TBD 
Appoint gender specialist/consultants  
 Project consultants will be hired on a 
contingency basis  TBD 
Audit and verification teams have the 
expertise to review and assess project 
gender responsiveness and impact  Project consultants will be hired for  audit s, if 
required/as needed  TBD 
Page 99


---
*Page 103*
---

 
Page 100


---
*Page 104*
---

  
 
 
 
CRAFT – CATALYTIC CAPITAL FOR FIRST PRIVATE 
INVESTMENT FUND FOR ADAPTATION TECHNOLOGIES IN 
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES  
Gender Action Plan  
Annex 8 
 
 
  
September  2021  
THE LIGHTSMITH GROUP  
      
 
Page 101


---
*Page 105*
---

 
Annex 8: Gender Action Plan  
Impact Statement:   The CRAFT Fund seeks to invest in technologies that can help c ommunities , particularly those 
marginalized – including women and girls , in developing countries suffer less damage, loss, harm, and disruption (and 
recover more effectively when harm and disruption occur).  CRAFT mobilizes capital and invests in technologies to enable 
vulnerable populations, including women, to identify, mitig ate, and manage  risks from climate change . Concurrently, it seeks to 
create opportunities to enhance livelihoods , particularly for women . In ensuring equitable access to the benefits of the project, 
including  employment and income generating activities, th e Fund will identify potential impact, technical assistance, or other 
available donor funds where possible to support disenfranchised groups, including women, to access climate resiliency tools  and 
knowledge products  to facilitate climate -smart  innovation. CRAFT will enable local businesses, including women -owned and/or led 
enterprises to adapt their existing methods , expand local markets  and demand , as well as a ttract further investment , especially for yet 
to be identified adaptation products an d services.  
 
Outcome Statement:  CRAFT will reduce climate vulnerabilities for women  and contribute to boosting income -generating 
opportunities by scaling access to  localized, asset -specific information on climate -related risks and impacts, and physical pr oducts 
and services to manage those risks and impacts. CRAFT will achieve the following gender -responsive outcomes  and report sex-
disaggregated fund level impacts  to the extent possible.  
 
Sustainable Cities and Communities: Empowerment  and resilience  of vulnerable populations, including women and girls , through 
strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes .  
 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions . Opportunities benefiting 
women and girls who are  often disproportionately disadvantaged , will build resilience through enhanced  access to resources and 
economic engagement.  
 
Increased resilience of health a nd well -being, food and water security  for communities, including women and girls . More resilient 
water systems from investments in distributed, data -based, and efficient water technolog ies will enhanc e access to reliable and safe 
water supply , despite climate shocks and stresses , which  will benefit vulnerable populations, including women  and girls .  
 
Page 102


---
*Page 106*
---

Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change will lead  to human be nefits , including for women 
and girls. Resulting in s trengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks by vulnerable populations, including 
women and girls . 
The activities of each Portfolio Company will be assessed based on their expected contribution to Sustainable Development Goals  
2,5, 6,7,9, 10,11,12,13 . To the extent possible, the data informing the indicators for each impact goal will be segmented by gender.  
Activities:  Indicators & Targets:  Timeline:  Responsibilities:  Costs:  
Output 1: Establish fund -level gender equity process and outcomes  
1a. Fund Governance: Lightsmith 
will appo int women as part of  the 
leadership and governance of the 
Project through a Limited Partner 
Advisory Committee (LPAC), Impact 
Council, or Strategic Advisory Board  
1b. Knowledge Generation and 
Communication: CRAFT will ensure 
equitable gender participation through 
the inclusion of women in public 
stakeholder meetings and events  such 
as web inars and other conv enings 
hosted by The Lightsmith Group that  
discuss practical approac hes to 
adaptation and resilience investment  Indicator  1a: % of women in 
CRAFT governing bodies and key 
committees  
Target  1a: At least 25% of the 
members of CRAFT’s key governing 
committees are women  
Indicator  1b: CRAFT will collect 
gender -disaggregated information 
from key stakeholder meetings to 
track gender participation and 
engagement.  
Target  1b:  40% of the participants 
of CRAFT’s key public stakeholder 
meetings  are women  December 
2022 - This 
will occur on 
an ongoing 
basis as 
various 
governance 
functions are 
established. 
December 
2021 - will 
occur on an 
ongoing basis  The AE, Pegasus 
Capital Advisors 
and the EE, the 
Lightsmith 
Group, have a 
dedicated, 
permanent 
employees 
responsible for 
the 
implementation 
of GCF’s Gender 
Policy, Gender 
Action Plan and 
full integration 
of gender within 
the investment 
teams.  
The EE’s 
Director of 
Sustainability The planned 
total budget for 
the 
implementation 
of activities 
outlined in the 
gender action 
plan amounts 
to USD 
300’000 (excl. 
travel and 
logistics costs 
or the ESG and 
Impact 
Manager 
salary) for all 
projects 
throughout the 
entire fund life.  
The indicativ e 
budget and 
budget 
Page 103


---
*Page 107*
---

1c. Capacity Development : Ensure 
that gender is operationalized in the 
investment process by strengthening 
staff capacity  Indicator  1c: Number of existing  
and new investment professionals 
participating in  gender -related 
training within the first year of 
employment.  
 
Target  1c: 100%  of employees  of 
CRAFT participating in gender -
related training within the first year 
of employment  
  
Annually, 
beginning in 
2022  and Impact will 
have d ay-to-day 
responsibility for 
the 
implementation 
of the Gender 
Action Plan  
The AE ESG and 
Impact Manager 
will provide 
oversight of the 
EE and utilize 
external gender 
experts to ensure 
compliance and 
implementation 
of the GCF 
Gender Po licy 
and Gender 
Action Plan. allocation is a 
preliminary 
estimate and is 
subject to 
further review 
and update by 
the AE  
 
 
 
 
Output 2: Implement portfolio -level gender assessments and action plans  
 
(NOTE: Assessments, and hence specific gender indicators and targets, can only be established once portfolio companies are identified  and a baseline has been 
established . Thus, indicators and targets are identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)  
2a. Country Level Stakeholder 
Engagement  informs portfolio 
company level gender assessments and 
identifies opportunities to align  
investment  with the gender -related 
priorities at the country level.  
 Indicator 2a:  Number of Country  
and Sector level consultations that 
identify barriers and opportunities to 
expand climate resilient solutions to 
women vulnerable to climate change  
 
Target 2a : 1 annual country -level 
consultations for each GCF country Annually 
beginning in 
2023  
 
 The AE, Pegasus 
Capital Advisors 
and the EE, the 
Lightsmith 
Group, have a 
dedicated, 
permanent 
employees 
responsible for The planned 
total budget for 
the 
implementation 
of activities 
outlined in the 
gender action 
plan amounts 
to USD 
Page 104


---
*Page 108*
---

Project Level  Gender Assessment 
and Action : through the gender 
assessment, CRAFT will identify 
opportunities to invest  in women led 
and governed companies  (2b); income 
generation for women through direct 
and indirect employment  (2c); and the 
adaptation of climate resilient products 
or services by vulnerable women  (2d). 
2b. Invest in Portfolio Companies 
with Women   Leadership and 
Governance : CRAFT will evaluate, 
and track women owned  and led  
companies in the portfolio  and require 
companies to report on  gender -related 
actions or considerations taken  
2c. Create income -generating 
opportunities for women : identify 
opportunities within  portfolio in which the Fund has made an 
investment   
Indicator 2b: Report on number of 
CRAFT portfolio companies that 
meet the following criteria  as 
Women -Led Companie s:  
•at least 51% women -owned or
founded by one or more
women;
•at least one woman on the
company’s executive
management team (e.g., C -
suite);
•at least one woman on the
company’s Board of Directors
Target 2 b: CRAFT will invest in 2 
Women -Led Companies  
Indicator 2c(i): Number of direct 
jobs created for women within 
Portfolio Compan y Throughout 
the 
investment 
period  
Throughout 
the the 
implementation 
of GCF’s Gender 
Policy, Gender 
Action Plan and 
full integration 
of gender within 
the investment 
teams.  
The EE’s 
Direc tor of 
Sustainability 
and Impact will 
have day -to-day 
responsibility for 
the 
implementation 
of the Gender 
Action Plan 
The AE ESG and 
Impact Manager 
will provide 
oversight of the 
EE and utilize 
external gender 
experts to ensure 
compliance and 
implementatio n 
of the GCF 
Gender Po licy 300’000 (excl. 
travel and 
logistics costs 
or the ESG and 
Impact 
Manager 
salary) for all 
projects 
throughout the 
entire fund life. 
The indicativ e 
budget and 
budget 
allocation is a 
preliminary 
estimate and is 
subject to 
further review 
and update by 
the AE  
Page 105


---
*Page 109*
---

companies that provide a new source 
of income for women in climate -
vulnerable communities and  / or 
facilitate  employment opportunities for 
women  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2d. Increased  Usage by Women of  
Resilien t Products and / or Services : 
Identify opportunities to e xtend 
physical products and services to 
climate -vulnerable women to better  
manage climate risks and impacts  
 
  
Indicator 2c(ii):  Number of indirect 
jobs created for  vulnerable women  in 
developing countries as a result of 
CRAFT’s investment  
 
Target 2c(i) and 2c(ii) : [Targets for 
number or percent of direct and 
indirect employment  created for 
women and vulnerable groups will be 
established at the time of each GCF 
portfolio investment ] 
 
 
 
Indicator 2d: Number of additional 
women and girls  provided access to 
and/or  benefiting from climate 
resilience solutions, including 
localized climate risk information or  
physical products or services (for 
example women made more aware of 
climate threats and risk - reduction 
processes; made more food secure; 
provided improved access to water / 
water management solutions, etc.)  
 
Target 2d:  At least 30% of all 
beneficiaries from GCF Portfolio 
Companies are women and girls  
 investment 
period  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Throughout 
the 
investment 
period  
 and Gender 
Action Plan. 
Output 3: Applying a gender -lens in M&E analyses  
 
Page 106


---
*Page 110*
---

3a. Develop a  Monitoring and 
Evaluation framework that provides 
granularity on the impact of vulnerable 
communities, including women and 
girls. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3b. Gender Safeguarding in 
Portfolio Companies: Include  
protections to ensure that the 
employment relationship is based on 
the principle of equal opportunity and 
fair treatment and will not discriminate 
with respect to any aspect of the 
employment relationship (recruitment, 
hiring, compensation, working 
conditions, terms of employment, 
access to traini ng, promotion, 
termination, etc.)  
 Indicator 3a:  Number of c ompanies 
that incorporated gender metrics into 
their reporting and / or develop 
relevant policies, strategies, and plans 
produced that include discussion of 
gender  
 
Target 3a:  100% of GCF Portfolio 
Companies incorporate gender 
metrics in reporting and / or develop 
policies, strategies, and plans to 
address  gender gaps, barriers and 
challenge and  opportunities   
 
 
Indicator 3b : Monitor and report 
non-compliance through the Annual 
ESG and Impact Report and address 
violations, as necessary, through 
Environmental and Social Action 
Plans . Verify company reporting on a 
routine and randomly selected basis . 
 
Target 3b:  Each active Portfolio 
Compan y monitors and reports for 
compliance  on an annual basis.  Throughout 
the 
investment 
period  with 
annual 
reporting 
requirements  
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio 
Companies 
will provide 
this data 
annually 
through the 
Annual ESG 
and Impact 
Report  
 The AE, Pegasu s 
Capital Advisors 
and the EE, the 
Lightsmith 
Group, have a 
dedicated, 
permanent 
employees 
responsible for 
the 
implementation 
of GCF’s Gender 
Policy, Gender 
Action Plan and 
full integration 
of gender within 
the investment 
teams.  
The EE’s 
Director of 
Sustai nability 
and Impact will 
have day -to-day 
responsibility for 
the 
implementation 
of the Gender 
Action Plan  
The AE ESG and 
Impact Manager 
will provide The planned 
total budget for 
the 
implementation 
of activities 
outlined in the 
gender action 
plan amounts 
to USD 
300’000 (excl. 
travel and 
logis tics costs 
or the ESG and 
Impact 
Manager 
salary) for all 
projects 
throughout the 
entire fund life.  
The indicative 
budget and 
budget 
allocation is a 
preliminary 
estimate and is 
subject to 
further review 
and update by 
the AE  
 
 
 
 
Page 107


---
*Page 111*
---

oversight of the 
EE and utilize 
external gender 
experts to ensure 
compliance and 
implementation 
of the GCF 
Gender Po licy 
and Gender 
Action Plan. 
Page 108