=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210913164016+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/ModDate: D:20210913182731+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 21.5.92
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  X 
Funding proposal package for FP 178 
 GCF/B. 30/02/Add.10 
14 September 2021  Meeting of the Board  
4 –7 October  202 1 
Virtual meeting  
Provisional Agenda Item  15 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility ” submitted by  the 
African Development Bank (AfDB) ; 
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities  or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and s ocial report(s) d isclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessme nt; and  
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility” submitted by  
the African Development Bank  (AfDB)  is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privileged o r commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                            1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)                 68  
Environmental and s ocial report(s) disclosure                      75 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           80  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                86  
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                    89


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility   
Country(ies):  Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania , and Niger  
Accredited Entity:  The African Development Bank (AfDB)  
Date of first submission:  2021/01/27  
Date of current submission  2021/06/25  
Version number  [V.00 4]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1 OF 67  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section G  GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross- reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time.  
• The reco mmended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[AfDB]- [Africa]- [2020/12/21]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 2 OF 6 7 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public  and Private   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  Not applicable  
  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed 
project/programme targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated 
percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when 
summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☒ Energy access and power generation:  
  
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:    
   
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities,  and 
regions:    
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water 
security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:   
  
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
100%  
 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation impact  14.4 million  tCO 2equ. A.6. Expected 
adaptation impact  N/A 
N/A 
 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co- finance)  966, 716,400 USD  
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 million)   
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  150,000,000  USD  
For multi -country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should 
be consistent with A.8.  
☒ Grant  8,000,000  
☒ Loan  82,000,000   
☒ Guarantee  20,000,000  ☒ Reimbursable Grant   40,000,000  
 
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  25 years


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 6 7 
 
 A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  12/10/2021  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and GCF ESS 
Standards  to assess your FP 
category.  
A  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been 
used to prepare this 
FP? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme  complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, 
AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information    
The Executing Entities of the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility are:  
1 - African Development Bank.  
2- G5 Sahel countries: Government of Burkina Faso, Government of Chad, 
Government of Mali, Government of Mauritania, Government of Niger.  
3-Storage  Companies1 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
In line with the mandate obtained by the African Development Bank (AfDB) from the Heads of State of the G5 
Sahel  countries to drive the implementation of the DtP initiative,  the role of the  AfDB is to assist the G5 Sahel 
countries in mobilizing resources from various sources including the GCF to address the barriers that hinder 
these countries from adopting a low emission power generation path by seizing the abundant solar potential of 
the region.     
The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility (DtP) consists of US$ 150 million GCF financing that leverages 
US$ 816.7 million co- financing including US$ 379.6 million from the AfDB and US$ 437 million of private 
sector co-financing.   
 
The Sahel is  a vast semi -arid region that lies south of the Sahara Desert and stretches from Africa’s Atlantic 
Coast to the Red Sea. It covers 11 countries including Burkina Faso, Chad, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mali, 
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, and Sudan. These count ries are among the poorest in Africa with an average 
GDP 2.5 times lower than the rest of the continent.  The Sahel countries are also largely underserved with 
electricity,  exacerbated by  growing electricity demands driven among other factors by cooling needs. A 
temperature increase of 0.3 °C per decade has been recorded between 1979- 2015.  
 G5 Sahel Countries: Low Human Development, Vulnerability and Security Challenges  
The G5 Sahel includes a group of five countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,  Mauritania,  and Niger. The G5 Sahel 
countries have a total population of 86 million as of 2020, 75% of whom live in rural areas. In all five countries, 
agriculture and cattle -raising remain a central pillar of the econom y and the occupation of a large maj ority of the 
population, despite the presence of high- value resources such as  gold, hydrocarbons, uranium, and manganese. 
All the G5 Sahel countries rank at the bottom of the Human Development Index (HDI) and are among the 10 
poorest countries in the world. The G5 Sahel Strategy for Development and Security identifies its members as 
ecologically vulnerable states, and recognizes that this vulnerability, combined with insecurity and a history of 
low state capacity as key contributor s to the region’s developm ent challenges. These issues are further 
 
1 Storage Companies, when selected, will be the Executing Entities of the storage sub- projects.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 6 7 
 
 compounded by infrastructure  challenges , which restricts the movement of people, goods and energy into these 
desert countries, four of which are land locked .  
 
Impact of COVID on G5 - Sahel Countries  
According to the African Economic Outlook (AEO) 2021, African economies contracted by 2.1% in 2020 due to 
the impact of COVID -19 with an estimated U S$ 4.5 billion required to lift the newly extreme poor out of poverty. 
The COVID -19 impact in the G -5 Sahel countries is especially manifested by subdued economic growth rates 
and widening budget deficits. Furthermore, COVID -19 resulted in border closures and lockdowns that impacted 
revenue collections (taxes) and led to a re -prioritization of public spending to social sectors of health and social -
safety nets.  
The electricity sub- sector in the G5 countries, as in  most African countries,  has suffered from disruptions to global 
supply chains, as well as from lower demand in global markets for a wide range of Afric an commodit ies. Low 
electricity access rates have also exposed the vulnerability of the public health systems in these countries as 
reliable electricity is required to offer the much- needed medical care, support the healthcare infrastructure 
including cold- storage facilities for vaccines. On the electricity project financing front, the COVID situation has 
seen a freezing of new investments as most financiers have opted to postpone their engagements , with potential 
negative impact on expected new generation and grid investment projects.  
The livelihoods of rural households in fragile environments of G5 Sahel countries have been severely affected 
by the unprecedented circumstances associated with the COVID -19 pandemic. Chronic food insecurity threat ens 
the most vulnerable in the Sahel, including women, as women constitute the majority of the Sahelian population, due to high rates of male migration from the region. Women of this region are subjected to additional stress in 
this period of pandemic because they find themselves alone and separated from their usual social institutions 
such as schools and savings groups. Children remain  at home and require care and food , which women must 
generally provide alone. Thus, by enabling the environment for private capital flows in the renewable energy 
sector, the DtP Facility will create economic and social opportunities for women and men. In the medium term, the program will also foster social cohesion in the targeted areas by reducing migratory  pressures .  
 SDGs and Global Agenda 
Desert to Power is a flagship program and an important climate project in the quest towards the achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7 on energy for the beneficiary Sahel countries, all of which are LDCs. 
The Desert to Power G5 -Sahel Facility (DtP) is part of the AfDB’s agreed entity work program with the Green 
Climate Fund and in line with the declaration of intent on cooperation on DtP signed between the two institutions in 2018 during the Bank’s Annual Meetings in Busan.  
 
Lack of Direct Access Entities in a Fragile Environment  
The G5 Sahel countries do not have any direct access entities coupled with fragility , which makes this proposal 
critically important and catalytic in terms of attracting investors to the Sahel region and supporting the ambition 
of the governments in the region to fight poverty, create employment for the youth, address migration and 
desert ification challenges as well as to ensure the development of low -carbon and climate resilient economies.  
 
Strong political and partner support  
In September 2019, the Heads of State of the G5 Sahel countries endorsed the Desert to Power Initiative and its holistic implementation approach focused on five key priorities: (1) increase on -
grid solar generation; (2) 
strengthen transmission and distribution networks; (3) deploy decentralized energy access solutions at scale: (4) 
improve the viability of the utili ties and (5) improve the enabling environment to facilitate more private sector 
investments . An implementation structure composed of a dedicated DtP T askforce housed by the AfDB, a 
steering committee and country focal points was set up and operationalized.  This strong support to Desert to 
Power was reiterated in the communique of the Extraordinary Sahel G5 Heads of State S ummit in July 2021. The 
initiative also enjoys strong support from  relevant regional organizations as evidenced by formal letters of support 
received from the ECOWAS Commission,  the G5 Sahel Executive Secretariat,  the Pan- African Great Green Wall 
Agency and support expressed by others , such as the Alliance Sahel2. Various technical and financial partners 
 
2 https://www.alliance -sahel .org/actualites/le -6eme -comite -de-pilotage -de-lalliance -valide -des-avancees -significatives/


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 6 7 
 
 support the initiative and are represented in the Steering Committee, and several have also expressed their co -
financing interest (e.g. AFD, Power Africa) under this Facility.   
 
Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility  (DtP or the Facility)  
The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility seeks to enable the G5 Sahel countries  to adopt a low -emission pathway  
by making use of their  abundant solar potential .  
The Facility has the potential to deliver a substantial climate mitigation dividend which is estimated at over 14.4 
million tCO 2equ. for the G5 Sahel countries over the programme lifetime. This dividend will be  reaped by adding 
over 500 MW of solar energy generation capacity, which will significantly increase the share of clean energy in the generation mix across the five countries.  The proposed approach will address the identified barriers through 
the execution of three components that are part of the overarching priorities of the Desert to Power initiative as endorsed by the G5 Sahel Heads of State:  
• The first component  will focus on g rid investments to de- risk solar IPPs and pave the way for the uptake 
of a regional solar market. This component will include financial support  to grid ancillary infrastructure for 
solar integration, and storage for grid stability.  
• A second component  will provide concessional finance to solar IPPs as well as partial risk guarantee s 
(PRGs)  to cover investors against the risk of the government (or the  government -owned utility) failing to 
perform under the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) obligations with respect to the underlying project .  
• A third component  focuses  on technical assistance (TA) which includes:  the development of capacity of 
local stakehol ders to manage larger shares of variable renewable energy and improve the enabling 
environment for IPPs  to attract  private sector investments in solar energy across the G5 Sahel region.  
 
Expected Outcomes and Impact of the Facility  
The Facility intends to generate the following outcomes: (i) A backbone grid with utility scale storage for solar 
power integration and basic  technical conditions in place for a regional solar market; (ii) 500 MW of additional 
solar generation capacity through IPPs. The IPPs are expected to mobilize US $ 141.7 million in equity and 
US$ 566.9 million in debt financing ( AfDB, other DFIs, and commercial loans). A partial risk guarantee of US $ 40 
million is introduce d as a feature to facilitate the bankability of the IPP projects, designed to improve the credit 
and risk profile of the off takers . The outcomes of the proposed technical assistance activities under the Desert 
to Power Financing Facility are the c reation of a clear and reliable environment for private sector solar  project 
financing  and the development of adequate capacity at national institutions in the G5 Sahel countries to ensure 
the long- term sustainability of the ir national  renewable energy sec tors. Through these outcomes, the Facility will 
create attractive and viable opportunities for solar PV in the G5 countries, improve energy access and security, 
reduce 14.4 million tCO 2equ., and directly benefit 3.5 million people (out of which 1.75 millio n are women). The 
expected indirect beneficiaries are estimated at 700,000 people3. It is also estimated that 1250 jobs will be 
created during construction and 450 permanent jobs4. 
 
 
 
 
3 This is as result of an estimated additional 20% of installed generation capacity installed as a result of the 
project activities but not funded by the project.  
4 This is based on the assumption of 2.5 jobs per MW during construction, and 0.9 jobs per MW for O&M.


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 67 
 
 
  
5 The World Bank, available at https:/ /data.worldbank.org/country/burkina- faso  
6 Sources, knoema.com   
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
The overall climate context  
The Sahel region is characterized by some of the lowest rates of electrification and ownership of cooling 
devices (e.g. , fans, refrigerators) in the world, despite the fact that almost 700 million people in Africa are 
living in areas where the average dail y temperature exceeds 25 degrees. By 2040, this number will approach 
1.2 billion as average temperatures are projected to rise as a result of climate change. Hence, Africa and 
the G5 Sahel countries in particular have so far been minor contributors to global GHG emissions. The 
continent’s energy -related CO 2 emissions account for less than 4% of global emissions although the Sahel 
region is in the frontline when it comes to bearing the brunt of a changing climate.  
 
Increasing electricity demand is  driven by population growth, cooling demands amid growing temperatures, 
and commercial/industrial demand for the production of commodities and services. The energy sector plays 
a pivotal role in contributing to the region´s climate mitigation and adaptation goals, a  role it can only assume 
if it is fundamentally transformed into a low carbon energy supply system.  
 
Energy systems are vulnerable to climate change, from changes in resource endowments to impacts on 
energy supply, transmission and distribution.  Cross -sector impacts on energy from climate change can be 
seen across socio -economic sectors and include compet ition for water resources (in electricity generation, 
oil refining and irrigation) and land competition (e.g. , food stock for biofuels production). However , the 
countries’ high dependence on fossil fuels and exponential demand growth (average 10% annual increase) 
may make it harder for them to embrace a low -emission future.  
 
The G5 Sahel countries are heavily dependent on biomass for cooking energy and the AF OLU sector 
currently represents the largest source of GHG emissions. All G5 Sahel countries have set unconditional 
and conditional targets to reduce emissions from the energy and AFOLU sector s by investing in renewable 
energy technologies. Common priority sectors identified in both the countries’ economic development plans 
and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) include climate- smart agriculture, sustainable land 
management, and increasing access to energy with a strong focus on developing their renewable energy 
potentials.  
 Regional  context 
The G5 Sahel countries share common socio -economic and infrastructural characteristics, providing the 
opportunity to tackle their climate challenges in a concerted fashion.  
 
Burkina Faso : Burkina Faso’s high dependence on climate -sensitive economic activities both at national 
and household l evels makes it vulnerable to climate change, with the rural poor being the most vulnerable 
group.  CO
2 emissions per capita are 0.185  tCO 2equ. (2019)6. In the business -as-usual scenario, emissions 
will increase from 92 million tCO 2equ. in 2020 to 118 million tCO 2equ. in 2030. Unconditional objectives aim 
at reducing GHG emissions by 7,808 million tCO 2equ. per year in 2030, i.e. , 6.6% when compared to BAU 
scenario. Under the conditional scenario, Burkina Faso will reduce its emissions by  11%, which corresponds 
to 13,766 million tCO 2equ. per year in 2030. The energy sector has been identified as a priority sector for 
emission reduction strategies, together with the objectives or reaching sustainable energy access for all.  
 
Chad:  Chad’s development vision is to become an emerging economy  by 2030, driven by diversified and 
sustainable sources of economic growth. GHG emissions per capita are around 0.732 tCO 2equ., placing 
them amongst the lowest in the world. The GHG emissions of Chad are expected to rise from 18 million 
tCO 2equ. to 28 million tCO 2equ. between 2020 and 2030 in the business -as-usual scenario. The country ’s 
mitigation objective is a cumulative 18.2% (unconditional) to 71% (conditional) reduction in GHG emissions 
by 2030 compared to the reference scenario, corresponding to 41,700 million t CO 2equ. for the unconditional 
objective and 162,000 million t CO 2equ. for the conditional objective. In line with the unconditional objective,


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 67 
 
 
  
7 Sources, knoema.com   emissions per inhabitant in 2030 will be 1.02 8 tCO 2equ., whereas they would be just 0.364 tCO 2equ. if 
means are acquired to enable the country to reach the conditional objective of a 71% reduction.  The energy 
sector, dominated by oil production, is responsible for 2,165 million  tCO 2equ. in the reference scenario and 
it has been identified as priority sector for emission reduction interventions. According to the NDC, adopting 
a low emissions path will be achieved by various means, including increasing renewable electricity supply 
from 0 to 750 GWh/year in 15 years from the 2015 baseline.  
 Mali:  Mali’s economy relies on the use of natural resources. Projected climate scenarios state an average 
temperat ure increase of 3°C with a reduction of 22% rainfall by 2100. Yet 78% of energy supply in Mali 
currently comes from biomass mainly in the form of wood and charcoal for domestic use. In 2020- 2030 
climate mitigation scenarios, the energy sector is the larges t contributor to the country’s climate mitigation, 
with a mitigation potential estimated at 31% of total emissions abatement potential.  CO
2 emissions per 
capita for Mali are 0.05 tCO 2equ.7 
 
Mauritania:  In its first NDC, Mauritania identified the energy sector as its first climate mitigation priority area 
and the second largest contributor to emissions after AFOLU sector . Mauritania is expected to see an 
average decrease of 10 to 15% in water resources by 2030, driven by significant temperature increases and reduction in rainfall. A lack of access to modern sources of energy has significant negative impacts on 
the Mauritanian population for whom 87% of energy is from biomass. In the business -as-usual scenario 
emissions would increase from 6.6 million tCO
2equ. in 2010 to 18.84 million tCO 2equ. in 2030. Mauritania 
intends to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 22.3% in 2030 or by 4.2 million tons of CO 2e compared 
to projected emissions for the same year i n the BAU scenario. Thus, for the period from 2020 to 2030,  
avoided accumulated emissions by the proposed mitigation measures are about 33.56 million tCO 2e. Rural 
electrification and the increase of renewable energy in the energy mix are mentioned as prior ity actions for 
achieving mitigation goals and poverty reduction objectives in the country.  
 Niger:  The energy sector represents a priority sector for mitigation activities in the country.  The national 
energy consumption is expected to double by 2030. Emissions from the energy and AFOLU sector are 
estimated to increase from 66 .8 million tCO
2equ. in 2020 to 96 .4 million tCO 2equ. in 2030 in the business -
as-usual scenario. Conditional objectiv es will reduce emissions by 34 .7%, or 33 .4 million tCO 2e, compared 
to the BAU 2030, while unconditional objectives will achieve a 3 .5% reduction compared to the reference 
scenario. To reduce GHG emissions by 2030, Niger will, among other actions, increase the renewable 
energy  generation to reach around 57% of the electricity mix in 2030, partly achieved through the installation 
of a 130 MW hydroelectric plant at Kandadji, the increase of solar generation capacity from 4MW in 2010 
to 250 MW in 2030 and a 20 MW Wind power plant . Niger also plans to double the share of renewables in 
the energy mix to 30% by 2030. Niger reorganized its energy sector with the aim of improving operational 
performance to achieve national electricity coverage by 2035 which will incl ude 85% through grid, 5%  
through mini -grids and 10%  through SHS with a target of household access to electricity of at least 80%.  
 Table 2: Key HDI Metrics for G5 Sahel Countries.  Sources: Human Development Report (2020); UNDP  
 
 Chad  Burkina Faso  Mali Mauritania  Niger  
GDI/Capita (US$)  1,555  2,133  2,269  5,197  1,219  
Life expectancy at 
birth in 2020 (Years)  54.2 61.6 59.3 64.9 62.4 
Total expenditure on 
health as % GDP  4.1%  5.6%  3.8%  4.5%  7.3%  
Energy access rate  
(%) 11.7 14.4 50.9 44.5 17.6


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 67 
 
 
  
8 This figure does not include Chad and Mauritania   
Electricity Sector Context  
The power sector in the G5 Sahel is characterized by low energy access rates which are as low as 2% in 
the rural areas of  Chad, high reliance  on fossil fuel and biomass to cover the growing energy needs  and 
ageing electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure. G5 Sahel countries share comm on features 
in terms of low energy access in the rural areas, insufficient share of renewables in their generation m ix 
and a steady growing energy demand that is being served in ways not always friendly to the environment.  
Electricity demand is expected to increase fivefold by 2030 to 250 TWh in West Africa8 and the G 5 Sahel 
countries are expected to follow a s imilar path.  
 
The total installed capacity of the region (about 2,203 MW  out of which 72 % is from non -renewable sources ) 
is insufficient to meet the current  electricity demands, resulting in frequent load shedding by utilities.  
Domestic generation is based mainly on costly heavy fuel oil. Peak demand is also met by utilities using 
emergency supply through diesel generators , which are easier to deploy for capacity ramp up at peak hours , 
an approach which is unsustainable with regards to the emissions path the region could take given the  
expected energy demand growth. The G5 Sahel countries will need to invest in cleaner technologies, in 
particular solar energy, to reduce its dependency on fossil fuels for power generation, to decrease the 
region’s GHG emissions  profile , to reduce exposure to oil price shocks, and to take advantage of global 
advances in reducing the cost of emerging technologies aimed at decarbonizing the power sector.  Table 3 
shows the power sector profile of the G5 Sahel countries.  
 
Table 3: Energy statistics of G5 Sahel Countries. Sources: World Bank Data Bank , Africa Energy Portal.  
 Burkina 
Faso Mali Mauritania  Chad Niger  
Population with access to 
electricity – national (% of 
population)  14.4 50.9 44.5 11.7 17.6  
- Urban (% of population)  62.3 85.6 80.3  41.8 47.6 
- Rural (% of population)  4.7 25.4 0.6 2.7 11.6 
Installed capacity, total (MW)  386.9  871.5  580.8  87.1 277.0  
- In renewable energy (MW)  97.8 374.9  121.9  1.3 27.0 
- In non -renewable energy (MW)  289.2  496.6  458.9  85.8 250.0  
Electricity generation total 
(GWh)  2606  2881.0  881.5  308.4  604.1  
- Electricity generated from fossil 
fuels (GWh)  1642.7  1859.1  586.9  308.4  598.9  
- Electricity generated from 
renewable sources (GWh)  963.4  1021.9  294.6  0 5.2 
Electricity demand growth (yearly)  9% in 2017 
14% in 
2018 10% 10% 9% 16%


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 67 
 
 
  
9 ESMAP. 2020. Global Photovoltaic Power Potential by Country. Washington, DC: World Bank  Electricity Grids Context  
Existing electricity networks across the G5 Sahel coun tries were not desi gned to integrate non-
dispatchable renewable energy. With power distribution infrastructures that are oper ating at the edge of 
acceptab le voltage ranges, connect ing additional variable renew ables such as  solar or wind  to these  
distribution grids requires careful consi deration. These  cons iderations include several technical factors 
such as volta ge variations, power plants reactions  under faulted syste ms, interactions w ith protection 
system s, and the overall operational flexibility for dispatch centres including potential economic 
consequ ences of  ad-hoc integr ation. In addition, the lack of interconnection  between national grids makes it 
impossible to dispatch renew able ener gy generation surplus across the countries, thus widely limiting the 
uptake of a regional solar mark et and private sector investment s. A modernization and extension of 
electricity grids and the integration of utility -scale storage options is required to establish the backbone for 
a regional renewable energy market, which is the entry point for private sector investment. In the current 
situa tion utility scale energy projects  within the G5 Sahel count ries require an off-take agreement which 
generally is with the national utility of the concerned count ry. This further slows  down the uptake  of solar  
investments, given the poor financ ial situation of national utilities. Beyond the technical barriers, governance 
and management challenges within the national electricity utilities result in power grids being operated with 
frequent and persistent load- shedding, thus lacking a uniform base- frequency which enables injection of 
solar power in a distributed manner. A second consequence of load- shedding is customer’s dissatisfaction 
resulting in large portions of the population and businesses relying on small -scale diesel generators across 
the G5 Sahel to cover their electricity needs, further creating a gap vis -à-vis the needs to decarbonize 
energy access in the region.  
 
Energy Access context   
Low access to electricity entrenches fragility and represents a key challenge considering political insecurity 
in the region. Impacts  at the economic level  mean that  communities encounter difficulties in operating 
businesses and generating incomes, which impedes efforts towards poverty reduction. At the social level, 
energy poverty and inequality in access make it more difficult for countries to achieve socio- economic 
targets in health and education, and to realize the full potential of human capital . It also increases their 
vulnerability to climate change, natural disasters,  and pandemics, as energy is an important input for water, 
sanitation, broadband, as well as economic activity . 
 Power generation context    
Overall, the total installed capacity of the region is insufficient to meet the electricity demand, especially considering the expected demand growth. Mauritania is the only country in the region that is able to export 
electricity. A large portion of non- electricity energy needs is still covered by biomass, which has led to the 
depletion of forests over the years, and all 5 countries aim to tap into their solar potential to increase their 
power generation capacity. The Sahel has a tremendous  renewable energy potential , and the G5 Sahel 
countries benefit from some of the highest solar energy irradiation and PV potential in the world.
9


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 67 
 
 
  
 
Table 4: Overview of the solar energy irradiation in the region.  Sources:  ESMAP. 2020. Global 
Photovol taic Power Potential by Country. Washington, DC: World Bank and DtP Roadmaps  
Country  Solar potential  
Burkina Faso  Solar irradiation average estimated at 5.5 kWh/m2/ day , for a 
duration of 8.2 to 9.5 hours a day . 
Chad  Solar irradiation average varies from 4.5 to 6.5 kWh/ m2/day 
depending on the areas of the country and seasons, with a daily 
duration of 7 to 8 hours.  
Mali Solar irradiation average varies from 4 to 7.6 kWh/m2/ day 
depending on the areas of the country and seasons, with a daily 
duration of 7 to 8 hours.  
Mauritania  Solar irradiation average 5.5 to 6.5 kWh/m2/day with daily irradiation 
of 7-8 hours  
Niger  Solar irradiation is one of the highest in the world, with average 7 
kWh/m2/day  
 
Least Cost Generation Analysis (see details in Annex 2)  
 Burkina Faso  
The current generation fleet will be able to meet demand until 2030, but an additional energy source will be 
needed. For 2023, the extension of one of the thermal power plants could be envisaged (so the 
decommissioning  is planned for 2022). Thus, PV + batt eries (150 MW, 3h), will be needed from 2025.  To 
optimize the generation fleet, an additional source of energy will be needed from 2023 onwards, which could be provided by extending the life of existing power plants. Also, there will be a need to increase the 
solar and battery park (100 MW, 3h) to avoid load shedding from 2025. In case of lack of investment in 
solar capacity and grid development, the government would import LNG through a trucking distribution 
network and/or will continue to use HFO.  
 Chad 
To reduce the cost of supply and cover the on -grid demand, Chad will have to heavily rely on import s from 
Cameroon and solar power plants.  The combination of solar PV plus import s will be able to cover the peak 
demand, on average, during the year. Th anks to the investments in solar  PV and the interconnection, the


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 67 
 
 
 average cost -reflective tariff would decrease from the current $cent 16/kWh to <11, when import s would 
start to phase out HFO.  
 
Should the country fail to build additional solar capacity, it  would mostly rely on import capacity from 
Cameroon. This would generate a significant risk of security of supply and an increased overall cost of 
US$145 million in 10 years. This figure would increase further if import were replaced  by domestic HFO  for 
example due to delays in the construction of the Chad- Cameroun interconnection.  
 
Mali 
If the necessary funding is secured, Mali could turn into a regional player, able to export excess solar 
generation and import power from Guinea, CIV and Nigeria (through the Burkina/North Core extension) and 
significantly reduce its cost of production. Mali could be very well integrated in the WAPP market thanks to 
the different interconnections, but it’s important that supply contracts are signed to fully utilize the import 
capacity (especially from Guinea). Regional solar parks and the participation in the OMVS projects (hydro) 
will complete a balanced (and green) installed capacity  mix. Without the necessary investments into solar 
and additional interconnection capacity , the country would still need to utilize domestic HFO. This scenario 
would cost the country ~ US$ 700 million and add 3.6 mln t CO 2 equ. 
 
Mauritania  
Mauritania has a significant natural gas potential that, if exploited, could reduce the cost of kWh. Solar PV 
could be developed to vary the generation  mix and make the country a net exporter. Despite the important 
gas potential, the country could cover the daily demand peak with just renewable energy sources (on 
average). The main driver for the cost reduction is the development of gas and solar capacity. An upside 
could be generated if more solar could be installed, so to free up gas generation for export.  Without the 
necessary investments into solar, the country would mostly utilise thermal generation and the hydro power 
from the OMVS. It would  lose US$117 mln and emit an additional 1 mln t CO 2 equ. 
 
Niger  
Niger will be able to phase out HFO thanks to the development of the Kandadji  dam and the import from 
Nigeria through the North Core. However, also solar PV could play a role if a stronger  political buy -in from 
the Government can  be secured. There is  potential to develop solar PV, especially after the 
operationalization of the Nort h Core. Investment  in solar PV would  achieve financial sustainability of the 
sector. Investment into the consolidation and extension of the grid remains an enabler for additional solar 
MW. Without the necessary investments into solar, the country would  be even more dependent on the North 
Core and might decide to use domestic HFO (or even develop a coal power plant).  
 
Policy and Regulatory Context 
The G5 Sahel count ries have  expressed  a commo n desire to utilize their untapped solar potential under a 
common Desert to Power  Framework to transform their growing dese rt area into a solar energy generation 
zone that chan ges their entire power  generation mix while delivering climate adaptation co-bene fits. Amid 
these  objectives, the G5 Sahel countries have ar ticulated their policies around a green and climate resilient 
vision expressed in their updated N DCs, where they have al so recognized the energy sector to be a priority 
contributor  to their climate action efforts. Various policies and regulatory reforms have  started or have been 
put in place with the aim to create an enabling environment to support their NDC goals. 
 With these premises, the DtP  Initiative aims to harness the solar potential of 11 countries across the Sahel 
(Burkina Faso, Chad, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, and Sudan) to 
deploy 10 GW of solar PV by 2030 and provide access to electricity to around 250 million people currently without electricity access through a combination of on- grid and off -grid solutions.  Pursuant  to the political 
mandate from the G5 Sahel Heads of State during the G5 Sahel Summit held in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso on 13th September 2019, the DtP Taskforce worked in close collaboration with the G5 Sahel countries 
on the development and validation of   the  
DtP National Roadmaps  which identified some 85 priority 
projects; 22% in solar generation, 26% in transmission and distribution, 23% in decentralized solutions; 7% in utility reforms and 22 % in enhancing the enabling environment. . On generation al one, over 2 GW of 
solar generation projects were identified.  In addition to the National Roadmaps a Regional DtP Roadmap


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 67 
 
 
 is under finalization by the countries. This strategy aims at promoting and supporting regional interventions 
based on a cooperative ap proach. The rationale behind the regional cooperation assumes that the 
development of the energy sector is the primary responsibility of national governments but that the success 
in one country can spur benefits to others. Thus, a regional approach to poli cy, planning, investor outreach, 
and procurement could see the creation of more attractive markets and bring costs down thanks to 
economies of scale and standardization of procedures.   
 
Complementarity and coherence 
The facility will work in a coordinated  way with existing and planned activities in the region. Individual 
investments will be guided by selection criteria that include procedures to avoid overlaps as described in 
section B.4 of the funding proposal.  A key criterion, in addition to country priorities, is coordination with 
existing GCF and other donor funded activities in the region. Moreover , underlying investments by the 
Facility will have to be in line with national sector development plans of the 5 countries  and the Desert to 
Powe r Roadmaps , which were validated by all 5 countries at the end of 2020 while noting.  
 
The Facility will also build on and complement existing and planned initiatives, including:  
• The Great Green Wall initiative which is part of  Africa´s environmental defens e system, a shield 
against desertification and degradation. DtP has been identified as a flagship initiative under the 
Great Green Wall  (GGW), and it will complement the GGW  by improving energy security along the 
GGW  corridor, putting in place conditions w hich will protect the new forests with a new paradigm on 
energy access, shifting users from the depletion of forests as the ultimate way to cover basic energy 
needs to modern use of electricity that promotes better land management .  
• The Sahel Alliance  which specifically aims to increase the coordination between partners and 
accelerate the implementation of projects , and notably the energy working group of the Sahel 
Alliance in which the AfDB actively participates . 
• The West African Power Pool (W APP)  and the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency (ECREEE). The WAPP aims to establish regional power integration and a common 
electricity market in West Africa , with the mission to coordinate power exchange among ECOWAS 
Member States  and is notably in charge of the development of regional solar parks in Burkina Faso, 
Mali and Niger. ECREEE aims to support ECOWAS countries in accelerating the deployment of 
renewable energy and energy efficiency  solutions.  
• The UN Sahel Renewable E nergy Initiative that aims to promote peace, stability and inclusive, 
sustainable development in the entire Sahel region. DtP  is coherent with the UN Development 
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for 10 countries of the Sahel, especially with the priorities it has of 
promoting cross -border and regional cooperation in the region, building resilience to climate and 
improving management of natural resource, promoting access to renewable energy and 
empowering women and youth for peace and development in the Sahel.  
• The Africa50 Infrastructure Fund  chaired by the AfDB and currently co -owned by 28  African 
countries .  AfDB and Africa50 collaborate on the design of a programmatic approach in developing 
and launching competitive procurement programs in the G5- Sahel countri es which  seeks to 
implement additional generation capacity at scale while facilitating government participation and 
local content. The combination of upstream work, stapled financing and government commitment 
will ensure an effective delivery of additional solar MWs on competitive terms.  
• The BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale up Solar Energy Investments in Francophone West 
Africa LDCs  which will provide additional solar capacity in Mali and Burkina Faso, thus will benefit 
from grid stabilization investments on storage by Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility.  
• The World Bank’s Solar Risk Mitigation Initiative  supported by the GCF  covering specifically  Mali. 
The Bank is part of a multi -stakeholder  group led by the World Bank and compris ing in addition  KfW,  
EIB, AFD, ISA and IRENA. The multi -stakeholder group is  an informal high- level platform where 
stakeholders will discuss their vision to support the development of renewables in developing 
countries , thus avoiding overlaps and seizing synergies.  
 
Further details on these initiatives are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2).


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 67 
 
 
 Co-Financing with Technical and Financing Partners  
 
The Bank is cooperating closely with various  Technical and Financing Partners  (TFPs)  on the 
implementation of DtP . For instance, t he Agence Française de D éveloppement ( AFD) has committed to 
financ ing solar projects  for the G5- Sahel countries . Other  potential  TFPs include Power Africa, Rockefeller  
Foundation (RF), Abu Dhabi Fund (ADFD) ; European Investment Bank ( EIB), the Arab Bank  for Economic 
Development in Africa ( BADEA); the United Nations Development Programme (U NDP ), the Islamic 
Development Bank (IsDB) , the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the International Solar 
Alliance (ISA) amongst others.  The AfDB  2020 Africa Energy Market Place (AEMP) focused on the G5 
Sahel countries and mobiliz ed over 30 TFPs  and the Governments  in country roundtables focused on the 
implementation and resource mobilization for the DtP Roadmaps.  
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)  
 
The power sector in the G5 Sahel countries is characterised by low energy access rates, especially for the 
poorest such as  female -headed households, by a generation system that relies predominantly on fossil 
fuels and that is unable to meet growing demand for electricity, and by power networks and infrastructure 
that are inadequate to integrate larger shares of variable renew able energy sources. While some progress 
has been made over the last few years and the countries’ governments are committed to transform the 
energy sector towards a low -carbon pathway, the potential for widespread renewable energy adoption 
remains largely untapped. The proposed programme will address barriers that prevent the Sahel countries 
from adopting an inclusive low emission power generation path and achieving universal access to electricity 
by harnessing their largely  untapped solar potential. The ke y barriers are listed below:  
 
Technical barriers: Existing electricity networks in the region were not designed to integrate large shares 
of variable renewable energy generation and the electricity grids will need to be upgraded, also from a 
perspective of  de-risking IPPs and distributed generation. The transmission and distribution networks are 
limited, fragmented and not sufficiently interconnected, presenting a strong constraint for additional 
generation projects.  
 The total installed capacity of the region is insufficient to meet electricity demand from women and men, 
especially considering the expected demand growth. Domestic generation is based mainly on costly heavy 
fuel oil. The average price of electricity is extremely high in most of the countries (average of 0.20 US$ per 
kWh) preventing poor households like female -headed households and households with men who migrated 
for economic reasons to access to energy. This is attributed to the high dependence on fossil fuels, the inability to attract invest ments in power generation at scale, and inefficiencies along the value chain—such 
as high distribution losses, relatively low billing collection rates, non- inclusive value chain, and small isolated 
grid systems.   
 
Financial Barriers:  To date, most investm ents in the sector have come at concessional rates from actors 
such as the AfDB, the EU, the World Bank, AFD, the Islamic Development Bank and other development finance institutions. The high cost of electricity generation is subsidized by Governments. The utilities 
struggle to cope with the challenges of increased cost of generation, sustained growth in energy demand, 
and the need to significantly increase energy access for the population. Moreover, the utilities in the Sahel 
region are financially unviabl e, and, in most cases, depend on state subsidies for survival. This has been 
exacerbated by the COVID -19 pandemic which further undermines the ability of countries to attract private 
sector participation in the renewable energy space in the region. As gene ration costs are likely to continue 
to increase, utilities will need to sustain their performance through new investments and via innovative 
restructuring that efficiently mainstream gender throughout the value chain.  
Off-takers require to be 
accompanied w ith credit enhancement instruments such as PRGs or specific incentives for supporting 
gender integration based on best economic return on investments, as they set themselves on a path of 
recovery and develop a dependable track record of dealing with IPPs.


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 67 
 
 
  
10 The World Bank Cameroon - Chad Power Interconnection Project (P168185)   
Legal and regulatory barriers:  The target countries are characterized by similar legal and regulatory 
barriers. Constraints vary from lack of clear institutional roles between different agencies, low planning 
capacity, the absence of a clear framework for IPPs, the absence of incentives  for enhancing gender 
mainstreaming at the legal and regulatory levels, and the mismatch between tariffs in urban and rural areas, 
necessitating harmonization. Even when appropriate institutional frameworks are in place, these may not 
yet be operational an d/or enforced, and the capacity of the sector's actors is too limited for effectively 
planning and implementing electrification strategies. Private sector participation has so far been limited for 
various reasons including lack of conducive legal framework s, fiscal and customs barriers,  customary habits 
limiting gender integration at the institutional level, lack of authority of the regulators, high tariffs and 
transparency challenges. The country -by-country  regulatory challenges are as follows:  
 
• Burkina Faso –  policy and regulatory barriers  
 
The state -owned utility, Société Nationale d’Eléctricité  du Burkina (SONABEL), has a monopoly on the 
transmission and distribution segments for urban areas. The utility also oversees electricity production, 
sales, and imports. Since liberalization of the production segment in 2007, two private sector players 
entered the market: APR Energy, operating the Kossodo thermal plant (30 MW) and GPS, operating the 
Ouaga 2000 thermal plant (31 MW). The Burkinabè  Rural Electrification Agency (ABER) is currently 
responsible for promoting rural electrification in Burkina Fas o, which has replaced the former Electrification 
Development Fund (FED). Since 2013, the Government of Burkina Faso (GoBF) has initiated various 
projects to support electrification within rural communities through ABER. The agency presently works with 
rural cooperatives (COOPELS) to coordinate development efforts towards rural and off -grid electrification 
in the country. To properly structure the renewable energy sector, the National Agency for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency (ANEREE) was created in 2017 to organize policy, promote private sector 
participation through Independent Power Producers (IPPs) and mobilize funding. For details on the key 
policies and law relating to renewable energy in Burkina Faso, see Table 1  of the FS.  
 
• Chad – policy and regulatory barriers  
Chad’s  2020 finance law, stipulates  any equipment relevant to the generation and promotion of renewable 
energy is exempt from import duties and value- added tax.  
The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (MPE) is in charge of the energy sector, including planning, policy 
formulation and implementation, sector monitoring and evaluation, as well as supervision of the State -
owned companies in the sector. The MPE has undert aken the preparation of an energy sector development 
policy. In that capacity, the MPE supervises the SNE (Societé Nationale d’Electricité) and the Renewable 
Energy Development Agency (ADER). SNE is in charge of electricity generation, transmission and 
distribution. SNE was established in June 2010 as a result of the dissolution of the Société Tchadienne 
d’Eau et d’Electricité (STEE) to unbundle water and electricity operations between two separate companies 
(SNE and STE), which are fully owned by the State.  
Chad relies heavily on diesel -based generation. Together with SNE 's operational and commercial 
inefficiencies, the cost of electricity service is extremely high in Chad. SNE suffers from chronic loss -making 
and is unable to maintain its aging infrastruc ture. Additionally, SNE has no consistent payment track record 
for electricity supply, nor import, and its poor commercial performance seriously hinders the cash position of the utility. SNE is completely dependent on government support to operate.
10 
ADER is in charge of the promotion of renewable energies, including for electricity access increase through 
decentralized systems. ADER was created by law on 19th August 2013 by Ordinance with the mandate of 
supporting the preparation of a strategy and action plans for renewable energy development, mobilizing 
financing, implementing and training and proposing norms and standards for renewable energy equipment. 
The promotion of decentralized rural electrification is de facto ensured by ADER. The organization and 
functioning of ADER were defined by decree in 2014. Since its creation, ADER has focused on the 
promotion and development of decentralized photovoltaic systems and support to the development and


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 67 
 
 
  
11 https://africa -energy -portal.org/country/mauritania  negotiation of on -grid photovoltaic IPPs and particularly Dje rmaya Solar , which has benefitted from AfDB 
support.  
• Mali – policy and regulatory barriers  
The Direction Nationale de l’Énergie (DNE), within the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEE), is responsible 
for national energy policy formulation, promotion, coordination, monitoring and evaluation. Électricité du Mali (EDM -SA) is a vertically integrated private sector electricity utility, operating under a public service 
concession agreement for electricity supply in urban areas. Formerly a fully state -owned enterprise, the 
Government of Mali (GoM) retains 40% ownership. The institution operates as a monopoly over 
transmission and distribution, while generation is open to private IPPs such as SOPAM -SA and Albatros 
Energie. EDM -SA is currently the single off -taker for power produced by these IPPs. Recent information 
tends to indicate the GoM 's willingness to split production and distribution activities into two different 
companies. The Domestic Energy and Rural Electrification Development Agency (AMADER) was created 
in 2003 to manage and oversee the country’s rural electrification initiatives. The Regulatory Commission 
on Water and Electricity sectors (CREE) is the regulatory authority and operates directly under the 
supervision of the Prime Minister’s Office. This institution is responsible for granting concessions, promoting 
competition between private operators and supervising public procurement and tenders. As stated in the 
National Energy Policy (PEN), “there is a multiplicity of players in the energy sector in Mali, leading to an 
institutional dispersion of public energy management.” Thus, the country is aiming at  consolidat ing these 
efforts to ensure more coherent and efficient management of the sector. The EDM -SA had a total loss 
amounting to US $ 100 millio n in 2016, due to high generation costs, lack of tariff adjustments and high 
technical and commercial losses. As a result, EDM -SA has not invest ed adequately in network extensions 
and maintenance of grid infrastructure. The corresponding off -taker credit r isk that arises from this situation 
has deterred private investment and IPPs from entering the country’s electricity market. Grid network 
expansion is very expensive due to the vastness of the country’s territory, its low population density and 
scattered p opulation centres . Connection to semi -urban and urban areas is estimated to cost US $ 1,000 
per connection. Connection to rural areas is estimated to be even more expensive. Therefore, grid 
expansion will likely be limited to urban areas in the short and medium term. For the k ey policies and law 
relating to renewable energy in Mali, please see Table 2 in the FS.  
• Mauritania – policy and regulatory barriers  
The electricity sector is under the care of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Development, Ministry of 
Petroleum, Energy and Mines  and Ministry of Finance, and is regulated by the Regulatory Authority. Due 
to the failure of the privatization process, there is a unique operator, the government -owned electricity utility 
in Mauritania,  the Mauritanian Electricity Society . Implementation of rural electrification government policies 
is led by  the Rural Development and Electrification Agency and the Agency for the Promotion of Universal 
Access to Services.  
Mauritania has made the following strategic choices  related to power generation:  
• Continue the policy of promoting energy projects on sovereign financing so a s to be able to 
massively introduce new technologies contributing to considerably modify ing the energy mix of the 
country.   
• Connect localities of more than 200 people to the network and improve access to the  national 
network.   
• Connect to the network diesel and hybrid power plants in the E ast of the country; and  
• Keep those in the N orthern part of the country isolated by hybridizing them.11 
The electricity sector is governed by the Electricity Code, which was adopted in 2001. The Code provides 
a framework for liberalizing the electricity sector and ensuring its financial viability. The code envisages :


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 67 
 
 
  
 
 
12 Desert to Power Regional Roadmap. Draft November 2020  • The liberalization of the electricity se ctor is subject to the award of a license. Licenses are granted 
on the basis of a public call for applications accompanied by specifications. The licensing procedure 
is performed by the Regulatory Authority.   
• Specifies the attributions of the Regulatory Authority which is associated by the MPEM in the 
development of the sectoral policy and the regulations in force; and  
• States that electricity rates must "provide sufficient revenue levels to enable licensees in the sector 
to achieve a normal rate of return on their investments. They will nevertheless have to be cost -
oriented.  
The legal framework continues to work on  accelerating the liberalisation  of the sector .  
• Niger – policy and regulatory barriers  
The Minis try of Energy is responsible for development and implementation of energy policy. The Société 
Nigérienne d'Electricité (NIGELEC) is Niger’s utility and only monopoly over transmission and distribution; 
NIGELEC is majority -owned by the Government. The Niger ien Rural Electrification Promotion Agency was 
established to manage the country’s rural electrification programs and initiatives. Niger has an independent 
regulatory authority –  Regulation Agency of the Energy Sector (ARSE), which advises the Ministry on 
energy policies, laws and regulations. N IGELEC ’s tariffs are not cost -reflective. The government subsidizes 
tariffs to ensure their affordability and the commercial viability of the utilit y. It is therefore unable to invest 
sufficiently in improvements in installed capacity, network extensions or in the maintenance of grid 
infrastructure.  Key policies and law s are highlighted in Table 64 of the FS.  
Section D .5 provides an  assessment of the main country organizations involved in the  implement ation of 
the project and its activities mentioned above.  
Business as usual scenario:  Electricity demand growth in the region averages 10% per year mainly 
driven by population growth, growing cooling demand because of GDP growth and increasing temperatures, 
and increasing commercial and industrial demand for the production of commodities and services. The G5 
Sahel countries have identified that grid- based electricity demand is projected to increase rapidly over the 
next decade, attaining a peak demand of approximately 3 GW of new capacity and annual consumption of 
18.5 TWh by 2030 - a 230% increase in both peak demand and annual consumption.12  This additional 
demand could be met by additional grid supply based on Heavy Fuel Oil / diesel thermal power plants. 
Power production based on coal and gas are not considered to be significant in the region, except for Niger 
where the construction of a 625 MW coal power plant is being considered. Hydropower forms part of the 
business -as-usual scenario with investments in grid- connected hydropower planned for Burkina Faso, Mali 
and Niger. For off -grid areas and to address power shortages in grid connected l ocations diesel gensets 
are the primary source of power.   
 
By removing the multiple barriers that are preventing the G5 Sahel countries from harnessing their solar 
potential, achieving energy security, expanding energy access and achieving their mitigation ambitions, the 
programme will facilitate project funding in the target countries and will develop the capacity of local 
stakeholders to deploy solar technologies widely. Without addressing these barriers, the market for solar 
investments is likely to rem ain limited in these countries and private sector actors will not be willing to take 
the risk to invest. Table 5 below outlines how each barrier will be addressed by the proposed programme 
activities. For further details on barriers related to women, and how dedicated budget and activities have 
been assigned to gender -related outcomes, please refer to Annex 8 -  Gender Assessment and Action Plan.


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 67 
 
 
  
Table 5 :  Addressing the e xpected barriers through the p roposed programme  activities  
 
Type of 
barrier  Barrier  Area of 
intervention  Programme activities that address the 
identified barriers  
Technical  
 Grids in current 
status are not 
allowing the 
integration of high 
shares of variable 
RE Electricity grids  Activity 1.1.1:  Development and upgrade 
of grid infrastructure to facilitate solar PV 
integration   
Activity 1.1.2: Grid upgrades into smart 
grids on solar development areas with RE 
penetration higher than 30%  
Activity 1.1.3: Construction of grid 
infrastructure from new solar plants  
Activity 1.2.1:  Storage for base loads and 
grid stability  
Financial  High risk 
perception from 
financial institution 
in RE lending  Power 
generation  
 Activity 2.1. 1 Installation of new solar 
generation capacity and 2.1. 2 –Partial Risk 
Guarantee  
 
Off-takers ’ weak 
balance sheet and 
lack of track 
record  Power 
generation/IPP engagement
 Activity 2.1.2 – Partial Risk Guarantee  
Regulatory  Unclear policies 
and regulations 
limit private sector participation, 
including the 
absence of a clear framework for 
IPPs  Electricity grids, 
power generation  Activity 3.1.2: Revision of regulatory texts 
based on recommendation of the Electricity 
Regulat ory Index to attract private sector 
investment in the electricity sector in the 
Sahel countries, gender -responsiveness, 
operationalization of renewable energy 
auctions.


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 67 
 
 
 Figure 1 : Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility’s Theory of Change  
 
   
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)  
Overall objective  
The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility seeks to enable the African countries of the Sahel region 
to adopt a low-emission path by transforming their dese rt area into an opportunity to ad dress their 
energy security needs using clean techno logies, while delivering various adap tation co-benefits. The 
Sahel has unmatched renewable energy availability, and the G5 Sahel countries benefit from some 
of the highest solar energy irradiation and PV potential in the world. However, this potential for 
increasing electricity access, reducing GHG emissions and proving long- term sustainable growth in 
the Sahel countries remains largely untapped.  
 
The proposed approach w ill address the barriers presented in section B.2 through the execution of 
three compo nents that are part of the overarching priorities of the Desert to Power  initiative end orsed 
by the G5 Sahel Heads of State. By removing the financial, technical  and regulatory barriers that are 
preventing Sahel countries to embark on a low -emission and sustainable pathway, the Desert to 
Power G5 Sahel Facility will facilitate project funding in grid infrastructure, solar PV integration, and


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 67 
 
 
 additional solar gener ation capacity of 500 MW in the target countries to meet growing  demand , 
increase the share of renewables in the countries’ energy mix and benefit around 3.5 million people.  
 
Structure of the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility:  
 
Compone nt 1: Grid investments to de-risk solar IPPs.  
This component will focus on grid investments to de- risk solar IPPs and pave the way for the uptake 
of a regional solar market. In the Sahel countries some pre- identified sites for solar generation plants 
can benefit from grid refurbishment works at transmission level and upgrades at distribution level to 
de-risk IPPs and distributed generation by making the power in -take possible upon commissioning 
of the solar power generation assets.  
 
Output 1.1: Development and upgrade of grid infrastructure to facilitate solar PV integration.  
Activities will include:  
1.1.1. Investments in grid ancillary equipment to enable the integration of larger variable renewable 
energy notably solar . Such ancillary equipment will include grid equipment for frequency and voltage 
regulation, spinning reserve management systems and load protection systems. Grid investment 
activities will be financed through sovereign loans from the GCF to the Host Countries via the AE 
(AfDB) for investing in the ancill ary equipment that enables solar generated energy to be fed into the 
grid in a way that provides stability and security for grid operation, irrespective of solar generation 
variability.  
 1.1.2 Grid upgrades into smart grids on solar development areas with RE penetration higher than 
30%. Smart grid investments can help facilitate the integration of higher shares of solar PV into grids . 
Smart grid investments can help facilitate the integration of higher shares of solar PV into grids. In 
such cases the financing from GCF and AfDB will be deployed through sovereign loans to the G5 
countries to upgrade grids into smart grids. The grid upgrades will only be made where they are 
required to integrate larger shares of variable renewable energy into the grid, thus mitigating against 
the risk that they will lead to an increase in the distribution of existing non- RE sourced power. Smart 
grid investments to ensure RE penetration of more than 30% could include, solar forecasting system, 
transmission and distribution automation, Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS) . 
 
Output 1.2: Increase solar PV Penetration and grid stability  
  
This sub- component involves the following activity:  
 
1.2.1 Construction of innovative storage systems. Storage provides a solution for grid stabilization 
and flexibility as it copes with the challenges of maintaining system reliability despite the variable and 
intermittent nature of solar power generation. The Programme aims to install a total of 239 MWh of 
utility scale storage by investing in selected storage sub- projects in the Host Countries which to be 
selected in accordance with the Eligibility  Criteria and the terms of the FAA (  
“Storage Sub- Project ”).  Two options are foreseen for the implementation of the Storage Sub-
projects.  
Option A : The storage projects may be implemented by the national utilities ( Option A ) in which 
case, the AfDB will channel GCF financing, and its co- financing (sovereign loans ) to the Host 
Country.  
Option B : A second option provides for the storage projects to be implemented by private sector 
entities ( Option B ) in which case, the AfDB will channel the GCF Reimbursable Grant and its co -
financing (private sector loans)  to the storage companies. The project sponsors will provide equity 
contribution. The financing will be utilized towards the construction of innovative storage systems for 
base loads and grid stability that will contribute to de- risking solar IPPs.


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 67 
 
 
  
13 Gender -related barriers identified in the target countrie s; by ensuring gender -inclusive  capacity building , 
developing gender -responsive regulatory frameworks , tending towards gender -responsive standardization for 
solar integration,  and by providing awareness for the inclusion of women into solar energy value chains.  capture 
sex-disaggregated data through sex -disaggregated indicators and targets.  Compon ent 2: Incremental  Finance for Solar Power Generation.  
Under this Component, the Programme  will seek to achieve uptake in private sector investments 
across the G5 Sahel countries with the provision of finance for new solar IPPs. The lack of 
appropriate commercial finance, i.e. inadequate pricing, inflexible grace periods and loan tenors that 
are not adapted to the characteristics of renewable energy investments, represents one of the main 
barriers hindering private sector investments in the region. By incentivizing private sector investments 
into solar power generation, this component will resul t in additional 500 MWp installed capacity during 
the project lifetime and an increased share of solar in the region’s generation mix.   
 
Output 2.1: Adding 500MW of solar generation capacity.  
2.1.1  Provision of Private Sector Loans Installation of new solar capacity. This activity will involve the 
provision of affordable and long- term debt financing (loans from the GCF and AfDB private sector 
loans ) to private sector stakeholders to install new solar  capacity. With high solar potential in the 
region, on-grid PV technology has a high potential for emission reduction for countries relying to a 
large extent on fossil fuels, which is the case of the G5 Sahel countries.  
. 
Compone nt 3: Techni cal Assistance   
 
The outcomes of the proposed technical assistance activities the Desert to Power Financing Facility 
are the creation of a clear and predictable environment for private sector solar investments and the 
development of adequate capacity of national inst itutions in the G5 Sahel countries to ensure the 
long- term sustainability of the renewable energy sector. The program will use grant funding from the 
GCF, AfDB Grants, and/or grants administered by the Bank, and other technical and financial 
partners to bu ild the capacity of institutional stakeholders in the operation of integrated energy 
systems with higher shares of variable renewables (utilities, transmission system operators, the 
ministries in charge of energy, and energy regulators, female -headed households and low -income 
households who are likely to benefit from this program13) (“TA Beneficiaries”) on procurement of 
IPP projects and the operation of transmission grids with higher shares of variable renewables, 
notably solar. It will further operational ize existing policies and regulatory frameworks in order to 
mobilize more private sector investments in IPPs in the G5 Sahel countries. The Component 3 will 
also achieve completion of technical studies for identified transmission lines and solar PV project s to 
enhance solar integration into the grids across the region.  
 
Finally, this component addresses some of the gender -related barriers identified in the target 
countries, by ensuring gender -inclusive capacity building, developing gender -responsive regulatory 
frameworks, tending towards gender -responsive standardization for solar integration, and by 
providing awareness for the inclusion of women into solar energy value chains. The gender activities 
of the Desert to Power Financing Facility ensure to captur e sex -disaggregated data through sex -
disaggregated indicators and targets. It also includes female- headed households and low -income 
households who are likely to benefit from this Programme. Overall, the gender aspects of this 
Component aim to reduce gender  inequality and contribute to achieving SDG.  
  
Output 3.1: Improve capacity and enabling environment for IPPs.  
This technical assistance programme addresses regulatory and gender barriers. For this programme  
to be successful, institutional stakeholders’ capacity will need to be built to transfer international best 
practice in procurement of competitive IPP projects, PPA negotiation, operation and maintenance of 
renewable energy systems into the Sahel context.


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 67 
 
 
  
14 The ERI was developed by AfDB and is made up of three pillars or sub-  indices: the Regulatory Governance 
Index  (RGI); the Regulatory Substance Index (RSI); and the Regulatory Outcome Index (ROI). his report presents 
the results of the third edition of the Electricity Regulatory Index (ERI) for Africa, covering thirty -six countries. The 
first edition was published in 2018 and covered fifteen countries. Thirty -four countries participated and were 
assessed in ERI 2019. The full document can be accessed here: https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/electricity -
regulatory -index -africa -2020  
 Activity 3.1.1  Build capacity of institutional stakeholders in the operation of integrated energy systems 
with higher shares of variable renewables .   This activity is targeted at national utilities, Transmission 
System Operators (TSOs) and regulators. It  will include (i) training, capacity building, knowledge 
exchange for competitive procurement of IPPs projects and PPA negotiation; (ii) capacity building on 
demand side management and operation of grids with higher shares of RE; and (iii) recruitment of 
transaction advisors to assist G5 Sahel countries in negotiations of project documents, depending 
on jurisdiction. This activity will have a strong gender focus to ensure women’s inclusion in the 
renewable energy workforce and address women’s barriers to pa rticipation in renewable energy 
value chains. The gender -responsive technical assistance will enable utilities to mainstream gender 
considerations across their activities and particularly with a focus on workforce development and 
employment. Finally, awareness raising activities aim to implement  gender -responsive energy 
policies in solar energy companies and outreach actions that target the vulnerable population in 
localities on social energy tariffs.  
Activity 3.1.2  Revision of regulatory texts based on rec ommendations  of the Electricity Regulat ory 
Index14 to attract private sector investment in the electricity sector in the Sahel countries, gender -
responsiveness, operationalization of renewable energy auctions .  This activity will achieve the 
operationalization of policy and regulatory frameworks necessary  to support private sector 
participation in the solar energy sector. Technical assistance support will (i) establish a transparent 
and sound regulatory framework for competitive tenders to attract private sector investment for on -
grid solar generation; (ii ) review and/or develop tariff methodology, structures and its associated 
financial models; (iii) support the establishment of a common tax regimes and credit enhancement 
solutions for solar projects in the G5 Sahel. This activity will also involve a gender -responsive review 
of the regulatory frameworks of the target countries and the development of sectoral strategies for 
women’s inclusion in the solar energy sector. Gender activities plan the establishing of a national 
gender -responsive energy policy and of a national gender action plan within the Ministry of Energy 
to be used within the national electricity companies.  
 
Output 3.2: Incentivize additional private sector investment  
The expected result of this output is to build a conducive enabling environm ent in the G5 Sahel 
countries to attract private sector investment into the energy sector. The national gender -responsive 
energy policy and its national gender action plan mentioned above will include special incentives to the private energy companies meet ing gender criteria and these incentives could also be indexed to 
their level of commitment, in the national energy policy.  
Activity 3.2.1: Standardization and development of standards for solar integration.  The purpose of 
this activity is to develop the best -in-class tools, and guidelines usable by the utilities and the 
regulators to manage and regulate the integration of variable renewable energy into the grid as well as the design and management of the battery energy storage technology (BEST). In terms of gender 
impacts, this activity aims to support IPPs to establish and use gender -
responsive tenders and 
procurement process as well as solar energy companies to develop affordable tariffs especially 
targeting vulnerable population as poor households, women and female- led households.


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 67 
 
 
 Activity 3.2.2: Match -making events to leverage private investments.   The purpose of this activity is 
to organize an investment meeting including a match- making event whereby prospective investors 
will be pitched according to the desert to power projects pipeline in order to close their financial need 
gaps. The main goal of this activity is to mobilize private sector investment into the G5 Sahel 
countries. Marketing activities are planned for women with degrees in energy or wor king in the energy 
sector to disseminate good practices and approaches for women’s inclusion in the sector among the 
private solar energy companies. Reciprocally, marketing activities targeting private sector 
stakeholders will take place to inform them abo ut the financial benefits to implement a gender -
responsive Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)/Environment Social and Governance (ESG)policy 
and about the government incentives included in the gender -responsive energy policy and action 
plan (see output 3 .2). 
 
Table 6: Summary of the Technical Assistance component  
Output / Activities  Amount (US $)  
 
Output 3.1   
Activity 3.1.1  
- Training, capacity building, knowledge exchange for competitive 
procurement of IPPs  
- Capacity building on demand side management and operation of grids with higher shares of RE;  
- Recruitment of transaction advisors to assist G5 Sahel countries in negotiati ons of PPA and Concession Agreements  
- Gender technical assistance  
- Utility financial modelling and turnaround plan with the establishment of cash management system  
- Technical assistance related to transmission/distribution network 
studies   
250,000  
250,000  
2,000,000  
250,000  
250,000  
1,000,000  
Activity 3.1.2:  
- Revision of the regulatory framework to attract private sector and 
establish gender responsive energy policy   
500,000  
Output 3.2   
Activity 3.2.1:  
- Standardization and development of standards for solar integration   
300,000  
Activity 3.2.2:  
- Match -making events to leverage private investments.   
800,000  
Total  5,600,000


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 67 
 
 
  
15 Key partner organizations have joined the Steering Committee at senior level alongside the Ministers of Energy 
of the G5 Sahel countries. Africa50, ACWA Power, the French Development Agency (AFD), the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the Sustainable Energy for All (SEforALL) Initiative and the USAID Power Africa Program. The European Commission is participating in an observer capacity, and there is considerable interest from other stakeholders to become members of the Steering Committee.  
 B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
AfDB is well placed as an Accredited Entity to coordinate the implementation of the planned activities 
and has already started engagement with a broad range of financial and technical partners in close 
coordination with other relevant initiatives.  The Executing Entities of Desert to Power will coordinate 
with other related GCF projects in the region, notably the BOAD Mali Solar Rural Electrification 
Project (FP102), the BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale up Solar Energy Investments in 
Francophone West Africa LDCs (FP105) and the World Bank Solar Risk Mitigation Initiative (FP163) 
to ensure no overlap of funding in the activities.  
 
In September 2019 Heads of States of the G5 Sahel countries met in Ouagadougou and endorsed the Desert to Power Initiative with the creation of a Task Force hosted by AfDB. National Focal Points 
were appointed to work closely with the Task Force. The Task Force currently leads resource 
mobilization efforts and is engaging with potential partners to help syndicate projects.  
 The task force is guided by a high- level Steering Committee chaired by the CEO of the Moroccan 
Agency for Sustainable Energy (MASEN, which is undergoing accreditation approval by the GCF) 
and comprising Ministers of Energy of the Sahel G 5 countries and key partners.
15 
 The Programme will be implemented through three key executing entities, each responsible for 
the execution of different financial mechanisms   
1. AfDB  will be executing entity for  Component  2, and part of Component 3 (3.2.2) . 
2. The Storage Company will be executing entity for Component 1.2.1.  
3. The Sahel G5 Host Countries  are executing entities for all public sector activities under 
Component 1 and relevant activities under Component 3.  
 
 
Country  Executing Entity  
Burkina Faso  Government of Burkina Faso  
Republic of Chad  Government of Chad  
Republic of Mali  Government of Mali  
Islamic Republic of 
Mauritania  Government of Mauritania  
Republic of Niger  Government of Niger


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 67 
 
 
  
16 If Option A is selected.  Figure 2 outlines the implementation arrangements for the 2 Executing Entities.  
 
The activities which will be implemented by each Executing Entity and the related financial 
instruments are presented in the following table:  
Table 7: Executing Entities  
Executing 
Entity  Component  Financial 
instruments  Activities  
African 
Development 
Bank 
(Accredited 
Entity)  
 Component 2  Private Sector Loans  2.1.1: Provision of Private Sector 
Loans  
Guarantee  2.1.2: Provision of Partial Risk 
Guarantee  
Component 3  Grant  3.2.2: Match -making events to leverage 
private investments  
G5 Sahel 
Countries  Component 1  Senior loan to public 
sector  1.1.1: Investments in grid ancillary 
equipment for enabling solar generated 
energy feed- in 
 
1.1.2: Grid upgrades into smart grids on 
solar development  
Reimbursable Grants 
and Loans to national utilities  1.2.1: Construction of innovative storage 
systems16


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 67 
 
 
  
17 If Option B is selected  G5 Sahel 
Countries  Component 3  Grant  3.1.1: Build capacity of institutional 
stakeholders in the operation of integrated 
energy systems with higher shares of 
variable renewable 
 
3.1.2: Revision of regulatory texts based o  
recommendation of the Electricity Regulati  
Index  
 
3.2.1: Standardization and development of 
standards for solar integration 
Storage 
Company Component 1  Reimbursable Grants 
and Loans to private 
sector  1.2.1: Construction of innovative storage 
systems17 
 
a) Implementation arrangement for  Component 1 
 
Implementation arrangements for S torage  Systems under Output 1.2  
 
The implementation of the storage activity 1.2.1 will build on the initial feasibility study done by World 
Bank for all WAPP countries. Suitable opportunities for storage investments will be identified in 
coordination with the Host Countries , upon which a competitive process to identify storage operators 
on Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) basis. Some of the G5 Sahel countries have 
already indicated a preference that their national utilities are best suited to operate grid storage 
systems, gi ven the effects which large scale storage systems might have on the overall grid stability 
and limited appetite for “store or pay” contracts. Whether Build –  Own - Operate (BOT) contracts will 
be awarded to private sector EPC companies or EPC contracts wil l be awarded separately while the 
national utilities carry out the storage operations, the option which each country will take will be 
finalized during final negotiations of the relevant agreements also taking in consideration the ability 
of the national utilities to mobilize the required equity contribution.  
Subject to the preference of the relevant Host Country, Activity 1.2.1 may be implemented through 
public sector (Option A) or through private sector (Option B) in which case the Executing Entity 
arrangement will be as follows:  
 
a. Option A : If the relevant Host Country chooses to implement Activity 1.2.1 through 
its national utilities, the Host Country acting through its relevant Ministry(ies) will be 
the Executing Entity. The Host Countries will be responsible for procuring the storage 
equipment based on AfDB procurement rules and operating the Storage Sub- project.  
 
b. Option B : The Host Country may choose to implement Activity 1.2.1 through private 
sector players. The Host Country will procure the Storage Company through a 
competitive process or otherwise in accordance with relevant national laws, 
international best practice,  AfDB procurement requirements , and the eligibility criteria .  
Following due diligence, AfDB will finance the Storage Sub -projects in accordance 
with the Eligibility Criteria. The Storage Company  will be the EE in case Option B is 
selected for Activity 1.2.1.  
 
Whether Option A or Option B is selected will be determined after the FP approval, but  no later 
than AfDB Board approval of the relevant Sub- project .


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 67 
 
 
  
18 The Ministry of Planning of Niger signs all sovereign agreements.  The storage activities will be supported through a US $ 40 million reimbursable grant from the GCF, 
which will be blended with US $ 50 million loan proceeds from AfDB and US $ 20 million equity 
participation by the sponsors. The GCF reimbursable grant is critical to enable these investments 
and will accordingly act as a de- risking instrument. At the current cost of technology, storage systems 
by the private sector require subsidies. Various financial instruments for availing these subsidies have been considered and assessed, for instance an equity contribution by  GCF. However, the legal 
and contractual arrangements required by the AE to deploy equity instruments present a mismatch 
with regards to the foreseen implementation timelines. Also, the approach to large scale storage for 
grid stability taken by most of the G5 Sahel countries is to treat these assets as part of their overall 
grid infrastructure. Loans have been assessed as well and they present several limitations. At current 
market cost for storage, increasing the repayment contingency will result in a negative Net Present 
Value for storage projects. Thus , a reimbursable grant with triggering conditions as presented below, 
to mirror an equity investment is the most suitable market -based instrument.  
  
Implementation arrangements for grid investments ( Activit y 1.1.1 and 1.1.2)  
 
In each Host Country, the Programme’s DtP focal point will ensure coordination of the Programme’s 
activities. In each Host Country , the implementation arrangements include a Project Management 
Unit (PMU) structure comprised of technical  experts. The PMU will oversee the validation of technical 
and feasibility studies and the implementation of the financing plan until project commissioning and 
beyond.  
 
In Host Countries, subsidiary  agreements will be signed by the responsible ministries.  The national 
utilities (which coordinates the implementation of country activities) may  host Project Management 
Unit (PMUs) and would be supported by technical experts. The PMU  would  oversee the validation of 
technical and feasibility studies and the implementation of the financing plan. Each country will 
determine the exact composition of its PMU, which will be finalized in the inception phase of the 
Facility and before the first disbursement.  
 
With the exception of Niger, the Ministries of Finance of the Host Countries would sign relevant 
agreements.18 The Host Countries  will also act through their relevant agencies with the mandate to 
oversee or implement activities under the Facility . The relevant Ministries of Energy, as the Technical 
Delivery Arm, provides overall coordination of the activities of the facility in the country. They also 
have the mandate to carry Government activities . The  Project Management Unit (PMU) will be 
established w ithin the National Utilities (State -Owned Utilities) for each country:  
• In Niger : Société Nigérienne d'Electricité (NIGELEC)  
• In Mali : Électricité du Mali (EDM -SA)  
• In Mauritania : Société Mauritanienne d’Électricité  (SOMELEC )  
• In Chad: National Electricity Company (SNE)  
• In Burkina Faso: Société Nationale d’Eléctricité du Burkina (SONABEL)  
The flow of funds at the country level is provided in Figure 6 below.


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 67 
 
 
  
19 AfDB is the EE with the focus here as the provision of fina ncial instruments, and not the execution of the 
underlying activities  Figure 6 : Implementation arrangements with flow of funds at  the country level:  
 
 
Implementation Arrangements for Component 2  
 
Guided by each country´s energy master plan and the DtP  National Roadmaps, solar integration 
studies are being carried out through a grant of $5.05 million from the Sustainable Energy Fund for 
Africa (SEFA) approved by the Board of the AfDB in December 2020 which will identify suitable 
geographical areas and optimum i njection places for solar IPPs  in each of the G5 Sahel countr ies. 
The projects to be supported will notably include those identified in the G -5 DtP national roadmaps  
(see project pipeline) and projects identified through new competitive procurement  processes.  As 
far as the latter are concerned, for each country, suitable pieces of land will be identified close to 
transmission lines for the power plants and the right of way, after considering social and 
environmental impacts and the outcome of solar  integration studies.    
 
In addition, the AfDB and Africa 50 are considering development of an IPP procurement programme  
whereby Africa 50 will act as a surrogate sponsor to develop the projects and make them ready for 
competitive for private sector participation. The proposed collaboration with Africa 50 targets the 
addition of  generation capacity at scale while facilitating governments participation.   
 
The Executing Entity for Output 2.1 will be AfDB.19 A transaction advisor , where applicable, will be 
procured to support the Host C ountries and the Accredited Entity  in the implementation of this Output .  
AfDB shall provide  debt financing and partial risk guarantees for IPP Sub- projects, that comprise of 
(i) IPP Sub -projects that are already in the DtP  road maps and (ii) those projected to be selected by 
AfDB in accordance with the Eligibility Criteria.


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 67 
 
 
 The AfDB will avail a full  suite of its instruments including senior debt, Partial Risk Guarantee and 
may perform the role of a Mandated Lead Arranger role to mobilize  additional financing where 
necessary. Negotiation and signing of  an implementation agreement PRG (Part ial Risk Guarantee) 
between the winning IPPs will also take place. AfDB will follow its standard project processing cycle. 
These elements will facilitate the bankability of the projects leading to successful implementation of 
the solar PV IPP investments a nd developers deliver the solar PV farms on the grounds of this 
financial close.  
 Table 8:  Solar PV targets in the G5 Sahel countries  
Country  2030 PV target 
in MW  Existing PV 
plants in MW  Identified 
projects in MW  Uncommitted 
capacity in MW  
Burkina Faso  820 34 421 365 
Chad  702 0 383 319 
Mali 977 50 1,426  - 
Mauritania  420 85 5 330 
Niger  442 7 248 187 
TOTAL  3,361  176 2,483  1,201 
 
The implementation arrangements for these activities are  graphically described in figure 4 below : 
 
Figure 4:  Implementation arrangements for IPPs  
 
b) Partial Risk Guarantee supporting IPPs under output 2.1  
 
The proposed AfDB PRG under co -guarantee arrangement with the GCF is intended to address the 
payment risks to the IPPs specifically, component 2 of t he DtP initiative which seeks to add 500 MW 
of new grid- connected solar PV capacity. The need for the AfDB guarantee instrument stems from 
the fact that while the DtP initiative is transformative and will set the utilities on a path to recovery 
through low  cost of generation, the utilities are currently not creditworthy off -takers. Furthermore,


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 67 
 
 
  
20 Technical Assistance Beneficiaries may include relevant Ministries, the Utilities, renewable energy agencies, 
sector regulators, cooperatives, and other stakeholders (including women groups and other relevant non- state 
actors)  most of the utilities in the region have no track -record of dealing with multiple IPPs; therefore, 
increasing the need for various forms of credit enhancement instruments as a condition for most 
lenders and sponsors to reach financial close.  
 
The need for the PRG also stems from the financial situation of most of the off -takers across many 
African countries and in the G -5 Sahel countries. As a result, IPPs and lender s do require credit 
enhancement instruments to support the liquidity situation of the off takers .  
The proposed executing entity is the AfDB , as Accredited Entity, for the purpose of providing 
financing.  
 
 
 
Figure 5:  Implementation arrangements for PRG  
Monitoring and evaluation of the PRG will be carried out by AfDB from effectiveness  of the Guarantee 
Agreement , covering construction and commissioning phase and project operations phase , and will 
include monitoring of environmental and social performance and other project indicators as required 
under the Project agreement between the Project company and AfDB.  
 
During the project construction and commissioning phase, monitoring, evaluation and supervision 
will be conducted in accordance with the supervision procedures applicable to the senior lenders to 
the project. The monitoring will be done through construction progress reports, quarterly supervision reports, environmental and social management reports and technical advisors reports. A supervision 
of the project will be undertaken at regular intervals to be agreed with the Bank’s portfolio team.  
 
Implementation Arrangements for Component 3  
Implementation of technical assistance program under activities 3.1.1, 3.1.2 and 3.2.1:  
The Host C ountries through their relevant agencies are responsible for ensuring the implementation 
of these technical assistance activities to build the capacity of stakeholders ( TA beneficiaries )
20 and 
for the fulfilment of the  stated  development objective. The PMU in each country will play the role of


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 67 
 
 
 overall coordination. The selection and engagement of consultants and the procurement of services 
shall be carried out in accordance with the Accredited Entity’s applicable policies, rul es and 
procedures. The contracts may be signed between the Utility and the services providers whereas the 
fund will be released from the Ministry in Charge for signing behalf of the country upon each payment 
request.  
Figure 7: Implementation arrangements with flow of funds at country´s level for TA activities:  
 
 
 
Implementation Arrangements for Activity 3.2.2 -  Match -making events to leverage private 
investments:  
 
The African Development Bank through the Bank -hosted DtP Taskforce will lead the implementation 
of this component with support from (i) G5 Sahel focal points (representing interests of all countries), 
(ii) AfDB country offices; and (iii) PMU lead from each country. The DtP Taskforce will also closely 
cooperate with the Africa Investment Forum team and with other investment platforms, such as the 
Climate I nvestment Platform to amplify the impact of the match- making events and seize synergies 
where possible with other events.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grant
GCF Grant
CountryMinistry in Charge of
Signing on behalf of the Government
(e.gMinistry of Finance)
Ministry of Energy
PMU Relevant Agency or Utility SuppliersSubsidiary AgreementFunding Activity Agreement
Countries are EE on TA Grant operations 
Inter -Ministerial Letter
PMU arrangement
Letter of implementationService
ContractsFlow of funds
Contractual Agreements


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 67 
 
 
 Figure 8: Flow of funds for Activity 3.2.2.  
 
 
 
Flow of funds  
 
Different financial instruments are sought for the Facility with proceeds being allocated  based on 
their fit  with the activities of the Theory of Chang e. The instruments have been selected to 
appropriately address financial and regulatory barriers identified in the G5 Sahel countries.  For 
instance,  highly conce ssional loans  to the public sector are propose d to finance pub lic infrastructure 
such as the upgrade of grids. Storage could be pub licly owned. The storage infrastructure  that could 
interest the private sector investments  does not show sufficient financi al viability and will require mu ch 
higher conce ssionality, thus  the request for a reimbursable grant instrument on componen t 1 that 
will enable the viability of these activities.  Loans will be blended where appropriate with other 
mobilized resourc es by the accredited en tity to provide long-term finance at viable interest rates to 
the private sector on IPPs, enabling the projects’ financial sustainability and overall banka bility.  
 
The proceeds are allocated to the 3 windows  of the Facility according to the following flow of funds  
diagram (Figure 9 ), distinguishing between the different types of financial instruments provided by 
GCF funding and co- finance from AfDB.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desert to Power 
Taskforce
Service ProvidersTerms of Reference
Contract AwardExpressions of InterestAfDB Procurement Processes
Bid Submission
Bid EvaluationsShortlisting 
Service 
ContractsGrantFlow of Funds
Contractual Agreements


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 67 
 
 
   
Figure 9:  Diagram of Flow of Funds  
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Alignment with climate targets:  
The countries in the Sahel region are committed to tackling adaptation and mitigation needs and have 
embarked on a low emission growth pathway by identifying strategies and priority actions that achieve emission reductions while contributing to the socio- economic development of the region. The 
governments of the G5 Sahel countries are also interested in pursuing low -carbon economic growth 
strategies, which can dovetail with their climate change adaptation and mitigation plans. Common 
priority sectors identi
fied in both the countries’ economic development plans and NDCs include 
climate -smart agriculture, sustainable land management, and increasing access to energy with a 
strong focus on developing their renewable energy potentials. The Facility is fully align ed with the 
climate targets of the beneficiary countries as evidenced in their submitted NDCs. Supporting these 
countries to transform their desert area into an opportunity to adopt a low emission path while 
addressing issues of energy security and achievi ng adaptation co -benefits at the same time is at the 
core of GCF mandate.  
 
Concessionality:  
According to the Climate Change vulnerability index 2017, projections estimate that climate change 
threat will lead to an equivalent of 2- 4% annual loss in GDP in t he Sahel region by 2040. While there 
is an established co -relation between energy security and countries’ GDP, the overall economic 
situation of the G5 Sahel countries does not allow them to efficiently address the growing energy


---
*Page 36*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 67 
 
 
 demands with a national in tegrated utility model as a vehicle to invest in generation, transmission and 
distribution assets. The cost of electricity generation is high due to the countries’ dependence on fossil 
fuels, faltering grid systems and high technical and commercial losses.  The balance sheet of the 
utilities is not strong, as these national utilities are themselves recurrently subsidized by the States 
given the gap between their revenues and costs. The five countries are among the Least Developed  
Countries (LDCs) and their c urrent debt levels make them eligible to seeking highly concessional 
terms to finance key public infrastructure. The private sector is also shy to engage in utility scale solar 
plants in the context of single utility off -takers, given the balance sheets of  national utilities. Power 
wheeling arrangements would be much better for the private sector, but these require having in place 
common infrastructure for power transmission which the countries cannot currently finance on their 
own. Based on the aforementioned barriers and opportunities, GCF concessionality is required to 
achieve the following objectives:  
 
• To incentivize private sector involvement in the solar sector.  
• To finance public infrastructure projects that will enable further low -emission investments  in 
the sector.  
 
Energy tariffs are high in most of the countries. This is attributed to the high dependence on fossil fuels, the inability to attract investments in power generation at scale, and inefficiencies along the 
value chain—such as high distribution losses, relat ively low billing collection rates, and small isolated 
grid systems.  
Without GCF contribution, the electricity tariffs will need to increase to achieve 
bankability, leaving the poorest of the population unable to be connected and the public utilities unable 
to invest in decarbonizing the energy sector. The blended financing structure will assist the Facility’s 
projects in achieving financial viability with a lower average electricity tariff and attractive conditions 
for private sector investments, ultimate ly enhancing the bankability of solar projects that are 
competitive with electricity produced from fossil fuels energy.  
 
Unlocking the private sector on grid- connected solar:  
The use of GCF funding will facilitate private sector investments at a catalytic  scale. Amongst other 
constraints to be addressed are the low levels of private sector returns on any solar investment, given 
that power grids are only capable of absorbing injected power a few hours per day and power 
purchase agreements would mostly be based on injected power in the grids. Therefore, the GCF funding will be an enabler for IPP projects in the Sahel region, catalyzing private sector investment 
that is not readily available.  
The DtP National Roadmaps validated by the countries indicate that t he G5 Sahel countries have 
already identified the potential for grid connected PV and the need for the private sector to play a 
pivotal role in meeting those targets (see Table 9 below). For the private sector to be able to invest in 
grid connected solar, the GCF contribution is needed to ensure that IPPs can access quality 
contractual frameworks, that the country’s legal and institutional framework are in place to support 
private sector operations, and that appropriate finance is available.  
 To partially offset the financial situation of state utilities, a PRG co -guaranteed by GCF amounting to 
US$ 20 million has been proposed. PRGs are effective tools to insure investors against political risks emanating from government undertakings that the market is not able to bear or adequately measure 
and can therefore attract or provide access to new sources of financing and reduce effective financing 
costs.  
 
Ancillary services for grid integration:  
In markets where solar energy dealings have taken off, the portion of power grids which is required to 
connect new solar plants to existing networks is usually paid for by the public sector. In the G5 Sahel 
countries, asking private sector as it´s done today to cover these additional costs, makes investments 
simply more capital intensive while slowing paybacks under the current tariff regimes.


---
*Page 37*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 67 
 
 
 Market transformation:  
 
By building the capacities of institutional stakeholders such as grid operators and regulators this 
Facility will improve considerably the enabling conditions for decarbonizing the power supply systems 
of the G5 Sahel countries. The power sector in the G5 Sahel countries is characterized by low energy 
access rates, by a generation system that  relies on fossil fuels and that is unable to meet growing 
demand for electricity, and by power networks and infrastructure that are inadequate to integrate 
larger shares of variable renewable energy sources. While some progress has been made over the 
last few years and the countries’ governments are committed to transform the energy sector towards 
a low -carbon pathway, the potential for more widespread deployment of renewable energy solutions 
remains largely untapped.   
 
The Facility will create a conduciv e environment and market opportunities for solar energy through a 
well-structured TA program. In this regard, it is also expected that the technical assistance activities 
under the Desert to Power will create a clear and reliable environment for private se ctor solar 
investments and the development of adequate capacity of national institutions in the G5 Sahel 
countries to attract private sector investment and ensure the long- term sustainability of the renewable 
energy sector. Technical assistance support wil l also help to (i) establish transparent and sound 
regulatory frameworks for competitive tenders to attract private sector investment for on- grid solar 
generation; (ii) review and/or develop tariff methodology, structures and its associated financial 
model s; (iii) support the establishment of a common tax regimes and credit enhancement solutions 
for solar projects in the G5 Sahel.  
 
Technology and Innovation:  
Innovation is a key characteristic of the Desert to Power Facility, within which innovation will take 
place in the areas of a) deployment of private solar PV at scale in the G5 Sahel countries, b) 
technology innovation in grid- scale storage.  
a) Deployment of  private solar PV at scale in the G5 Sahel countries  
Currently there is only 176 MWp of installed PV capacity in the region, ranging from 0 MW in Chad 
to 85 MW in Mauritania. As a result of this programme, the PV capacity will increase by over 350%. 
This d eployment of private sector solar PV at scale in the participating countries constitutes a step-
change supply of renewable energy and will result in significant business and sector innovation in 
grid-connected solar in the region. While these technologies have been deployed at scale in other 
countries the innovation represented by Desert to Power relates directly to the scale and location of these systems.  
b) Technology innovation in grid -scale storage  
While there is significant worldwide experience with pumped storage systems, other grid- scale 
storage solutions are highly innovative and have not, to date, been deployed in the region. By way of example, large- scale Battery Energy Storage Systems based on Li -
ion systems are currently 
deployed in isolated commercial settings, almost exclusively in developed countries. In contrast other 
battery technologies, more suited to stationary and developing country settings, such as Sodium -ion, 
Lithium -sulphur, Redox Flow, and Zinc -air batteries are at experimental staged. Outside of battery 
technologies, options such as Compressed Air Energy Storage and High- Power Flywheels have been 
deployed in a limited number of cases in developed countries. Another potential storage technology 
is Liquid Air Energy Storage where pil ots have been carried out and the first 50MW storage facility is 
currently under construction in the United Kingdom.  
 
The programme will bring about a transformation of the market for solar PV in the participating 
countries. Key elements of the transformat ion include:


---
*Page 38*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 67 
 
 
  
 
 • Scaling up and replication: The Facility will provide a high potential opportunity for scaling-
up the uptake of variable renewable energy in the Sahel region, through grid and ancillary 
investments that will contribute to further absorption of  solar capacity.  
• Knowledge sharing and learning: The Facility creates potential for knowledge and learning 
for institutional players such as transmission system operators and regulators on efficient 
dispatch of variable renewable energy but also will create lessons learnt for efficient replication 
across  the other Sahel countries. Additionally, lessons learned, and knowledge generated in 
the G5 Sahel countries will inform replication in the remaining DtP countries.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The Facility will reinforce key institutions (ministries of energy, regulators, utilities etc.) with increased 
abilities to manage electricity systems with higher shares of variable renewable energy. By making 
direct investments in the grid and key infrast ructure that enable solar integration during 
implementation and beyond, the proposed activities will increase the system flexibility and 
stability.   The strengthened system will ensure the sector transition to green grids with high share of 
solar generation.  
 
The development of regional solar parks with battery storage near the regional interconnectors, is 
expected to provide more ancillary services into the system and help G5 Sahel countries to meet the 
regional requirements in terms of primary and secondary frequency and voltage control. The system 
can then efficiently participate in the regional power market under development with green electricity.    
 
The PRG will ensure sustained and consistent payments to the IPPs and indirectly, the project 
lenders. It is expected that with the PRG, and the improvement of their financial situation, the off -
takers will have a  track -record that will attract IPPs to invest in renewable energy sector with reduced 
needs for credit enhancements going forward.  
 
The technical  assistance provided under Component 3 will allow existing policies and regulatory 
frameworks to be operationalized to encourage more private sector investments.  By building the 
capacities of institutional stakeholders such as grid operators and regulator s the program will support 
the decarbonization of the power supply systems of the l G5 Sahel countries. Hence, the 
implementation partners will benefit from strengthened PIUs which will ensure the successful 
achievement of program objectives and long- term delivery. The program is designed to build technical 
and operational institutional capacity alongside the facilitation of new solar energy investments and 
energy planning. This enhanced capacity –  built at both regional and national levels –  will ensure th e 
long- term public ownership of the program.  
By contributing to the energy security of these countries the DtP program will also achieve significant 
socioeconomic and gender benefits through capacity -building, job creation during and beyond the 
program, and through economic value- added with the use of clean electricity for industrial use to 
transform the energy landscape in the 5 countries.  
 
Finally, the program will further provide potential for knowledge and learning on battery energy storage systems (associated assets of the regional solar parks) for institutional players such as transmission 
system operators and regulators on efficient dispatch of variable renewable energy.


---
*Page 39*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 67 
   
 
 FINANCING  INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii)  Total amount  Currency  
150 million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Public sector loans  40   Up to 40  years   Up to 10  years   As agreed in 
Term Sheet  
(ii) Private sector loans  42 Up to 20  years  Up to5  years   
(iv) Guarantees  20 same as senior 
loans  N/A  
(v) Reimbursable grants  40 20 N/A  
(vi) Grants  8  N/A N/A  
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
816.7  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currenc
y Tenor & 
grace   Seniority  
AfDB  Senior 
Loans  
 299.621 million 
USD ($)   Up to 20    As 
agreed 
in Term Sheet  
 senior  
 
AfDB  Grant  10 million 
USD ($)   N/A  
Enter    
N/A 
AfDB  Sovereign 
loans  50 million 
USD ($)  TBD  
senior  
AfDB  Guarantee  20 million 
USD ($)    20 
 years  Pari passu  
Other co -financiers  Senior 
Loans  275.4  million 
USD ($)  TBD senior  
Sponsor/shareholder  Equity  161.7  million 
USD ($)  N/A junior  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency 
966.7  
 
 million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)  GCF investment will leverage an estimated US$ 816.7 million from the 
AfDB, private sector equity, and other co -financing. The Program  size is 
estimated at US$ 966.7  million, including AfDB, GCF and other investors’ 
participation.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Component  Financing source  Indicative Amount (USD million)  
Component 1: Grid investment 
to de- risk Solar IPPS GCF  80 
AfDB  100 
 
21 Up to USD 50 million of this amount may be provided as sovereign loans depending on the implementation 
option for the storage system.


---
*Page 40*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 67 
   
 Private Sector  20 
Total Component  200 
 
Component 2: Incremental 
finance for solar power 
generation  GCF  62 
AfDB  269.6  
Other co -financing  417.1 
Total Component  748.7  
Component 3: Technical 
Assistance  GCF  5.6 
AfDB  9.4 
Component Total  15 
Project Management  3 
Grand Total  966.7  
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 
page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
The DtP Facility has a strong focus on building the capacity of target countries’ stakeholders in operating, 
maintaining a modern energy system with high shares of solar capacity, and in designing a conducive 
enabling environment that is able to attract private sector investments for long- term sustainable 
development. In particular, Component 3 focuses on building the capaci ty of energy sector  stakehol ders 
(utilities, transmission system  operators, and regulators ) on demand mana gement  and operation of grids with 
higher shares of solar. This will have a strong gender focus to ensure women’s inclusion in the renewable 
energy workforce and by addressing women’s barriers to participation in solar value chains. Additionally, 
capacity building will emphasize integrating gender into sector st rategies and policies.  
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s 
Initial Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Access to clean energy is key to the implementation of NDCs and mitigation goals of the G5 Sahel countries. 
Given that the energy mix in the target region heavily depends on fossil -fuel based electricity, low -carbon 
energy generation can be achieved by tapping into the vast solar potential in the region.  
 
The impact potential of the Programme  aligns with the Green Climate Fund’ objectives and result areas, i.e. 
the reduction of CO2 emissions through displacement of fossil -fueled electricity use by implementing and 
installing of clean and solar energy generation capacity.  
 
The Facility has the potential to deliver substantial climate mitigation impacts which are estimated at over 14 
MtCO2eq for the 5 countries over the programme lifetime. This impact will be achieved inter alia  by adding 
500 MW of solar energy generation capacity, which will significantly increase the share of clean energy in 
the generation mix across the five countries.  
 
• Expected tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided:  
Annual: 635,100 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime: 14,448,525  t CO 2 eq


---
*Page 41*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 67 
   
  
• Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries:   
Direct beneficiaries: 3.5 million people, of which 50% female 
Indirect beneficiaries: 0.7 million, of which 50% female 
 
Greenhouse gas emission impacts of the DtP Facility have been estimated by  developing a model for each 
of the main types of eligible investment that the facility will fund, namely:  
 
1. Solar grid connected PV via an Independent Power Producer (IPP) –  DtP programme 
subcomponent 2.1, incorporating subcomponent 1.1  
2. Storage for grid stabilisation –  subcomponent 1.2  
 
The results of the analysis are given below. The total emission reduction over the lifetime of the investments 
is 14.4 Mt CO2eq.  The methodology used to calculate emission reductions and detailed analysis are provided 
in Annex 22.  
 
GHG emission reduction summary  
Project types              
1. Solar PV IPP  Burkina 
Faso  Chad Mali Mauritania  Niger  TOTAL  
Annual emission 
reductions             
113,165              
116,386              
106,387                 
120,362              
133,327              
589,628  
Lifetime emission 
reductions          
2,539,787           
2,617,560           
2,382,939              
2,738,245           
3,033,194         
13,311,724  
              
2. Storage for grid 
stabilisation  Burkina 
Faso  Chad Mali Mauritania  Niger  TOTAL  
Annual emission 
reductions               
15,432                
13,437                
16,604                           
-                          
-                  
45,472  
Lifetime emission 
reductions             
385,790              
335,918              
415,093                           
-                          
-             
1,136,801  
              
TOTAL Burkina 
Faso  Chad Mali Mauritania  Niger  TOTAL  
Annual emission 
reductions             
128,597              
129,823              
122,990                 
120,362              
133,327              
635,100  
Lifetime emission 
reductions          
2,925,577           
2,953,478           
2,798,032              
2,738,245           
3,033,194         
14,448,525  
The 3.5 million direct beneficiaries and 0.7 million indirect are calculated on the basis of an average monthly 
grid connection consumption of 105 kWh/month in the region, and 5.08 people per household. The 
calculations are given on rows 56 to 76 on the "O verall economic analysis" tab in annex 3B.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Scaling up and replication  
The Facility will provide a high potential opportunity for scaling- up the uptake of variable renewable energy 
in the Sahel region, through grid and ancillary investments that will contribute to  further absorption of solar 
capacity. Component 1 will focus on grid investments to de- risk solar IPPs and pave the way for the uptake 
of a regional solar market. Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) in Component 2 will be commercially viable 
under current CAPEX benchmarks in the region as indicated in the financial mode l. With favorable loan


---
*Page 42*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 67 
   
 conditions coupled with partial risk guarantees, the financial risk perceived by developers will be moderate 
and the prices of PPAs will be more competitive than the cost of service of utilities which energy mix depends 
mainly on the rmal generation. The lower cost of the energy mix due to solar generation will improve the 
financial viability of power companies and allow the development of new solar projects.  
 
Knowledge sharing and learning  
The Facility provides an opportunity for inst itutional players such as transmission system operators and 
regulators to familiarize themselves with technical aspects related to integration of variable renewable 
energy . The  lessons learnt from the Facility will allow for efficient replication across the other DtP Sahel 
countries.  
 
Creation of an enabling environment  
Harnessing the solar potential of the G5 Sahel countries in an economically viable manner requires an 
enabling environment that allows for private sector participation, on a commercial basis, on power wheeling 
arrangements and a regional solar market which is being supported by various ongoing and planned 
investments from the AfDB and other development partners. By putting in place grid infrastructure  in 
connection with IPPs  and enabling energy policy frameworks, the Desert to Power Facility is establishing 
conditions for transforming the energy sector of the G5 Sahel countries and shifting them towards a low 
emission path. While enabling more private sector investments in po wer generation, the Facility helps 
establish a clear paradigm shift in the energy sector of these countries from the current situation where 
national integrated utilities are largely operating as vertically integrated utilities . Component 2 will address 
the lack of appropriate commercial finance (i.e. , inadequate pricing, inflexible grace periods and loan tenors 
that are not adapted to the characteristics of renewable energy investments  in the G5 Sahel countries ) to 
achieve uptake in private sector investments across the 5 countries with the provision of finance for new 
solar IPPs.  
 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
The Facility will enable stakeholders to operationalize regulatory frameworks and policies that encourage 
private sector par ticipation. Through component 3, the Facility will work with institutional stakeholders to 
revise regulatory texts to make provisions for private sector participation taking into account gender 
considerations. Specifically, the TA support will (i) establis h transparent and sound regulatory frameworks 
for competitive tenders to attract private sector investment for on- grid solar generation; (ii) review and/or 
develop tariff methodology, structures and its associated financial models; (iii) support the establ ishment of  
common tax regimes and credit enhancement solutions for solar projects in the G5 Sahel.   
 
Contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans  
The outcomes and i mpact of the Facility is consistent with and contributes to the G5 Sahel countries’ national 
climate change strategies and plans. The G5 Sahel countries have committed to use their largely untapped 
solar potential under the Desert to Power f ramework to transform their growing desert area into a solar 
energy generation source that transforms  their entire power generation mix. Amid these objectives, the G5 
Sahel countries have articulated thei r policies around a green and climate resilient vision expressed in their 
updated NDCs, where they have also recognized the energy sector to be a priority contributor to their climate 
action efforts.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approxim ately 1 page)  
The Facility is aligned with, and will broadly contribute to achieving  several Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) in each target country including:  
• Goal 1. No Poverty –  end poverty, in all forms, everywhere.  
• Goal 5. Gender Equality – achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls.  
• Goal 7. Affordable and clean energy –  ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern 
energy for all.  
• Goal 8. Industry Innovation and Infrastructure - build resilient infrast ructure, promote inclusive and 
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation.


---
*Page 43*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 67 
   
 • Goal 10: Reduced Inequalities - reduce income inequality within and among countries.  
• Goal 13: Climate Action -  Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by regulating 
emissions and promoting developments in renewable energy.  
• Goal 17: Partnerships for the Goals -  Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the 
global partnership for sustainable development.  
 
In addition to climate mitigation impact s and to contributing to the energy security of the target countries, the 
Desert to Power Facility will contribute to several environmental, socio- economic and adaptation co- benefits.  
 
Economic co- benefits: The Facility activities will generate various economic benefits during and after its 
implementation. The programme will achieve significant socioeconomic benefits through employment 
creation during and beyond the project and through economic value- add wi th the use of clean electricity for 
industrial transformation. By removing barriers for investments, the programme will enable investments in 
the energy sector thus supporting the economic growth of the beneficiary countries. It is expected that the 
G5 Sah el countries will improve their investment environment and that the Facility will create a sustainable 
market for solar IPPs. The solar projects will reduce reliance on high diesel generation resulting in significant 
annual savings for the cash- strapped ut ilities thereby supporting their long- term sustainability. The Facility  
will also contribute to reduced subsidies to cushion the electricity consumers , with such savings channeled 
to the much- needed social sectors of health, education, water and sanitation.   
 
Social co- benefits:  Covering the cost for grid ancillary equipment for power plants integration will help 
achieve fairer tariffs which will result in lower electricity prices for end users. The investments are expected 
to generate jobs during construct ion and operation phases with positive impact on vulnerable segments of 
the population targeting the female and youth. Furthermore, the IPP projects will facilitate knowledge and 
technology transfer and create opportunities for linkages with SMEs  in the va lue-chain.  
 
Environmental co -benefits : The Facility will help displace a large amount of fossil fuel generation helping 
the five countries increase the average proportion of solar generation from the current average of 10%. This 
translates into significant environmental benefits especially co nsidering the heavy usage of diesel generators 
to cover electricity needs. Further, rural populations in the target countries are dependent on biomass and 
non-renewable sources for their household energy consumption. Considering future climate scenarios  and 
a business as usual approach, the Sahel population is  expected to continue  cutting trees as fuelwood, which 
has direct effects on deforestation and soil fertility and ultimately on agricultural yields. The Facility is 
expected to drive environmental co- benefits and to combat deforestation by increasing access to electricity, 
which in turn is expected to reduce the need for  firewood. It is to be noted in this regard that DtP is a flagship 
program under the Great Green Wall initiative.  
 
Adaptation co- benefi ts: The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility seeks to enable the African countries of the 
Sahel region to adopt a low -emission path by transforming their desert area into an opportunity to address 
their energy security needs using clean technologies, while delivering multiple adaptation co -benefits. 
Renewable energy provides a reliable source of clean energy which by virtue of geographic distribution 
enhance both the instantaneous availability of energy and the long -term resilience of the grid. Removing the 
reliance on fossil fuel processing and supply chains significantly reduces risks associated with direct climate-
induced issues such as transport and indirect issues associated with broader geopolitical issues linked to 
climate change. Reduced running costs m akes renewable energy resilient to economic shocks induced by 
events such as droughts, floods, pandemics and political unrest. Renewable energy assets are no longer at 
risk from domestic or international policy transition and economies driven by renewable energy will in future 
have a strong advantage in accessing international trade. The Facility is a massive opportunity to address 
the structural challenges which have held many citizens of the G5  Sahel  countries in poverty, and to do so 
in a manner which is aligned with the objective of the Paris Agreement.


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 67 
   
 D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The Sahel region is home to the 40% of the African population that does not have access to electricity. The 
G5 Sahel countries are according to the Gain Index in the top five countries in the world that are the most 
exposed to climate change. According to the IMF more than 85 million sub- Saharan African are expected to 
be forced t o migrate by 2050 due to climate change threats5, and 4.2 million people in the G5 Sahel region 
are already displaced22.  
 
The climate -sensitive agriculture sector represents the largest sector of G5 Sahel economies and provides 
livelihoods to the majority  of the population. Climatic variability and extremes experienced in the region (e.g. 
droughts and reduced rainfall) and increasing temperatures present the main climatic challenges to 
agriculture in the target countries. The impacts of climate change are likely to include increased water and 
irrigation requirements under higher temperatures and reduced rainfall, and thus increased competition for 
water resources, as well as the increased incidence of pest and disease outbreaks.  
 
Women and girls are more v ulnerable to climate change due to strong gender -based inequalities in the G5 
Sahel countries. Access to energy, salaried employment or entrepreneurship in the energy sector are 
gendered issues, with women entrepreneurs, salaried, and end -users experiencing different challenges 
when accessing electricity or applying in the energy sector t han men.  
 
Access to finance is one of the main barriers for investments in clean energy in the G5 Sahel countries. 
Additionally, the utilities in the 5 countries have struggled to manage the challenges of increased cost of 
generation, sustained growth in energy demand, and need to significantly increase energy access. 
Generation costs are likely to increase and therefore the utilities will need to sustain their performance 
through new investments. Creditworthiness of utilities is also mentioned as a barrier for investments23. At the 
same time, public investments need to continue taking place, but have been happening at the cost of an 
unsustainable indebtedness trend further exacerbated by Covid- 19, which needs to be shifted towards more 
concessional terms.  
 
G5 Sahel countries are among the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and have limited institutional capacity 
to tackle their own energy security using renewable resources such as solar and are prone to internal security 
challenges, where capital investments  that are subject to long term returns are often deemed too risky for 
traditional investors. Additionally, inadequate legal frameworks hinder private sector participation in the 
absence of clear incentives. Fiscal and customs barriers, the lack of authorit y of the regulators, high tariffs 
finance and lack of transparency which further limit the countries’ attractiveness to investors.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Existing national climate strategies and alignment with existing policies  
G5 Sahel countries have committed to use their untapped solar potential under the DtP Framework and to 
transform their growing desert area into a solar energy generation source that changes their entire power 
generation mix while deliveri ng climate adaptation co -benefits. Amid these objectives, the G5 Sahel 
countries have articulated their policies around a green and climate resilient vision expressed in their updated 
NDCs, where they have also recognized the energy sector to be a priority  contributor to their climate action 
efforts. Various policies and regulatory reforms have started or have been put in place with different progress 
statuses with the aim to create an enabling environment to support their NDC goals.  
 
The overarching strat egy for DtP with the five priority areas was endorsed by the Heads of State in a 
dedicated Desert to Power Summit in September 2019. In addition, detailed national DtP Roadmaps have 
been finalized and validated by the countries complemented by a regional S ahel G5 Roadmap. These outline 
the specific targets, priority actions to achieve along the five areas and an assessment of an initial list of 
 
6 IMF Working Paper, ‘Africa Rising, Harnessing the Demographic Dividend’, 2014. Accessible here: 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp14143.pdf   
23 Climatescope 2020


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 67 
   
 identified priority projects. The action plan identifies 5 priority areas for intervention, 3 of which are the 
components of this Facility. Additionally, all G5 Sahel countries mention the energy sector in their NDCs as 
part of the national priorities for climate change mitigation. Key priority areas include integrating renewables 
in the energy mix, promotion of wind and solar PV and increased commitment to climate change mitigation 
targets.  
 
Under the Desert to Power Framework, the G5 Sahel countries have outlined their 2030 priority action areas 
and targets for the electricity sector, which are summarised in the tabl e below.  
 
Table 10: G5 Sahel countries 2030 priority action areas and targets for the electricity sector  
Country 
Identified 
priority 
action areas 
for the 
electricity 
sector  Burkina Faso  Chad  Mali Mauritania  Niger  
Pillar 1. 
Expansion of 
utility scale 
solar  Install 820 
MW of 
additional 
solar capacity  Deliver 702 
MW on -grid 
solar 
capacity  Install 977 
MW of 
additional 
solar 
capacity  Install 420 MW 
of additional 
solar capacity  Install 442 
MW additional 
solar capacity  
Pillar 2. 
Strengthenin
g of national 
grids and 
expansion of 
regional 
network  Develop 1 
GW of 
interconnectio
n capacity  Strengthen 
T&D grid with 
> US $ 300 
million of 
investment, 
to allow new 
on-grid 
connections 
and public 
lighting  Expand the 
network to 
support 658 
MW of 
import 
requirem ent
s Develop the 
network to 
increase 
exports  Develop 350 
MW of 
interconnectio
n capacity  
Pillar 5. 
Setting up a 
favorable 
environment 
and training Ensure a 
strong 
mobilization  of 
private sector 
investment  Ensure a 
strong 
mobilization  
of private 
sector 
investment  Ensure a 
strong 
mobilization 
of private 
sector 
investment  Ensure a 
strong 
mobilisation of 
private sector 
investment  Ensure a 
strong 
mobilization of 
private sector 
investment  
 
Capacity of AfDB to Deliver  the Programme’s Outcomes  
 
AfDB is well placed as an Accredited Entity (AE) to undertake the planned activities building on a close 
engagement with the relevant national authorities and a broad range of financial and technical partners. The 
Bank  has been and is still active in the G5 -Sahel  countries , despite the political situation. Currently, the Bank 
has approved the West Africa Regional Economic Program (WAREP) , an ADF 15 RPG Project preparation 
and TA facility (US$6M) to be implemented by ECREEE and WAPP. This project was  approved by the ADF 
Board in July 2021. In the electrici ty sector, for instance in Burkina Faso, the Bank is also engaged in the 
PEPU II –  PEDECEL Project for the extension of distribution network and connection of 235  000 households , 
with a financing of  UA 35 million (ADB Public - UA 25 million, ADF – UA 10 million ).  Also advancing is the 
earlier approved IPP projects e .g., the Segou 33 MW solar IPP in Mali. Moreover, the Djermaya Solar project 
(28 MWe) will be the first large photovoltaic solar power plant in Chad supported by Af DB. The project site 
is located 30 km north of N’Djamena is structured as a PPP with an independent electricity producer (IPP) 
and will be financed mainly by private investments. The project received significant support from the AfDB


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 67 
   
 of which, (i) the supp ort for the structuring of the transaction and network studies, (ii)a loan grant to the 
Project Company, (iii) a partial risk guarantee (PRG) and (iv) - a technical assistance to SNE for solar 
integration (intermittency management). The project is expected to reach financial close in Q4 2021, and 
power generation will start after twelve months construction period.  
 
The Desert -to-Power Technical Assistance Programme (TA) for expanding solar energy generation in the 
Sahel G5 for US $ 5.05 million was approved by the Bank’s Board in Q4 2020 financed from the Sustainable 
Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA). The programme seeks (i) to pave the way for the development of solar 
projects through variable renewable energy (VRE) grid integration st udies and (ii) support the deployment 
of a regional hybridization programme for reducing the use of high emitting fossil fuel generation (notably 
diesel) across the G5 Sahel  and (iii) provide capacity building and training to staff of public utilities . This TA 
will also incorporate activities under an additional  US$ 0.95 million  SREP Mali grant to cover detailed 
feasibility studies for the hybridization of selected thermal power plants . Several other ongoing and upcoming 
Green Mini -Grids/ decentralized energy access (GMG) activities are aligned to DtP under SEFA, including 
TA support for GMG Country Programs in Burkina Faso and Niger  and Transmission Support Facility ( TSF) 
grant s.  
 
Capacity Assessments  of the Executing Entities 
 
The capacity assessment of the countries indicate that the G5 Sahel governments are well positioned to 
implement the activities described in the Desert to Power Facility . However,  the institutional capacity to 
manage diversified delivery models and investment mechanism s needs to be further developed through 
AfDB’s continuous collaboration and oversight of the Programme. Significant capacity has been created 
during the programme preparation process to enable the implementation of the Facility. Over the past two 
years, Af DB and the countries have established coordination mechanisms and country focal points were 
nominated. The processes of setting up the right implementation arrangements are well underway. For 
example, a technical coordination mechanism  in Mali has been alr eady established, and the set -up of PMU s 
in the Host C ountries  is under consideration. Further, the G5 Sahel countries have a long track record of 
regional collaboration and of implementation of Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) programmes, in 
partnership with various donors and development partners (e.g. , EU, The World Bank). The proj ect 
implementation process will be managed by some of the best qualified personnel in the countries with the 
help of international advisory committees and subject area experts.  
 
In addition, the AfDB uses the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment  (CPIA) to determine countries’ 
performances with regards  to economic management, governance, structural policies, equity and 
infrastructures.  Within the CPIA, the Economic Management cluster measures the perfo rmance of the Fiscal, 
Monetary and Debt policy of a country. For instance, it covers the extent to which the primary balance is 
managed to ensure sustainability of the public finances and the capacity of public expenditure and revenue 
to be adjusted to abs orb external shocks. The criteria used to assess the economic management of the 
countries include financial sector development, trade policy, and business  regulatory environment. Table 11 
below  summarizes the CPIA score for the G5 -Sahel coun tries:  
 
 
Table 11 : CPIA Ratings for the G5 Sahel Countries  
CPIA Cluster  Burkina Faso  Chad  Mali Mauritania  Niger  
Economic Management  3.7 3.0 4.0 3.5 3.8 
Structural Policies  3.5 2.7 3.3 3.2 3.3 
Policies for Social Inclusion and 
Equity  3.6 3.0 3.2 3.5 3.3


---
*Page 47*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 67 
   
 Public sector Management and 
Institutions  3.2 2.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 
Overall CPIA Score  3.5 2.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 
Sources: World Bank IDA CPIA Africa ( www.worldbank.org/CPIA  Africa)  
 
Burkina Faso  
The responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the programme will rely 
on the Government of Burkina Faso, through the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance in its current 
configuration is the result of a regrouping of former ministerial departments in charge of financial resources, 
planning and cooperation and the budget, and operates a more functional organisation of services around 
three main economic functions:  
 
• the mobilisation of internal and external financial resources to support development activities . 
• the pursuit of sustainable economic development, through the conduct of economic strategies and 
programmes  
• the optimal allocation of the State's financial resources and the control of their use through  the 
execution of the various finance laws.  
 
The Government of Burkina Faso has a long track record of working with bilateral and multilateral 
development partners and on managing multi -million dollars projects and programmes on behalf of their 
donors. Apa rt from the Bank Group, other development partners financed activities in the energy sector, 
including AFD, World Bank, EIB, IsDB, BOAD, the EU and India.   
 
AfDB has a long history of interventions in Burkina Faso including in the financing of road infrast ructure, 
agriculture/environment and lines of credit to support SMEs. As at end- March 2021, the total Bank portfolio 
was UA 592 million for 22 active projects. The sector distribution of the active portfolio is: transport (41%), 
energy (22%), agriculture &  environment (1 5%), governance (12%), water and sanitation (8%), and social 
(2%).  
 
According to the CPIA  assessment  (see table 12 above),  Burkina Faso scores an overall 3.5 , above Africa’s 
average (3.4). Burkina Faso scores 3.7 for economic management cluster.  
 
Chad  
The responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the programme will rely 
on the Government of Chad, through the Ministry of Finance  and Budget. The government  of Chad is 
currently benefiting from intense technical assistance from  development partners  in the implementation of 
energy projects, mainly the AfDB, the World Bank , the Is DB, the EU , AFD, UNIDO and China . Through the 
International Development Association (IDA), t he World Bank’s current portfolio in Chad consists of 10 
national active operations totaling US$461.2 million. This is complemented by 6 regional operations totaling 
US$406.7 million, resulting in a total commitment of US$ 867.9 million.    
The AfDB has been working in Chad since 1974. As of June 2021 , the portfolio in Chad is composed of 29 
projects with a total amount of UA 301.07 million .  
Given the current COVID -19 pandemic context, the portfolio improvement plan (CPIP 2020)  has been shared 
with the stakeholders and will also take into account  all the recommendations made in the Bank’s internal 
audit report on project portfolio management in Chad.  
 
Mali  
The responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the programme will rely 
on the Government of Mali, through t he Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Economy and Finance, according


---
*Page 48*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 67 
   
 to Decree No. 2020 -0095/P -RM, is responsible for preparing and implementing the State's economic, 
financial and monetary policy.  
The Government of Mali has a long track record of implem enting energy sector projects in collaboration with 
development partners. Funders include AfDB, BOAD, BID, World Bank, IFC among others. The International 
Development Association (IDA), the World Bank Group’s institution that provides assistance to the poorest 
nations in the world, is currently financing 22 national projects and 8 regional projects in Mali totalling $1.5 
billion (grants and loans included). As of December 31, 2019, IFC, the private sector arm of the World Bank 
Group, had aggregated commitments of $33.8 million, including investments in the financial, infrastructure, 
and agro -industrial sectors. IFC's activities in Mali also include technical assistance projects that help boost 
financing for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and improve the business climate, in collaboration with 
the World Bank.  
AfDB  has been closely collaborating with the Government of Mali for several decades. As of March 31, 2021, 
the Bank’s overall portfolio in Mali has 22 operations for a total amount of UA 523.48 milli on, corresponding 
to US $ 624.18 million. The public sector comprises 20 projects. The transport sector, with 2 operations, 
accounts for 34% of the Bank’s financing in Mali, followed by agriculture with 23% for 6 projects, energy with 
11% for 3 projects, governance with 11% for 3 projects and the water and sanitation sector with 10% for 1 
project . The private sector stands for 6% of the financing and the other sectors, namely climate change and 
social development, account together for 5%.  
  
Mauritania  
The responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the programme rely on the 
Government of Mauritania, through the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and Mines.  
The Government of Mauritania has a long track record of implementing energy sector projects in 
collaboration with development partners. Partners include AfDB, The World Bank, IFC, EU, AFD, UNDP 
among others. The energy sector has benefitted from 1 .08 billion US $ (as of 2017) in investments.  
 
The AfDB has been engaged with the Government of Mauritania over several decades. The Bank’s active 
portfolio in Mauritania has 9 projects for a global value of UA 139.07 million. The sector distribution of the 
portfolio indicates a predominance of the indus tries and mines sector (80.79%), followed by the agriculture 
(8.73%), water and sanitation (7.07%), governance (1.97%) and social (1.44%) sectors. This demonstrates 
the long collaboration between AfDB and the country of Mauritania, and their ongoing effort s to implement 
investments aimed at sustainable economic growth.   
 
 
Niger  
The responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the programme will rely 
on the Government of Niger, through the Ministry of Planning. The Ministry of Planning and Development is 
organised according to the provisions of Decree No. 2016- 562 of 27 July 2016.  
 
The Government of Niger has a long track record of implementing energy s ector projects in collaboration 
with development partners. Funders include AfDB, World Bank, IFC among others.  Cooperation between 
Niger and the AfDB is dynamic , and the Bank remains a leading strategic partner.  
 
As of 31 December 2020, the Bank Group's active portfolio in Niger comprises twenty (20) projects with 
commitments of UA 621.14 million (CFF 491.68 billion). The national public portfolio totals 14 operations for 
an amount of UA 380.98 million (CFAF 301.57 bill ion). The 5 public multinational operations amount to UA 
226.58 million (CFAF 179.36 billion). The only private sector operation is worth 13.58 million U.A. (CFAF 
10.75 billion). The financing of the portfolio is from: ADF (73.44%), FAT (13.20%), FSC (3.95%), GAFSP 
(2.21%), EUAIF (2.21%), AfDB (1.77%), FSN (1.17).


---
*Page 49*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 67 
   
 Stakeholder consultations  
The Bank has engaged closely with the G5 Sahel countries notably via the Desert to Power national focal 
points, consultations in the context of the development of the national Desert to Power Roadmaps as well 
as the Regional Roadmap. The Bank also engaged with technical and financial partners including briefings 
on DtP in the context of the energy working group of Alliance Sahel. Furthermore,  the AfDB  organized the 
Africa Energy Market Place (AEMP) focused on the G5 Sahel countries in the context of DtP from 8- 10 
December 2020,  which successfully mobilized a broad coalition of technical and financial partners to support 
the initiative and respond to the priorities identified in the Country Roadmaps.  
  
.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Cost effectiveness and mitigation impact  
In terms of cost  effectiveness of the proposed intervention, the impact is estimated as follows:  
• Total project financing US $ 966.7 million  
• Requested GCF contribution of US $ 150 million  
• Estimated emission reduction potential generated over the project lifetime is a cumulative 14.4  
million tonnes of CO 2equ. 
• Calculated cost t CO 2equ. for the whole programme by GCF and AE is 66  US$/tCO 2equ. 
• Calculated cost t CO 2equ. for GCF is 10.4  US$/tCO 2equ. 
 
These figures compare favourably with other renewable energy projects in Africa within the GCF portfolio.  
 
Use of best practice  
The programme makes use of numerous best practices, including:  
• Country ownership fostered with executing entities in each country with Project Management Units 
within experienced technical delivery arms for all the public sector activities.  
• Public competitive bidding processes with transparent selection criteria Financing structures 
focused on the needs of pr ivate sector investors: limited concessionality loans to crowd in private 
sector financing for large -scale grid connected PV.


---
*Page 50*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 67 
   
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s 
Performance Measurement Frameworks  under the Results Management Framework  to which the 
project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co- financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low- emission sustainable development pathways  
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information 
provided in section A.  
E.2.1. Expected tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 equ.) 
to be reduced or avoided 
(mitigation and cross -cutting 
only)  Annual  635,100 t CO 2 equ. 
Lifetime  14,448,525   t CO 2 equ. 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t 
CO 2 eq, defined as total 
investment cost / expected 
lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation and cross -cutting 
only)  (a) Total project financing 966,716,400  USD  
(b) Requested GCF amount  150,000,000  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  14,448,525  t CO 2equ. 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2equ. (d = a / c)  66.91  USDUSD76 USD / 
t CO 2equ.  
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2equ.  
removed (e = b / c)  10.38 USD  / t CO 2equ. 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme 
as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by 
public and private sources 
(mitigation and cross -cutting 
only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  816,716,400  USD  
(g) Public s ource co- financed 379,572,133  USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  437,144,267USD  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b)  5.44  
(j) Public source co- financing ratio (j = g / b)  2.53  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  2.91  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number 
of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, (disaggregated 
by sex)  Direct   
Indirect   
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and 
provide the data per country in annex 17.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies)  
Indirect  Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies)  
For a multi -country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per 
country in annex 17.


---
*Page 51*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 67 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may 
be selected per expected impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those 
selected in section A.4 a bove. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baselin
e Target  Assumption
s Mid-
term Final  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -
emission energy access and power 
generation  M1.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced 
or avoided - 
gender -sensitive 
energy access 
power 
generation   Annual CO
2 
performance 
Monitoring,  
Reporting 
and 
Verification 
by 
independent  
CDM -DOE  
auditor or independent 
local 
carbon 
verifier  0 kt 
CO
2equ. 317 kt 
CO 2equ
.  Cumulative 
reductions: 
2.8 Mt 
CO 2equ.  Methodologie
s ACM0002, 
AM0103, 
used 
Project 
lifetime 25 years 
(standard 
practice for 
PV systems)  
Annual 
emission 
reductions 
0.63MtCO
2eq
u. 
Lifetime 
reductions 
14.4 
MtCO 2equ.  
 
E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes 
and corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator 
may be selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term) Final  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  
 M6.1 Proportion 
of low -emission 
power supply in a 
jurisdiction 
market  Monitoring,  
Reporting 
and 
Verification 
by 
independent  
carbon  
auditor or 
independent 
local 
carbon 
verifier.  
National 
reports  31% 32% 40% of 
current 
annual 
electrici
ty 
supply 
in the 
G5 
Sahel 
countri
es 
come 
from 
low 
emissioCalculated using 
to current figures 
for electricity mix 
in participating 
countries, 875 
GWh direct 
contribution from 
DtP and 175 
GWh indirect.  
 
Regulatory 
environment 
enables solar 
integration and


---
*Page 52*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 67 
   
 n 
source
s  incentivize 
investments.  
 
Information to be 
further 
disaggregated 
provided by 
project, country 
and type of 
technology in 
relation to the 
programme 
performance.  M6.2 Number of 
households and 
individuals (males 
and females) with 
improved access 
to low -emission 
energy sources   
Monitoring,  
Reporting 
and 
Verification 
by 
independent  
carbon  
auditor or 
independent 
local 
carbon 
verifier.  
National 
reports, 
verified by 
NDAs.  
 0 69,00
0 
house
holds  
 
350,0
00 
peopl
e, 
50% 
femal
e 695,00
0 
 
3.5m 
people, 
50% 
female  
M6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF 
support   0 MWp  50 
MWp 
Solar 
PV 
(10% 
of 
final 
target
) 500M
Wp 
Solar 
PV 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems  M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for low -
emission planning 
and development 
and their effective 
implementation  National 
reports 
verified by 
NDAs  
 
Baseline, 
mid-term and 
end term 
assessment 
in each 
country using 
RISE sub -
indicators for 
legal 
framework 
and 
incentives 
and 
regulatory 
support for 
RE  
 0 
regulator
y 
systems  1 
regula
tory 
syste
m that 
incent
ivizes 
solar 
invest
ments 
desig
ned in 
each 
target 
countr
y 1 
regulat
ory 
system 
that 
incentiv
izes 
solar 
invest
ments 
design
ed and 
enacte
d in 
each 
target 
country  Engagement 
among G5 Sahel 
countries 
continues, and 
country's 
governments are 
committed to the 
programme's 
objectives.  
 
Regulations to 
represent best 
practice as 
reflected in RISE 
indicator 
framework


---
*Page 53*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 67 
   
  Number of 
technologies  
and innovative 
solutions  
transferred or 
licensed to 
support low -
emission 
development as a 
result of GCF 
support  National 
reports 
verified by 
NDAs  0 
technolo
gies 0 
techn
ologie
s 3 new 
utility 
scale 
storage 
system
s in 
operati
on Suitable storage 
opportunity is 
created and 
exploited. Public 
or private 
investors make 
the required 
investments  
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add 
rows as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verificati
on (MoV)  Baseli
ne Target  Assumption
s Mid-term Final  
Component 1: Grids investments to de -risk solar IPPs  
Output 1.1: 
Development and 
upgrade of grids 
infrastructure to 
facilitate solar PV 
integration  Grids are upgraded 
to a status where 
VRE becomes 
dispatchable 
 
Number of grid-
connected solar PV 
farms  Commissi
oning and 
project 
completio
n 
certificate
s 0 MWp  
 
 
0 solar 
PV 
farms  Grids 
supportin
g 50 
MWp  of 
solar PV  
 
 
At least 1 
solar PV 
farm Grids 
supportin
g 
500MWp 
of solar 
PV  
 
At least 6 
grid 
connecte
d solar 
PV farms  Utilities are 
interested 
and able to 
implement 
grid 
investments.  
 
Continuous 
governments
’ 
commitments 
to the 
Programme.  Output 1.2: Increase 
solar PV penetration 
and grid stability  Utility scale storage 
installed  0  239MWh 
of utility 
storage  
Component 2: Incremental Finance for Solar Power Generation  
Output 2.1: Adding 
500MW of solar 
generation capacity  Additional solar 
capacity installed 
 
Improved reliability 
of supply –  
reduction in 
blackouts and 
brownouts – SAIDI 
& SAIFI measures 
for selected cities  Programm
e 
monitoring 
and 
completio
n reports  0MWp  
 
 
 
0% 
reducti
on 50 MWp  
 
 
 
 
2% 
reduction  500MWp 
installed 
capacity  
 
20% 
reduction  Private 
sector is 
interested 
and able to 
invest in 
solar 
generation  
 
Regulatory 
and legal 
frameworks 
in place for 
incremental


---
*Page 54*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 67 
   
 solar power 
generation  
Component 3: Technical Assistance  
Output 3.1:  Improve 
capacity and enabling 
environment for IPPs.  
 Knowledge and 
experience exists 
within transmission 
operators and 
utilities to operate 
with high VRE  
 
Conducive enabling 
environment for 
IPPs  established 
 
Number of people 
trained (including 
regulators, utilities) , 
sex disaggregated  
 
Improved capacity / 
skills of trainees  
(sex disaggregated  
data)  Project 
monitoring 
and 
completio
n reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Training 
feedback  
forms  0 
people 1000, of 
which 
50% are 
women 
 
 
Minimum  
80% of 
the 
target  
audience 
should be 
satisfied  
- 
Minimum  
80% of 
the 
target  
audience 
should be 
able to  
articulate  
the 
message  
delivered 2500 , of 
which 
50% are 
women 
 
 
Minimum  
80% of 
the 
target  
audience 
should 
be 
satisfied  
- 
Minimum  
80% of 
the 
target  
audience 
should 
be 
able to  
articulate  
the 
message  
delivered  Institutions 
and 
stakeholders 
willing to 
participate in 
the activities  
Output 3.2: Incentivize  
additional private sector 
investment  Standard developed 
and competitive 
tender using gender 
responsive 
procurement 
process designed 
 
 
 
 
 
Matchmaking events 
organized to 
mobilize private 
investments  Programm
e 
monitoring 
and 
completio
n reports  0 
standar
d for 
solar 
integrat
ion 02 
standards 
for solar 
integratio
n 05 
standard
s for 
solar 
integratio
n  
 
 
Regulatory 
and legal 
frameworks 
in place for 
incremental 
solar power 
generation  
 
 
 
Private 
sector is 
interested 
and able to 
invest in 
solar 
generation  
 
E.6. Activities


---
*Page 55*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 67 
   
 All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should 
be reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Component 1: Grids investments to de -risk solar IPPs  
Activity 1.1.1: Investments 
in grid ancillary equipment 
for enabling solar 
generated energy feed -in Investments include 
storage for grid stability, 
contingency and 
flexibility reserves as 
well as tools for 
synchronized regulation.  Preparation of priority 
investment progra mmes 
matching selection 
criteria  
Project concept note, 
Project Appraisal,  
Approval  
implementation 
Evaluation  At least 5 projects financed 
by the Facility  
Activity 1.1.2: Grids 
upgrades into smart grids 
on solar development 
areas with RE penetration 
higher than 30%  Investment through 
loans and sovereign 
loans to upgrade grids 
into smart grids.  Preparation of priority 
investment programmes matching selection 
criteria  
Project concept note, 
Project Appraisal  
Approval  
implementation 
Evaluation  At least 5 projects financed 
by the Facility  
    
Activity 1.2.1: 
Construction of innovative 
storage systems  Financing for the 
construction of 
innovative storage 
systems for base loads 
and grid stability that will 
contribute to de -risking 
solar IPPs.  Preparation of priority investment programmes 
matching selection 
criteria  
Project concept note, Project Appraisal,  
Approval  
implementation 
Evaluation   
For the storage system, it 
is expected that 239 MWh 
of storage will be 
deployed, and the 
indicative  distribution per 
country is as follows: 90 MWh for Mali, 80 MWh for 
Burkina Faso and 69 MW 
for Chad.  
 
. 
Component 2: Incremental Finance for Solar Power Generation  
Activity 2.1.1: Provision of 
Private Sector Loans  Provision of debt 
financing to private 
sector stakeholders to 
install new solar 
capacity.  Preparation of priority 
investment programmes 
matching selection 
criteria  
Project concept note, Project Appraisal  
Approval  
implementation 
Evaluation  At least 6 projects financed by the Facility  
Activity 2.1.2 Partial Risk 
Guarantee  Provision of partial risk 
guarantees to back -stop 
off-taker payment 
obligations to the IPPs.  Preparation of priority 
investment programmes matching selection 
criteria  At least 6 projects financed by the Facility


---
*Page 56*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 67 
   
 Project concept note, 
Project Appraisal  
Approval  
implementation 
Evaluation  
Component 3: Technical Assistance  
 Activity 3.1.1: Build 
capacity of institutional 
stakeholders in the 
operation of integrated 
energy systems with 
higher shares of variable 
renewables.  
  
This activity will include 
the procurement of 
transaction advisors to 
assist G5 Sahel 
countries to launch, 
manage, negotiate PPA 
and conclude IPP 
procurement for the 
second phase of WAPP 
regional solar parks. The resources allocated 
to this procurement 
process is expected to 
be US$  
1 000 000.  Conduct gender -
responsive training / workshop / conference 
assessment needs for 
key stakeholders  
Procure training 
services as required  
Prepare gender -
responsive workshop / 
conference / training 
material  
Conduct gender -
responsive training, 
hold workshops and 
conferences  
Evaluate events and embed learning in future 
events applying a 
gender lens  
Prepare, publish and 
distribute gender -
responsive information 
materials  Capacity building activities, 
including workshops, 
conferences and trainings 
for at least 2500 people 
targeting at least 30% 
women.  
Activity 3.1.2: Revision of 
regulatory texts based on 
recommendation of the 
Electricity Regulation 
Index to attract private 
sector investment in the 
electricity sector in the 
Sahel countries, gender -
responsiveness, operationalization of 
renewable energy 
auctions.  This activity will achieve 
the operationalization of policy and regulatory 
frameworks necessary 
to support private sector 
participation in the solar 
energy sector. Technical 
assistance support will 
(i) establish a 
transparent and sound 
regulatory frameworks 
for competitive tenders 
to attract private sector 
investment for on- grid 
solar generation; (ii) 
review and/or develop 
tariff methodology, 
structures and its 
associated financial 
models; (iii) suppor t the 
establishment of a 
common tax regimes 
and credit enhancement Conduct barrier and gap 
analysis on PV 
deployment related to 
IPPs and storage.  
Determine needs, opportunities and best 
practices ensuring local  
ownership 
Procure expert services  
Improve, and where necessary, establish 
new targets, policies, 
regulations, and 
frameworks  
Support enactment and implementation At least 1 revised 
regulatory text, including 
national gender -responsive 
energy policies in each 
country


---
*Page 57*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 67 
   
 solutions for solar 
projects in the G5 Sahel.  
Activity 3.2.1: 
Standardization and 
development of standards 
for solar integration.  
 
 This activity will develop 
the best -in-class tools, 
and guidelines usable 
by the utilities and the 
regulators to manage and regulate the 
integration of vari able 
renewable energy into the grid as well as the 
design and management of the 
battery energy storage 
technology (BEST).  
support IPPs to 
establish and use 
gender -responsive 
tenders  Review of existing 
standards and best 
practices in the world 
and the subr egion in 
Solar systems 
standards. Preparation 
and adoption of 
adequate standards for 
the G5 Sahel countries.  
Establishment and use 
of gender -responsive 
procurement process and development of 
affordable tariffs for 
vulnerable population 
 At least 1 standar d 
developed and 1 tender 
using gender responsive 
procurement process  
Activity 3.2.2: Match -
making events to leverage 
private investments.  This activity will help 
organize an investment 
meeting including a 
match -making event  Mobilization of private 
sector investment into 
the G5 Sahel countries 
Marketing activities are 
planned for women with 
degrees in energy or 
working in the energy 
sector t o disseminate 
good practices and 
approaches for 
women’s inclusion in 
the sector among the 
private solar energy 
companies.  Marketing 
activities targeting 
private sector 
stakeholders  At least three 
matchmaking event 
organized 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and  evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Monitoring of the programme  
All projects financed under the Facility will be monitored by the AfDB’s Portfolio Management team as per the 
relevant internal policies and procedures. The AfDB –  as the accredited executing agency –  will be responsible 
for direct monitoring of implementation conditions and reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to be 
agreed between the AfDB and GCF. All projects financed under the Facility will comply with the AfDB appraisal, 
approval, monitoring and supervision standards and procedures involvi ng representatives or all relevant teams 
(engineers, lawyers, project finance specialists, procurement experts, E&S specialists, gender specialist, 
climate finance officers, financial management officers, supervision and monitoring specialists). The 
implem entation and monitoring of each stage of the project will be guided and managed by the AfDB project 
lifecycle management framework. The key task managers, who will perform due diligence, implementation 
monitoring, risk monitoring and mitigation, will be located in the relevant teams in the headquarters, West, 
Central and North Africa regional hubs and the country offices.  
 
Reporting  
1) Reporting of project companies to AfDB will be in line with the standard loan agreement, and the AfDB will 
conduct a bi -annual supervision.


---
*Page 58*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 67 
   
  
2) Reporting of AfDB to GCF: The AfDB will comply with the relevant GCF policies (as specified under the 
AMA) in reporting and evaluation arrangements for this framework. The AfDB will provide the annual 
performance report (APR) to the GCF during the seven- year implementation period. In addition, during the sub-
loan lifetime, semiannual activity report on the status of the GCF -financed individual sub- projects will be 
provided. For the TA component, reports from the beneficiaries will be consolidated by the AfDB for reporting 
to the GCF. In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA and the FAA, inception report, mid- term and 
final evaluation reports, and financial information reports (semi -annually throughout the life of the programme) 
will be submitt ed.  
 
Evaluation  
The evaluation arrangements for this framework will comply with the related AfDB and GCF policies. Both the 
independent mid -term and final evaluation will be carried out by the AfDB ‘s independent evaluation unit (IDEV). 
The work of the A fDB’s independent evaluation work is guided by internationally accepted principles for the 
evaluation of development assistance, in particular, the Organization for Economic Co- operation, and 
Development Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) evaluation guiding principles, and the good- practice 
standards issued by the Multilateral Development Banks’ Evaluation Cooperation Group (ECG).


---
*Page 59*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 67 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
The main programme  risks are related to technical and operational factors, institutional capacity, and macro -
economic factors including exchange rate fluctuations, political instability and other factors that impact 
programme performance. The risks present low to medium probability , and they can be mitigated through 
the implementation of planned programme’s activities.  
Further, AfDB has over 50 years of experience in project financing in the target region and it has established 
relationships with the countries’ governments,  private sector and other financing institutions that enable AfDB 
to assess and mitigate identified risks. Each investment under the Facility will be subjected to AfDB’s project -
specific risk screening. The AfDB will put in place an implementation team for  the Facility, to be in charge of 
due diligence and execution of the programme.  
Below are described the main risks that might prevent the programme’s objectives from being achieved,  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible 
probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or 
witnesses, as well as fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Technical and operational capacity to implement the strategic plans and programs  in relation to 
implementation of strategic plans, effective monitoring and evaluation,  and delays in having a PIU in place.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The mitigation measure will be to ensure effective co -ordination and streamlining of the programs and the 
Bank’s High -5 priorities to maximize advantages and optimize resources, including the establishment of a 
well-coordinated multidisciplinary Taskforce and implementation units at partner institutions, as well as the 
engagement of regional c oordination entities.  
 
Efforts will be made to establish a robust institutional structure to effectively co- ordinate implementation and 
undertake capacity needs assessments as to design targeted interventions to boost implementation 
capacity.  
 
An additional mitigation measure will be to establish a well -articulated and functional monitoring and 
evaluation process/mechanism.  Delay in having the coordination unit implemented and regional coordination 
entities engaged will consequently impact early implementa tion of the program. D ialogue would be 
accelerated to mobilize the involved parties as expeditiously as possible.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  High Medium  
Description


---
*Page 60*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 67 
   
 Deployment risks lin ked to simultaneous planning and implementation of multiple projects.  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Capacity building as a cross -cutting component of the initiative , aims at improving institutional capacity to 
implement projects, but also to develop local workforce and value chains. Policy reforms are part of the 
program, political commitment is required to ensure that there is a willingness to implement reforms.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Foreign exchange risks related to potential Power Purchase Agreement s. 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
PPAs are usually denominated in local currency. The practice however in the region is to introduce 3 
important commercial features in the PPA that mitigate the FX risks. Those are:  
• A take or pay feature in the price. The price has an element of measured injected energy and an 
element of available energy.   
• The possibility to revise the tariff in the event of major FX fluctuations.  
• A bank guarantee provided by the off  taker which can cover up to 3 months of payments. This bank 
guarantee is often put in place by the off -taker and will be extended to 6 months with the support of 
a PRG.  
These measures will be addressed at a transaction level.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risks related to political and social unrest and insecurity.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
ECOWAS and t he G5 Sahel Alliance are working with partner s to stabilize the region through military and 
development actions. The Bank also has a security monitoring system to determine its engagement with 
countries in transition.  
In addition, t he DtP Team will continue to work with the Host Countries  to monitor t he security situations in 
the region as well as other partners and stakeholders on the ground to ensure that project implementation 
in not affected by tensions and conflicts. All sites selected for the programme will be secured sites in the countries conce rned. Each country will propose a plan of action for the safety of the intervention sites that 
will be taken into account during planning, construction, operation and evaluation.  
Selected Risk Factor 6:  Counterparty  risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium       High 
Description  
Risks related to i nability of Off-takers to maintain their financing payments .


---
*Page 61*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 67 
   
 The Programme  will be primarily providing  financial support to the IPP projects in Least Developed Countries 
prone to political and economic instability.  The off -takers are also characterised with weak balance sheets  
and limited track -record of dealing with IPPs. These financing instruments  may be difficult to restructure or 
workout, particularly in str essed conditions, and  as such  the risk  of loss may be greater than the risk of 
similar loans for IPP projects in other countries.    
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The AE will conduct extensive due diligence on IPP project financing  parameters and contractual 
arrangements, including the creditworthiness of counterparties, such as countries utilities, the impact and 
performance of the financial structure under various  stress scenarios. The Programme will seek to target 
contracts with credible counterparties with long term visibility on cashflows and appropriate credit 
enhancements, where possible.   
The Programme will apply its robust monitoring process to manage the ri sk of default and any work out 
situation required to aim to deliver the best outcome for the Programme and ultimately the GCF and 
commercial investors.    
 
As part of the sector due -diligence, the AE will identify and discuss possible reforms that the gover nments 
will need to put in place to ensure long- term sustainability of the sector backed by a monitoring plan. The 
Programme has also a Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) in the in the financing structure to be funded by AfDB and the GCF. The PRG will support the payment obligations of the off -takers to the IPPs for approximate 
duration of 6 months, providing the off -takers with the temporary liquidity as they sort -out their cash- flow 
situation. The PRG is also intended to support the IPPs in developing a dependable track -record in dealing 
with the private sector in the long -run. 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Project’s environmental and social impacts assessment: The project is expected to have positive 
environmental and social impacts as it includes the generation of solar ene rgy which will reduce the use of 
fossil fuels. This positive shift due to the project is to be compared to the baseline situation in the G5 Sahel region where the majority of the population lacks access to electricity and relies on expensive, polluting,  and 
dangerous sources to meet their energy needs. Negative impacts are inherent  in the following risk factors :  
• Cumulative impact issues of the multiple sub- projects  across the 5 countries (Construction of grid 
infrastructure for new solar plants, Construction of solar IPPs  and similar activities ): The nature and 
scope of the physical works presents risks of  cumulative impacts to groundwater and soil pollution, 
vegetation removal, waste management, noise emissions, and impacts related to the influx of workers 
to the surrounding areas.  
• Inefficient use of resources and pollution risks:  The production of liquid, solid and hazardous waste 
as well as air pollution, noise and vibration can result from the operation during construction. This also 
includes r isk related to management of end- of-life batteries.  
• Gender -Based Violence (GBV) risks:  Temporary workers’ camps may present risks of  gender -based 
violence (GBV), sex trafficking, and child abuse.  
• Community Health, Safety, and Security issues associated wi th temporary influx of labor:  The 
influx of workers may present risks of  increased volume in traffic and higher risk of accidents, social 
conflicts within and between communities, increased risk of spread of communicable diseases, and 
increased rates of il licit behavior.  
• Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks:  These include exposure to physical hazards from use 
of heavy equipment and cranes; trip and fall hazards; exposure to dust and noise; falling objects; 
exposure to hazardous materials; and exposure to electrical hazards from the use of tools and 
machinery.  
• Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement risks: The site/land acquisition for construction of grid 
infrastructure for new solar plants and grid infrastructures for regional interconnections can be associated 
with risks of  physical and/or economic displacement (i.e. loss of assets or access to assets tha t lead to 
a loss of income or means of livelihoods).


---
*Page 62*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 67 
   
 Environmental and social risk classification:  Despite the positive impacts, the overall environmental and 
social risk rating for this project is high both according to the African Development Bank (AfDB) ’s 
environmental and social assessment procedures (Category 1) and the GCF Environmental and Social 
Standards (category A). This classification is mainly due to the fact that the project entails potentially 
significant and cumulative negative environmental  and social risks and/or impacts that can derive from the 
component 1 (Grids investments to de- risk solar IPPs.).  
 
GCF relevant standards:  The project will manage these impacts in a manner consistent with the following 
GCF/IFC Performance Standards deemed relevant: (i) PS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental 
and Social Risks and Impacts, (ii) PS2: Labor and Working Conditions, (iii) PS3: Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution Prevention under the counter -indemnity agreement, (iv) PS4: Community Health, S afety and 
Security and (v) PS5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Bank’s Operational safeguard (OS) triggered by the Project includes:  (i) OS1 –  Environmental and 
social assessment, (ii) OS 2 –  Involuntary resettlement: land acquisition, popul ation displacement and 
compensation, (iii) OS 4 – Pollution prevention and control, hazardous materials and resource efficiency and 
(iv) OS 5 – Labor conditions, health and safety.  
 
In relation to (iv), the project will also address the risk of forced labor in the solar value chain. The AfDB does not finance any operation involving forced labor  as per AfDB’s policies for  Non-Sovereign Operations.  The 
Bank's exclusion list  specifically  states that “Production and activities involving harmful or exploitative forms 
of forced labor and/or child labor are excluded from Bank financing”.  
Any project transaction 
documentation includes a restriction on the Bank’s financing being used for any of the activities on the 
exclusion list ( See Annex 2 AfDB NSO policies under  
 https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Policy -Documents/N SO_Policy -En.pdf
). 
AfDB applies specific requirements and safeguards on forced labor informed by applicable ILO and UN 
conventions.  The Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System and relevant Operational Safeguards  apply a 
systematic approach in  assessing and i mproving the management of risks and impacts related to labor and 
working conditions in projects, including conducting effective due diligence, inclusion of appropriate 
provisions in legal documents, operationalization of grievance management mechanisms, c onducting 
capacity building and awareness raising, and ensuring periodic monitoring, reporting and auditing (See 
https://esa.afdb.org/sites/defaul t/files/IESIA%20Guidance%20Materials%20Vol%202%20ENGLISH.pdf ). 
As part of the environmental and social assessment,  client responsibilities  include the necessity to undertake 
a risk assessment to identify where there are high risks of  forced labor in the pr imary supply chain, to manage 
such risks and cases where identified, and to monitor the primary supply chain to assess changes in risk.  
 
Framework approach for risk mitigation:  The details and exact physical location of all activities are not 
known in advance, which prevents an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an 
associated Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) which are site specific risk management 
instruments are not applicable at this stage. Instead, a framework approach has been adopted. An ESMF 
was prepared by the G5 Sahel countries with AFDB support. The ESMF seeks to (i) enhance positive and 
sustainable environmental and social outcomes associated with project preparation and implementation; 
integration of environmental and social aspects associated with the numerous projects into the decision-
making process; (ii) minimize environmental degradation as a result of either proposed individual pr ojects or 
their cumulative effects and (iii) minimize impacts on ecosystems.  
 
Institutional arrangements for the implementation of the ESMF: The peculiarity of the ESMF is that it 
has to adapt to the context of 5 beneficiary countries of the G5 Sahel that have some specific characteristics 
concerning the procedures for the elaboration and implementation of environmental and social assessments. 
All participating countries shall formulate their own ESMF that are complaint with the AfDB’s Integrated 
Safeguards  System (ISS) and the GCF environmental and Social standards. Country ESMFs shall be 
reviewed and approved by the AfDB to ensure that they are materially consistent with the applicable 
requirements . At the regional level, it is planned to recruit a full environmental safeguard specialist and a full 
social and GBV specialist within the Regional Coordinating Unit, who will be responsible for coordinating


---
*Page 63*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 67 
   
 and monitoring the implementation of the ESMF at the regional level. At national level, the management of 
country activities will be entrusted to coordinating units attached to the different Ministries in charge of 
Electricity/Solar.  
 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for ESS:  The preliminary borrower's institutional capacity for safeguards 
policies/standards  found that, at national level, the G5 Sahel countries have a legislative and regulatory 
framework which is conducive to good environmental and social management. They have signed a number of international treaties and conventions and have experience with the Donor’s Safeguard Policies/ESS 
Standards (such as AfDB, World Bank) across different sectors. However, implementation capacity 
especially concerning GCF ESS remains limited. The Government’s E&S management system for each of 
the 5 countries needs to be enhanced to comply both with the GCF and AfDB ESSs. The ESMF will include 
a capacity assessment and propose capacity -building activities and trainings and recommendations to 
ensure adequate M&E of the E&S aspects of the project and resources needed. The E &S specialists 
appointed in the PCU as well as some government agencies and private entities involved in the G5 Sahel 
Power project implementation will comply with the ESS’s instruments to properly address environmental and 
social risks that may occur duri ng project execution. Capacity building activities relevant to the 
implementation of the environmental measures will be reflected both in the ESMF at regional level and the 
country’s specific ESMFs.  
 
Information disclosure requirement:  The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
prepared both at regional level and country levels was disclosed on the AfDB and G5 Sahel websites 
(February 25, 2021)  and at each country’s level through the primary ministry in charge of the project.  
 
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Women and girls in the G5 Sahel countries are particularly more vulnerable to climate change  and effects 
of energy poverty  due to strong gender -based inequalities . They lack access to livelihood assets, division of 
labor and are absent from the climate change related decision- making processes  at all levels . Access to 
energy, salaried employment or entrepreneurship in the energy sector are gendered issues, with women 
entrepreneurs, salaried, and end- users experiencing different challenges when accessing electricity or 
applying in the energy sector than men. Recognizing the role of the private sector in reducing gender 
inequalities  and to allow a greater clean energy access for househol ds and businesses as well as to create 
income- generating activities in the energy sector for women and men, the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility 
program phase I will start by creating an enabling environment for attracting private sector investments. This  
attraction of capital will then be used for addressing the barriers for female entrepreneurs to launch 
businesses in the energy sector.  
 
According to the gender assessment in Annex 8, the G5 Sahel countries have made progress in integrating 
the gender dimension at the political, strategic and legal levels. However, despite progress, large deficits still 
persist in the energy sector, especially in terms of gender disaggregated statistics and their consideration in 
development actions.  Also, socio- cultural reluctance continues to view women as an inferior being who 
cannot become the equal of man. To this must be added the slow balance between the demands of modern 
life in favour of respect for human rights and the strong oppressive patriarchal traditions towards women.   
 
To remove these burdens in the energy sector within the Desert to Power Facility program phase I, specific 
recommendations drawn from this assessment converge on starting by the creation of an enabling 
environment for the integration of women in the energy sector. Therefore, the following main actions are 
proposed:  
 Strengthening gender -responsive capacity of institutional stakehol ders (utilities, transmission system  
operators, the ministries in charge of energy, and energy regulators ) on gender -responsive procurement of 
IPP projects;  
 Elaborating and operationalizing gender -responsive national energy policies and energy regulatory 
frameworks to mobilize more private sector investments in IPPs in the G5 Sahel countries;


---
*Page 64*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 67 
   
  Completing gender -responsive technical studies for identifying solar  PV projects to enhance gender -
responsive solar integration into the grids across the G5 Sahel countries.  
 
Increasing women’s engagement in the energy sector requires an environment that facilitates 
entrepreneurship: one with gender -responsive institutional stakeholders and gender -responsive 
regulatory texts in the energy sector. The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility considers pivotal to align 
gender -responsive private sector incentives with gender -responsive national priorities by 
operationalizing existing policies and regulatory frameworks. The Program will also achieve completion of 
gender -responsive technical studies for identifying solar PV projects to enhance solar integration into the 
grids across the region.  
 
The gender action plan incorporates gender activities drawn from the activities of the overall log frame of the 
program. The gender action plan ensures to capture sex -disaggregated data through sex -disaggregated 
indicators and targets. It also includes female- headed households and poor -headed households who are 
likely to benefit from this program.   
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Details on the various financial instruments as well as Flow of Funds arrangements are outlined in section 
B.4. 
Due Diligence  
The African Development Bank, as the GCF- accredited entity, will oversee implementation of the programme 
in line with the African Development Bank procedures, standards and requirements as indicated in the AMA.. 
The A fDB’s fiduciary and financial management measures for the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility started 
at the upstream engagement with the G5 programme countries during the preparation of the Country 
Strategy Papers (CSPs) where fiduciary risks and capacity of the countries were assessed in the Country Fiduciary Risk Assessment (CFRA). This is a key document for dialogue with the country for the risk rating and agreed mitigating measures to address noted fiduciary risks including corruption and AML/CFT issues.  
The AfDB has also carried out review of sanctions involving United Nations Security Council, security and 
exchange commissions, financial oversight authorities as well as review of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) and Other High -Risk Relationships of the Technical Responsible Parties (TRPs).  
The AfDB team responsible for project origination will carried out first level due diligence and assessments 
of financing proposals including Know -Your -Customer (KYC) for each of the indicative pipelines that are 
ready and will be done accordingly for the rest of the pipeline before the final internal approval of the Facility by the AfDB Board. The origination team’s findings and recommendations went through a rigorous internal 
review process before they were cleared by Senior Management to be presented to the AfDB’s’s Board of Directors for approval. This includes various interdepartmental committee reviews.  
The AfDB will, through its Anti -Corruption and Integrity department, provide Integrity Due Diligence (IDD) for 
the project operations through a structured, systematic analysis to identify, assess, mitigate, manage and 
monitor potential loss from integrity risks and riskier exposure. This is to ensure that funds are used for their intended purposes and with due attention to considerations of economy, efficiency and competitive trade. The AfDB will use the following assessment criteria to safeguards its investment. (See also the Bank’s IDD 
Policy for further information.)  
•     Identification of beneficial ownership 
•     Assessment of civil and regulatory backgrounds  
•     Identification of sanctioned persons and entities  
•     Identification of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) and other high- risk relationship


---
*Page 65*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 67 
   
 Corporate financial transactions are closely monitored through the MDB harmonized treatments of corporate 
groups and also through the AfDB’s established guidelines on anti -fraud, anti -corruption and anti -money 
laundering policies (AMLCFT). Harmonization of  relevant policies includes the MDBs Agreement for Mutual 
Enforcement of Debarment Decisions; General Principles and Guidelines for Sanctions; MDB Harmonised 
Principles on Treatment of Corporate Group and Uniform Framework for Combatting Fraud and Corrupti on. 
The AfDB continues to ensure that its financing operations and investments are not used for illegal or tax - 
evasion purposes. In addition, measures are currently in place to address the issue of tax havens and the 
accompanying risks. The AfDB  through t he Integrity and Anti -Corruption will lead standard Know Your 
Customer due diligence process including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors for all 
the pipeline projects before the final approval by the AfDB Board. The AE has Due Diligence Guidelines and 
Screening Procedures for AML, CFT and CIFFs and provides guidance on mainstreaming AML/CFT/CIFFs 
measures in its internal operations and activities. The Department will apply the same procedures for 
assessing AML/CFT/CIFFs risks for all A fDB’s financing operations to the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility 
too. The screening tools usually includes the ITR, PEP Check Tool, Accuity, Lexis Nexis, Google Advance and other open- source  search tools. The Due Diligence Report is part of the document s submitted to the 
Board for the approval of projects/programmes.  
The AfDB conducts administrative investigations into staff misconduct, corruption, fraud, coercion, collision 
and obstructive practices and refers to national competent authorities for crim inal investigations in relevant 
cases. The AfDB mainstreams counter Illicit Financial Flows, Anti -Money Laundering and Combating 
Terrorist Financing measures in internal operations of the Bank Group.  
 
Whistle -blowing mechanism  
The AfDB is committed to maintaining the highest possible standards of ethical and legal conduct within its 
corporate decisions and operations and in all its internal -funded projects, programmes and business. In line 
with this commitment and in order to enhance good governance and tra nsparency, the main aims of the 
Bank’s Whistle Blowing and Complaints Handling Policy (2016) are to provide an avenue for raising concerns 
related to Fraud, Corruption or any other Misconduct and to assure that persons who disclose information 
relating to fraud, corruption or any other misconduct will be protected from Retaliation. The policy is a 
comprehensive mechanism that applies in all Bank -funded projects and programmes and includes a detailed 
scope and coverage, protection of and remedies for Whistle- blowers and Complainants, and Hotline 
facilities.  
Financial Management  
 
Prior to project commissioning and subsequent handover  to the implementing agency as described in Figure 
2, the Project Management Unit (PMU) in each country will be responsible for the overall coordination and 
financial management.  Its financial management staff will comprise the project coordinator, the 
administrative and financial officer, the accountant and cashier, all of whom will be recruited (or seconded) 
in ac cordance with the project procurement arrangements. At present, the financial management systems 
at the countries level are deemed as moderate ( Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali) and low ( Mauritania  and 
Niger) because of the absence of: (i) designated programme financial coordinator s and personnel; (ii) 
administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual s; (iii) operational accounting and financial 
management software s; and (iv) financial management tools and reference framework s since it is a new 
facility . As a result, each PMU would take the following measures: (i) as soon as the project is launched, 
prepare budget plans coupled with the indicative activities schedule; (ii) when the project is launched, recruit 
consultants to prepare the administrative, f inancial and accounting procedures manuals (AFAPMs) ; (iii) 
assign financial tasks as soon as the financial staff are recruited; (iv) establish the financial management 
frameworks and instruments in accordance with the AfDB’s financial management guidelines .


---
*Page 66*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 67 
   
 Procurement and Disbursement Arrangements  
 
Procurement Arrangements  
The procurement of goods (including services other than consulting services), works and the acquisition of 
consulting services financed under the G5 Facility, will be carried out in accordance with the Procurement 
Framework for AfDB-financed ooperations, 2 015 edition, and in compliance with the provisions of the GCF 
FAA. More specifically, procurements will be made in accordance with AfDB ’s Procurement Methods and 
Procedures (BPP) as applicable on the time of implementation, on the basis of the relevant standard bidding documents (SBDs) for goods and works contracts as well as consulting services for which the BPP are 
considered to be the most appropriate.  
 
Disbursement:  The disbursement methods to be used under the G5 Sahel Facility are: (i) the direct payment 
method; (ii) the special fund/revolving fund method;  and, (iii) the reimbursement method. Direct payments 
will be made in respect of contracts for works, goods and services signed between the Borrowers and suppliers, in accordance with AfDB
’s procurement rules and procedures and national procurement 
legislations . The special account method will be used to settle operating expenditure, training costs, field 
mission costs etc. Grants, Loans and Guarantee resources will be kept in separate accou nts. Special 
Account s will be opened by the Ministries of Finance, who also represent the countries for such agreements , 
with the exception of Mauritania, where both Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and 
Mines jointly represent the country, and Niger where Ministry of Planning represents the country. These 
designated Ministries  will, in turn, pay all the funds received from the AfDB into the PMU bank account 
opened in a bank acceptable to AfDB. The opening of the Bank account will be a c ondition precedent to the 
first disbursement. The reimbursement method will be used when eligible expenditure on all pro gramme 
resources is pre -financed with the Bank’s prior approval. These disbursements will be made in accordance 
with the list of goods and services and AfDB ’s rules and procedures as described in AfDB’s Disbursement 
Handbook , 2020 edition.  
 Accounting Management: Legal Agreements require all G5 Sahel countries participating in the programme 
to - (i) maintain accounts and books, as well as prepare financial statements for projects financed from 
AfDB's resources and AfDB’s administered resources; and (ii) implement accounting, administrative and financial procedures documents in manuals. These account s and records should provide justification for the 
use of funds disbursed to the programme and prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards.  
 
Accounting Standards and Practices: Although accounting standards and practices may differ from 
country to country, the accounts of project s under the programme shall, irrespective of the system adopted, 
comply with the principles of transparent management and provide exhaustive information on the following: 
1) Accountability of funds provided to the pr oject; such funds may comprise proceeds from the AfDB’s loan 
or grant, or other resources from co -financiers and counterpart funds; 2) Disclosure of expenditure and 
specific information on components financed under each project .  
 
Project Financial Statements: Project financial statements prepared under the Desert to Power G5 Sahel 
Facility shall include:  
 
• For each project: i) Statement of Receipts (funds received from AfDB , counterpart funding and where 
applicable, co- financiers’ funding) and expenditures eexpenditures (expenditures incurred for both the 
current year and accumulated to- date) showing separately AfDB’s funding, those of counter -party  and co-
financiers as well as cash balances; 2) Statement of Special Account/s; 3). N otes to the Fi nancial 
Statements describing the applicable accounting principles used and a detailed analysis of the main 
accounts.  
 
• For revenue -earning projects (in addition to the requirements stated above); i) Balance Sheet showing 
accumulated funds of the project, bank balances and other assets and liabilities of the project as at the 
close of each fiscal year; ii) Income Statement (or Operating, or Income and Expenditure, or Profit and 
Loss); and iii) Cash Flo w Statement disclosing cash flows during each fiscal year.


---
*Page 67*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 67 
   
  
• The following should be included as an annex to the financial statements of all projects under the Facility : 
i) a reconciliation between the amount shown as “received from the Bank” and that shown as having been 
disbursed by AfDB  or co -financiers . The reconciliation should indicate the methods used for 
disbursement, i.e. , Special Account, direct payment or reimbursement guarantee, reimbursement 
methods with those recommended in the subsidiary agree ments  and the disbursement letter; and ii) a 
comprehensive list of all fixed assets purchased with given dates, value and condition of the assets.  
 
Financial Reporting: The countries are required to regularly and exhaustively communicate accounting and 
financial information on the projects . The information should detail out the various uses of the loan and grant 
proceeds , including other financial instruments . Financial systems and financial communication reports may 
vary according to the nature of the proj ect, the lending instrument used, and the country. AfDB may not 
require a standard format but will ensure that the reports submitted for verification and consideration are 
adequately informed.  
 
Keeping and Filing of Documents: Each participating country in  the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility  is 
required to keep up -to-date and preserve pro ject documents and supporting documents, and to make them 
available to AfDB’s representatives as needed.  
 Retention of Documentation: AfDB’s General Conditions require that each participating country in the 
programme retain all documentation related to the loan proceeds to enable external auditors or AfDB’s 
representative to examine the same. The documents should be retained in a manner where they are readily 
accessible.  
 
Audit: The General Conditions applicable to loan and grant agreements require that all pro ject accounts are 
audited each year in accordance with the relevant generally accepted standards. The auditor, in accordance with the standard Terms of Reference for external audits of AfDB financed programmes or projects, is 
required, among other things, to examine pertinent documents, review internal financial control mechanisms 
to identify deficiencies and weaknesses that could af fect the efficiency of the programme , form an opinion 
on the quality of the financial statements and confirm that the funds granted to the programme or project have been used for their intended purpose. Each country must have the accounts of the project au dited by 
qualified and independent accountants that meet the AfDB’s requirements. In countries, where auditing is 
entrusted to the Auditor General’s Office (AGO) under the supervisory authority of the State, AfDB may 
approve the designation of this Office provided that the matter is discussed during the loan negotiations and 
the audit conducted in accordance with AfDB’s standard terms of reference for the audit for AfDB financed 
projects/programmes. The audited financial statements, the auditor’s report and management letter must be 
received by AfDB no later than six months after the end of the financial year to which they relate. Non -
compliance with this requirement will result in the immediate suspension of further replenishments to the 
Special Account.  
 
Programme Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  
AfDB’s primary monitoring tools are post -procurement reviews (PPRs), procurement audits (PAs), 
independent procurement reviews (IPRs) and other miscellaneous reviews associated with AfDB 
programme or project -related oversight and monitoring. In all the G5 Sahel countries, the PMU will be 
responsible for programme monitoring and evaluation, using a Project Result Monitoring Framework (PRMF) 
to be developed. A consolidated inception report (IR), quarterly and annual performance activity reports 
(APR) will als o be prepared and submitted to the AfDB by each PMU , followed by frequent interim evaluation 
reports (IERs). AfDB will carry out a rigorous monitoring and supervision mission at least twice a year, to the 
extent possible with other partners collaborating on this programme. A programme completion evaluation 
will be conducted to evaluate progress against outputs and outcomes and draw lessons for possible follow -
up operation.  
 
PRG Procurement arrangements, monitoring and Audit arrangements


---
*Page 68*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 67 
   
 Procurement  
The PRG structure will involve the participation of a commercial bank to issue a Letter of Credit to the IPPs. 
The commercial bank will be procured through an international competitive bidding process using the 
countries’ procurement rules and supported by AfDB.  
Monitoring and Evaluation  
Monitoring and evaluation of the PRG will be carried out by AfDB from the signature of the Guarantee 
Agreement covering (i) construction and commissioning phase and project operations phase and will include 
monitoring of environmental and social performance and other project indicators as required under the 
Project agreement between the Project company and AfDB.  
During the project construction and commissioning phase, monitoring, evaluation and supervision will be 
conducted in accordance with the supervision procedures applicable to the senior lenders to the project. The 
monitoring will be done through construction progress reports, quarterly supervision reports, environmental 
and social management reports and technical advisors reports. A regular physical supervision of the project will be undertaken at regular intervals to be agreed with the Bank’s portfolio team.  
Within six months of the completion of the project, the Fund together with the implementing agencies will 
prepare and submit a Project Completion Report (PCR).  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favor of 
disclosure for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, 
project and programme funding proposals wil l be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the 
submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to 
the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied 
broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed 
without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not  the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidenc e. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is pr oviding to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.


---
*Page 69*
---

H  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 67 
   
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/ programme milestones (template 
provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify –  e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy 
Framework, Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 
10 Procurement plan (template p rovided)  
☒ Annex 
11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 
12 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 
13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 
14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment 
schedule   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 
15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 
16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17 Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)
 
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or eval uation report for proposals based on up -scaling or 
replicating a pilot project


---
*Page 70*
---

H  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 67 
   
 
  
 ☐ Annex 
19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22 GHG Emissions reduction calculations with methodological note


---
*Page 71*
---

Page 68


---
*Page 72*
---

 
Page 69


---
*Page 73*
---

 
Page 70


---
*Page 74*
---

 
 
Page 71


---
*Page 75*
---

 
Page 72


---
*Page 76*
---

Page 73


---
*Page 77*
---

Page 74


---
*Page 78*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project or programme information  
Project or programme title  Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility  
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  African Development Bank (AfDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category A  
Location – specific location(s) 
of project or target country or 
location(s) of programme  The project sites are located in Burkina Faso , Chad, Mali, 
Mauritania and Niger.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, February 25, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is the national official language of Burkina Faso, 
Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger. With respect to 
disclosure in English language for French speaking countries, this is an inte rim arrangement on request by GCF 
Secretariat to satisfy paragraph 17 of GCF Information 
Disclosure Policy  (IDP)
. 
Link to disclosure  Burkina Faso :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -coun tries -burkina -
faso -p-z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -coun tries -burkina -faso -p-
z1-ff0-019 -cges -rapport -provisoire  
Mali :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -mali-p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -mali -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges-rapport- provisoire
Page 75


---
*Page 79*
---

Mauritania :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -
mauritania -p-z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench : 
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -coun tries -mauritanie -p-
z1-ff0-019 -cges -rapport -provisoire  
Niger :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -niger -p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -niger -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges-rapport- provisoire
Chad :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -chad-p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -chad -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges -rapport -provisoire
Other link(s)  National Bureau for Environmental Assessments (BNEE) 
Niger website:  
https://www.bnee.ne/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/DtP -
project_AfDB_ESMF_Niger -FR-version -v1-2.pdf  
Remarks  The ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category A programme is contained in the  “Environmental Social 
Management Framework ”.   
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, February 25, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French 
Explanation on language  French is the national official language of Burkina Faso, 
Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger. With respect to 
disclosure in English language  for French speaking 
countries , this is an interim arrangement on request by GCF 
Secretariat to satisfy  paragraph 17 of GCF Information 
Disclosure Policy  (IDP) . 
Page 76


---
*Page 80*
---

Link to disclosure  Burkina Faso :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -coun tries -burkina -
faso -p-z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -coun tries -burkina -faso -p-
z1-ff0-019 -cges -rapport -provisoire  
Mali :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -mali-p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -mali -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges-rapport- provisoire
Mauritania :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countr ies-
mauritania -p-z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench : 
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -mauritanie -p-
z1-ff0-019 -cges -rapport -provisoire  
Niger :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -niger -p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -niger -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges-rapport- provisoire
Chad :  
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
desert- power -financing-f acility -g5-sahel -countries -chad -p-
z1-ff0-019 -esmf -provisional -report  
Page 77


---
*Page 81*
---

French:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -desert-
power -financing- facility -g5-sahel -countries -chad -p-z1-ff0-
019 -cges-rapport- provisoire
Other link(s)  National Bureau for Environmental Assessments (BNEE) 
Niger website:  
https://www.bnee.ne/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/DtP -
project_AfDB_ESMF_Niger -FR-version -v1-2.pdf  
Remarks  The ESMP consistent with the requirements f or a Category 
A programme is contained in the  “Environmental Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) / The ESMF include 
RPFs and the d isclosure is made on the Accredited Entity ’s 
website under the Project Number P -Z1-FF0-019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is the national official language of Burkina Faso, Chad, 
Mali, Mauritania, and Niger. With respect to disclosure of 
ESMF in English language, this is an interim arrangement on 
request by GCF Secretariat to satisfy paragraph 17 of GCF 
Information Disclosure Policy.  
Link to disclosure  See links for ESMF above.  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Thursday, February 25, 2021  
Place  The documentation is made available online, and in 
locations that are accessible to the beneficiaries :  
•In Burkina Faso, the document is available at Agency
for Environmental Assessments  (ANEVE) situated in
Ouagadougou.
•In Chad, the document is available at Department o f
E
nvironmental Assessments and the Fight against
Pollution and Nuisance (DEELCPN) at Ministry ofEnvironment  in N´Djamena
•In Mali, the document is available for consultation atNational Directorate of Sanitation and Pollution and
Nuisance Control  (DNACPN) in Bamako.
Page 78


---
*Page 82*
---

•In Mauritania, the document is available at
Department of Environmental Control at Minister o f
E
nvironment in Nouakchott.
•In Niger, the document is available at the Nationa l
B
ureau for Environmental Assessments (BNEE) i n
N
iamey and online at: https://www.bnee.ne/wp -
content/uploads/2021/02/DtP -
project_AfDB_ESMF_Niger -FR-version -v1-2.pdf
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Tuesday, October 12, 2021  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting * Monday, October 4, 2021  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
*S
ubsequent to the issuance of this form to the Board and active observers on 26 February
2021, the following update  has been made: The date of the GCF Board meeting  in which the
funding proposal is to be considered  has been updated to B.30  date .
__
______ 
Page 79


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 80 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP178 
Proposal name:  Desert to Power  G5 Sahel Facility (DtP)  
Accredited entity:  African Development Bank  (AfDB)  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent  Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                Scale:  High  
1.1.1 Overview  
1. The proposed Desert to Power (DtP) program me is an ambitious multi- country, multi -
project renewable energy program me expected to generate just under USD 1 billion in 
investments, of which USD  150 million, or 15.5  per cent, is expected from GCF . It aims to deliver  
500  MW of new solar photovoltaic  capacity and 239  MWh of utility -scale solar energy in five 
countries in the  Sahel zone:  Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Maur itania and Niger . These five countries 
are amongst the most deprived  least developed countries ( LDCs ) in the world and have very low 
energy access rates and extraordinarily low annual power consumption levels per capita (e.g. 
below 100  kWh/capita  in Chad) . Their current power systems are heavily reliant on diesel and 
heavy fuel oil, exposing them substantially to world oil market movements.  
2. Providing substantial modern and renewable power generation capacity will have an 
outsize impact in these countries, where effective power generation capacity is currently very 
limited. In fact, the additional power generation capacity foreseen to be added under the 
programme exceeds that  available in  three of the five participating countries (Chad, Mauritania 
and Niger)  and accounts for over 20  per cent  of the current generation capacity of all of them.  
The project storage installations are equivalent to 13.5  per cent of the generation capacity of the 
three target countries and can therefore be expected to have a substantial impact on enabling 
additional solar generation to be connected in all of them.  
3. Recogni zing the weak capacity of grid operators and regulators, the program me also 
contains a substantial technical  assistance component to support the growth in human and 
institutional capacity through training and policy development program mes.  
4. Therefore, o n the regulatory and capacity side , the impact of the new approach to 
procurement (using  auctions ) and the trai ning of officials, coupled with critical  support in utility 
reform, can be expected to have a long -lasting impact on the development of the sector in all five 
countries. If successful, it will provide part of the foundation for long -lasting and sustainable  
growth, enabling the power sector in the target countries to contribute to their economic 
development while reducing the environmental impact of their continued growth.  
1.1.2 Climate impact  
5. The proposed prog ramme is expected to deliver  direct reductions of  14.4  Mt CO 2 over its 
lifetime, while also delivering substantial developmental impacts. This is a substantial climate 
impact, which will be further strengthened by the indirect impacts in future years when 
additional renewable energy  projects can be connected thanks to the storage additions.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 81 
 
1.1.3 Impact potential rating  
6. Overall, the independent Technical  Advisory Panel ( TAP)  considers that the impact 
potential of DtP as presented is H igh. 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential              Scale:  High  
7. The paradigm shift potential originates from the program me’s working with the grain of 
the market, where a large pipeline of project proposals for solar photovoltaics  is being 
discussed in the region, but where the general agreement is that these pr ojects will depend on 
the financial, institutional and technical strengthening of utilities to be  successfully  delivered . 
8. DtP recogni zes this need ; it is looking beyond the headline project announcements into 
what is needed to make these projects reality and  is deliver ing an integrated package that is 
designed to address the existing weaknesses in the region. This involves strengthening grid 
operation t hrough storage additions, strengthening balance sheets through the provision of 
risk-bearing concessional finance elements and strengthening human and institutional capacity, 
which will bring both short - and long -term impacts by making the next investments  in the 
region easier to achieve.  
9. The program me will also enable a paradigm shift in the procurement of renewable 
power  by utili zing auctions for price discovery ( the current best practice worldwide ), which has 
led to substantial cost reductions for renewa ble energy production.  
1.2.1 Risks to paradigm shift  
10. Needless to say, there are substantial risks to achieving this paradigm shift, some of 
which are exogenous and some are within areas the program me can influence. These include : 
(a) Adverse world market shifts in t he cost of solar power generation and storage in the 
wake of recent  impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic and supply chain concerns ; 
(b) Adverse world economic developments;  
(c) Regional and global instability, which is already affecting the region;  
(d) The unavailability of reputable project developers;  and 
(e) Low u ptake of training , technical assistance/institutional development , and policy 
dialogue projects. 
11. Regardless,  in terms of  balancing the risks and rewards in terms of paradigm shift , 
helping to move the five participating countries onto a power sector development trajectory centred  around low-cost renewable energy and modern grid control and storage systems has to 
be consider ed as a sufficiently worthwhile objective  in order  to accept the risks. These will in 
any case be mitigated by the capacity of the African Development Bank (AfDB) as the  accredited 
entity  (AE) for the program me. 
12. In relation to paragraph 10 (e) above, DtP , as endorsed by the Heads of State of the 
Group of Five for the Sahel countries  (G5 Sahel) , includes as its fourth priority a Sustainable 
Utility Transformation P rogram me aimed at improving the operational efficiency and financial 
performance of the utilities. These activities are carried  out outside of the technical assistance 
component of this funding proposal .  
13. The AE also has parallel activities underway in some countr ies to address the challenges 
of utility reform. In Chad f or example, beside s the development of the Djermaya s olar 
photovoltaic plant and in close cooperation with  the Government of Chad, the AE has mobilized 
resources from the AE- managed  Sustainable Ener gy Fund for Africa  to address financial 
sustainability issues of the utility  La Société Nationale d'Electricité  SNE with a view to making


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 82 
 
sure  the cash flow situation ensures that the utility will be able to honour  its power purchase 
agreement  obligations . 
1.2.2 Paradigm shift potential rating  
14. In view of the above discussion  on impact potential, and balancing the overall impact 
potential and the risks , the TAP finds  that the paradigm shift potential of the DtP programme is 
High based on the available information . 
1.3 Sust ainable development potential             Scale:  High  
15. The provision of electricity access is universally recogni zed as a key element in ensuring 
sustainable development, as it is a key enabler of a wide range of social and productive activities 
and has the potential for a wide range of economic, social and environmental benefits . These 
include : 
(a) The potential for expa nsion of clean cooking and  consequent  reduction of deforestation 
and avoidance of health risks ;  
(b) The ability to move beyond primary and subsistence agricultural activities into 
processing and the creation of added value along the supply chain ; and 
(c)  The ach ievement of enhanced educational and health outcomes.  
16. The program me proposes to add over 20  per cent  of capacity in the target countries and 
increase the overall reliability of their power grids, and will thus have an outsize impact.  
17. Environmental benefit s include an expansion of renewable, clean power in countries 
that are heavily dependent on diesel and heavy fuel oil. This will alleviate not just greenhouse 
gas ( GHG)  emissions but also reduce emissions of dangerous local air pollutants and reduce the 
risks of oil spills.  
18. Economically, reducing the share of power production exposed to  the world oil market 
movements will stabiliz e and reduce tariffs while also preserving critically needed foreign 
exchange reserves for other purposes. The provision  of stable, clean power supplies around the 
clock, enabled by the addition of storage, will provide the countries with an attractive source of 
energy to bring in, for example,  processing industries for agricultural production.  
1.3.1 Sustainable development poten tial rating  
19. In view of the above discussion on i mpact potential and balancing the overall impact 
potential and the risks, the TAP finds  that the s ustainable development potential of DtP should  
be rated  as High . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
20. The five participating countries are LDCs. They all suffer from very low energy access 
rates  (e.g.  only 9  per cent  in Chad and 40  per cent  in Mali ), with millions of their citizens having 
to rely on traditional, environmentally destructive  and healt h-impairing forms of energy, in 
particular women and children. While the program me itself will not increase access to energy , 
both the investment and technical capacity component s will help  lay the groundwork upon 
which access rates could be increased.  
21. It is not just an access issue , however, since even connected electricity consumers suffer 
from low power quality and availability, as well as high prices. The power networks in the five 
countries covered by the program me are caught in a vicious circle, and w hile it would be too 
much to expect this program me to break that , it can lay the groundwork for moving out of it 
eventually.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 83 
 
22. A good example of the consideration of the needs of the recipient is the approach to 
avoiding lock -in to expensive power, as has happened in other African countries. The AE 
foresees that the independent power producer ( IPP)  regulations drafted under the technical 
assistance component will include proper planning processes such as a least cost generation 
plan and a competitive  bidding process for the selection of solar IPPs. The  AE will also establish  
the process of contracting IPP capacity  in case of emergency -accelerated procurement by laying 
out the requirements for transparency, benchmarking and rigorous process to ensure t hat 
prices are competitive and demand exists. This will avoid the challenges that affect Ghana, for 
example,  where IPP power was procured beyond actual needs under take -or-pay contracts that 
now negatively affect the country’s economic position.  
1.4.1 Needs of t he recipient rating  
23. The independent  TAP rates the needs of the recipients  in relation to the proposed 
investments by DtP  as High . 
1.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High  
1.5.1 Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
24. The proposed investments are fully aligned with country strategies and programmes as 
identified  in the relevant policy documents such as nationally determined contributions (N DCs ). 
Putting these into action, the G5 Sahel countries have developed policies and have also 
recognized the energy sector to be a priority contributor to their climate action efforts. A range 
of policies and regulatory reforms have started or have been put in p lace with the aim of  
creat ing an enabling environment to support the achievement of the NDC goals.  
25. All five countries  are fully committed to this program me not just because of their NDCs , 
however , but also through other policy and technical cooperation pla tforms. In particular, the 
G5 Sahel countries  are fully engaged to move towards a renewables -driven electricity mix,  also  
delivering climate adaptation co -benefits.  
26. All five countries have an active renewable energy pipeline that will depend on the 
progra mme for successful implementation.  
1.5.2 Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
27. AfDB  is the AE and has substantial experience in delivering large -scale programmes in 
the power  sector . It also has considerable experience in designing and implementing utility 
turnaround plans , including in the subregion, which will  be important to its success.   
28. The executing entities are a mix of AfDB and national institutions. As noted above, AfDB 
has the experience and capacity to implement the progra mme. The national entities will most 
likely require support , in some cases at le ast substantial support, in implementing  the 
program me in their jurisdictions. The technical assistance programme,  which forms a separate 
component of DtP , is critical in ensuring that these national entities receive this support .  
1.5.3 Engagement with civil so ciety organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
29. Stakeholder engagement for the program me is at an early stage and will need to 
accelerate to ensure meaningful  consultations take place. This is critically important even in a 
utility -scale program me beca use the fundamental reforms of power utilities that are required to 
enhance the financial health and standing of these companies will have a major effect on 
electricity users. It is also important to consult with the vast majority of people who are not 
connected to power to ensure they are not left behind as the impact of the program me makes 
itself felt . Civil society organizations (CSOs) can be effective as intermediaries between


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 84 
 
government s, the private sector and end users, and can advise on  the design and delivery of 
energy services, particularly for poor and vulnerable groups.  
30. While more needs to be done in this regard, the independent TAP understands that the 
project team will work closely with the civil society  division  of the AfDB  in engagi ng with CSOs 
and other non -governmental actors . The AE has identified some non -governmental 
stakeholders in participating countries through its outreach activities. In addition, a 
consortium/platform of non- governmental organizations t hat work to promote r enewable 
energy  in all five countries has also been contacted. The program me team at the AE will also 
engage with stakeholders through  the observer networks of GCF and other  development  
institutions to engage a wide range of non -State actors in the activit ies and governance of the 
program me.  
1.5.4 Country ownership  rating  
31. Considering the above, the  independent TAP rates  the Country Ownership  based on the 
information available  as High. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale:  High  
1.6.1 Overview  
32. The program me expects to see the installation of 500 MW of new renewable power 
generation and 239 MWh of grid storage. Given the price tag and the investment environment in 
the target countries, these are acceptable numbers.  
33. The overall program me investment is supported by USD  150 million of GCF funds, or 
about 15.5  per cent of the total programme cost . This is a reasonable share, given the ambitious 
objectives and important impacts the program me is expected to generate, and the high level of 
co-financing will serve to ensure the full commitment of program me partners.  
34. With  an expected GHG emission reduction of 14.4  Mt CO2, the cost to GCF is approx.  USD  
10.41/t  CO2. While this is not a low number , considering the needs of the target countries , it is 
acceptable. It also needs to be considered that the program me includes storage , which does not 
reduce CO2 emissions in its own right. The overall investment cost is USD  67/t  CO2, again 
somewhat on the high side, but for acceptable reasons.  
35. The program me will utili ze auctions for price discovery, providing reassurance that the 
lowest cost renewable energy an d storage provision s will be chosen. It will also work in 
alignment with strong private sector and government interest, assuring high levels of efficie ncy 
in the implementation.  
1.6.2 Efficiency and e ffectiveness rating  
36. In view of the above considerations , the effectiveness and efficiency of the project is 
rated as H igh.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 85 
 
II. Overall remarks  from the independent  Technical Advisory Panel  
37. The independent TAP is pleased to see this well -prepared program me coming to GCF . It 
welcomes the development of strong renewable power pipelines in some of the most deprived 
countries on the planet  and the utilization of  one of t heir main, renewable natural resources . 
38. The discussions with the AE focused on issues such as the nature of the technical 
assistance to be provided, storage, the completeness of the risk register, stakeholder 
engagement, the additionality of the pipeline and the pricing of the renewable energy 
developments. The AE provided satisfactory answers on  all of these  issues , even though the 
independent TAP notes that more effort is needed in engaging stakeholders .  
39. In terms of the technical assistance program me, the independent TAP welcomes the 
clear focus  on utility and subsidy reform, and strongly encourages the AE and the participating 
countries to engage with this challenging agenda, as it is crucial to the success of the long -term 
reforms of the power sector  in the region.  
40. As a similar observation  was made in the assessment of the AfDB  Leveraging Energy 
Access Finance Framework (LEAF)  program me at B.29, a recommendation has been added.  
41. The development of a private sector -driven concept for green hydrogen for  export in 
Mauritania  was recently announced , and it  is not discussed in detail in the programme  
documentation as it came too late to be analysed in the context of country ownership . This  led 
the independent TAP and the AE to discuss and agree that no renewable capacity dedicated to the production of green hydrogen for export purposes can be co -financed by the program me. 
This is not prejudicial to support for green hydrogen in other program mes, but simply reflects 
the fact that there are a number of issues associated with this technology which would need to 
be discussed in more detail.  
42. The independent TAP recommends the program me to be considered for approval by the 
GCF Board, with the  following covenant  and recommendation to the AE.  
Covenants  
43. No renewable power  project dedicated to the production of green hydrogen for export 
can be co -financed by the GCF contribution to the program me. 
Recommendation  
44. The AE may want to consider a review of their stakeholder engagement process in the 
development of large -scale, multi -country, multi -project programmes in order to ensure that 
they fully cover the needs of the varied stakeholders affected by these programmes, including 
the active engagement of civil society.


---
*Page 89*
---

GCF /B.30/02/Add.10  
Page 8 6  
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel 
assessment fi ndings (FP 178)
Proposal  name : Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility (DtP)  
Accredited entity : African Development Bank  (AfDB)  
Impact potential  
The AfDB would like to thank I TAP for the  positive review of the D esert to Power G5 Sahel Facility. 
S
pecifically, the AfDB  concur s with ITAP’s view that providing substantial modern and renewable power 
generation capacity will have significant impact in these countries, where effective power generation 
capacity is curre ntly very limited and dominated by fossil -fuels .  
The AfDB  also agrees that the impact of providing support to government on competitive procurement 
processes and capacity building for energy sector stakeholders, coupled with critical support in utility 
reform, can be expected to have a long -lasting impact on the development of the sector in all five 
countries.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The AfDB  thank s ITAP  for the  positive assessment that the Programme’s paradigm shift potential is high . 
It is no ted that successful financial, institutional and technical strengthening of utilities will be critical. 
The AfDB  also agrees with ITAP’s assessment that a viable paradigm shift  will entail  strengthening grid 
operation through storage additions, strengthening balance sheets through the provision of risk -bearing 
concessional finance elements and strengthening human and institutional capacity, which will bring both short - and long -term impacts by facilitating  the achievement of impactful investments in the reg ion.  
The AfDB  agrees  with ITAP’s assessment that t he programme will also enable a paradigm shift in the 
procurement of renewable power by placing emphasis on utilizing auctions for price discovery (the current best practice worldwide), which has led to su bstantial cost reductions for renewable energy 
production.   
The AfDB  takes note of ITAP’s identification of the adverse world market shifts in the cost of solar power 
generation and storage in the wake of recent impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic and supply chain 
concerns due to adverse world economic developments; regional and global instability, which is already 
affecting the region; the unavailability of reputable project developers; and the low uptake of training, 
technical assistance/institutional development, and policy dialogue projects. ITAP ’s view  that the capacity 
of the African Development Bank (AfDB) as the accredited entity (AE) for the programme will help in 
mitigating these risks, working with the countries  is appreciated . 
Sustainable developm ent potential  
The AfDB  appreciates  ITAP’s positive assessment of the Programme’s sustainable development potential 
as high . We concur with ITAP’s assessment that t he provision of electricity access is universally 
recognized as a key element in ensuring su stainab le development, as it is a key enabler of a wide range of 
social and productive activities and has the potential for a wide range of economic, social and 
environmental benefits, which include (i) the potential for expansion of clean cooking and cons equent 
reduction of deforestation and avoidance of health risks; (ii) the ability to move beyond primary and 
subsistence agricultural activities into processing and the creation of added value along the supply chain; 
and (iii) the achievement of enhanced e ducational and health outcomes.  
Moreover, the AfDB  concur s with the view that, economically, reducing the share of power generation 
exposed to the world oil market movements will stabilize and reduce tariffs while also preserving 
critically needed foreign exchang e reserves for other purposes. The AfDB is  of the view that the provision 
of stable, reliable, and clean energy , enabled by the addition of storage, will provide the countries with an


---
*Page 90*
---

GCF /B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 87 
 
 
attractive source of energy to support , for example, processing i ndustri es for agricultural production.  
 
Needs of the recipient  
The AfDB  appreciates  ITAP’s positive assessment of the needs of the recipient as high, considering that 
the five participating countries suffer from very low energy access rates, with million s of th eir citizens 
having to rely on traditional, environmentally destructive and health -impairing forms of energy, in 
particular women and children. T he investment and technical capacity components of the Program will 
help lay the groundwork upon which access r ates could be increased.  
The AfDB  agrees  with ITAP that the issue s extend beyond access, since grid -connected electricity 
consumers suffer from low power quality and availability, as well as high prices. The Programme has the 
potential to  lay the gr oundwor k to address  these issues holistically . 
 
Country ownership  
The AfDB appreciates  the high rating for country -ownership by ITAP based on the information available.  
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
The assessment that t he propose d inves tments are fully aligned with country strategies and programmes 
as identified in the relevant policy documents such as nationally determined contributions (NDCs)  is 
noted and appreciated . Putting these into action, the G5 Sahel countries have develo ped pol icies and have 
also recognized the energy sector to be a priority contributor to their climate action efforts. A range of 
policies and regulatory reforms have started or have been put in place with the aim of creating an enabling environment to supp ort the  achievement of the NDC goals.  
During the G5 -Sahel Ministerial meeting (of Energy Ministers) that took place on  September  2, 2021, the 
ministers of Energy of the G5 -Sahel countries  reaffirm ed their  full commitment to this programme . In 
addition , the G5 Sa hel countries are fully engaged to move towards a renewables -driven electricity mix, 
which also deliver s climate adaptation co- benefits. As noted, a ll five countries have an active renewable 
energy pipeline that will depend on the programme for succ essful implementation.  
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
The AfDB  thank s you for trusting the AfDB as the AE , with  substantial experience in delivering large- scale 
programmes in the power sector , in designing and implementin g utility turnaround plans, including in 
the sub -region, which we also think will be important to its success.   
We agree that th e national entities will require support in implementing the programme in the  G5 Sahel 
countries . Recently, the during the DtP Ministe rial meeting for the G5 -Sahel countries, the Ministers of 
Energy for the five  countries re -emphasized the need for substantial capacity building. We believe that  
the technical assistance component of DtP, is critical in ensuring that these national entitie s receive th e 
required support.  
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
The AfDB  takes  note of ITAP’s assessment  that the stakeholder engagement for the programme is at an 
early stage and will need to accelerate to ensu re meaningful consultations take place and that this is 
critically important even in a utility -scale programme because the fundamental reforms of power utilities 
that are required to enhance the financial health and standing of these companies will have a major effect 
on electricity users.  
We agree with ITAP that Civil society organizations (CSOs) can be effective as intermediaries between 
governments, the private sector and end users, and can advise on the design and delivery of energy 
services, pa rticula rly for poor and vulnerable groups.  
Furthermore, as remarked by ITA P, we will  work closely with the civil society division of the AfDB in 
engaging with CSOs and other non -governmental actors. We agree that as an AE, we will reach out to 
some identi fied no n-governmental stakeholders in participating countries. In addition, we will also work


---
*Page 91*
---

GCF /B.30/02/Add.10  
   Page 88 
 
 
with a consortium/platform of non -governmental organizations that work to promote renewable energy 
in all five countries. Finally, we will also  engage with stakeh olders through the observer networks of GCF 
and other development institutions to engage a wide range of non -State actors in the activities and 
governance of the programme.   
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The AfDB  appreciates  ITAP’s high rating for efficiency an d effectiveness.  
As noted by ITAP, the programme expects to see the installation of 500 MW of new renewable power 
generation and 239 MWh of grid storage. The programme is expecting a  GHG emission reduction of 14.4 
Mt CO 2 and the cost to GCF is appr ox. USD  10.41/t CO 2, while t he overall investment cost is USD 67/t CO 2. 
Finally, the AfDB  concur s with ITAP that the  programme will work in alignment with strong private 
sector and government interest, assuring high levels of efficiency in the implementati on. 
 
Overall remarks from the independent T echnical Advisory Panel : 
 The AfDB  welcomes  the overall positive remarks from iTAP . The AfDB  takes good note of  the 
recommendation on stakeholder engagement especially focusing on active engagement of civil society. The AE has a dedicated division with a mandate for civil society engagement and will work closely with 
said division  to address this recommendation .


---
*Page 92*
---

Page 89 
 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment  
 
The Multinational – SOLAR -POWERED REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  - ADF15 
Desert to Power RPG  PROGRAM – PHASE 1 covers Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger . 
This program  includes 3 main  components:  (i) the first component will focus on grid investments to de -
risk solar IPPs and pave the way for the uptake of a regional solar market. This component will include 
financial support to grid ancillary infrastructure for solar integration, and storage for gri d stability; (ii) 
a second component will provide concessional finance to solar IPPs as well as partial risk guarantees (PRGs) to cover investors against the risk of the government (or the government -owned utility) failing 
to perform under the Power Purcha se Agreement (PPA) obligations with respect to the underlying 
program t; and (iii) the third component focuses on technical assistance which includes:  the development 
of capacity of local stakeholders to manage larger shares of variable renewable energy and  improve the 
enabling environment for IPPs  to attract private sector investments in solar energy across the G5 Sahel 
region.  
The outcomes of the proposed technical assistance activities under Phase 1 of the Desert to Power 
Financing Facility are the c reation of a clear and reliable environment for private sector solar project 
financing and the development of adequate capacity at national institutions in the G5 Sahel countries to ensure the long -term sustainability of their national renewable energy sectors . Through these 
outcomes, the Facility will create attractive and viable opportunities for solar PV in the G5 countries, 
improve energy access and security for women and men, and directly benefit 3.5 million people (out of 
which 1.75 million are women). Th e expected indirect beneficiaries are estimated at 700,000 women 
and men.  
The aim of the gender assessment is to indicate how to focus  on the different  components  of the overall 
logical framework for having  the greater impact in terms of reducing gender inequalities in the areas of 
the program . The analysis will  also take into consideration the very particular  Covid -19 period to fine -
tune the ways  to address the gender gaps.  
 
 
COVID- 19 and gender equality wi thin the ADF 15 Desert to Power RPG  program  
The livelihoods of vulnerable rural households in fragile environments such as Sahel and West African 
countries have been severely affected by the unprecedented circumstances associated with the COVID -
19 pandemic. Chronic food insecurity threatens the livelihoods of the most vulnerable in the Sahel, including women as they constitute the majority of the Sa helian population, a situation which is 
explained by the high migration of men from the region. The main challenges for this area and for the 
West Africa region are  energy access for households and health centers (for keeping the vaccines cool),  
financial needs including the ability  to access formal financial services and informal savings groups that 
are suspended due to social distancing and heightened economic difficulties during a pandemic. The 
health crisis has also led to a reduction or a halt in remit tances from migrants to their families, disruptions 
for grain banks and limited access to credit from local merchants.  According to IEA 2020 report, 
COVID -19 reversed the progress to achieve universal access to affordable, reliable, and modern energy, 
increasing women and youth vulnerability to ethnic conflict , family violence, insecurity and poverty.  
 Furthermore, w omen in vulnerable households are disproportionately affected by the pandemic (Koning, 
Anderson and Bin- Huma n 2020). Indeed, these women are prone  to additional stress in this period of 
pandemic because they find themselves alone and separated from their usual social institutions such as 
schools and savings groups. Children are at home and need care and food, whi ch women must provide 
alone. Caring for the children and the home was difficult before the pandemic, but now without the help 
of family members or neighbours in the village, it is even more difficult. Access to social assistance is 
very limited, if not imp ossible, because everyone faces the same restrictions.


---
*Page 93*
---

Page 90 
 
 
Assessment methodology  
The gender assessment of th is program is based on the country strategic papers, country gender profiles, 
the database of the National Bureau of Statistics, of the main Multilat eral Development Banks and UN 
agencies. All this knowledge is compiled below to identify the gender gaps to address in the solar energy 
sector within the Sahel and West African countries. The compilation of these desktop studies are based 
on stakeholders c onsultations. They contain the needed data to elaborate a gender action plan at the 
program level and give the guidelines for the further national gender action plans. Gender inclusive 
consultations will be led by the gender expert of each PIU at the beginning of the implementation phase 
to elaborate a specific national gender action plan at the  country- level  based on the gender action plan 
described at the program level in annex.  These national gender action plans will include the specific 
timelines appropriate to the ongoing country context.  The five gender assessments and gender action 
plans will be undertaken at the inception phase, before the implementation of this program. As the AE, 
the AfDB will work with the government as they prepare the national gender action plans  and ensure 
that they meet the GCF  and AfDB  requirements . Then, the AE will  review, clear  and endorse  the national 
gender action plans . The AE will  share the final national level gender action plans with the GCF 
Secretariat. The AE will keep the GCF Secr etariat informed of any updates or revisions to the p rogram -
level gender action plan and share an updated version if applicable.  
 
Regarding the nature of this Program , it has been decided to focus the budget for gender  sub-activities  
under the component 3 to have a gender integration in cross -cutting sub- sections through Technical 
Assistance and Capacity Building lenses. Thus the strategy is to focus on strengthening a nd building 
capacities at different levels for different kind of stakeholders, as well as for concentrating the budget 
allocation. The sub- activities requesting specific attention, specific budget allocation, implementation, 
and M&E are gathered in the gen der action plan under the component 3. However, gender is 
mainstreamed in the whole program  as visible in the funding request main document.  
 Country -level gender assessment  
 
Key data on gender inequality  
The highest gender inequality index (GII) is in Chad (0.710), and the lowest is in Burkina  (0.594 ; Table 
1). A study on the gender gap conducted by the World Economic Forum in 2020 found different results 
with Mauritania ranking 11
th far ahead of Burkina F aso (28), Mali (30) and Chad (33).  
 
Table 1:  Overview of gender development index, gender inequality index, regional and global gender gap rankings  
 
 
Country  Gender 
Development 
Index (GDI)1 Gender Inequality Index 
(GII)  Regional 
Gender 
Gap 
ranking2 Global 
Gender Gap 
ranking  2005  2019  
Burkina Faso  0,867  0,641  0,594  28 129 
Chad  0,764  0,714 (2015)  0,710  33 147 
Mali  0,821  0,706  0,671  30 139 
Mauritania  0,864  0,663 (2010)  0,634  11 141 
Niger  0,724  0,703  0,642  N/A N/A 
 
Even if the  Sahel  and West African  countries gender data reveal a high inequality between both sexes 
in many fields, they all improved their situation in recent years. The following sub -sections will provide 
more detailed information on key areas related to gender inequali ty in the program´s target countries . 
 
Poverty and income  
 
1 Gender Development Index (GDI) | Human De velopment Reports (undp.org)  
2 WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf (weforum.org)


---
*Page 94*
---

Page 91 
 
Five of the 20 worst places to be born a girl are Sahelian countries. Indeed, gender inequality is a strong 
challenge in the program´s target countries. In terms of the human development index, Mauritania  has 
the highest average HDI ranking of the program´s target countries. When focusing on the HDI 
disaggregated by gender, women have a lower HDI than men in all of the program countries, with a 
substantial gap between females and males in Chad and Niger.  
 
The World Bank states that around 40%3 of the G5 Sahel populations live on less than US$ 1.90 a day, 
which gives us an estimation of the number of poor -headed households targeted in the program.  
 
Table 2: Human development index (HDI) disaggregated by gender4, FHHS and population living below national 
income poverty line  
 
 
 
Country  Human Development Index 
(HDI)  
2019  Female headed 
households5 Population living 
below income 
poverty line, 
national poverty 
line (%)  Female  Male  Female headship  
Burkina Faso  0,418  0,482  10% 40.1%  
Chad  0,342  0,448  22% 46.7%  
Mali  0,388  0,473  9% 41.1%  
Mauritania  0,500  0,579  36% 31% 
Niger  0,321  0,443  16% 44.5%  
 
Female headship data are very old and does not take into account the conflicts of recent years and the 
migrations that this has engendered, from men and women sides. Migrations are part of the livelihood 
strategies in the rural places of the Sahel and West  African countries. More men than women migrate 
toward urban cities or other countries and women and many women have to manage the home on their own. Conflicts broke the precarious and fragile balance of these migrations as men send less money and 
when the y are able to send it, women cannot necessarily go and get it back. On the other hand, conflicts 
force men to return home prematurely, and food is no longer enough for all members. The data on % of 
population living below the national income poverty line a re eloquent with more than 40% of people 
concerned in 6 out of the 7 program’s countries. Knowing that the program’s  countries have a sharp 
urban/rural divide, we can assume that the % of population living in rural places below the national 
income poverty line should be higher.  
 
Legal framework and gender promotion policy  
 
 
Country  CEDAW  African 
Charter o 
Human  
and 
People’s 
Rights 
(Maputo 
Protocol)  
 Gender 
Equality 
recognized in 
the National 
Constitution  
 National 
Gender 
Policy  
(NGP)  Ministry of 
Gender, 
Advancement of 
Women and the 
Family  Recognition 
of and 
struggling 
against 
Gender -
Based 
Violence  
 
Burkina 
Faso  0,867  X X X X X 
Chad  0,764   X X X X 
Mali  0,821  X X X X X 
Mauritania  0,864  X X X X X 
Niger  0,724   X X X X 
 
3 Sahel Adaptive Social Protection Program (ASPP) (worldbank.org)  
4 Human Development Reports (undp.org)  
5 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.HOU.FEMA.ZS?


---
*Page 95*
---

Page 92 
 
 
Despite their enormous potential, the  G5 Sahel countries face socio -economic challenges  that could be 
meaningfully addressed if women and men had access to the same opportunities. On the road to economic empowerment, women are hindered by discriminatory traditions and gender stereotypes . For 
example, while they provide 80% of the agricultural labour force in the Sahel and play an essential role 
in household nutrition, they have less access than men to the factors of production (land, inputs, 
equipment, digital tools, tra ining, information, credit, etc.). In a security context marked by violent 
extremism and armed conflict,  women and girls experience the double impact of an unstable security 
context and social discrimination. Yet they are excluded from the peace and securi ty process in the 
Sahel.  
 
BURKINA 
On the international front, Burkina Faso has ratified  most  of  the  legal  instruments recognizing  the  
equal  rights and duties for women and men and prohibiting all forms of discrimination  against  women. 
The main challenges still to be tackled relate to the need to ensure wide dissemination/ popularization of 
these instruments  and to the need to al ign national legislation with the ratified instruments. Nationally, 
there is    a formal gender equality framework. The Constitution of 2 June 1991, revised most recently 
in November 2015, guarantees gender equality. It recognizes  gender promotion as a fac tor for achieving 
equal rights between men and women. Its  Section  1  states  that  all  Burkinabe  are  born  free  and  
equal.  The  country  has  also  passed  laws  that  essentially  grant  men  and  women  the  same  rights  
to  access  services  an d  resources. The   provisions   of   the   Labour   Code   prohibit   and   penalize      
discrimination in employment and occupation, including gender -based discrimination (Sections 4 and 
38).  The  law  enshrines  equal  pay  for  jobs  of  equal  level   (Section  182)  and  provides  for  working   
conditions adapted to the motherhood status of women.  It prohibits sexual harassment at the  workplace 
(Section 37). The new law on violence against women provides for penalties for sexual harassment in 
gener al.   
 
The    legal    framework    limits    gender    equality    as    evidenced,  among  others,  by  the  existence  
of  legal  instruments that still discriminate against women, the existence of legal loopholes regarding 
violence against women,  the  enforcement  of  customary  law  some  of  whose  aspects,  such  as  
widowhood  rites,  forced  or  early  unions,  genital  mutilation  and  discriminatory  access  to  land,  
are  often  disadvantageous  to  women.  While significant progress has been made in terms of de jure 
equality, de facto equality remains a challenge, as   the   practice   on   the   ground   is   still   faced   
with numerous legal obstacles. Finally, political commitments for the promotion of gender and    
women’s   empowerment   were   announced   in   Burkina Faso’s major national policies and reforms.  
 
CHAD 
Article 14 of the Chadian Constitution guarantees the equality of all before the law "distinction as to 
origin, race, sex, religion, political opinion or social position". T he same article states that the State has 
the duty to ensure "the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and the protection of 
their rights in all areas of private and public life". The Civil Code establishes the man as head of the 
household (article 213); among its prerogatives, the latter decides on the place of family residence and 
women are obliged to follow it (article 215). While women have the right to open a bank account in the 
same way as men (article 222), they do not have the sa me rights with regard to the exercise of a salaried 
activity (article 223). Following the signing of the CEDAW, the government undertook a new Code of 
Persons and the Family, which would be less discriminatory against women but which has not been 
followed up (National Gender Policy, 2018). The Civil Code granted women and men equal land rights, 
but in practice customary law prevailed. The Constitution recognizes customary law as a valid source 
of law, provided that they are not contrary to public order and do not advocate inequalities between 
citizens (article 156). In some regions, customary law governs the matrimonial regime, property and 
rules for the transfer of inheritance and accords a higher status to men and unfavorable  to women, 
particularly with regard to access to land and inheritance. 
 
The institutional responsibilities on gender are: the ministry in charge of interventions in the field of 
gender equality and equity and the advancement of women. Within this Ministry, the "Directorate for


---
*Page 96*
---

Page 93 
 
the Advancement of Women and Gender Integration" (DPFIG) is responsible for coordinating these 
issues. Two structures are created to ensure the implementation of National Gender Policy (NGP): (1) a State/Partners Steering Committee an d (2) an NGP Steering Committee. Finally, the Observatory for 
Gender Equality and Promotion is the body for consultation between different actors, which participates 
in the monitoring of the implementation and the preparation of the implementation reports of NGP. If 
the Chad Country Strategic Plan for 2019- 2023 considers the gender thematic, it remains structural 
development challenges, high prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition, gender inequalities, 
vulnerability to climate and weather -related cri ses and displacements driven by conflicts and insecurity 
in neighbouring countries are hampering the Government’s development efforts and putting pressure on already vulnerable households and communities.  
 
MALI  
The Ministry for the Advancement of Women, C hildren and the Family (MPFEF) is the first state 
institution responsible for the establishment and monitoring of gender policy in Mali. Other institutions 
will need to be put in place to guide, coordinate and monitor the National Gender Policy such as the  
Higher Council of Gender chaired by the Prime Minister, the Permanent Secretariat and gender 
institutionalization committees in the ten targeted sectoral ministries.  These ministries will include the 
Ministry of the Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Labour, Civil Service and State Reform.  
 
The limits of the institutional framework on gender equality are mainly found in: (i) the lack of 
operationality of institutional mechanisms due to the still recent adoption of the Gender Policy and its 
action pla n, (ii) in the limited impact of association activities and women's movements and (iii) in the 
relative influence of the WG GED for taking into account effective gender dimension in successive 
CSCRPs.  
   
A national strategy for Planning and Gender Sensitive Budgeting (PBSG) was also launched the 
establishment of a special fund to ensure the effective operationalization of NGP. At the sectoral level, 
we can cite the gender equality policy of the Ministry of Justice and plans of shares specific, such as the 
action plan to combat trafficking in women and girls, and fight against Violence against Women and 
Girls. While the political framework creates the conditions for gender equality, it is constrained by its 
lack of operationalization. Most sectoral policies a re not always followed by concrete actions, nor 
translated into operational mechanisms and sufficient allocated resources. At the legal level, several 
international and regional instruments have been ratified by Mali, recognizing women and men as equal 
rights and duties and prohibiting any discrimination against women.  
 
The limits of the legal framework for gender equity concern the poor harmonization of national 
legislation with international instruments, certain legal loopholes in positive law (violence a gainst 
women), and discrimination against women. In addition, customary law, often unfavorable to women, 
is applied to the detriment of the law, especially in rural areas, in particular with regard to the succession 
on rural land.  
 
MAURITANIA 
Despite the p ersistence of certain socio -cultural considerations, Mauritania expresses, through its legal 
arsenal, a clear and gradual political will to eradicate the disparities to which women are victims. 
However, in many countries that have Islam as their religion, customary interpretation dominates. At 
the national level, the Mauritanian Constitution of July 20, 1991, considers women as full citizens and 
recognizes equality between men and women. The constitutional principle of equality of citizens before 
the law is taken up by all legislative texts (labor, trade, investment, land ownership, etc.). The Staff 
Regulations Code, adopted in 2001, is the heart of the national legal system founded on the principles 
of Muslim law which constitute the source of legislation i n Mauritania. It governs questions related to 
the private sphere (family, marriage, divorce, guardianship of children, inheritance, etc.).  
It is a compendium of all the provisions of the Maliki rite of Sharia relating to the personal status.


---
*Page 97*
---

Page 94 
 
Despite its p rogressive aspect and its advances, it remains a revealing tool of the powerful ideological 
and cultural patriarchal patterns which perpetuate the idea that women are an eternal one. Almost all 
legal texts dealing with social issues and economic issues rel ating to women continue to place them in 
a position of obvious vulnerability and detrimental to their development. Criminal legislation is 
characterized by the absence of specific provisions relating to violence against women and any 
criminalization of dis crimination against them. To the limitation of several legal texts relating to the 
promotion and protection of women's rights, factors are added which make the effectiveness of those 
existing in their favor.  
 
For about two decades, Mauritania has been stri ving to adopt policies, strategies, programs and action 
plans that take into account the gender perspective in order to promote equity between men and women 
and create favorable conditions  to flourishing of the latter at all levels (political, economic and social). 
As such, we can cite between others: the National Strategy for the Advancement of Women, the National 
Action Plan for Rural Women, the National Strategy for the Institutionalizat ion of Gender, the National 
Strategy for the Abandonment of FGM, and the National Strategy for Micro Finance and Micro 
Enterprise which is a privileged tool for the economic advancement of women.  
 
Despite a demonstrated political will, the status of women remains a concern in Mauritania because of 
the prevailing socio- cultural factors. Indeed, these factors negatively influencing the chances of 
education, therefore limit the capacity of Mauritanian women to participate fully and visibly in the socio -
economic life of the country and in the fight against poverty. In Mauritania, significant efforts have been 
made in favor of the transversal integration of gender and the consideration of human rights in policies 
sectoral or national development. These effo rts materialized at the institutional level by the creation of 
structures, at the governmental level and at the level of civil society, to operationalize this will.  
 
 
 
NIGER 
Niger has undertaken political reforms, institutional and legal systems aimed at p romoting gender 
equality and ensuring growth inclusive economy. However, some of the legal and regulatory provisions 
established by the government are still applied insufficient or partial. Non -ratification of the African 
Charter on Human Rights and of peoples on women's rights and coexistence of three sources of law 
(customary, religious and positive) are among other things major legislative challenges relating to the 
promotion of kind. This section analyzes the policy framework in link with the gender promotion 
strategy as well that the institutional and legal environment of gender promotion. At the regional level, 
Niger has not ratified the Maputo Protocol. However, the country in at the sub- regional level, Niger has 
ratified several legal instruments suc h as the African Charter rights and well -being of children 
(ACRWC). At the national level, the constitution of Niger adopted on November 25, 2010 guarantees 
equality of the kind and ensures to all equality before the law without distinction of sex, of soci al, racial, 
ethnic or religious origin. Article 5 of the labor code expressly prohibits employers from discriminatory 
practices in recruitment, conduct and distribution of work, training professional, advancement, 
promotion, remuneration, the granting of s ocial benefits, recruitment and remuneration of female 
workers based on age, gender or disability status. However, discrimination against women still exist in 
the application of these legal dispositions reinforced by the preeminence effective customary law  over 
modern law.  
 
The government's political commitments of Niger to reduce gender inequalities have been announced 
in major policies and reforms. This concerns in particular i) the Strategy of Sustainable Development 
and Inclusive Growth; ii) of the Deve lopment Plan economic and social 2017- 2021; iii) of the initiative 
Nigeriens feed Nigeriens; iv) the National Gender Policy; v) of the National Empowerment Strategy 
women's economy in Niger ; vi) of the Strategy national prevention and response to GBV; vii ) the 
Gender Strategy of the Court of Auditors Niger under development and viii) integration gender in 
development plans communities and the integration of gender in curricula of schools and training 
institutes; and ix) the gender and Islam  strategy. Howev er, taking gender into account in development 
strategy documents remain to improve. The framework development guide sector strategies currently


---
*Page 98*
---

Page 95 
 
being revised for gender mainstreaming in policies, plans and sector strategies will improve this 
situation.  
 
Energy  and renewable energy  
Women have a significant role to play in the power sector — from policy makers and executives 
of private  sector  partners , to utility managers and employees of power plants and distribution systems, 
to renewable energy entrepreneurs and customers of electricity services. Their contributions are broad 
and impactful. As indicated by USAID: “A sector that fails to meet the needs or capitalize on the talents 
of half the population will not be sustainable.” Indeed, gender mainstreaming within the energy sector 
not only creates immediate opportunities for women, but it also strengthens a sector that supports better 
health care, education, and entrepreneurial opportunities for women, and further advances national 
development goals.  
 
Acco rding to a McKinsey report, women represent 20% of employees in the African power sector and 
less than 10% of engineers. The report also mentions that  African companies in general whose boards 
of directors are made up of at least a quarter of women have earnings before interest and taxes 20% 
higher than the industry average. Some of the reasons highlighted in the report for why companies with 
a greater number of women in leadership positions perform better include: enhanced risk management; 
openness to new ideas and ways of doing things; improved collaboration and cooperation between 
stakeholders; and stronger ethics and consistency in making fair decisions. Companies with greater 
gender diversity are also better equipped to understand the needs of female customers – who directly 
influence 70- 80% of global spending, notes the report.  
 
Table 6: Global, urban and rural electricity access, and access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking  
 
Country  Access to 
electricity  (% of 
population)  Access to electricity, 
urban (% of urban 
population)  Access to 
electricity, 
rural  (% of rural 
population)  Access to clean fuels 
and technologies for 
cooking (% of 
population)  
Burkina Faso  19.2%  62,3%  4.7%  9% 
Chad  8.8%  41,8%  2.7%  1% 
Mali  35.1%  85,6%  25.4%      1% 
Mauritania  44.5%  82,4%  0.6%  N/A 
Niger  16.2%  47,6%  11.7 9% 
SEforALL Africa Hub (se4all -africa.org)  and 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?locations=ZG  
 
The average electrification rate in the program’s countries is among the lowest in the world. The rural 
areas of these countries have the lowest data: from 0.6% for Mauritania to 25.4 % for Mali . Besides, 
access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking a nd heating is very anecdotical . We can note a sharp 
rural urban divide, with urban access rates reaching 88% while rural areas still mostly not electrified.  
 
According to the AfDB's gender profiles, in the program’s countries, more than 60 million people do 
not have access to electricity, including at least 30 million women and girls, the energy balance shows 
that biomass (firewood and charcoal) is widely used in rural areas. Solar energy, which is poorly used 
in urban areas, remains a valuable source in ru ral areas, although torches remain the main source of 
lighting in rural areas and wood fuel is used almost singularly.  
 
Governments have ambitious targets such as achieving nearly 95% electricity access rates by 2030 and  
to target of 50% Renewable Energy i n the electric mix by 2030 (without biomass) in Burkina, or by 
setting a 87% access target and 100% for clean cooking solution for Mali. As for Niger, the measures 
in the energy sector in Niger  reach universal access to modern energy services in urban area s and 30% 
in rural areas by 2030, both for electricity and clean cooking.


---
*Page 99*
---

Page 96 
 
These are ambitious targets to get out of the energy crisis. Indeed, the national utilities are facing 
challenges for the inadequacy of its transmission and distribution network, its commercial performance 
and financial equilibrium. The network is often ob solete and does not cover enough surface.  
 
Women in the energy sector 
There are no updated  data available on women in the energy sector in the G5 Sahel countries so far. 
However, the challenges met by a majority of women in the energy area in the African continent have certain similarities : (i) g ender -specific problems in relation to roles in energy production and use ; (ii) 
women and men have different energy needs linked to their gender roles ; (iii) w omen and girls bear the 
main burden of biomass collection ; (iv) w omen are poorer than men (both in resources and time) ; and 
(v) w omen are generally disadvantaged in terms of ownership and access to land, natural resources, 
credit, information and decision- making, at  all levels.  
 
Therefore e nergy povert y on the continent is gendered. Indeed, there are different gender -defined roles 
in energy production, distribution and use in households, communities and the market. Therefore, women and men experience energy poverty differently. Women and girls are force d to travel long 
distances to collect fuelwood or water and to carry heavy loads. Additionally, the cooking takes place 
in poorly ventilated rooms.  In rural and peri -urban areas, women and girls are mainly responsible for 
procuring and using cooking fuels;  they are disproportionately affected by the negative effects of limited 
access to clean and modern forms of energy. Some of the challenges faced by the majority of African 
women and girls include: (i)  time poverty  – time that could be used for educational  or productive 
ventures; (ii)  adverse health effects  – exposure to respiratory diseases (as a result of indoor air pollution 
from cooking with traditional biomass); and (iii)  safety issues encountered while gathering fuelwood. 
Rural women and girls are especially affected as the majority of energy is derived from traditional 
biomass fuels such as wood, charcoal and agricultural waste.  
 
Lack of access to energy sources for lighting, heating, cooking, transport and economic production 
inhibits the  productivi ty of men and women, and society at large. Yet women – as both consumers and 
suppliers  – remain invisible in the energy sector.  
 
In designing energy projects, it is crucial to take into account the realities of the differences in needs, 
constraints and opportunities between women and men in relation to energy infrastructure and the 
development of services. Renewable energy solutions such as solar have the great potential to aid in the 
development of women- owned small -scale enterprises.  That is why the gender action plan will focus on 
tailored activities to improve the capacity and enabling the environment for IPPs  to support women 
inclusion especially through gender -responsive TA for LFIs or local funds  by providing trainings to 
women and men staff of local banks and financial institutions by enhancing their ability to: i) be aware 
of credit lines dedicated to PUE;  ii) appraise and lend to women and men including FHHs for energy 
access and for investing in productive use equipment; iii) cre ation of gender -responsive and RE appraisal 
toolkits; (vi) standardized gender -responsive loan document templates; and (vii) design financial 
products to address the traditional barriers for women and women owned businesses.  
 
These activities must act in synergy with others dedicated to develop gender -responsive regulatory 
frameworks , establish a national gender -responsive energy policy and a gender action plan within the 
Ministry of Energy to be used within the national electr icity companies and utilities that include 
grievance mechanisms , include incentives within the national gender -responsive energy policy to the 
private energy companies meeting gender criteria and these incentives could also be indexed to their 
level of com mitment, in the national energy policy. Furthermore, activities aiming at s upport ing IPPs to 
establish and use gender -responsive tenders and procurement process  will be included as well as 
marketing activities for private sector stakeholders. See more details in the gender action plan below the 
assessment.  
 Education, science and technology  
We can note in the UNDP Human Development Report  that 3 countries of the program out of 6 have 
more than 50% fo literacy rates. Although a very large proportion of t he population suffers from the


---
*Page 100*
---

Page 97 
 
lack of literacy, women are much more  affected than men by this deficiency. It should also be noted that 
the literacy and secondary schooling rate is an average and that there are substantial gaps between urban 
and rural areas where the majority of the population does not have access to education despite the 
presence of schools. In fact, under -trained and underpaid teachers must support themselves by working 
outside. While the situation of women is absolutely critical to the n umber of years spent studying, that 
of men is hardly more satisfactory. Training, however, is a necessary corollary to the prospect of 
improving living conditions and economic emancipation in an arid territory that requires innovation and 
certain agricultu ral techniques and equipment.


---
*Page 101*
---

Page 98 
 
 
Table 3: Literacy and population with secondary education and years of schooling both disaggregated by sex  
 
 
Country  Literacy rate 
(% of adults 
15 and above)  Population with at least 
some secondary 
education (% ages 25 and 
older) in 2018   
Mean years of schooling, (years) data 
from 2019  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
Burkina Faso  41.2% (2018)  6.1%  12.3%  1.1 2.3 
Chad  22.3% (2016)  1.7%  10.5%  1.3 3.8 
Mali  35.5% (2018)  7.3%  16.4%  1.7 3 
Mauritania  53.5% (2017)  12.7%  25% 3.8 5.6 
Niger  30.6% (2012)  4.7%  9% 1.4 2.8 
 
According to the gender profiles of the program’s  countries, the comparison of the different faculties 
shows the low presence of girls in Science and Technology. It seems that girls have a noticeable interest 
in the humanities and social sciences (on average 39%), compared to economic and legal studies ( 22%) 
and pure and technical sciences (12%).  
 
 
Health  
Access to health care between urban and rural areas in the program’s  countries, linked to unequal 
distribution of health workers and difficult access to health centres . Moreover, as can be seen with data 
indicating high maternal mortality, mobility constraints mainly affect women. In reproductive health, 
fertility remains high and early fertility is a public health problem. There is evidence that there is a strong 
link between educational attainment and fertility rates.  Women without education have on average a 
higher fertility rate than others: 7.0 children compared to 6.3 for women with primary education and 3.8 
children for women with secondary or higher education. W ith infant mortality declining, the program’s  
countries are experiencing a high growth rate that is akin to doubling the population every 24 years.  
 
Table 4:  Maternal mortality ratio, adolescent birth rates, and gender -disaggregated lifespan (2019)6 
 
 
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Adolescent birth 
rate (births per 
1,000 women ages 
15-19) Life expectancy at birth (years)  
Female  Male  
Burkina Faso  320 104.3  62.3 60.7 
Chad  1140  161.1  55.7 52.8 
Mali  562 169.1  60.1 58.5 
Mauritania  766 71 66.5 63.3 
Niger  509 186.5  63.6 61.3 
 
 
Political Participation & Decision Making  
At the international level, all participating countries ratified or have acceded to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). The programme will further 
support the Sustainable Development Goal 5 “achieve gende r equality and empower all women and 
girls”. All participating countries are committed to strengthening gender equality. Each country has 
developed its own institutions, as well as targets, strategies and goals for enhancing gender equality 
within their co nstitutions, national development plans, strategies and sector -policies except Mauritania. 
If all the G5 Sahel countries mention gender in their legal and political documents, in fact, women have 
very little influence in the home as well as in institutions . 
 
 
6 Human Development Reports (undp.org)


---
*Page 102*
---

Page 99 
 
The issue of gender in governance concerns both the low representation of women in the public sphere 
and the low level of accountability that women have access to in the decision- making process. Thus, 
there is a numerical superiority of men in positions  of responsibility in public services, in the institutions 
of the Republic and on the political scene. There are on average 12% women in the National Assembly 
and 18% of women in representation at the local level (between 12.7% for Burkina Faso and 31.4% i n 
Mauritania). The judicial system is also largely male- dominated.  
 
Work, employment and vulnerability  
In the program’s  countries, about 75% of the population lives in rural areas. The main economic 
activities are thus mainly related to agriculture (up to 75.1% in Niger and 76% in Chad), except in Burkina Faso (25.2%), the most advanced country in terms of gender equality,  where more people are 
working in services (41.1%). Men hold more formal jobs than women, and among these formal jobs they hold more senior positions, particularly in the public service, where they occupy an average of 85% 
of the Class A workforce accordin g to the gender country profiles of the AfDB.  
 
Self-employment is the main economic activity in rural areas, occupying an average of 95% of rural 
workers, 51.2% of men and 48.7% of women. It can be inferred from this double observation that there 
are highl y feminized industries where women are employed in the vast majority in the informal sector 
with a very low level of qualifications. This means that women most work in sectors where there is little 
job security and stability, and in job positions lower level, with no prospect of evolution over time, and 
hence without any possible income improvement.  
 
Table 5 : Employment in agriculture and services, labor force participation rate disaggregated by sex, 
unemployment rate and women rate with account at financial institution or with mobile money -service provider  
 
 
Country   
Employment 
rate in 
agriculture 
(%)  
Employment 
rate in 
services (%)  Labour force 
participation rate (% 
ages 15 and older)  Women rate with account 
at financial institution or 
with mobile  money -service 
provider (female older 
than 15) %  
Female  Male  
Burkina Faso  25.2%  41.1%  58.3%  74.8%  34.5%  
Chad  76.6%  21.3%  63.9%  77.5%  14.8%  
Mali  62.6%  29.8%  61.2%  80.6%  25.7%  
Mauritania  51.3%  35.8%  28.9%  63.1%  15.5%  
Niger  75.1%  17.7%  60.6%  83.7%  10.9%  
Human Development Reports (undp.org)  
 
While women mostly work as entrepreneurs, we can notice that they have few access to financial 
services, between about 10% in Niger up to 34.5 % in Burkina Faso . Therefore, women have difficulties 
to raise funds to invest and grow economically. With the migrations and global insecurity in the Sahel 
countries, the self -help systems are working less and less. Being able to use local institutions that wou ld 
require lean guarantees would be necessary to improve women economic empowerment. There is room for improvement in the labor force participation rate for women with only 28.9% of women involved in 
the workforce in Mauritania. 
 
Here again, the assessment shows the importance to enabling the environment for the private sector as 
well as for women workers. In the context of this program , this can be reflected by creating incentives 
of which some focused on gender mainstreaming for the solar energy companies and by ensuring that 
the companies are aware of them. The environment also needs to be i mproved  for women so that they 
have a better access to finance and it can be used  to benefit from energy access. Access to energy and 
finance  will contribute to economically empowering women.  
 
Energy access for women and women headed- households could be facilitated by social energy tariffs as 
well, and by raising awareness about this measure. Access to jobs for women  in the energy sector would 
benefit from match -making events to further leverage private investments and create awareness for


---
*Page 103*
---

Page 100 
 
women’s participation in the energy sector as well as from TA for utilities to mainstream gender  
considerations across their activ ities and particularly with a focus on workforce development and 
employment.  
 
Agriculture  
The gender profiles of the African Development Bank state that in the agricultural sector, women are 
present throughout the agricultural chain, but they do not have t he means to increase their production 
and productivity (lack of access, control and ownership of land and means of production). They usually 
take care of small -breed farming, and all processing activities. This role of full -fledged producers is not 
always valued or accounted for. Women invest mainly in food and vegetable crops for the family's 
livelihood. The challenge of food security cannot be envisaged without seeking to improve their 
contribution to food production.  
 
According to UNDP, women make up mor e than 40% of the agricultural workforce in the program’s 
countries  and play a key role in strengthening household food security. However, in the Lake Chad 
region and in the north of the country, women farmers have significantly less access to land, inform ation, 
financing and agricultural inputs. This makes them more vulnerable to climate shocks and crises in the 
region. To ensure their survival and that of their families, women come together in associations to 
strengthen their productive capacity and acces s land and financing, thus contributing to the fight against 
hunger in the region, but also to their empowerment.  
 
Gender -based violence  
In the program’s  countries, gender -based violence has long been seen as a taboo subject and some of  
they are often tolerated or even "accepted" by different communities. They are multiple and come in 
different forms: physical, sexual, psychological and economic. They are  also found in all walks of life: 
within the family, at school, in detention centres and reception centres and everywhere.  
The main violence manifests itself in the following facts: FGM, gavage, touching and sexual harassment, psychological pressure, dome stic violence (35.5% in Mauritania), rape and incitement to prostitution, 
deprivation of rights. This list is non- exhaustive.  
 
However, effective action has been taken such as: awareness/information with the involvement of 
religious guides against FGM and gavage, the creation and start -up of NGO- led listening centres, the 
establishment of technical cells to combat all forms of violence, the establishment of adoption and 
extension of various pieces of legislation. National statistics in the G5 Sahel countrie s for VGGS are 
almost non- existent. Those that exist are those identified episodic by NGOs (only exclusively concerned 
with capitals where they exist) that manage the listening centres or those that have been produced, with 
the support of international organizations in the investigation of all forms of violence against women 
and girls. From these surveys, it appears that the most widespread violence is psychological (64.3%), 
and sexual (14.3%). It should be noted that domestic violence is not recognized in communities as a 
type of violence against women.  
 Finally, grievance mechanisms have to be included in the Corporate Social Responsibility of the solar  
companies and in the awareness raising activities of the gender action plan and in the gender -responsive 
energy policies that will be set up.  
 
Conclusion and recommendations  
The G5 Sahel countries have made progress in integrating the gender dimension at the political, strategic 
and legal levels. However, the operationalization of this process still seems to be based on the weakness 
of the existing institutional framework, the  lack of coordination and synergy between the different 
institutional players, the multiplicity and the opacity of the sources of positive law and its weak 
application, especially on women's rights issues.  
 
At the sectoral level, despite progress, large deficits still persist, especially in terms of gender 
disaggregated statistics and their consideration in development actions.  Also, socio- cultural reluctance 
continues to view women as an inferior being who cannot become the equal of man. To this must be


---
*Page 104*
---

Page 101 
 
added the slow balance between the demands of modern life in favour of respect for human rights and 
the strong oppressive patriarchal traditions towards women.   
 
To remove these burdens in the energy sector within the Desert to Power Facility program phas e I, 
specific recommendations drawn from this assessment converge on starting by the creation of an 
enabling environment for the integration of women in the energy sector. Therefore, the following main 
actions are proposed:  
 
 Strengthening gender -responsive capacity of institutional stakeholders (utilities, 
transmission system operators, the ministries in charge of energy, and energy regulators ) on 
gender -responsive procurement of IPP projects;  
 Elaborating and operationalizing gender -responsive national energy policies and energy 
regulatory frameworks to mobilize more private sector investments in IPPs in the G5 
Sahel countries;  
 Completing gender -responsive technical studies for identifying solar PV projects to 
enhance gender -responsive solar integration into the grids across the G5 Sahel countries.  
 
Gender activities under the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility program:  
 
The gender action plan incorporates gender activities drawn from the activities of the overall logical 
framewo rk of the program. The gender action plan ensures to capture sex- disaggregated data through 
sex-disaggregated indicators and targets. It also includes female- headed households and poor -headed 
households who are likely to benefit from this program.  
 
The ge nder aspects of the Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility aim to address and reduce gender inequality. 
Indeed, in this program, gender is understood as an economic catalyzer able to allow a faster return on 
investment. Based on economic studies, considering women as consumers, producers, and agents of 
change, the DtP Facility program aims to create a virtuous cycle where the whole communities will 
benefit from women economic empowerment. To contribute to reduce gender inequalities and to 
strengthen women econom ic empowerment, the gender action plan will focus on the component 3 of 
the program. 
 
Outcome 3 : Technical Assistance  
Output 3.1 :  Improve capacity and enabling environment for IPPs  
 
Activity 3.1.1: Build capacity of institutional stakeholders in the operation of integrated energy 
systems with higher shares of variable renewables. Increased share of solar in national grids and rural 
decentralized systems (700MW additional capacity)  
 
 Improve capacity and enabling environment for IPPs through Institutional stakeholders’ 
capacity built to transfer international best practice in gender -responsive procurement 
of competitive IPPs projects, PPA negotiation, operation and maintenance of 
renewab le energy systems into the Sahel context  
 
 Gender -responsive TA for LFIs or local funds by providing trainings to women and 
men staff of local banks and financial institutions by enhancing their ability to: i) be 
aware of credit lines dedicated to PUE;  ii) appraise and lend to women and men 
including FHHs for energy access and for investing in productive use equipment; iii) creation of gender -responsive and RE appraisal toolkits; (vi) standardized gender -
responsive loan document templates  
 
 TA for utilities to mainstream gender  considerations across their activities and 
particularly with a focus on workforce development and employment  
 
 Raise awareness of gender responsive energy policy amongst solar energy companies


---
*Page 105*
---

Page 102 
 
 
 Awareness raising  among the vulnerable population of the localities about the social 
energy tariffs  
 
Activity 3.1.2: Revision of regulatory texts based on recommendation of the Electricity Regulation 
Index to attract private sector investment in the electricity sector in t he Sahel countries, gender -
responsiveness, operationalization of renewable energy actions.  
 
 Develop gender -responsive regulatory frameworks  
 Establishing a national gender -responsive energy policy and a gender 
action plan within the Ministry of Energy to be used within the national 
electricity companies and utilities  that include grievance mechanisms  
 Include incentives within the national gender -responsive energy policy to 
the private energy companies meeting gender criteria and these incentives 
could also be indexed to their level of commitment, in the national energy 
policies . 
 
Output 3.2 : Incentivize additional private sector investment  
 
Activity 3.2.1. Standardization and development of standards for solar integration  
 Support IPPs  to establish  and use gender -responsive tenders and procurement process  
 
 Solar energy companies develop affordable tariffs  optimize solar energy available, 
especially targeting vulnerable population as poor HHs, women and FHHs   
 
Activity 3.2.2. Match -making events to further leverage private investments and create awareness for 
women’s participation in the energy sector  
 
 Marketing activities for women with degrees in energy or working in the energy sector  
The aim is to disseminate good practices and approache s for women’s inclusion in the 
sector among the private solar energy companies  
 
 Marketing activities for private sector stakeholders  
The goal is to inform them about the financial benefits to implement a gender -
responsive CSR policy and about government i ncentives  
 
 
Program management, monitoring and evaluation  
 The project implementation unit of each country includes a gender expert to mainstream 
the gender issues throughout all the phases of the program  
 
 The gender expert of each PIU elaborates a country level gender assessment as well as 
a National Level Gender Action Plan based on the program level gender assessment and 
gender action  
 
 Program management team includes gender expert to monitor and evaluate the 
implementation of the GAP and support LFIs and solar energy companies to implement 
gender -related components of the program.  
 
 Regular reporting on GAP progress according to program timeline and monitoring protocol  
 
The Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility program phase 1 will be executed by the Accredited Entity that 
will then split the responsibilities between the African Development Bank, the African Guarantee Fund, 
and the countries.


---
*Page 106*
---

Page 103 
 
Annex 8 –  Gender Action Plan  
 
Activities  Indicators and 
Targets  Timeline  Responsibilit ies Costs in USD  
Impact statement of component 3:  Creation of enabling conditions with local transformation such as the ability of stakeholders to 
adequately organize the sector, the capacity of operators to operate grids that have higher shares of renewables, the operati onalization of 
conducive policy and regulatory frameworks that are inclusive of private sector participation.  
 
Outcome 3: Technical Assistance  
 
Output 3.1 : Improve capacity and enabling environment for IPPs  
 
Activity 3.1.1. Build capacity of institutional stakeholders in the operation of integrated energy systems with higher 
shares of variable renewables  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.1 Improve 
capacity and enabling 
environment for IPPs  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 Indicator 1:  Institutional 
stakeholders’ capacity 
built to transfer 
international best 
practice in gender -
responsive procurement 
of competitive IPPs 
projects, PPA negotiation, operation 
and maintenance of 
renewable energy 
systems into the Sahel 
context.  
Baseline: 0  
Mid-term target: 1000, 
of which 50% are 
women  
Final target: 5000, of 
which 50% are women  
 
Indicator 2: Number of 
people trained (including 
regulators, utilities), for 50% women  
Baseline: 0  
Mid-term target: 
Minimum  
80% (of which 50% 
women) of the  
target  
audience  
should be  
satisfied   
Final target: Minimum  
80% (of which 50% women) of the  
target  
audience  
should be  
satisfied  
 Inception phase  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 AE - gender expert of 
the PIU


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 104 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
Sub- activity 3.1.1.2  
Gender -responsive TA for LFIs 
or local funds  by p roviding 
trainings to women and men staff 
of local banks and financial 
institutions by enhancing their 
ability to: i) be aware of credit lines dedicated to PUE;  ii) 
appraise and lend to women and men including FHHs for energy 
access and for investing in 
productive use equipment; iii) 
creation of gender -responsive 
and RE appraisal toolkits; (vi) 
standardized gender -responsive 
loan document templates ; and 
(vii) des ign financial products to 
address the traditional barriers 
for women and women owned 
businesses.  
 Sub- activity 3.1.1.3  
TA for utilities to mainstream 
gender  considerations across 
their activities and particularly Indicator 3: Improved 
capacity / skills of trainees  for 50%  women  
Baseline: 0  
Mid-term target: 
Minimum  
80% (of which 50% 
women) of the  
target  
audience  
should be  
able to  
articulate  
the 
message  
delivered  
 
Final target: 
Minimum  
80% (of which 50% women) of the  
target  
audience  
should be  
able to  
articulate  
the 
message  
delivered  
 Number of trainings 
provided  
Baseline: 0  
Target: Number of  
women and men staff of LFIs or local funds  able 
to inform and advise women as well as able to deliver loans to women.  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TB D 
with the national level GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 Number of women and 
men local staff who 
participated in these trainings  
Baseline: 0  
Target: all local staff of 
LFIs or local funds 
involved in the loan allocation process  
 
Number of women and 
women HHs accessing 
concessional loans  
Baseline: 0   
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
After selection of the 
localities and before 
the implementation 
phase  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Inception phase  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
AE - gender expert of 
the PIU of each 
country to contract a 
firm for the trainings in 
collaboration with the 
LFIs/local funds


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 105 
 
with a focus on workforce 
development and employment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- activity 3.1.1.4  
Raise awareness  of gender 
responsive energy policy 
amongst solar energy companies  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 Target: All the women 
and women HHs meeting the LFIs’ requirements  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBC 
with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
 
Number of trainings 
organi zed within utilities 
for women and men including FHHs, to become solar energy operators  
Baseline: 0 Target: 
Number of women and 
men including FHHs 
with a degree in the energy sector and/or already working in the 
energy sector  able to 
work in the solar energy 
sector  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
 
Number of jobs created 
within utilities for 
women and men 
including FHHs in the 
program operation and maintenance phases 
(temporary and 
permanent)  
Baseline: 0  
Target: Number of 
women and men 
including FHHs with a 
degree in the energy 
sector and/or already 
working in the energy sector  that applied for 
solar energy companies of this pro gram  
    
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  Inception phase  
 
 AE - gender expert of 
the PIU of each 
country to contract a 
firm for the trainings in 
collaboration with the 
utilities  
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
AE - gender expert of 
the PIU of each 
country  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
145,000  
From the gender 
technical assistance 
budget


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 106 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Solar energy companies 
aware of the incentives  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 30% of  Solar 
energy companies 
recruited women for this 
program  
  
 
 
Activity 3.1.2. Revision of regulatory texts based on recommendation of the Electricity Regulation Index to attract private 
sector investment in the electricity sector in the Sahel countries, gender -responsiveness, operationalization of renewable 
energy actions  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.1 Develop 
gender -responsive regulatory 
frameworks  
Establishing a national gender -
responsive energy policy and a 
gender action plan within the 
Ministry of Energy to be used 
within the national electricity 
compani es and utilities that 
include grievance mechanisms  
 
 
 
  
Sub- activity 3.1.2.2  
Include incentives within the 
national gender -responsive 
energy policy to the private 
energy companies meeting 
gender criteria and these 
incentives could also be indexed 
to their level of commitment, in 
the national energy policy  
  
 Establishment of a 
national gender -
responsive energy policy 
within the Ministry of 
Energy  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 5 (1 per country)  
 
Establishment of a 
national gender -
responsive energy action 
plan 
Baseline: 0  
Target: 5 (1 per country)  
 
Increased share of female 
employees in the national 
companies of electricity  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 20% women 
employees of which 10% 
of women engineers  
 
Gender -responsive 
incentives included in the national energy policy  
Baseline: 0  
Target: Number of  new 
RE companies settling 
benefiting from 
incentives due to gender mainstreaming  
 Inception phase  
 Gender expert of the 
PIU of each country in 
collaboration with the 
Ministry of Energy, 
Ministry of Gender, 
and utilities  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
100,000  
(Part of the 3.1.2 
budget of the overall 
logical framework 
500,000)  
 
Output 3.2:  Incentivize additional private sector investment  
 
Activity 3.2.1. Standardization and development of standards for solar integration  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.1 Support 
IPPs to establish and use gender -
responsive tenders and 
procurement process  
  
 IPPs have gender -
responsive tenders and 
procurement process’ 
templates and implement 
them  
Baseline: 0  Inception phase  AE - gender expert of 
the PIU of each 
country


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 107 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Sub- activity 3.2.1.2  
Solar energy companies develop 
affordable tariffs  optimize solar 
energy available, especially 
targeting vulnerable population 
as poor HHs, women and FHHs  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Sub- activity 3.2.1.3  
Awareness raising  among the 
vulnerable population of the 
localities about the social energy 
tariffs  and about the existence of 
grievance mechanisms  Target 1: All the 
program’s IPPs  are 
provided with gender -
responsive tenders and 
procurement process  
Baseline: 0  
Target 2: Number of 
women owned 
businesses that 
successfully win 
contracts  with IPPs  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD 
with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
 
 
Energy companies  
joining the program 
propose social tariffs for 
vulnerable HHs  
Baseline: 0 Target: 
Number of Energy 
companies  proposing  
social tariffs in the 
program area 
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD 
with the national level 
GAP  provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
 
Vulnerable population of 
the localities aware of the 
social energy tariffs  
Baseline: 0 Target: 
Number of poor HHs 
including FHHs  
benefiting from social 
tariffs  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
75,000  
(Part of the 3.2.1 
budget of the overall 
logical framework 
300,000)  
 
Activity 3.2.2.  Match -making events to further leverage private investments and create awareness for women’s 
participation in the energy sector  
Sub-activity 3.2.2.1 
Marketing activities for 
women with degrees in energy 
or working in the energy 
sector  
The aim is to disseminate 
good practices and Number of marketing 
activities organized  
Baseline: 0 Target: 
women with degrees in 
energy or women 
working in the energy 
sector  who participated Implementation 
phase  AE - gender expert of 
the PIU of each 
country


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 108 
 
approaches for women’s 
inclusion in the sector among 
the private solar energy 
companies  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Sub- activity 3.2.2.2  
Marketing activities for 
private sector stakeholders  
The goal is to inform them 
about the financial benefits to 
implement a gender -
responsive CSR policy and 
about government incentives  
 in these marketing 
activities  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD 
with the national level GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
  
 
 
Number of marketing 
activities organized  
Baseline: 0  
Target: private solar 
energy companies 
joining the program  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD 
with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gender expert  
 
 
Number of private solar 
energy companies who 
participated in these 
marketing activities  
Baseline: 0 Target: 
private solar energy 
companies joining the 
program  
To the extent possible , 
specific number TBD 
with the national level 
GAP provided by the 
PIU gende r expert  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
75,000  
(Part of the 3.2.1 
budget of the overall 
logical framework 
300,000)  
 
Activity 3.2.3 Program management, monitoring and evaluation  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.3.1  
The PIU of each country includes 
a gender expert to mainstream 
the gender issues throughout all 
the phases of the program.  Gender expert included 
in the PIU of each 
country  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 5 gender experts 
recruited under the 
program, 1 per country  Inception phase   1 gender expert half 
time per country  
3,000 x 7 
years=21,000 per 
country  
21,000 x 5 countries=  
105,000 USD  
From the gender 
technical assistance 
budget  Sub-activity 3.2.3.2  
The gender expert of each PIU 
conducts inclusive consultations 
at the national- level before 
elaborating the country- level 
gender assessment and gender 
action plan . These inclusive 
consultations have to be done in agreement with AfDB and GCF 
requirements and thus include Inclusive consultations 
are conducted in each 
country and include 
meetings with a wide 
range of stakeholders: 
women’s groups and 
associations, women’s 
cooperatives, female-
headed households, 
youth groups, and other 
marginali zed and Inception phase, once 
the gender experts o f 
each PIU are 
recruited – 1 to 2 
weeks


---
*Page 112*
---

Page 109 
 
equal access to grievance 
mechanisms.  vulnerable groups, as 
well as targeting gender 
representatives at the 
Government, line 
ministries,  utilities, non -
state actors, etc.  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 5 reports of 
inclusive consultations, 1 
per country  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.3.3  
The gender expert of each PIU elaborates a country -level gender 
assessment as well as a National Level Gender Action Plan based 
on the program level gender 
assessment and gender action  and 
based on the consultation 
conclusions.  
See more details below this table.  
The AE will review, clear and 
endorse the national gender 
action plans and the eventual 
revised program level gender 
action plan. Finally, the AE will share the national level g ender 
action plans as well as the revised program level gender action plan if changes have been made, with  
the GCF secretariat  
for its 
information.  
 
 Each country has its own 
national level gender 
assessment and national 
level gender action  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 5 country -level  
Gender assessments and 
action plans, 1 set per 
country  
 
If applicable , the 
program -level gender 
action plan will be 
updated  
Baseline: 1 existing 
program -level gender 
action plan  
Target: 1  program -level 
gender action plan 
updated if needed  
 Inception phase, after 
having conducted the inclusive 
consultations in 
country – 1 week  
Sub-activity 3.2.3.4  
Program management team 
includes the PIU gender expert to 
monitor and evaluate the 
implemen tation of the GAP and 
support LFIs/local funds, utilities 
and solar energy companies to 
implement gender -related 
components of the program.   
The gender expert of 
each PIU is in charge of implementing, monitoring and reporting 
on the gender sub-
activities of the country-
level gender action plan  
Baseline: 0  
Target: The gender -
related sub -activities are 
implemented, monitored 
and reported in 
compliance with AfDB 
and GCF requirements  Implementation and 
M&E phases  
Sub-activity 3.2.3.5  
Regular reporting on GAP 
progress according to program 
timeline and monitoring protocol  Program Reports include 
GAP progress (e.g. 
Inception report, annual 
program monitoring 
reports, final program 
report)  
Baseline: 0  
Target: Gender reports 
are done yearly by the 
PIU gender expert of 
each country in Reporting phase


---
*Page 113*
---

Page 110 
 
compliance with AfDB 
and GCF requirements  
TOTAL budget  500,000  
 
Outline and process for developing these national level assessments and action plans  
The preparation of country- specific gender assessments and gender action plans will follow established 
Bank’s standards and best practices and will be informed by the gender -related specificities which are 
similar among the Sahel G5 countries.  
The goal of the country- specifi c gender assessments and gender action plans is to deliver practical 
benefits to women and facilitate strategic changes in gender relations in the Sahel by providing a tool 
and mechanism for ensuring gender -inclusive design and implementation of all projec ts and 
components. The GAP will provide a tangible and explicit accountability framework for gender mainstreaming. The proposed GAP would include quotas, targets, activities, and design features to address gender -equality issues, and facilitate women’s par ticipation in, involvement, and accrual of 
tangible benefits from the project. In addition, the GAP will provide a road map for project 
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation.  
The process to develop the gender action plans is defined below:  
 
Sub-activit ies Details  
Initial consultation and wider stakeholder 
engagement  Consultations with a broad stakeholder base 
comprising government and non- state actors, 
including women’s groups, female -headed 
households, youth groups, and other marginalized and 
vulnerable groups.  
Develop a GAP implementation plan  This would define GAP activities, targets, resources, 
responsibilities, and timeline.  
Baseline Data Collection and Setting Targets  Obtain sex -disaggregated baseline data to inform 
gender -based targets for the GAP and its monitoring 
framework with relevant and realistic project 
outcomes and output.  
Conduct gender analysis  This portion of the GAP preparation would include a 
broad set of activities designed to identify gender 
access and controls in the social context of the Sahel 
(access to and control of resources, decision making 
participation at community- level, gender 
differentiated needs and priorities, and institutional 
capacity). This analysis would be supported by data 
on gender -based constraints that hamper access to 
renewable energy resources, and measure labour -
intensity reduction, productive use of energy as a 
result of access to new technologies and renewable 
energy.  
Consultations and engagement  The GAP will be developed join tly with the local 
partners and project implementing entities. 
Participatory approaches will be adopted to promote 
full ownership and understanding of the plan and its 
monitoring requirements. Grassroots women 
organizations will be consulted in focus group s and 
other community -based consultations.