=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210914131006+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/ModDate: D:20210914132800+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 October 2021  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
14 September  2021 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package f or FP 177 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Cooling Facility "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory P anel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.30/02 /Add.09 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 86 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  100  
Secretariat’s assessment  104 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   132 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  150 
Gender documentation  154


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
   
 Official Use  
  
 
  
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Cooling Facility    
Country(ies):  Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi,  North Macedonia, 
Panama, Sao Tome and  Principe , Somalia, Sri Lanka 
Accredited Entity:  The World Bank   
Date of first submission:  2020/ 04/29  
Date of current submission  2021 /09/12  
Version number  V. 9


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2. |  PAGE 2 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2. |  PAGE 3 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  LIST OF ACRONYMS  
 
 
AE Accredited Entity  
AC Air Conditioning  
BFAR  Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources  
BAU Business As Usual  
CDM  Clean Development Mechanism  
CLASP  Collaborative Labelling and Appliance Standards Programs  
CO2eq  Carbon Dioxide Equivalent  
DRR  Disaster Risk Reduction  
ECCP  Efficient, Clean Cooling Program  
EDGE  Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies  
EE Executing Entity  
EEff Energy Efficiency  
EERF  Energy Efficiency Revolving F acility  
ESA Energy Service Agreement  
ESMAP  Energy Sector Management Assistance Program  
ESF Environment and Social Framework  
ESCO  Energy Service Company  
ESCP  Environmental and Social Commitment Plan  
ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMF  Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ESMP  Environmental and Social Management Plan  
ESMS  Environmental and Social Management System  
ESPC  Energy Savings Performance Contract  
ESRC  Environmental and Social Risk Classification  
ESS Environmental and Social Standards  
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FI Financial Institution  
FM Financial management  
GHG  Greenhouse gas  
GWh  Gigawatt -hours  
GWP  Global Warming Potential  
GoP Government of Panama  
GoU Government of Uganda  
GCF  Green Climate Fund  
GHG  Greenhouse Gas  
GRM  Grievance Redress Mechanism  
HCFC  Hydrochlorofluorocarbons  
HFC Hydrofluorocarbon  
IFC International Finance Corporation  
ICR Implementation Completion Report  
IFR Interim financial  report  
ISR Implementation Status and Results Report  
IEG Independent Evaluation Group  
IDP Information Disclosure Policy  
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IBRD  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2. |  PAGE 4 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  IDA International Development Agency  
IEA International Energy Agency  
LMP Labor Management Plan  
MSME  Micro small and medium enterprise  
MEPS  Minimum Energy Performance Standards  
MP Montreal Protocol  
NAMA  Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action  
NAP National Adaptation Plan  
NBS Nature -based solution  
NDA  National Designated Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
NGO  Non-Governmental Organization  
PFI Participating Financial Institution  
PIE Project Implementing Entity  
PMU  Project Management Unit  
PPSD  Project Procurement Strategy Document  
PS Performance Standard  
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goal  
SEforALL  Sustainable Energy for All  
TA Technical Assistance  
TFs Trust Funds  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
WBG  World Bank Group  
WHO  World Health Organization


---
*Page 7*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 5 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  LIST OF TABLES  
Table 1: Summary of climate trends and drivers for each country at high risk of extreme heat hazard
 ................................................................................................................................................................ ................................ ..................  13 
Table 2: Indicative implementing model by country  ................................ .......................................................................  33 
Table 3: Economic Model Spreadsheet Summary  ............................................................................. 58 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Cooling Facility Theory of Change  ..................................................................................................................... 22 
Figure 2: Overview of the Cooling Facility  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 24 
Figure 3: Project review and investment approval process  ................................ ................................ ........................  31 
Figure 4: Typical project management unit key personnel  ................................ ................................ .........................  32 
Figure 5: Implementation arrangement for public procurement and contracting model  .............................. 34 
Figure 6: Implemen tation arrangement for credit lines  ................................ .................................................................  36 
Figure 7: Energy efficiency financing facility  implementation arrangement  ....................................... 38 
Figure 8. Public super ESCO implementation model  ......................................................................... 39 
Figure 9: Energy efficiency revolving facility (EERF) model  .............................................................. 39


---
*Page 8*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:   
       
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:   
GCF contribution:  :   
0% 
0% 
77% 
0% 
 
0% 
0% 
23% 
0 % 
 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  16,240,201 tCO2eq  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  4.2 million direct and 16.8 
million  indirect 
beneficiaries of which 50% 
of women  
 
 
10.3% of total population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  879.8 million   USD   
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  157 million   USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant             32 million USD   
☒ Loan             125 million USD  
☐ Guarantee  0 ☐  Reimbursable grants                          0          
☐ Results -based  payment             0 
A.11. Implementation 
period  10 years   A.12. Total lifespan   27 years   
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  Tbc A.14. ESS category   
B  
I-2


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information1   
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, represented by the Ministry of 
Finance,  Planning and Blue Economy  and acting through the Ministry of Health  
 Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, represented by the Ministry of 
Finance, and acting through the Ministry of Power   
 Federal Republic of Somalia, represented by the Ministry of Finance, and 
acting through the Ministry of Health   
 
People's Republic of Bangladesh, represented by the Ministry of Finance, and 
acting through the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources   
 
 
Republic of El Salvador , represented by the Ministry of Finance, and acting 
through the Ministry of Health 
 
Republic of Kenya, represented by the National Treasury of the Republic of 
Kenya and acting through the Ministry of Energy  and Petroleum  
 Republic of Malawi, represented by Ministry of Finance,  Economic Planning 
and Development,  and acting through Ministry of Industry, Trade and Tourism   
 
Republic of North Macedonia, represented by the Ministry of Finance and 
acting through the Ministry of Economy  
 
Republic of Panama , represented by Ministry of Economy and Finance and 
acting through the  Ministry of the Presidency   
 
  
 
1 For the purposes of the loans and grants, the Executing Entities would be the Host Countr ies, acting through 
the relevant Ministry(ies) .  A Project Implementing Entity (PIE) may be designated by the Host Country, to 
implement Component s 1-3, as identified and confirmed during Project preparation.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The Cooling Facility is proposed as an innovative, multi -sector and multi -country programmatic financing 
mechanism  to help address  the key sustainable development  challenge of providing access to cooling while 
minimizing  negative climate impacts .    
In a warming world , access to cooling –  from cold chains and refrigeration to ensure the safety of foods, 
medicine and vaccines, to space cooling to ensure comfortable, healthy and productive homes, institutions 
and workplaces –  is not a luxury , as over 1 billion people globally are deemed at risk from the lack of it.   The 
need to adapt and build resilience in a rapidly warming climate – together with growing populations, 
urbanization, and rising disposable income levels in developing countries  – are driving  the exponentially  
growing demand for  cooling services in many developing countries , which is associated with a projected 
rapid increase in cooling- related energy demand and greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions .     There is a window 
of opportunity to support access to cooling services while avoiding maladaptation and limiting GHG 
emissions  if we can shift this growing demand toward  climate -friendly , passive and low -carbon cooling 
solutions , thereby creating an oppor tunity for driving scale, reducing costs and ultimately creating sustainable 
markets for  sustainable cooling.   Such  actions would contribute to responding urgently to the challenge of 
climate change , meeting Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , planning for disaster risk reduction (i.e. 
from heatwaves) and supporting the goals of the Kigali Amendment.   
Developing countries have many competing demands for capital -- it is estimated that only 0.04 percent of 
total Overseas Development Assistance is directed to cooling solutions2.-- and the COVID -19 pandemic has 
further compounded these constraints .  The onset of the global pandemic due to COVID -19 and its impact 
across economies, further heightens the relevance of sustainable cooling solutions, which have a role to 
play in support of recovery efforts . This is reflected, for example, in the need for proper cooling and ventilation 
in health (as well as other) facilities, as well as the need for efficient cold chains to safely store vaccines, 
and to support food value chains from harvest to markets.   
In this context, a dedicated Facility for cooling would tar get addressing the barriers that have so far limited 
the deployment of clean cooling technologies and also put into place the support for a broader paradigm 
shift by working across key cooling target areas and with a range of  countries from different parts of the 
developing world to amplify the potential to leverage the experiences and learnings.  The Facility  seeks to 
scale and mainstream  sustainable cooling applications in a number of key sectors (agriculture, health, 
buildings) , thereby accelerating the deployment of climate -friendly solutions . It will help countries facing risks 
of extreme  heat hazard enhance access to cooling by putting place climate resilient  sustainable infrastructure 
and equipment, thereby contribute to adaptation efforts .  At the same time, the Facility also aims to help 
countries build enabling environments and support  investments to scale up access to sustainable cooling 
with a lower carbon footprint .  The Facility  is designed to promote passive and  low-carbon cooling in  a 
manner that will lead to the improved energy efficiency of buildings, cooling equipment and appli ances; 
enhance access to climate- friendly and heat -resilient cooling solution, as well help strengthen enabling 
environments for the scale- up of climate friendly cooling solutions.  It is expected that the Cooling Facility 
will also lead to broader development impacts, such as helping lower pressures on already strained energy 
systems, lowering local air pollution, as well as helping lower losses of food and medicine.    
In so doing, the Facility , taking into account the cross -sectoral nature of cooling , the different cooling needs 
and priorities of countries  and the necessity to adapt to different national contexts,  hopes to develop and 
demonstrate implementation and business models and approaches that can be fit -for-purpose in more 
countries wit h similar circumstances, and thus provide a foundation to further scale -up access to cooling 
 
2 Kigali Cooling Efficiency Program ( https://www.k -cep.org/why -cooling/ )


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  services and the shift to sustainable cooling investments , supporting  mitigation objectives  as well as goals 
of building resilience to  increased temperatures , even beyond the scope of this Facility .    
The Cooling Facility will support projects3 that meet the Facility’s criteria  in the following cooling target areas  
(in either grid or off grid contexts) : (i) space cooling and cool/green surfaces  (including passive cooling 
strategies in the built environment, cooling equipment; building automation and controls, as well as solar and 
vegetative roofs and walls) ; and (iii) refrigeration, cold chains and logistics  (including refrigeration, storage, 
and distribution activities, along with associated equipment and logistics) . 
Components  
The Cooling Facility consists of three main components  which support activities to be adapted to the needs 
and specific context of each country that is part of the Facility : 
 
Component 1 - Policy, regulatory and enabling environment support  (US$ 15.7 million of GCF grant) . 
This component will support activities that aim to strengthen institutional, policy and regulatory frameworks, 
raise awareness and stimulate behavi or changes, as well as build the capacity of key stakeholders to plan, 
finance and implement sustainable cooling investments as well as to plan for responses to increased 
heatwaves and other extreme events.  Enabling activities will include cooling- specifi c inputs (related to both 
climate mitigation and adaptation) into the country’s Nationally Determined Contributions planning process 
under the Paris Agreement such as Cooling Action Plans, as well as inputs on national policies and 
regulations that encoura ge sustainable cooling.  It will also support activities linked to the Facility’s Gender 
Action Plan.  
Component 2 - Financing for cooling investments (US$1 41.3 million of GCF funds, of which $ 125 
million in loan  and $16.3 million in grant ). The Facility will provide financing to eligible projects for 
investments that support and help lock -in more resilient, climate -friendly as well as affordable development 
paths  for cooling. Concessional financing will foster the adoption or scale- up the deployment of sustainable 
cooling technologies, appliances and business models. The deployment of these funds will be tailored to the 
needs of the projects, through  suitable financing modalities  for each project’s  context , for example, credit 
lines to financial intermediaries , or loans to households, municipalities and small, medium and large 
enterprises , or subsidies . 
Component 3 –  Project management (US$0  million  of GCF funds) . This component will support the 
Executing Entities (EEs) and Project Implementing Entities (PIEs) in their management , coordination and 
implementation of their project activities, in compliance with the EEs’ and PIEs’ contractual obligations 
included or referred to in the legal agree ments entered into with the Accredited Entities (AE).  
 
 Facility’s impact  
The Facility  will provide critical support to the transition to sustainable cooling through the mobilization of 
approximately  US$879.8  million  in financing (including both GCF and IBRD/IDA ).  It is expected to avoid or 
reduce over 9 .1 MtCO 2e over the 10-yearimplementation period of the Facility  (reduction that would reach 
16.2 MtCO 2e over the 27 year lifespan of the Facility ’s underlying assets) , strengthen local capacities, policy 
and regulatory environments to mainstream and support  sustainable cooling, facilitate  countries’ efforts to 
meet NDCs, and importantly reach approximately 4.2 million  direct beneficiaries  across  the 4 countries  
most vu lnerable to extreme heat risk hazards . 
 
3 The Cooling Facility is referred to as a “Program”, which supports a number (9) of “projects”


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME  INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
I. Rising global temperatures,  cooling needs  and GHG emissions  
 
a. Global perspective  
The world is off -track to meet the 1.5°C objective of the Paris agreement. The global demand for cooling 
resulting from this temperature rise is generating a vicious cycle: as temperatures increase demand for cooling 
increases. The consequent increases in GHG emissions as a result of increased energy use and refrigerants 
will further increase temperatures.  Population growth, increased urbanization and increased incomes in 
developing countries – especially in the world’s hotter regions  that are increasingly  susceptible to extreme 
heatwaves and related weather shocks -  further contribute to the projected exponential increase in the demand 
for cooling and its associated energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs).    Worldwide, there 
are currently an  estimated 3.6 billion cooling appliances in use; a figure projected to increase to 9.5 billion by 
2050 – and this would not even provide cooling for all who will need it in a warming world (as opposed to only 
to those who can afford it), which could requi re in the order of 14 billion cooling appliances (Dreyfus et al 
2020).  
Greater and rapid access to affordable cooling has become a development necessity. In 2019, the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that at 1.5°C of warming, 2.3 billion people could 
be both exposed and vulnerable to heatwave events –  a threshold that could be reached as early as 2030. 
SEforALL (2020 ) estimates over 1 billion people in developing countries are already facing immediate risk 
from lack of  access to cooling, which includes 6 99 million slum dwellers living in hotter -climate urban areas 
where electricity services do not exist, are intermittent or are too expensive; and about 318  million people living 
in poor rural areas without access to cold chains for storage and preservation of food and medicine.    This 
situation has implications for the health and well -being of people, food security, productivity and economic 
development and livelihoods.  In terms of health, extreme heat can cause illness es, including heat cramps, 
fainting, heat exhaustion heat stroke and even death.    In terms of productivity and livelihoods, t he International 
Labour  Organization (ILO 2019) estimates the productivity loss due to heat by 2030 to amount to 80 million 
full time jobs, representing GDP losses averaging 1.5 percent in low income countries and 4 percent in lower -
middle income countries –  figures that are lik ely under -estimates as projections assume that the increase in 
global temperatures by the end of the century will not exceed 1.5oC.  Productivity losses may reach 5 percent 
by 2030 in the worse affected regions of South Asia and West Africa.  The worse aff ected sectors will be 
construction and agriculture –  which in many countries will disproportionately affect women given their 
proportionately larger participation in that sector.  
The global demand for cooling resulting from this temperature rise – which is trending towards higher than the 
1.5oC target set under the Paris agreement according to multiple reports -  is generating a vicious cycle: as 
temperatures increase,  demand for  electricity increases to meet the growing cooling needs . The consequent 
increases in GHG emissions because of  increased fossil -fuel driven energy  use and high pollutant  refrigerants 
will further increase temperatures.  Population growth, increased urbaniz ation and increased incomes in 
developing countries – especially in the world’s hotter regions that are increasingly susceptible to extreme 
heatwaves and related weather shocks -  further contribute to the projected exponential increase in the demand 
for co oling and its associated energy consumption and GHGs.  
b. Sector context  
 The scale of the cooling challenge is significant across many sectors  as illustrated below.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
4 Hinnant and Mednick (2020) estimate that nearly 3 billion live where temperature- controlled vaccine storage is 
insufficient for an effective COVID -19 immunization campaign.  
5 Peters, T. and B. Hartley (12 November 2020), https://www.seforall.org/news/sustainable- cold- chains -needed-
for-equit able-covid -19-vaccine -distribution  
6 World Bank (October 13, 2020), “IBRD and IDA Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Financing to the 
COVID -19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Program Using the Multiphase Programmatic Approach 
(Global COVID -19 MPA)"  (P173789).   Agriculture and rural development . Higher temperatures contribute to droughts can increase 
undernourishment through impact on crop yields resulting in malnutrition and affecting food security in many 
developing countries, where it is estimated that about 45 percent of food spoils mainly due  to inadequate cold 
storage and cold chains.  The GHG emissions associated with food loss and waste contribute to about 4.4 
GTCO2e per year, representing 8 -10 percent of total GHG emissions from 2010 to 2016 (Mbow C., et al 
2019) Supply chain disruptions  further threaten food security and nutrition of millions of people, are lead to 
urban centers struggling to access fresh fruits, vegetables, dairy, meat and fish, making the existing gaps felt 
even more. The FAO (2018) warns that “addressing food loss and waste through cold chain extension without 
any technology improvement would have serious adverse effects on climate change as a result of increased 
GHGs”. As governments around the world plan to boost loc al employment, the agriculture and  fisheries 
sectors stand -out; and are also areas where integrating efficient, clean cooling (from efficient building 
constructions to efficient cooling and refrigeration systems powered with renewable energy) could suppor t low-
carbon development . 
 
Health.  The health sector is a priority.  Hospitals and many health facilities are often open 24 hours a day and 
require heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems to control room temperature, pressurization, 
air change rates and humidity in order to mitigate airborne contaminants and provide a healing space for 
patients while also providing a high level of protection for healthcare personnel.  The increased electricity load 
from hospitals should be met as efficient ly as possible to avoid burdening electricity systems and lowering 
costs for health facilities so they can dedicate scarce resource for treatments.  Rural clinics may need to be 
built and should be done integrating energy efficiency into the design and construction; their increased energy 
needs for cooling (and other uses) can be met with distributed renewable energy.  The availability of 
sustainable cold chains to safely store and preserve medicine and vaccines – was already inadequate4 – and 
becomes more urgent.  The global healthcare sector, with its need for temperature control facilities and storage 
for medicine and vaccines, is estimated to account for about 4.4 percent of net GHG emissions globally (E3G, 
2020).  A well- functioning cold chain and health system infrastructure is essential; it is also an opportunity to 
build institutional capacity and sustainability to put countries’ health systems on a more sustainable and 
climate -friendly path with sustainable cooling.  
The COVID -19 pandemic has shed light on –  and compounded - the pre -pandemic inequities in the health 
cold chain and the challenges in achieving universal immunization coverage, especially in Africa.  It has been 
estimated that the cost of vaccine lost due to exposure to temperature fluctuations amounts to approximately 
USD 34 billion annually – a figure that does not include the physical and financial cost associated with 
avoidable illnesses5.  The COVID -19 pandemic will have both short – and long-  term effects on populations 
around the world, causing hardship practically everywhere, but with particularly severe risks for the poorest 
countries and under -resourced communities.  COVID -19 will likely have long -lasting impacts on healthcare 
systems globally, especially in developing countries where health facilities are already lacking in capacity and 
reach, but also in other sectors and across the economy.  It is clear that priorities of countries are shifting.  A 
multi- pronged approach will be needed to respond to the crisis and help address the strains put on health, 
food, energy, housing, and other systems and plan a recovery.  The World Bank Group has been responding aggressively to address these needs, making available up to $160 billion in financing capacity through June 
2021, including an envelope of $12 billion for vaccine purchase and deployment 6
, which could help cover 
vaccination for up to 1 billion people, and support strong immunization and health systems, including cold 
chain infrastructure.  This overall $160 billion suppor t is tailored to the health, economic and social shocks 
countries are facing and includes over $50 billion of IDA resources on grant and highly concessional terms . A


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
7 Refrigerants are critical to vapor compression- based equipment used in refrigeration and air conditioning.     
8 ESMAP (2020), Primer for Space Cooling.  
9 Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (www.globalabc.org).  
10 See the World Bank Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)’s ThinkHazard!  web-
based tool ( https://thinkhazard.org/en/ ) 
11 According to SEforALL 2020, Bangladesh ranks among the top 10 countries with urban poor populations at 
risk from lack of cooling.   portion of the cooling solutions supported by this Facility will contribute to those effor ts, and help “green” the 
response and recovery.  
Refrigerants .  About  20 percent of the climate impact comes from the direct emissions of hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFC) refrigerants.7 Further, t he leakage of refrigerants used are responsible for 15 -20 percent  of the global 
warming effect of refrigeration.  (Carbon Trust, 2020).  This highlights the importance of tackling the energy 
dimension of cooling across sectors , as efforts to only address the climate impact of refrigerants (under the 
Montreal Prot ocol’s 2016 Kigali Amendment, countries committed to cut use of HFCs, a potent greenhouse 
gas widely used as refrigerants, by more than 80 percent over 30 years ), would leave out the largest share of 
the cooling mitigation challenge.   The HFC phase down sc hedule of the Kigali Amendment could avoid up to 
0.5°C of warming by 2100. If combined with efforts to maximize energy efficiency in cooling equipment, close 
to 1°C of global warming can be avoided by the end of the century (G. Dreyfuss et al, 2020).  
Build ings.   Cooling is the fastest growing end- use in buildings.  Forty percent of the world’s population resides 
within the tropics, with dramatically lower access to space cooling in relation to their need – and this figure is 
projected to grow to 50 percent by 20508. The use of air conditioners and electric fans is becoming increasingly 
common and already accounts for about a fifth of the total electricity in buildings around the world –  or 10 
percent of all global electricity  consumption (IEA, 2018) . Globally, the energy consumption of buildings 
represents 36 percent of the global final energy demand and almost 40 percent  of GHG emissions9.  The 
global energy use for space cooling is projected to grow 300% between 2016 and 2050, and by then space 
cooling could account for 30- 50 percent  of peak electricity loads, requiring an increase of 2,500 GW to meet 
that additional demand.   Improvements are needed for the existing building stock to become less energy and 
GHG intensive, and new buildings (keeping in mind that half of the buildings that will be standing in 2060 have not yet been built and the majority of these will be in developing countries) will need to be built with a lower 
energy and GHG footprint.  
 Energy.  About 80 percent of the clima te impact of cooling equipment is associated with energy use (i.e. the 
indirect CO
2 emissions from fossil -fuel based electricity generation). Much of the use of energy for cooling is 
driving peak demand which is typically the least efficient and carbon int ensive and driving the need for more 
power plants.  In hot countries like India the share of air conditioners ( ACs) in peak electricity load could reach 
45 percent  in 2050, up from 10 percent  today.  Globally, space cooling- associated emissions from electricity 
use are set to double by 2050 (even as the grid gets cleaner).  In fact,  an estimated 2.3 billion people in lower -
middle class in developing countries are on the verge of purchasing the most affordable –  and also least 
efficient – ACs.   Worldw ide, there are currently an estimated 3.6 billion cooling appliances in use; a figure 
projected to increase to 9.5 billion by 2050 –  and this would not even provide cooling for all who will need it in 
a warming world (as opposed to only to those who can af ford it), which could require in the order of 14 billion 
cooling appliances (Dreyfus et al 2020).  Moving to best available technologies would reduce cumulative emissions by 38- 60 GtCO2eq by 2030 and up to 130- 260 GtCO2eq by 2050.  
 
c. Facility country -specific context  
 
Each of the countries covered by the Facility face the need to adapt to a warming world as they are exposed 
to risks of extreme heat hazard
10, albeit at different intensity levels , which translates into a growing demand 
for cooling . For example, Bangladesh11, Malawi, Somalia, and El Salvador are exposed to a high risk, while


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  the others are facing a medium risk.  Table 1 provides a summary of the climate trends and drivers for each 
of these four high risk countries . 
Table 1: Summary of climate trends and drivers for each country at high risk of extreme heat hazard  
Country  Historical extreme 
temperature  Extreme temp erature  
projections (base period 
1986- 2005)   Cooling degree day (CDD) - 
linked to temp erature  
projections  
Bangladesh  Observed data between 1985 
and 1998 indicate an 
increasing trend in 
temperatures of about 1°C in 
May and 0.5°C in November. 
The seasonal frequency of 
days with Tmax≥36°C has 
been showing an increasing 
trend since 1986 in most parts 
of Bangladesh, with the 
highest rate of +1.018 
day/year at Mongla.  
Average temperatures have 
been increasing more rapidly 
during the monsoon season, 
from June to August, as is 
evident from historical data for 
the last 30 years (1991- 2020) .   
Maximum and minimum 
temperatures during monsoon 
season increased by 0.05°C 
and 0.03°C respectively . Mean annual temperatures 
are predicted to increase b y 
about 1. 2°С by mid- century, 
and by 1.9°С  by the end of the 
century  compared to the 1986-
2005 base period.  
Compared to the 1986- 2005 
base period, the total number 
of hot days in a year where 
the daily maximum 
temperature is above 35°С will 
rise by 13.23 by 2039, and by 
41.11days by 2099. The 
probability of heat waves, 
defined as a period of three or 
more days where average 
temperature is above 95th 
percentile, will grow by 5% in 
2040- 2059, and by  9% 
between 2080- 2099 compared 
to 1986- 2005 base period.  
 Projected change in a nnual 
cooling degree days is  
projected to rise from 482 
CDD between 2020- 2039 to 
778 CDD between 2040 and 
2059   and 1210 CDD by the 
end of the century . 
El Salvador  One of the most climate 
affected countries in the world.   
El Salvador experienced a 
sustained increase in monthly 
temperature over the last 30 
years .  The summer months of 
April to August have 
witnessed consistent increase 
in temperature. The average 
temperature recorded in April 
2020 was 27.9 ºC which 
exceeded the average April 
temperature of 1986- 2005 
(26.6 ºC) by 1.3ºC  
 
Since, 1950s, the temperature 
increased on average by 
1.3°C compared with the 
global average of 0.8°C.  
 Mean annual temperature will 
rise by 1.24°C in 2050. The 
projected change in the 
annual probability of 
heatwaves in El Salvador will 
grow by 19 % by 2040- 59, 25% 
by 2060- 79 (compared to 8% 
between 2020- 2039). The 
projected change in hot days 
(Tmax>35°C) will increase by 
14.49 days  by 2059 , and 
36.12 days by the end of the 
century .  
 Projected change in  annual 
cooling degrees is projected to 
rise to 946.81 CDD by 2050 
and 1370.68CDD  by the end 
of the century  (compared to 
578.98 CDD in 2020- 2039 
period).


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
12 ThinkHazard! – Bangladesh https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/23- bangladesh/EH  
13 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Bangladesh –  Climate Data: Historical and Projections 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/bangladesh  
14 Climate Policy Institut e: 
https://www.climateemergencyinstitute.com/uploads/M__Drought_in_Bangladesh_and_its_adaptive_measures.
pdf Malawi  Between 1960 and 2006, 
mean annual temperature 
increased by 0.9°C, with an 
average increase of 0.21°C 
per decade. Climate trends 
over this period show the total 
number of hot days in a year 
have increased by 30 days.  Mean annual temperature will 
rise by 1. 58°C in 2040- 2059  
and 2.16 °C by the end of the 
century . The number of days 
where the daily maximum 
temperature exceeds 35°C will 
increase by about 21 days by 
2059 relative to the period 
1986- 2005, and by 32 days by 
the end of the 21st century . Projected change in a nnual 
cooling degree days is  
projected to rise by 1,154 
CDD between 2040 and 2059, 
and 1317 CDD by the end of 
the century . 
Somalia  Between 1960 and 2020, 
mean annual temperature 
increased by about 0.5°C in 
the hottest months (April and 
May) and 0.3°C in the coldest 
months (January and 
December).  Mean annual temperature is 
projected to increase by 1. 3°C 
by mid- century  and 1.7°C  by 
the end of the century , with 
the number of hot days 
(Tmax>35°C)  in a year 
expected to increase by 70 
days.  Annual cooling degree days 
are projected to rise by  836  
CDD between 2040 to 2059, 
and 1182 CDD by end of the 
century . 
 
The rationale for climate change adaptation of the countries at high risk extreme heat hazard is presented 
below.    
Bangladesh.  Bangladesh is highly exposed to extreme heat, drought, and wildfires. Extreme heat hazard is 
classified as high throughout the country, which indicates that prolonged exposure to extreme heat, resulting 
in heat stress, is expected to occur at least once in the next five years12.  The seasonal frequency of days with 
Tmax  ≥ 36°C has been on an increase since 1986 in most parts of Bangladesh,  as highlighted in Table 1.  
Average temperatures have been increasing more rapidly during the monsoon season from June to August ,  
according to historical data for the last 30 years (1991- 2020) .  The increment in temperature has been 
consistent in the last 5 years alone. Looking into the future, extreme temperatures are expected to occur with 
high frequency, duration, or severity. Mean annual temperatures are predicted to increase by about 1. 2°С by 
mid-century, and by 1.9°С by the end of the century, with warming more likely pronounced during winter 
months from December to February. Most notably, the total number of hot days in a year (where daily maximum temperature is above 35°С) is projected to increase by 13.23 days  by 2039,  22.27 by 2040- 59, and 
by 41.11 days by 2099.  By mid -century, annual cooling degree days (CDD) are projected to rise from 482 
CDD (202- 2039) to about 778  CDD by 2059  , and 1210 by the end of the century  . Overall, this will impact the 
energy sector as any time the temperature rises above 18.3°C, there is an expected increase in power demand 
for cooling
13.  Without decarbonization efforts, t his could result in significant increases in GHG given high 
share of fossil fuel in the power generation mix. 
On average, Bangladesh is affected by a major country -wide drought every five years. There have been 19 
major droughts between 1960 and 1991 that have affected around 53% of the population and 47% of the 
country14. Seasonal drought events commonly occur throughout the country, mostly in the relatively drier 
northwestern region. Climate change is projected to exacerbate drought conditions in Bangladesh, especially


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
15 GFDRR: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2018-
10/wb_gfdrr_climate_change_country_profile_for_BGD.pdf  
16 Think Hazard –  El Salvador: https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/75- el-salvador  
17 Climate & Development Knowledge Network: https://cdkn.org/project/planning- around- temperature-
increases -san-salvador/?loclang=en_gb  
18 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: El Salvador –  Climate Data, Historical and Projections: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/el -salvador/climate- data- projections  
19 The CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security: 
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/regions/latin- america/el -salvador  
20 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: El Salvador –  Climate Data: Historical and Projections  in the northwestern parts. Areas of the country that  currently experience moderate droughts will likely turn into 
severely drought -prone areas in the next 20- 30 years15. This can put significant stress on the energy system 
as it is likely to increase energy demand while decreasing energy supply reliability.  With higher aridity, wildfires 
are also expected to be a prevalent risk in Bangladesh. Wildfire hazard is classified as high in the country. 
This means that there is greater than 50% chance of encountering weather that could support a significant wildfire  that is likely to result in both life and property loss in any given year. Climate projections identify a likely 
increase in the frequency of fire weather occurrence, including an increase in temperature and greater 
variance in rainfall. In particular, the fire season is likely to increase in duration with greater number of days 
with weather that supports fire spread and longer periods without rain during fire seasons. Projections also 
indicate that there could be an increase in the severity of fire, and even areas that are not currently at risk of 
wildfire hazard could see an increase due to an expansion of the wildfire hazard zone.   
These changes in climate will only lead to increase in energy demand for both space cooling and cold storage. 
This increase will be on top of energy demand growth driven by increasing urbanization and rise in income 
levels. Thermally efficient design and construction and passive measures that limit heat entering into the 
building, efficient air conditioning and ventilation will  be needed, especially  to protect vulnerable segments of 
the population, such as children, the elderly and the sick during hot days and heatwaves. Furthermore, various 
economic and social sectors will rely more on cooling solutions as adaptation mechanisms  as temperatures 
increase across regions. Therefore, the F acility will support investments in sustainable cooling solution s as 
essential adaptation measures delivered through low -carbon efficient solutions.    
El Salvador. El Salvador is highly exposed to extreme heat, hurricanes, droughts, and wildfires. Extreme heat 
hazard is classified as high throughout the country, which indicates  that prolonged exposure to extreme heat, 
resulting in heat stress, is expected to occur at  least once in the next five years16. Historical trends suggest 
that the temperature increase in El Salvador has been more pronounced than in other parts of the world, with the temperature increase since 1950s of 1.3°C compared to 0.8°C globally
17.   El Sa lvador experienced a 
sustained increase in monthly temperature over the last 30 years   (1991- 2020) . In particular, the summer 
months (i.e., April to August ) have witnessed consistent increase  in temperature.  The average temperature 
recorded in April 2020 was 27.9  ºC which exceeded the average April temperature of 1986- 2005 (26.6 ºC) by 
1.3ºC.  Looking into future, mean annual temperature is projected to increase by 1. 24°С by 2059. Most notably, 
the number of days where the daily maximum temperature exceeds 35°C will increase by 36.12  days by the 
end of the 21st century, and the probability of heat waves will increase by 30% by 2100. The annual cooling 
degree days are projected to rise by 46.81 CDD by 2050 , and 1370.68 CDD by the end of the century18.  
 El Salvador is situated in the dry corridor of Central America, and prolonged dry periods often result in 
significant economic losses. More than 10,000km2 of land area in El Salvador is likely to be regularly affected 
by severe, moderate, or weak droughts19. The probability of severe drought will grow by 36% by 2059, 
compared to 1986 -200520. Droughts can put significant stress on the energy system as they increase energy 
demand while decreasing energy supply reliability  (which have a detrimental impact on key health services 
and vaccine safety) . Additionally, the annual precipitation is predicted to decrease by -65.33mm by 2059.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
21 GFDRR: El Salvador, Earthquake and Hurricane Profil e 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/El%20Salvador1.pdf  
22 IRENA: Renewables Readiness Assessment, El Salvador https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Dec/IRENA_RRA_El_Salvador_2020.pdf  
23 ThinkHazard! – Malawi https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/23- bangladesh/EH  
24 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Malawi –  Climate Data: Historical and Projections 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/malawi/climate- data- projections  Similar to other countries in Central America, El Salvador has seen a steady increase in the intensity and 
frequency of extreme we ather events and storms in the last 30 years. Due to its social and economic 
vulnerability, economic assets and infrastructure in El Salvador are at a high risk of damage from hurricanes. 
Annual average loss from hurricanes is estimated at US$2.9million (0 .01% of GDP) and the probable 
maximum loss at US$ 374million (1.5% of GDP)21. Adding to that, the frequency and intensity of hurricanes 
and extreme weather events is likely to increase in the future. Wildfire hazard is classified as high in the 
country. This means that there is greater than 50% chance of encountering weather that could support a 
significant wildfire that is likely to result in both life and property loss in any given year. Warming climate, rising 
sea level rise, combined with the increasing unpredictability of the EL Niño Southern Oscillation’s patterns, will 
likely put additional stress on the country’s energy system, especially considering that ~35% of El Salvador’s 
energy supply comes from hydropower energy22 that might be impacted by droughts and decrease in annual 
precipitation.  
These changes in climate will only lead to a significant increase in demand for both space cooling and cold 
storage. This increase will be on top of energy demand growth driven by increasing urbanization and rise in 
income levels. Efficient air conditioning and ventilation will be needed, in particular to protect vulnerable 
segments of the population, such as children, the elderly and the sick during hot days and heatwaves. Further, 
in health facilities, for example, adaptation mechanisms such as adequate cooling and ventilation will be 
needed to create the ambient temperature ranges for optimal functionality and to safely preserve medications 
and vaccines. This will be another factor contribut ing to increasing energy demand. The impacts of increased 
demand will be exacerbated by the supply variability from hydropower as a result of droughts and decrease in 
annual precipitation thus putting additional stress on the power system.  
Therefore, the i nvestments in sustainable cooling s olutions  supported by the F acility will not only help adapt 
to extreme temperature hazard on the demand side (for space cooling and cold chains) , but also help reduce 
system stress due to hydropower variability ,  which will help safeguard the efficacy of vaccines and medecines , 
as well as essential medical services  necessary for the health and well being of the population.  
 
Malawi. Malawi is prone to adverse climate hazards including extreme temperatures, dry spells, seasonal 
droughts, intense rainfall, and flash floods. Extreme heat hazard is classified as medium to high risk throughout 
the country, which indicates that prolonged exposure to extreme heat that results in heat stress is likely to occur at least once in the next five years
23. The southern region is particularly highly exposed to extreme 
temperatures and heat stress. Between 1960 and 2006, mean annual temperature increased by 0.9°C, with an average increase of 0.21°C per decade. Climate trends over t his period show that average temperatures 
are increasing more rapidly during the rainy summer season (i.e., December to January ), and the total number 
of hot days in a year has increased by 30 days. As climate change intensifies ,  mean annual temperature 
will rise by 1. 58°C (1.38°C to 1.96°C) in 2040 -2059.   By mid -
century, annual cooling degree days are 
projected to rise by 953 CDD, with the number of hot days in a year expected to increase by about 21days24. 
This can significantly impact the energy sector as any time the temperature rises above 18°C, there is an 
expected increase in power demand for cooling.


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
25 GFDRR: https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/malawi_low.pdf  
26 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Malawi –  Vulnerability 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/malawi/vulnerability  
27 ThinkHazard! – Malawi https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/23- bangladesh/EH  
28 See https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/malawi/overview  Beyond extreme temperatures, droughts and floods are two of the most severe of climate hazards in Malawi, 
which have only increased in frequency and severity over the past twenty years. On average, 1.5 million people 
are affected by water scarcity every year, mainly in t he central and southern parts of the country25,  and close 
to 6 million people were affected by drought between 1985 and 2018.  This is especially important for Malawi, 
where about half of the population lives below the national poverty line, as severe droughts (1 -in-25-year 
drought) can increase the poverty rate by 17 percentage points (roughly an additional 2.1 million people falling below the poverty line)
26. Drought conditions are a significant risk to the country’s energy supply as 70% of 
generation capacity comes from hydro ,  as well as to agriculture production –  a key economic sector in the 
country . Such conditions are wors ened by extreme temperatures and wildfires. Even when looking at the next 
few decades, wildfire hazard is projected to continue to be a high risk throughout the country given that in any given year, there is greater than a 50% chance of encountering weathe
r that could support a significant 
wildfire27. Extreme heat events will likely put additional stress on the country’s energy system, especially 
considering that majority of  of Malawi’s energy supply comes from hydropower that might be impacted by 
droughts and decrease in annual precipitation.    At the same time, the agriculture sector will need to adapt to 
a warming and changing climate which is reducing yields and impacting livelihoods.  
These changes in climate will  have a negative impact on many economic  sectors, and agriculture in particular 
– affecting food security and livelihoods .  The changes will also  lead to a significant increase in demand for 
both space cooling and cold storage. This increase will be on top of energy demand growth driven by efforts 
to achieve higher access rates. Specifically, in the agriculture sector –  which employs a very large share of 
the working population and is vulnerable to external shocks, particularly climatic shocks28, adaptation 
mechanisms such as proper cold storage for optimal functionality and to preserve perishable agricultural 
products will be critical for farmers  and for avoiding food security problems . This will be another factor 
contributing to increasing energy demand with rising temperatures and increased extreme heat events. The 
impacts of increased demand will be exacerbated by the impact of potential supply de crease from hydropower 
as a result of droughts and decrease in annual precipitation thus putting additional stress on the power system , 
in a country where there are significant energy shortages . 
As the agriculture sector is both one of the most vulnerable to climate change and one of the largest 
contributors of GHG emissions in the country, facilitating the deployment of  climate -friendly (including energy 
efficient, low GWP refrigerants, use of solar energy) cooling technologies would contribute to achieving a low-
carbon and climate -resilient economy.  The support provided through the Cooling Facility will not only help 
adapt to extreme temperature hazard on the cold chains for the agriculture sector but also help increase 
agricultural productivity, reduce power system stress due to hydropower variability  and avoid the use of diesel .  
 
Somalia . Somalia is generally arid and semi -arid with two seasonal rainfall seasons. The country’s climate is 
influenced by the Inter -Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), monsoonal winds and ocean currents, jet -streams, 
and conditions of the neighboring Indian Ocean a nd Red Sea. Mean annual temperatures was  about 27°C   in 
the period between 1901 -2016, with June to September being  the hottest months in the north and December 
to March hottest in the south. Between 1960 and 2020, mean annual temperature increased by about 0.5°C 
in the hottest months (April and May) and 0.3°C in the coldest months (January and December).  By mid -
century, mean annual temperature is projected to increase by 1.3°C and by around 1.7°C by the end of the


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
29 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia –  Climate Data: Historical and Projections: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/climate- data- projections  
30 Somalia National Adaptation Programme of Action to Climate Change: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/som01.pdf  
31 Think Hazard –  Somalia https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/226- somalia/EH  century across all areas of Somalia29.  In addition, t he El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) influences 
Somalia’s climate variability in several ways, bringing more rainfall and flooding during El Niño and droughts 
in La Niña years30. Majority of Somalia is at risk of several natural hazards, including extreme heat, drought, 
floods, and cyclones due to these factors that affect the level of temperature and precipitation in the land. For example, extreme heat hazard risk is considered high, with prolonged exposure to extreme heat that results in heat stress expected to occur at least once in the next five years
31. The number of days where the daily 
maximum temperature exceeds 35°C will increase by about 70 days by 2059 relative to the period 1986- 2005, 
and by 93 days by the end of the 21st century.  Annual cooling degree days are expected to rise by more than 
836 CDD between 2040 to 2059, and by 1182 CDD by the end of the century. This significant increase in 
temperatures will impact the energy sector as there will be higher power demand for cooling.    
Beyond extreme temperatures, droughts and floods pose the most severe hazards to the country. According 
to Somalia’s National Adaptation Program of Action, the country has endured multiple, severe drought 
episodes since 1965. Somalia experienced a sever e drought event in 2011, which resulted in 258,000 deaths 
in the country and affected 13 million people throughout the Horn of Africa between October 2010 and April 
2012. Continued increases in temperature could have vast impacts on the Somali population, livestock, and 
crop yields. Heat stress could also alter livestock’s feed intake, health, mortality rates , agricultural production, 
and thus the country’s overall economic growth.  
These changes in climate will only lead to a significant increase in demand for both space cooling and cold 
storage. This increase will be on top of energy demand growth driven by increasing urbanization and rise in income levels. Efficient air conditioning and ventilation will be needed, especially to  
protect vulnerable 
segments of the population, such as children, the elderly and the sick during hot days and heatwaves. Further, 
in health facilities, for example, adaptation mechanisms such as proper cooling and ventilation will be needed to create the ambient temperature ranges for optimal functionality
,  ensure safe and healthy indoor 
environments,  and to preserve medications and vaccines. This will be another factor contributing to increasing 
energy demand with rising temperatures and increased extreme heat events.  
In summary, t here is an opportunity to set the course for affordable and sustainable cooling pathways now. 
The proposed cooling- related investments in the Facility’s Somalia project will help improve the quality of 
health infrastructure and services, while als o limiting operational costs which is key in the context of the health 
ministry’s depleted budget .  The investments in sustainable cooling systems  supported by the Cooling Facility 
will not only help enhance the health system’s resilience and adapt ation to extreme temperature hazard on 
the demand side (for space cooling and cold chains) , but also make it more sustainable and help improve 
health outcomes in the country’s population by making available medicine and vaccines longer to more people .      
II. Cooling Facil ity strategic approach  
The wide range of cooling needs and priorities implies an equally diverse set of challenges and solutions. 
Many issues are also country and context specific.  There is no one- size-fits-all solution or approach.  
Given the nascent and still early stage focus on cooling (globally) to address for both development and climate 
reasons, the Cooling Facility seeks to cater to different contexts  – geographic, socio -economic and including 
within countries’ efforts and prio rities to respond to the COVID c risis.  In fact, it is hoped that t he diversity of 
the selected countries in the Facility will provide pioneering examples for mitigation and adaptation activities 
related to cooling in different contexts.  The Facility aims to  support different approaches and generate lessons 
that can then be adapted and scaled more broadly to enhance access to affordable cooling while at same ti me


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
32 Bang ladesh also ranks among the top 10 countries with lower -middle income populations on the brink of 
purchasing the most affordable air conditioner or refrigerator –  and least energy efficient –  on the market, 
causing increased energy demand (along with GHG e missions) that will further strain the country’s energy 
system.  
33 The listed programs and initiatives, while having the potential to strengthen project’s impact and producing 
analytical and knowledge products which will inform project design, are not part of the Cooling Facility nor the 
projects supported by the Facility.  
34 For more information on the World Bank Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), a global 
technical assistance and knowledge program administered by the World Bank (housed wit hin the Bank’s 
Energy and Extractives Global Practice) , see www.esmap.org.  kick start a transformation towards more sustainable cooling , offering examples to be emulated and adapted 
in countries beyond the scope of the Facility .   Operationally, the nature of cooling needs is such that often 
interventions will consist of proje cts within larger country programs; this is particularly likely for measures to 
address cold chain issues in health, food security, and labor productivity, for example (e.g., the sustainable 
cold chain investments will typically be a part of a broader proj ects targeting support to a country’s health 
sector).    
 Where  growing cooling demand is creating pressures on country energy systems and upward pressures on 
GHG emissions,  the priority is to support space cooling, both in terms of passive measures (such as building 
design and high efficiency thermal envelopes) and energy efficient cooling equipment and systems (this is the 
case for Bangladesh
32, Sri Lanka, Panama, North Macedonia) .  In agriculture -dominant economies  with needs 
to expand access cooling to rural and off -grid areas, the priority is to support efficient  and climate friendly cold 
chain (as through the Facility’s support to Malawi and Kenya).   
In hot climate countries, ensuring health infrastructure is adequate for patients and storage of pharmaceuticals 
is a priority , as pharmaceuticals expire and become ineffective more quickly in hot climatic conditions.   Efficient 
and solar -powered cold chain and health facilities can expand quality health services and ensure safe storage 
of vaccines while making them more resilient to warmer temperatures, in addition to keeping their carbon 
footprint low (e.g. Somalia, Sao Tome and Principe and El Salvador).   
Overall, t he Cooling Facility  is aligned and supports countries’ climate change goals and ambitions, as 
reflected  in their respective climate change Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) .  
III. Related interventions / programs  
The Cooling Facility draws on and coordinates with other  initiatives and programs33 related to cooling, which 
are funded through other financiers but are not  part of the Funded Activities.  
The ESMAP34 Efficient, Clean Cooling program (ECCP) is a multi -sectoral technical assistance (TA) program 
dedicated to cooling implemented in collaboration with the World Bank’s Montreal Protocol unit (housed within 
the Bank’s Environment , Natural Resources and Blue Economy Global Practice).  It was established in 2019 
with seed funding from the philanthropic Kigali Cooling Efficiency Program (K -CEP), with the aim of kick -
starting a new business line within the WBG by suppor ting the design and inclusion of efficient, clean cooling 
components or characteristics in WBG country engagements, lending and investments, as well as activities to 
raise awareness and disseminate knowledge.    The ECCP also seeks to develop strategic par tnerships within 
and outside the WBG and help mobilize funding.  Under ESMAP’s new business plan for FY21 -24, the Efficient 
Clean Cooling TA Program is proposed to be sustained and scaled up, including to support project preparation 
activities and develop a pipeline of projects across the World Bank’s Global Practices.    The ESMAP Efficient 
Clean Cooling TA program will also support knowledge exchange events and the development of knowledge 
products (e.g. case studies) to share experiences and lessons from  World Bank projects , including from those  
supported by the Facility – both among the beneficiaries of the projects and other key national and international


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
35 The Africa Energy Access Leap is a program proposing a WBG global effort to help reach universal access to 
modern energy, aiming to achieve SDG7 (“Access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for 
all”) by 2030.  The proposal is currently under development.   stakeholders, as well as with other countries – to help raise awareness and inform further scaling -up of 
sustainable cooling more broadly.  
The Climate Investment Funds (CIF). The Cooling Facility builds on synergies with the CIF, a multi -donor fund 
administered by the World Bank. For example, CIF funding could address the barriers to the deployment of 
standalone- solar technologies  in general , while the Cooling Facility  would focus on cooling solutions for 
productive uses. The Cooling Facility will continue to identify and leverage partnerships with the CIF to 
enhance its development impact.  
The Bank’s Energy Leap proposal for Africa35 seek s to help reach universal energy access by 2030.  It 
specifically aims to promote conditions for increased use of productive efficient refrigeration and cooling 
electric appliances for households, micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME), and agriculture s ector to 
help boost both household income and energy demand – and in doing so help strengthen the business case 
for electrification and provide households access to welfare- enhancing appliances.  
The ESMAP Gender and Energy Program  is helping to strengthen women's roles as consumers, employees, 
and entrepreneurs in the energy sector. Aligned with the WBG Gender Strategy (FY16 -23), the program works 
with countries to generate crucial knowledge of actions and design interventions needed to close gender gaps 
in the sector and improve development outcomes. The  ESMAP Gender and Energy program will provide 
support to identify, assess and suggest options to respond to specific gender issues in the context of cooling-
informed projects, including in  new areas, such as  women in energy leadership and productive uses of energy.   
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)  
The theory of change diagram ( Figure 1) presents  the logical underpinning of the Facility.  
There are multiple barriers and risks to the scale- up deployment of climate -friendly cooling solutions . The first 
barrier,  i.e. lack of regulatory/policy framework for sustainable cooling system along with limited institutional 
capacity to design, implement, monitor, and enforce cooling standards, is a fundamental hurdle to address to 
foster a transformational change in the cooling sector. However, the extent to which market transformation 
can be sustained relies particularly on changes to people’s behavior whether that means changes in 
consumption patterns or in approaches to meet their cooling needs. Low demand for sustainable cooling 
usually hampers market development. Addressing the barriers related to the lack  of public awareness of the 
benefits of climate -friendly cooling, and the absence of suitable business models and market mechanisms 
becomes critical to stimulate the demand.  
Meeting the demand for climate- friendly cooling solutions requires access to suff icient and affordable sources 
of financing.  Gaps in financing for investments in energy efficient buildings and efficient and climate friendly 
equipment have been highlighted by the IEA, SEforALL and others .   According to t he NGO CLASP 
(Collaborative Lab elling and Appliance Standards),  consumer affordability is the most significant constraint 
for growth of demand for off -grid appliances . On the demand side, consumers cannot afford the retail price 
of an off -grid appliance without upfront financing. On the  supply side, producers and retailers struggle to 
lower the retail price due to high distribution costs. Access to finance for consumers, product innovators, and distributors will be critical to achieving scale  
In this context, the Facility will support ac tivities that address and help remove regulatory/policy -related, 
institutional , market and behavioral  barriers to the development of sustainable cooling investments by (i) 
providing technical assistance and building the capacity of state and non -state acto rs (such as commercial 
banks, private investors and technical companies, end user beneficiaries) , (ii) supporting the design of 
sustainable implementation mechanisms and business models;  (iii) increasing end user awareness of the 
benefits of low -carbon co oling solutions, (iv) facilitating access to  affordable  sources of financ ing; and v)


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  provide credit lines to financial intermediaries. In turn, these activities will strengthen the capacity of key 
stakeholders, stimulate the demand for climate -friendly cooling solutions , foster the penetration of climate -
friendly equipment and infrastructure and mobilize  capital from public and private sources . These interventions 
will  strengthen institutional and regulatory systems, improve access to c ooling, improve the adaptive capacity 
of end user beneficiaries to respond to rising temperatures, as well as the energy efficiency of cooling buildings 
and cooling infrastructure. Ultimately, the climate change resilience of built infrastructure will incr ease, while 
the carbon intensity of buildings, cold chains and cooling appliances decreases. The Facility seeks to provide 
pioneering examples of countries, cooling sectors, approaches and technologies and measures that can be 
scaled up including in other countries, beyond the Facility, that are facing similar situations and opportunities.   
It is indeed hoped that other countries may emulate or adapt the Facility’s experience and lessons to their own circumstances to enhance access to cooling services whic h is critical to building resilience in a warming world 
while breaking the vicious circle of rapidly increasing emissions that is projected to be associated with meeting 
cooling needs.   At a time when there are many pressing demands on developing country governments’ priorities and budgets, including responding to the global COVID -
19 pandemic that has left no country 
untouched, the Facility opts for a pragmatic approach, seeking to take advantage of available entry points that 
build on synergies between sustainable cooling and other sector and development priorities to trigger the 
changes that need to be put in place and lead, over time, to broader mainstreaming of sustainable cooling 
among the priorities of target countries.  Building on these synergies be tween priorities, identifying the 
counterpart(s) in target countries that can become champions of sustainable cooling and the ability to stimulate 
interest and generate results to build confidence in sustainable cooling solutions will be key factors to ens ure 
success,  The Program is designed in full awareness of the barriers and particular risks that may affect the 
successful implementation of the Facility’s project, including (i) hard to predict disruptions due to the COVID -
19 pandemic and its impact; (ii ) as well as political instabilities, and (iii) risks associated with potential 
operational delays, and (iv) end -users not responding as anticipated to information and interventions 
highlighting the benefits of energy efficient and climate friendly cooling.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   Figure 1: Cooling Facility Theory of Change


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
36 The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015- 2030 provides Member States with concrete 
actions to protect development gains from the risk of disaster, including heatwaves.  
37 “Space cooling”, also referred to as “comfort cooling” , refers to the means by which people are provided 
thermal comfort from heat by maintaining the optimum temperature, humidity, and ventilation within the built 
environment  (See ESMAP 2020, Primer on Space Cooling).  See below for more details.  B.3. Programme  description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)  
 
I. Objectives and goals  
The World Bank’s proposed Cooling Facility is a multi -sector, multi -country financing mechanism as part of its 
efforts to  support countries to mainstream and bring to scale sustainable cooling solutions  across key sectors .  
It aims to support the eligible countries to:  
 
• Mobilize additional financing to support transition and market transformation in support of the 
most climate friendly means of meeting cool ing needs ; 
• Enhance access to energy efficient and climate friendly cooling services;  
• Strengthen enabling environments to catalyze a demand for sustainable cooling solutions;  
• Raise public awareness of the benefits, financial viabilities and positive impacts that result from 
investments and public programs to promote sustainable cooling;  
• Build and strengthen skills and capacity among the range of stakeholders involved in the 
deployment and scale- up of sustainable cooling solutions ; and  
• Integrate and mainstream cooling into both long- term climate planning for mitigation and 
adaptation and Sendai framework d isaster risk reduction (DRR)36 planning,  and support the 
achievement of the Kigali A mendment  Goals . 
 
In doing so, the Facility will (i) increase access to cooling, contributing to multiple Sustainable Development 
Goals; (ii) mitigate the climate impacts of meeting the projected increased cooling demand; (iii) promote 
interest and support for innovative means of providing cooling services; and also (iv) contribute to improving 
climate change resilience, contributing to countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), as well as 
National Adaptation Plans and Disaster Risk Reduction Plans , while also de livering a wide range of co- benefits 
including those related to health, economic impacts, and development of nature- based solutions (NBS). 
Recognizing the magnitude of financial needs, the proposed Facility is the first phase , which will expand  to be 
the basis for substantial scaling and replication to follow.  
To achieve this goal, the Facility will  channel concessional climate finance from the GCF to co -finance IBRD - 
and IDA -financed operations that:  
• support  investments in efficient, affordable and sustainable cooling;  
• catalyze technology , financial  and business model innovations across cooling value chains and 
sectors to reduce barriers for private sector investment;  
• help build an enabling environment  for sustained, long- term systemic changes . 
• Support the integration of sustainable cooling into long- term plans to address climate  change, 
DRR and SDGs.  
 
At country level, the Facility development objectives will be adapted to reflect the specific needs an d priorities 
of countries and thereby to align the  objectives and impacts  of the investments.  
 
Figure 2 provides an overview of the Cooling Facility’s overall framework, including its goals to contribute to 
the transformation of the cooling sector through policy, regulatory and enabling environm ent support that would 
help mainstream sustainable cooling into countries’ overall development and climate change strategies, its 
key cooling target areas , (i.e.,  (i) space cooling37 and cool/green surfaces ; as well as (ii) refrigeration, cold


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
38 For example, off grid cooling appliances could be deployed in the context of broader energy access programs, 
e.g. the deployment of efficient off -grid cooling technologies (refrigeration and cooling, including fans) in homes, 
farms, rural schools and heal th facilities.  Such deployment may be in the context of productive uses of electricity, 
which are typically diverse applications across agricultural, commercial, industrial and public sectors as a direct 
input to the production of goods or provision of services that enable or enhance income generation.  
39 See ESMAP 2020 Space Cooling Primer  (https://www.esmap.org/primer -for-space- cooling- report ) 
40 See ESMAP and Global Platform for Sustainable Cities 2020 Primer for Cool Cities: Reducing Excessive 
Urban Heat  (https://www.esmap.org/primer -for-cool-citiesreducing- excessive -urban- heat chains and logistics, along with its proposed approach enabled by GCF concessional climate finance.   It is 
important to note that the Facility’s two cooling target areas could be implemented in on-grid as well as off -
grid contexts .38  
 
Figure 2: Overview of the Cooling Facility  
 
 
Space Cooling and cool/green solutions. “Space cooling39” refers to the means by which people are 
provided thermal comfort from heat by maintaining the optimum temperature, humidity, and ventilation within 
the built environment.  Space Cooling includes (i) passive cooling strategies  and measures  to reduce or avoid 
building cooling loads (energy efficient building construction and design, including building thermal insulation 
and ventilation); (ii) equipment used to achieved required amount of cooling (e.g. fans, air conditioning, and 
centralized cooling systems); and (iii) building automatio n, controls and good operation and maintenance 
practices.   Cool surfaces40 are solar reflective roofs and walls; while green surfaces refer to vegetative roofs 
and walls (also referred to as nature -based solutions).  
Space cooling projects may (i) improve the thermal efficiency of buildings (to reduce or avoid cooling loads), 
(ii) improve the energy efficiency of cooling equipment and appliance, (iii) use low GWP refrigerants available in the local market, in line with the goals and requirements of the Kigali Amendment;  and may also (iv) further 
lower the emissions associated with cooling with the installation of clean energy (mainly solar) supply.     
Space cooling projects may target greenfield investments or refurbishments in different sectors, i.e., public 
(including health facilities, education, and administrative buildings), residential - (multi -family and single family), 
commercial or industrial.


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
41 Global Cold Chain Alliance website: https://www.gcca.org/about/about -cold- chain  
42 ESMAP Efficient Clean Cooling technical assistance program would finance upstream activities and 
ultimately help identify potential investment opportunities, including for the Facility.   
Refrigeration, cold chain and logistics  
Refrigeration and cold chain refer to managing the temperature ( at specified low -temperature range) of 
perishable products in order to maintain quality and safety from the point of origin through the distribution chain 
to the final consumer41.  Refrigeration has many applications, including household refrigerators, industrial 
freezers.  A cold chain includes refrigeration, storage and distribution activities, along with associated 
equipment and logistics.   The projects may target energy efficient refrigeration equipment and facilities  in 
residential, public, commercial  and industrial  sectors .   
 
For the health cold chain, projects may target the different components of cold chains, i.e., national  and 
regional facilities and cold stores, as well as district -level stores and local clinics and vaccination outreach.  
The projects may include efficient, clean built infrastructure ( e.g., walk -in refrigerators and freezers) and cold 
storage equipment (e.g., refrigerators and freezers, as well as passive cooling solutions ). 
 
Similarly, for food cold chains  (e.g., in agriculture and fisheries sectors) , projects may include efficient, clean 
cold chain equipment linked efficient, clean build infrastructures (e.g. refrigerated warehouses, hubs, and 
packhouses) and cold storage equipment (e.g., refrigerators and freezers).  
 
Projects may include the solarization of the cold chain (built infrastructure and cold storage equipment).  
Project may also include digita l devices and to monitor and track temperature and performance of the 
equipment, as well as logistics planning systems to enhance overall efficiency of the cold chain. An eligible 
project under the Cooling Facility  may involve the replacement of existing e quipment or refurbishment of 
existing facilities or target new equipment and facilities.   
 
II. Program components  
The Cooling Facility is composed of three complementary components that will be adapted to each eligible 
country’s context and focus cooling area , and will be calibrated according to its needs and in accordance to 
the Facility’s criteria .  The Facility’s components are structured to help countries address the barriers to 
sustainable cooling by (i) helping address the upfront cost and financing barriers, along with  (ii) supporting 
measures that help build an enabling foundation to enable and sustain sustainable cooling through activities 
such as  informing policy and regulatory frameworks, reaching out to stakeholders through effective 
communication and supporting training and capacity building.   (the last component – not funded with GCF 
resources is for project management – essential for effective implementation).   Subject to receiving World 
Bank corporate approval in due time, the projects supported by the Facility will be co- financed by IBRD/IDA.  
The indicative total co -financing amounts to $722 .8 million.  
 
Component 1 - Policy, regulatory and enabling environment support42 (US$15.7 million in GCF grant ). 
This component will support activities that aim to strengthen institutional, policy and regulatory frameworks,  
support program  design and roll -out, raise awareness and stimulate behavior changes, as well as build the 
capacity of key stakeholders.  These are critical to help address some of the key barriers and market failures 
to a systematic shift towards sustainable cooling.  Indeed, support provided through Component 2 seeks to support countries address fundamental market and non- market barriers to sustainable cooling, including lack 
of awareness, lack of transparency (about the cost savings and benefits of energy efficient buildings, cooling 
and refrigeration appliances and equipment, as well as nature-
based solutions and energy efficient cold 
chains), the first -cost bias, mis -aligned policies and incentives and the capacity gaps. A key feature will be 
support for  developing an enabling environment that can support the effective implementation of sustainable 
cooling investments , mainstream sustainable cooling policies and actions, and sustain the development of 
regional, national or local industry and services in the relevant sectors , while ensuring alignment with  the Kigali 
Amendment .


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
43 The World Bank offers IBRD and concessional IDA lending. The lendin g terms  can be found here 
(https://treasury.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/treasury/ibrd- financial- products/lending- rates -and-fees) for IBRD 
and here ( https://treasury.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/treasury/ida- financial- products/lending- rates -and-fees) 
for IDA.   
Activities relevant to the eligible cooling areas supported under Component 1   may include, for instance, (i)  
capacity building of key stakeholders (for example, on technologies; business models; cooling project 
appraisal, implementation and evaluation); ( ii) technical assistance for enabling plans , strategies, policies, 
regulations, standards;  (iii)  designing sustainable market  mechanisms and business models; and  (iv)  
communications  and awareness  campaigns . 
Component 2 - Financing for cooling investments (US$14 1.3 million of GCF funds, of which $ 125 
million in loan and $16.3 million in grant) .   In order to promote and accelerate the uptake of investments 
in innovative and climate friendly cooling technologies and syste ms, including in markets with low penetration 
and unmet cooling demand, the Cooling Facility aims to support increased access and deployment of 
sustainable cooling solutions performing better than current market practice and at the same time, ensure that 
the level of ambition is appropriate and relevant to each market (i.e. affordable) to expand access to –  and 
deployment of - more climate -friendly cooling at scale (and avoid promoting a prohibitively expensive market 
niche, which would hinder the goals of scaling -up access and deployment).  The Facility will provide 
concessional funds  to foster the adoption or scale- up the deployment of sustainable cooling technologies, 
appliances through (i) financing of climate friendly cooling investment  and (ii) credit lines to financial 
intermediaries . The financial instruments will be calibrated to what is needed to make the cooling project viable 
and to overcome barriers to implementation, including addressing the incremental cost associated with the adoption of efficient cooling solutions or serve remote off -grid areas, which include higher upfr ont capital costs 
compared to baseline options, and market entry barriers arising from efficient, clean cooling solutions 
underrepresentation in many developing country regions and sectors. The deployment of these funds will be 
tailored to the needs of the projects, through various financing modalities, for example, public financing to 
sovereign or sub- sovereign entities  credit lines to commercial banks, loans  or subsidies  to households, 
municipalities and small, medium and large enterprises.  
High concessional loans  and grant from the GCF will largely be targeted toward investment projects where 
upfront affordability is a major obstacle and the quantity or concessionality of the World Bank’s IDA/IBRD 
resources43 are insufficient to ensure affordability and/or to make the efficient, clean cooling project viable.    
Different financing and implementation mechanisms and models –  suitable for different cooling sectors and 
differ ent countries may be deployed by different projects of the Facility based on specific country and sector 
conditions.   Examples of these financing and implementation mechanisms and models are provided below 
(Section B.4) .    
Component 3 –  Project management  (US$ 0 in GCF funds) . This component will support  the Executing 
Entities (EEs)’ and Project  Implementing Entities (PIEs)’  management, coordination and implementation of 
their project activities, in compliance with the EEs’ and PIEs’ contractual obligations included or referred to in 
the legal agreements entered into with the Accredited Entities (AE).  
III. General approach for activities supported by the Cooling Facility  
 
Integrated and holistic approach: The scale of the cooling challenge and the window of opportunity to get 
now on a path to affordable, efficient, clean cooling demand an approach that integrates the development and strengthening of an enabling environment . Doing this involves  technical assistance, capacity building, and 
concessional  financing to 
mainstream sustainable cooling and establish sustainable implementation and 
business models.   Moreover, i n line with the Facility’s goals of supporting access to affordable, efficient, clean 
cooling in a warming world, the Facility will int egrate efficiency (starting with passive measures)  and low carbon


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
44 This approach is consistent with the approach promoted by the Cool Coalition 
(https://coolcoalition.org/about/overview/ ).  
45 The four pillars: (i) improving human endowments, (ii) removing constraints for more and bet ter jobs, (iii) 
finding solutions that help increase women's ownership of and control over assets, and (iv) enhancing women’s 
voice and agency and engaging men and boys.  considerations and adopt a holistic approach to sustainable cooling consisting of one or more of the following 
elements44: 
• Minimize  - Reduce and avoid cooling loads, for example, with passive building design, increase 
of thermal efficiency of buildings and cold storage warehouses/facilities, and nature -based 
solutions such as  green roofs.   
• Shift to cooling  solutions with lowest GHG e missions, for example solar cooling, climate -
friendly (low GWP) refrigerants -based cooling systems, or centralized cooling solutions where 
the right enabling conditions are in place.  
• Improve efficiency – use energy efficient technologies to achieve cooling with less energy 
(and less GHG emissions), for example, super -efficient appliances and equipment and demand 
management to reduce peak demand and the need for new generating power capacity.   
• Optimize  – control cooling loads, for example, smart sensing and behavior change 
approaches . 
• Protect the most vulnerable  in urban and rural areas from extreme heat and consequences 
of unreliable or insufficient medical and agriculture cold chains.  
 
National and sec toral contexts: The Cooling Facility recognizes that the technologies, opportunities and 
modalities to enhance access to efficient, clean cooling depend on the sector of application (e.g. space 
cooling vs agriculture cold chains), as well as specific national – and sub -national (e.g. urban or rural) 
circumstances, and capabilities.  As such, assessments of potential cooling- informed activities should 
consider, as relevant, country -specific context and technology benchmarks (including those derived from 
regional benchmarks).  
Link with climate change and cooling policy goals: Projects supported by the Cooling Facility should be aligned with,  and contribute to the respective country’s NDC  revisions  under the Paris Climate Change 
Agreement, and Cooling Action Plan (where available) , as well as support and/or strengthen as appropriate, 
NAMAs, National Adaptation Plans and Disaster Risk Reduction Plans  and support the goals and 
requirements of the  Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol .   
Link with gender equality objectives:  
 The Cooling Facility will seek to contribute to enhancing the 
knowledge base on gender issues associated with access to cooling and will seek to contribute to reducing 
gender gaps in cooling- related sectors (including agriculture, buildings, health and energy) by (i) identifying 
gaps relevant to the four pillars of the World Bank Group (WBG) Gender Strategy45, and (ii) aiming to address 
these gaps through specific actions supported by the project.  
Link with countries’ COVID -19 response and ‘ build better ’ efforts  - The Cooling Facility may also  support 
efficient cooling- related interventions in the context of the Bank’s overall COVID -19 response  and related 
operations.  As an example, the Cooling Facility may  support the deployment of efficient, climate fri endly cold 
chains for COVID -19 and routine immunization vaccines  as a component of projects seeking to strengthening 
the countries’ overall health services .  This could include:  
• strengthening the health sector cold chain by financing the gap at service delivery points  at 
national, regional, district and sub -district levels ; 
• energy efficient and climate friendly built infrastructure, including vaccine stores, walk -in cold 
rooms, walk-in freezers , etc; 
• efficient and climate friendly cooling equipment  (including refrigerators and freezers)  with lower 
GWP refrigerants ; 
• preventive maintenance and as -needed repairs of walk -in cold /freezer  rooms a t national and 
sub-national  levels;


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
46 Together IBRD and IDA form the World Bank.  IDA focuses on the world’s poorest count ries, while IBRD 
assists middle -income and credit -worthy poorer countries.  
47 Annex 24  provides calculations of estimated GHG emissions for each Facility project.  • strengthening vaccine logistics systems and energy efficiency upgr ades of ventilation and 
refrigeration systems in cold storage hubs for vaccines and medicines ; 
• Solarization of health and agricultural cold storage facilities . 
 
Nine countries are currently considering potential investments to be supported from the Facility . The World 
Bank will work with each Executing Entity covered under this Facility to finalize the scope and co -financing of 
these investment opportunities , taking into account (i)  the needs of the clients as they may evolve, (ii) the 
results of the ongoing market assessments,  and (iii) stakeholder  consultations . 
 
 
IV. Eligibility criteria   for Facility -supported projects  
The Cooling Facility w ill allocate a maximum amount equivalent to an aggregate of 30% of the total GCF 
proceeds to any  given  Host C ountr y, regardless of the financial instrument(s) deployed.  Supported projects  
will be assessed by the Bank as  meet ing the following eligibility criteria .  A market assessment  may be 
conducted prior to appraisal to inform the design of the project and demonstrate how it meets the criteria to access funds from the Cooling Facility.  
  
 
• Cooling investments.  Projects  selected under the Cooling Facility will support investments in the 
following cooling target areas: (i) s pace cooling and cool/green solutions ; and (ii) r efrigeration, cold 
chain and logistics , as defined in section B 3.I. above.  
In the case of (i) space cooling and cool/green solutions , projects should d emonstrate a pathway 
towards financially sustainable models that reduce the need for public resources over time  and 
eventually, leverage commercial and private sector funding.  
In the case of Facility -supported projects financing investments in off -grid cold storage capacity 
additions (under (ii) refrigeration, cold storage), E xecuting Entities will need to demonstrate that the 
main source of energy to power these additional cold storage facilities is renewable energy (e.g. solar).   
 
• World Bank operation linkage . A Cooling Facility -supported project may : (i) co -finance a new 
IDA or IBRD
46 operation; or (ii) be an additional financing to an existing IDA or IBRD operation.  
The ratio of GCF funds to IDA/IBRD funds for each supported project will be at  least 1: 2.   
 
• Performance threshold . To receive  support from the Facility the proposed project will meet the 
following performance thresholds:  
- At least 20% energy efficiency improvement ; and/or  
- At least 20% avoided/reduced GHG . 
To that effect, for each project,  an estimate of GHG  impact should be developed  based on 
publicly available GHG methodologies and calculation tools  and consistent with guidelines 
outlined in Annex  2447.  
• Alignment with the transition to low GWP refrigerants  - Facility supported projects will be 
aligned with the goals and requirements of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, under 
which HFCs are being phased down and replaced with climate friendly refrigerants that do less 
damage to the c limate.   As such , investments supported by the facility will promote the use of 
climate friendly cooling equipment/ appliances commercially available for the cooling applications


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
48 This criteria  takes into account that very low GWP refrigerant alternatives may not be readily 
available in all local markets for all the applications considered in the project  
 considered in the respective project that either (i) provide cooling services without the use of 
refrigerants (e.g. fans and passive cooling solutions); and/or (ii) use refrigerants that are aligned 
with the Kigali amendment and meet relevant safety standards, as commercially available in 
respective local markets48. 
                                                         
• Adaptation to climate change.  The Host Country will be vulnerable to climate change, facing 
extreme heat risk hazards, and in need of cooling services.  The Cooling Facility -supported 
projects will b ring cooling- related benefits associated with  services provided by the buildings, cold  
chains , health facilities  and other related cooling investments .   
• Paradigm shift potential. Supported projects  will propose activities/ technology/applications 
that aim to  achiev e market transformation , create new markets and business activities at local, 
national or international levels , and can potentially be replicated in other sectors  or geographic 
areas.   
 
• Country ownership & a lignment with country priorities. Facility -supported projects will be  
aligned with country priorities and climate change/cooling action plans as presented in national 
development plans or other policy document s. 
 
• GCF Concessionality Level.  The concessionality levels would be assessed based on the pricing 
of the WB co -financing, risk of external debt distress of the  Host Country as published by the IMF 
under joint WB -IMF debt sustainability framework, and the financial analysis of the projects. In 
doing so, it would apply the following principles:  
(a) Grant only . Countries in external debt distress and for which the WB co -financing is 
exclusively grant -based, would receive 100% grant from the Facility.  
(b) Combination of high concessional loans and grants. Projects would meet any of the three 
criteria below:  
- Host country in high risk of debt distress;  
- Non-revenue generating project or where the reflows from the ultimate beneficiaries are 
not cost -reflective ;  
- Projects that target vulnerable communities or groups that are more vulnerable than the 
overall population (for example, refugees, people in rural areas with low economic 
income).  
(c) Financing terms: 40- year maturity, 10- year grace period with an all- in fee of 0.25 percent  
( i.e., 0.00 percent interest rate, 0,00 percent commitment fee, 0.25 percent service fee) . 
Low concessional loan.  Projects not meeting the conditions set out in (a) or (b) above 
would be eligible for low concessional loans for  investment.   
Financing terms: 20- year maturity, 5- year grace period, 0.75 percent  interest rate, 0.5  
percent  service fee, 0.75  percent  commitment fee.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
 
The Cooling Facility is essentially designed as an umbrella facility  (a Program)  that enables  aggregat ing, 
through a programmatic approach, different types and sizes of sustainable cooling interventions .  This will 
enable to lower transaction costs, reach a br oader range of countries (of different sizes and income levels), 
and generate the necessary experience and lessons to underpin further scaling- up of sustainable cooling more 
broadly and the needed transformation of the cooling sectors.  In fact, without th e possibility of aggregating


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  through the Facility’s programmatic approach to sustainable cooling, it would not be possible to reach the 
diverse set of countries covered by the Facility, especially smaller and more fragile countries.  Moreover,  the 
programm atic approach is essential to take advantage of opportunities to introduce and support climate 
friendly cooling solutions in the context of different sectoral operations -  that may otherwise be overlooked.  
The Cooling Facility currently proposes to support nine projects (one project per country) subject to the results 
of their appraisal.  This Funding Proposal includes indicative information for each of the currently proposed 
projects. Under the programmatic approach, the GCF would rely on the AE’s due diligence on the proposed 
projects included in the Program. Subject to the outcome of such due diligence, the World Bank will approve 
funding for such projects that meet the eligibility criteria as presented in Section B .3. 
 
I. Facility -level arrangements 
As part of its role as  GCF AE and co -financier of the projects to be supported under the Facility, the World 
Bank will assess and confirm the eligibility of each such Project to be included in the Facility ’s pipeline for Bank 
and GCF Financing. In order to do so, for each project proposed to be included in the Facility, the World Bank  
team  will comprise energy and climate finance experts to manage and be responsible for the Facility’s overall 
objectives and ensure that the projects selected meet all the eligibility criteria as presented in Section B3.  The 
team will aggregate findings from each project team’s i mplementation progress  reports and facilitate the 
dissemination of lessons learned across Facility projects and beyond the Facility.  
 
Following the GCF Board approval, the World Bank and the GCF will, based on the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA), enter into one Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) for the Facility  for the provision of the 
funds under all GCF instruments supporting the Pr ogram. The World Bank will be solely responsible for the 
management and administration of GCF resources and will carry out such management and administration in 
accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, and the relevant provisions of the FAA and AMA. The 
World Bank will apply its own fiduciary principles and standards relating to any integrity checks, anti -corruption, 
countering of financing of terrorism, fraud, financial sanctions, embargoes and anti -money laundering.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  The process for reviewing and approving GCF funding for the Facility -supported projects is embedded in the 
WB’s project cycle ( Figure 3) and based on it s standard policies and procedures . 
 
Figure 3: Project review and investment approval process  
 
 
During the identification stage (stage 1), candidate- projects  are screened for formal inclusion in the Facility 
pipeline. This preliminary review focus es on the proposed use of the GCF funds, the scope of activities , the 
paradigm shift potential  and the financing instruments envisaged. The WB project teams  then carry out a 
technical, economic, financial, environmental and social, fiduciary, procurement appraisal of the project, in line 
with WB’s operational policies and procedures, and prepare a draft Project Appraisal Document (PAD) or 
equivalent for a technical review meeting (stage 2). This due diligence is separate from the responsibility of 
the recipi ent countries to prepare and implement the projects according to WB’s policies and procedures. The 
scope of the technical review will cover the assessment of the GCF financing against the eligibility criteria for 
the Facility -funded projects. Upon determination by the Bank that the projects meet the eligibility cr iteria, the 
WB project team will prepare the appraisal -stage project documents and the draft legal agreements (stage 3). 
The next stages (negotiations,  WB institutional approval, project implementa tion through completion and 
evaluation) will follow the WB’s applicable rules and procedures. Following approval of projects, the World 
Bank will sign Subsidiary Agreements with the Exe cuting Entities   to make available GCF investment financing 
in line wit h the provisions of the FAA.  
Relevant experience and track record of the World Bank. The proposed facility builds on the WBG’s 
decades of experience in supporting client countries across the globe implement clean energy projects. Over 
the past dozen years  (FY10 -21), the Bank has built a strong track record in financing clean energy, providing 
support to developing countries across the globe with a clean energy portfolio of 520 operations amounting to 
US$33.9 billion (approximately US$3 billion per year), helping countries achieve their energy and climate 
(NDCs) goals as well as SDG goals.  The renewable energy share of the portfolio amounts to about US$1.6 
billion per year, and the share of solar PV -  the most likely source of RE to be associated with sustainable 
cooling activities – is growing fast.  The Bank’s EEff portfolio of US$ 16.5 billion (about US$1.5 billion per 
year).  The Bank’s EEff portfolio alone has saved more than 1,300 TWh to date, associated with 575 Mt of 
avoided CO2 emissions.  Demand -side EEff account ed for about a third of the total FY -10-21 World Bank EEff  
portfolio and covers different sectors (public, industrial, and residential), implemented primarily through the 
Bank’s Energy and Extractive Global Practice, but with an increasing share with other WB Global Practices, 
including Urban, Water, Transport an d Agriculture.  Demand side energy efficiency interventions have also 
(a) World Bank project cycle                                                                                                     (b) Cooling Facility investment process


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  been combined with other energy sector focus, such as energy access, and have been combined with 
renewable energy investments.   This EEff experience has included interventions related t o cooling, such a 
building energy efficiency projects and energy efficient appliance programs.  
The WBG has an extensive history of EEff  projects aimed at overcoming the market failures and barriers to 
scaling -up energy efficiency which include weak policy /regulatory frameworks, higher first cost, lack of access 
to affordable financing, new technology risk, lack of credit worthiness, transaction/aggregation costs (for 
financiers) and risk of financing low- income consumers.  The World Bank has helped deploy a menu of 
effective clean energy financing and delivery mechanisms across sectors and across the developing world, 
including dedicated credit lines,  financing facilities , results -based schemes and others. Projects have 
encompassed both public and private financial institutions. The design of these mechanisms has evolved, 
building on lessons learned and in response to local needs and circumstances; and they have achieved 
considerable success as documented in multiple evaluation reports.  
 
The Cooling Facilit y builds on this deep operational foundation, combined with the Bank’s traditional energy –  
and sectoral -  dialogues with client countries.  It also builds on the Bank’s experience as one of four 
Implementing Agencies of the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol, supporting the transition towards 
climate friendly refrigerants.  The Facility will also benefit from the Bank’s extensive track record in providing 
energy efficiency and clean energy technical assistance –  principally through ESMAP - , to supp ort the 
upstream design of lending operation, setting up the regulatory, policy and institutional foundations to help 
mobilize financing and catalyze private sector investments. In particular, ESMAP’s Efficient, Clean Cooling 
technical assistance program ( established under ESMAP) which is assisting the Bank in developing a new 
business line for sustainable cooling – will be leveraged by the Facility.  Already, the Bank has gained 
experience with the inclusion of sustainable cooling activities in the urban, agriculture, transportation, and 
health sectors.  
 
II. Project Management Arrangement  
 
For each project, a project management unit will be established by the relevant Executing Entity  with a team 
expected to include a team lead, technical expert, procurement specialist, financial management specialist, 
environmental specialist and social/gender specialist, and a lawyer. Each project will have its own monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) and reporting process.  
Figure 4: Typical project management unit key personnel  
 
Project -level implementation arrangements are defined during the appraisal phase and vary according to the 
design of the project and are adapted to the country -specific context .  
Cooling cuts across different sectors (public, residential, commercial and industrial) , and targets different areas 
(space cooling; off -grid appliances; and refrigeration/cold chains).  In this context  and given the different 
circumstances in individual countries, there is no single,  one-size-fits-all implementation model . In addition, 
the Bank’ s experience with demand- side energy efficiency and off -grid energy access projects  in particular  
provide  valuable insights that have been considered for implementation.  For these reasons , the Cooling 
Facility will provide  individual projects the opportunity to adopt the implementation  model  that suits their own


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  situation best among those described below , and in doing so  enhance the prospects for successful 
implementation  – and inform a sustainable cooling transformation in other countries . 
III. Indicative countries’ implementation arrangements  
The Facility will support one project per country  and thus, a total of nine projects. Each project  comprises 
activities from all three components of the Facility  and may include one or more implementing models as 
shown in Table 2 below. Several models may be considered for projects a t their current early stage of 
development.  The actual implementation models/arrangements will be finalized during the preparation stage 
of each project depending on the specific situation at project preparation and negotiations with the government. 
It is expected that  all Projects shall be approve d by the World Bank within five years of the GCF Board 
approval of the Funding Proposal .  
 
Table 2: Indicative implementing model by country  
Country  Target 
cooling 
area  Implementation models  
Component 1 : 
Policy, regulation  
and enabling 
environment 
support  Component 2 : 
Financing for cooling investments  
support  Component 3 : 
Project 
management  
PP&C  PP&C  CL EEFF  PP&C  
Bangladesh  S      
El Salvador  S,R      
Kenya  R      
Malawi  R      
North 
Macedonia  S      
Panama  S      
Sao Tome and 
Principe  S,R      
Sri Lanka  S      
Somalia  S,R      
Notes  
S: Space cooling & cool/green surfaces  
R: Refrigeration, cold chains and logistics  PP&C: Public procurement and contracti ng 
CL: Credit lines  
EEFF: Energy efficiency financing facility including the 
public sector ESCO and the revolving facility variation


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
49 This model is  primarily  relevant for both Component 1 and Component 3 . IV. Implementation models description  
This section describes the implementation models and arrangements that would be followed by the projects 
supported by the Cooling Facility .   
,  
(i) Public procurement and contracting for cooling infrastructure service delivery  
and technical assistance49 
GCF funds  would be used to support investment s through a traditional public procure ment and contracting 
model.  Under this model, the EE ( or the Project Implementing Entity (PIE ) as designated by the EE)  would 
need to possess the necessary capacities to conduct the required activities consistent with relevant Bank 
procedures  (see below ), This  may be in the form, for example, of a dedicated unit within a government ministry 
or designated national agency such as a rural electrification agency .  
The EE (or PIE as ap plicable)  would: (i) prepare the technical specifications and terms of reference of the 
cooling infrastructure or equipment it wishes to procure; (ii) subject to no- objection of the World Bank, launch 
the procurement process to invite bids from suitable contractors;  (iii) award the procurement contract; (iv) sign 
contractual agreements with the winning bidders; (iv) monitor the delivery of the goods and services to ensure 
quality control using its own resources or through an owner’s engineer procured by the project, and (v) 
remunerate the contractor according to the agreed terms. Depending on its capacity and operating model, the 
EE (or PIE as appli cable) , may subsequently enter into an operations and maintenance (O&M) contract to 
ensure the sustainability of the infr astructure. ( Figure 5). Otherwise, the EE would ensure that  the beneficiaries 
receive adequate training to conduct O &M to ensure continuous operation of the equipment and infrastructure 
and that the impact is achieved as per estimates.    
Figure 5: Implementation arrangement for public procurement and contracting model  
  
This implementation model is well-suited where the private sector does not have the capacity or the appetite 
to implement the cooling activities and thus, public intervention is critical for service- delivery. Such cases 
include:  
- Interventions that strengthen the enabling environment by establishing the conducive policy, legal, 
regulatory and economic frameworks, reduce barriers to investment, improve access to knowledge, 
and strengthen institutional capacities.  GCF World Bank
Executing Entity* ContractorsContracts for services,  
works, goodsFAA
Subsidiary 
agreement(s)
Project levelFacility level
*If a project has a Project Implementing Entity (PIE), there may be additional arrangements including a project agreement 
between the World Bank and such PIE


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
50 At the minimum, investment rates of return should cover the cost of debt incurred by private actors, and the 
cost of equity. While the cost of debt can be easily determined as the cost at which commercial banks would 
lend to cooling projects, the cost of equity depends on the financial robustness of the prospective investor and 
its risk appetite (investors with an international footprint and a well -diversified portfolio would tend to be less risk 
averse than local investors). As a general rule, it would be higher than the rate that can be earned through a passive investment (for example, a AAA -rate sovereign bond) plus premia for the additional risks incurred (for 
example, investments with longer payback periods will command and higher maturity premium).    
51 See for exampl e, World Bank -ESMAP livewire (2014) “Designing Credit Lines for Energy Efficiency”, by 
Ashok Sarkar, Jonathan Sinton and Joeri de Wit. ( https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/18410 )  - Despite their economic viability, interventions that are not commercially v iable to adequately 
remunerate50 private investors (for example, dissemination of off -grid appliances in poor and 
marginalized communities with limited economic opportunities and low capacity to pay).  
- Interventions that promote the deployment of a public good (for example, refrigeration and cold chain 
for vaccines and medicines  such as in El Salvador, Sao Tome and Principe and Somalia) . 
- Pilot interventions that aim to demonstrate the benefits of energy efficient cooling options to improve 
energy services and energy access and generate lessons for a replication at scale.  
GCF concessional funds provided through loan or grant agreements with the Government  would help 
reduce the systemic risk of undertaking cooling investment and reduce transaction cost by 
establishing conducive investment, legal and policy frameworks. Further, it would promote social 
equity and protection by ensuring that the projects benef it poor and marginalized communities. To 
this end, GCF funding will be priced lower than and blended with WB funds, to reduce the overall 
financing cost and thereby absorbing the incremental cost to deploy efficient cooling solutions. Final 
beneficiaries could include households, sole traders, micro- , small - and medium - enterprises, communit ies. 
Through these interventions, GCF concessional funds would play a catalytic role in creating a market for and 
increasing access to clean, efficient and sustainable c ooling.  
 
For the purposes of the FAA,  this model may be used for the activities under C omponent 1, financing of 
climate -friendly cooling investment s under Component 2 and project management activities under Comp onent  
3.  
(ii) Credit lines  
A key barrier to investing in energy efficiency in general –  and sustainable cooling in parti cular – is the limited 
availability of commercial financing for these projects. The Facility will support the provision of c redit lines ,51 
for example in Mala wi,  to help financial institutions establis h business lines for  sustainable cooling 
investments .   Credit lines  can be well -suited in less mature market s; they help mitigat e the perceived high 
financial risk of energy efficient and clean cooling, which may be carried out by  energy service companies 
(ESCOs) .  An ESCO is an organization that provides a  range of services to energy users to design and 
implement cooling and energy efficiency measures. The services may also include providing or arranging 
financing. Such services are provided by the ESCO using a performance- based contract under which the 
payments from the energy user to the ESCO are contingent upon achieving certain pre -specified performance 
levels. Also, the ESCO generally allows energy users to pay for its services using the energy cost savings that 
result from the cooling/energy efficiency project. This approach allows energy users to transfer much of a 
project’s  technical, construction, and performance risks to the ESCO. The concept of energy savings 
performance contracts (ESPCs) implemented by ESCOs has been recognized as a promising approach to 
overcome some of the most intractable market barriers. Under an ESPC , an ESCO identifies and selects, 
develops, implements, and finances a cooling and energy efficiency project (at the customer level), and uses 
the stream of income from the cost savings to repay the costs of the project, including the costs of the 
investment).  
The WB would channel GCF finance along with World Bank co -financing to the EE (the Host Country  as the 
Borrower/Recipient ), through a Subsidiary Agreement. The EE would  extend the credit line to one or more 
participating financial institutions  (PFIs) , which would typically  be banks  or micro -lending institutions , for on -


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
52 The project, approved in August 2020, aims to i ncrease access  to financial services, entrepreneurship and 
capabilities for micro small and medium enterprises.  Additional financing from the Facility is critical to introduce 
sustainable cooling among the target development areas.  lending to eligible  sub-borrowers (for example, industr y and other private sector entities) .  In doing so, the  PFIs 
will select and approve sub- loan applications based on the agreed investment  criteria  Subsidiary Agreement s 
would require the EE to ensure that the PFIs comply with the sub -lending and other terms,  and monitor the 
performance of the PFIs . As such, the EE has  contractual control and oversight responsibility over the 
implementation of the Funded Activity . Repayment occurs through the same channels followed to disburse 
the credit line.  Where the EE designates a Project Implementing Entity (PIE) to provide credit lines to 
the PFIs, the World Bank would require the EE to enter into an on- lendin g agreement with the PIE. In 
addition,  it may enter into a project agreement with the PIE, outlining the obligations of the EE that are passed 
down to such PIE with respect to the implementation of the funded activities  (as shown in Figure 6 ).       
 
Figure 6: Implementation arrangement for credit lines  
 
 
GCF concessional funds would be critical to help create market s for clean cooling. For illustrative purpose, t he 
example of Malaw i is provided below.  
An agriculture- driven economy , Malawi is adversely impacted by climate change impacts such as floods and 
droughts . Energy is one of the priorities of the third Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS III), 
which has identified promoting the use of energy efficient technologies and systems as an enabling strategy. 
As the agriculture sector is one of the largest contributors of GHG emissions in the country, facilitating the 
deployment of low carbon cooling technologies would contribute to achieving a climate- resilient economy.   
However, commercial banks in Malawi seldom  provide loans for agricult ural activities. There is 
overdependence on firewood and charcoal for heating and domestic use  and knowledge and availability of 
cooling services is limited. Limited awareness and access to financing ultimately affect the deployment of 
much needed investments and income generating activities. Malawi is considering the provision of credit lines 
to partic ipating financi al institutions to stimulate the market adoption of cooling solutions.  
GCF and WB f unds  will be used  to extend credit lines to commercial banks, micro -finance institutions, and 
licensed Savings and Credit Cooperatives (collectively referred to as “participating financi al institutions” or 
“PFIs ), for on- lending to micro -, medium and small -scale enterprises (“M SMEs ”). The GCF funds would 
supplement IDA funds mobilized through a recently approved project52 to promote access to climate friendly 
refrigeration and cold storage by rural farmers.  
 
Flow of GCF funds . The World Bank would enter into a financing agreement  with the Republic of Malawi 
through  the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development  (the Executing Entity) , which will in turn 
sign an on- lending agreement with the Reserve Bank of Malawi ( the RBM ) for the administration of the funds.  
In such a  case, the World Bank would also sign a project agreement with the RBM  setting forth the obligations


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
53 For example, C ommunity Cooling Hubs may adopt cooling as a service model . of the Republic of Malawi that are transferred to RBM  with respect to the implementation of the funded 
activities  .  The RBM has a track record of managing World Bank -funded projects  and has the legal mandate 
to extend wholesale financing to PFIs for on -lending to MSMEs. Moreover, the RBM’s banking and micro -
finance institutions  supervision functions give it an added advantage in terms of its ability to manage the 
implementation of the credit lines.  
 
Select ion of participating financial institutions ( PFIs ).   The selection of the participating financial  
institutions is an  import ant aspect of the credit lines model , and is made according to criteria acceptable to the 
World Bank.  For example, in the case of Malawi, criteria to assess the participating financial institutions 
include, inter alia , (i) proof of possessing a license to  operate in the country; (ii) compliance with all national 
prudential and other applicable laws and regulations; ( iii) compliance with total capital to risk -weighted assets 
ratio prescribed by national prudential regulations; (v) adequate liquidity; (vi) a dequate internal audit and 
control systems; (vii) adequate management information systems; as well as (viii) commitment and previous 
experience lending out to MSMEs, preferably with a focus on businesses owned by women.   
 
For the purposes of the FAA, this model  may be used fo r credit lines  to participating financial institutions  
under Component 2 . 
 
(iii) Energy Efficiency Financing Facility  
 
Under this model, the GCF proceeds  are channeled through the Executing Entity (the Host Country as  the 
Borrower) according to the terms of the Subsidiary Agreement signed with the World Bank.  The EE either 
directly, or through an entity that it designates  (the P roject Implementing Entity o r PIE), on-lends the funds to 
sub-borrowers (for example,  private energy service companies, cooling as a service  operators53, 
municipalities , small - and medium -enterprises) to undertake eligible cooling investments.  Where there is a 
PIE, the World Bank w ould require the Host Country  to enter  into an on- lending agreement with the PIE  which 
would include provisions that require the PIE to execute the funded activities in accordance with the 
requirements of the Subsidiary Agreement.  In this manner,  the EE has contractual control and oversight 
responsibility over the PIE. In addition, the World Bank may  enter into a project agreement with the PIE  setting 
forth the obligations of th e Host Country that are passed down  to the PIE  with respect to the implementation 
of the funded activities .  The PIE would  extend sub- loans, partial guarantees, or grants, as applicable,  to sub -
borrowers ( e.g., energy service companies  or cooling- as-a-service  companies ), as shown in   
Figure 7.  Where there is no PIE involved, the Executing Entity directly provides financing to the sub- borrowers  
and t here is no p roject agreement or on -lending agreement.


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  Figure 7: Energy efficiency financing facility  implementation arrangement  
 
 
For the purposes of the FAA, this model may be used for financing of climate -friendly cooling investment 
under Component 2.       
The energy efficiency financing facility  implementation arrangement involves two main variation s, as 
presented below.  
(iii-a) Public super ESCO model.  In this variation of the Eff financing facility model, the Host Country 
designates a public energy service company (the public super ESCO) as the PIE. The public super ESCO 
would typically be a public entity established by the government to (a) support cooling and energy efficiency 
investments in the public sector (public buildings and sustainable cooling projects) and (b) strengthen private 
sector ESCOs through demand aggregation, bulk procurement of equipment (therefore reducing the cost of 
equipment for ESCOs), standardization of ESPCs, M&V templates and capacity building, project development, 
and facilitation. Figure 8  illustrates a potential structure for a public super ESCO implementation model. As 
shown in Figure 8, such PIE may even sub -contract with private ESCOs to implement energy efficiency 
projects through ESPCs in public buildings and facilities. The functions of public sector ESCO acting as a PIE  
are multifaceted and can potentially cover all the building blocks of an energy efficiency ecosystem, from 
energy audits to project design to performance contracting, procurement of cooling and energy efficiency 
measures or services (including through pri vate ESCOs), installation, and M&V of energy savings to 
operations and maintenance. Thus, the PIE would not only moderate stakeholders’ risks but also would help 
build trust, including between private ESCOs and public sector end users. This variation of th e energy 
efficiency  financi ng facility arrangemen t is envisaged in Bangladesh.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  Figure 8. Public  super ESCO implementation model  
 
(iii-b) Energy efficiency revolving facilitie s. This modality combines the features of the plain- vanilla 
financing facility and the super  ESCO model in  that, in addition to providing financing to eligible sub- borrowers,  
the PIE  would invest  in energy efficiency activities  using its own capital  (for example, retrofitting of existing 
buildings)  as shown in Figure 9 
 
Figure 9: Energy efficiency revolving facility (EERF) model


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
54 Details about EERFs using ESAs can be found at https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30388  
55 Budget capture: After the EER F completes an investment for a public agency, the government reduces its 
budgetary transfers to the public client by an amount equivalent to the energy cost savings (thereby capturing 
the savings gained through energy efficiency) and transferring this amount to the EERF . 
56 The World Bank will incorporate lessons -learned from its experience in supporting such mechanisms in, e.g., 
Kosovo, Armenia, Bulgaria, and India. See World Bank -ESMAP Livewire (2018) “Financing Energy Efficiency, 
Part 1: Revolving Funds” (https://www.esmap.org/node/170491).  Under the EERF  model , the PIE uses revolving mechanisms to recover its investment and operating costs 
based on contracts such as Energy Service Agreements (ESAs ) 54 or also uses more traditional revolving 
financing mechanisms such as debt financing and budget capture.55 Under an ESA, the facility finances and 
undertakes the investment on behalf of the beneficiary. In return, the beneficiary makes regular payments 
based on the energy savings generated by the investments to the EERF over an agreed period so that the 
EERF can recover the investment and operating costs. For the beneficiaries, the recurring payment (consisting 
of the reduced energy bill and the payment to the EE or PIE, as applicable) is equal or lower to their pre-
investment baseline energy bill. The ESA covers an agreed period, typically up to 15 years depending on 
criteria including, but not limited to, the size of the investment, the amount of energy saved  and the p rice of 
energy. As ESAs represent long- term term contractual commitments and are typically not classified as debt, 
they provide major advantages to the beneficiary since they are relatively simple to carry out, do not require 
debt financing, and pose littl e risk, thereby addressing key barriers to public investments in efficient space 
cooling and energy efficiency.  
The World Bank does not bear the risk associated with the performance  of these investments and the 
associated recovery  mechanism. That is, in any case, the Host Country is obligated to make repayments, as 
per the terms of the Subsidiary Agreement s, in line with the provisions of the FAA between the GCF and the 
World Bank. E nergy efficiency revolving facilities (EERFs) can be effective financing and implementation 
mechanisms to incentivize efficient, clean cooling where there are market failures, where commercial financing 
for energy efficiency/sustainable cooling is under -developed, and where local banks perceive energy efficiency 
– and sustainable cooling – as too risky.  It helps stimulate the market for sustainable cooling – mostly for 
space cooling (e.g., improve the thermal efficiency of buildings and the efficiency of cooling 
equipment/appliances, stimulate investments in new energy and cooling efficient buildings) in the target 
country by building capacity, establishing confidence in the energy savings, introducing new financing 
approaches, and encouraging the establishm ent of supply chain contractors, suppliers, and financial and legal 
experts in this area The World Bank has experience in various countries with the establishment of EERFs that 
have been in operation for many years .56 
North Macedonia envisages to deploy GCF funds through the EERF model . The North Macedonia Ministry of 
Finance will establish the EERF wit hin the Development Bank of North Macedonia (DBNM) , a development 
and export bank wholly owned  by the Republic of North Macedonia.  GCF funds along with WB funds will be 
provided to the Host Country (the Borrower). The Host Country, through the Ministry of Finance,  will make part 
of the GCF proceeds available to the DBNM  to support the initial capitalization of the EERF. In so d oing, the 
Host Country will (i)  ensure that the on- lending agreement is  on the terms and conditions acceptable to the 
World  Bank  and the GCF, particularly ensuring that the GCF concessionality of the loan financed out of the 
GCF Reimbursable Funds is substantially passed on for the financing of the GCF funded activities, and (ii) 
cause the DBNM to carry out the funded activities in accordance with the provisions of the Subsidiary 
agreement between the World Bank and the Republic of North Macedonia .  
The DBNM  would use the GCF proceeds to finance and implement efficient cooling and other energy efficiency 
investments and offer the full package of services required to (i) identify and select subprojects  presented by 
the participating muni cipalities  in response to  calls for proposals; (ii) finance eligible subproject s through 
various  mechanisms (including  ESAs, loans, budget capture,  partial guarantees and gr ants);  (iii)  procure and 
manage all required consultants to conduct energy audits and prepare technical designs, and contractors to


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   
57 These investments would be done on a grant basis, i.e., there would not be any sub-loan agreement signed 
with the beneficiaries.  
 
58 World Bank Group, Strategic Use of Climate Finance to Maximize Climate Action: A Guiding Framework. 2018  carry out the building retrofits and installation or upgrade of equipment  of central government  buildings57 (i.e. 
primary healthcare facilities identified in consultation with the Ministry of Health) ; and (iv) carry out and 
monitoring and evaluation activities . Investments financed by the DBNM , through the EERF, would need to 
meet the eligibility criteria for investm ents under the Cooling Facility and eligible beneficiaries would include 
government owned buildings (e.g., schools, universities, government administration buildings, health 
facilities).  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
Sustainable cooling will remain a small, boutique niche unless targeted efforts are made to mainstream it and 
catalyze a paradigm shift. As documented by the IEA, SEForAll, and others, current trends are neither 
sustainable or adequate to support developme nt goals.  If current trends continue, the rapid growth in 
purchases of residential and industrial air conditioners using inefficient technologies, often with high GWP 
refrigerants, will make the Paris climate goals unattainable.  Current trends are also f ar from sufficient to 
support the cooling services needed if health, food security, and other SDGs are to be achieved.   Opportunities 
for triggering a sustainability shift in traditional cooling approaches are often found within different sectors (e.g. agriculture, fisheries, health, cold chains, buildings, etc) and may be missed, as countries face competing 
priorities -  especially as they respond and navigate the health and economic challenges exacerbated and 
caused by the emergence of the COVID -19 pandemic.    
The GCF loan  and grant  are required for the development of the anticipated implementation models in the 
selected countries under the Facility, which involves adapting the models to the specific country context; 
testing, improving, and increasing the scale of the models; capacity building of government and private sector 
stakeholders; awareness raising among beneficiaries; development of investment pipelines; and 
dissemination of results; etc. This phase of developing the models and the associated policy and regulatory 
support to  enhanc e institutional and technical capacity  require concessional financing before the models can 
be scaled- up relying on non- concessional financing and private sector financing. Without the availability of 
long- term, concess ional finance from the GCF,  the initial costs to develop these models would be too high for 
the governments and result in either no, insufficient, or delayed adaptation in the critical area of cooling.   
Without appropriate adaptation mechanisms , rising temperatures would translate into higher electricity 
demand to meet cooling needs and consequently, higher cooling- related GHG emissions . GCF funding is 
critical to remove barriers and address market failures identified and demonstrate ways in which countries can 
adapt to rising temperatures in a climate- friendly manner.      
GCF funding will be allocated to eligible Facility projects in accordance with the WBG’s Guiding Framework 
on Strategic Use of Climate Finance to Maximize Climate Action58 which advises that to maximize the impact 
of climate finance, the degree of concessionality allocated to a program or project should be equal to what is 
needed to overcome the identified barriers to implementation and make the program/project viable.    
Different financing instruments will be assembled to form a cascade of concessionality or risk tolerance, which 
entails leveraging the private sector in ways that optimize the use of scares public resources.  Consistent with 
GCF criteria, projects will be se lected and designed so as to provide the least concessionality needed to make 
the proposal viable without crowding out other funding sources.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 83 
   
 Official Use  The following factors justify the use of concessionality:  
• Misaligned national and global incentives to reduc e GHG emissions. This explains the lack of 
incentives for governments to invest adequately in climate action ; more specifically, the fact that 
national and global incentives to invest in mitigation do not necessarily overlap accounts for much of 
the underinvestment. As decarbonization is considered a GPG, concessionality should support 
mitigation projects  and help align national and global plans for climate action.  
• Developing countries lack the resources to implement the  projects required to achieve deep 
decarbonization. Even though many climate policies bring significant domestic co- benefits, they often 
do incur significant short -term costs, e.g. investments required for deep decarbonization and the social 
costs linked to any economic transition (e.g., retraining of workers in declining industries).  
• In countries with limited access to capital markets, finance with a concessional component helps 
leverage private sector finance and helps reduce the funding gap that hamper mitigation and 
adaptation efforts. 
• Temporary interventions financed on grants or concessional terms can ease policy transitions and 
create new markets for low -carbon technologies. Without concessional support, nascent technologies 
will not break through fast enough and certainly not at  the scale needed to avoid a higher than 2°C 
global temperature rise.  
Several factors specific to cooling technologies add to the rationale for concessionality described in the 
Guiding Framework:   
• First, is the reality that there are market failures leading consumers to favor less climate -friendly 
solutions, even if the lifecycle cost, and impact on consumers and households’ pockets, is greater.  As 
highlighted in ESMAP ’s Primer for Space Cooling (2020) , expenditures to achieve space cooling 
already account  for an estimated 5 -15 percent of the median household income in many parts of the 
world .  With rising temperatures and increased demand for comfort, the operation o f air conditioning 
units to provide cooling will only increase.  A less efficient entry -level room AC can cost one- and-a-half 
to two times more over its lifetime compared  with commercially available high efficiency room AC units. .  
• Second, the lack of capital access and large transaction costs  that many developing countries face   
and, in particular, hinders affordability for poorer communities, see below .  (This, and other barriers are 
further highlighted in the feasibility study)  
• Third, waiting for markets to evolve without support , risks missi ng cost -effective opportunities and can 
lead to substantial avoidable increases in GHG emissions; action is urgently needed to mobilize 
concessional climate finance, as well as to better coordinate and create synergies between climate finance for cooling w ith funding from  the Multilateral Ozone Fund supporting refrigeration replacement 
project s. Proving performance and expanding the size of markets for efficient equipment, regulatory 
and fiscal incentives, and consumer awareness efforts can accelerate the tim e-frame for economies of 
scale that are n ecessary  to lower costs and achieve sustainability.   
• Another factor is the need to bridge the affordability gap, a major barrier in large urban slums, a 
category that according to the most recent SEForAll estimate includes 680 million people.  Another 2.2 
billion people are at risk because income limitations only allow purchase of the cheapest and typically 
least efficient air conditioners. (SEForAll 2019) Finally, concessional financing is necessary to enable 
a programmatic approach with opportunities for synergies, knowledge sharing, and dissemination of 
lessons learned, thereby accelerating the transition to sustainable cooling across regions and 
countries.  
• There is also the need to accompany physical cooling- related investments with non -revenue 
generating financing to build and/or strengthen the policy, regulatory, institutional  and general enabling 
framework needed to ensure the sustainability and scaling up of the physical cooling investment and 
the climate and other co- benefits.  
• Priority for grants will be given to cooling solutions whose beneficiaries are the poorer marginalized communities.  
• The learning generated by efforts to test and put in place new models and create a new market 
demand for climate friendly cooling solutions. When a climate initiative involves new approaches, 
tools, or solutions, it entails a risk for the implementing country, and benefits for all others —a key


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 83 
   
 Official Use   characteristic of global public goods . The lack of (historical) data, uncertainties regarding future climate 
conditions, and the need for new strategies and technologies imply a need for capacity and financial 
resources.  
• International transfer of knowledge about factors accounting for success/ failure in climate 
action related to cooling could reduce the cost of a low carbon cooling pathway globally. 
However, it also creates perverse incentives. Being able to learn from the mistakes of others creates 
an incentive to delay action and stick to proven solutions rather than experiment. Knowledge transfer 
does not happen automatically and is facilitated by financial support.  
• There is a real risk of negative global spillovers from low access to sustainable cooling which 
will hinder populations’ resili ence and livelihoods as a result of climate change. Climate change 
impacts often spill over internationally and do not remain within country borders. Examples include 
health- related impacts, with the possible spread of communicable diseases on a global scale, and food 
security impacts caused by lower agricultural yields in one region leading to higher food prices 
worldwide. Other, more uncertain but potentially very large sources of spillovers are:  
o Migration: If some places become unable to provide food security and jobs to the population; 
significant internal displacement and migrations could result, with large negative impacts on 
regional or even global stability;  
o Conflict: Some evidence suggests that climate change may increase local and subnational 
conflicts, again with impacts that could extend throughout a region and globally;  
o Humanitarian crisis  cost.  
In summary, the proposed level of concessionality is justified by the significant role of public goods; the 
presence of both substantial market and non -market barriers; the expected transition to sustainability over the 
life of the project; and the large leverage of investment expected from GCF funds.    
B.6.  Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The Facility will help the recipient countries to develop adequate systems to sustain the  results and benefits 
beyond project closure, where possible.  As provided in the Guiding Framework for the Use of Climate Finance, 
in its use of concessional funds , the WB is prepared to stay the course to support a change in trajectory up to 
the tipping point, where the targeted barriers to implementation are overcome and commercial finance can 
take over. Projects will signal that concessionality is timebound, delimited by a clear exit strategy, and intended  
to encourage and support policy changes that promote the adoption of nascent technologies and solutions.  
Financial. The financing package (including the GCF portion of the financing) will be designed to ensure that 
it does not distort the market or displace other sources of funds. Depending on the nature of the project, the 
design will incorporate actions that aim to st imulate the participation of the private sector and provide economic 
opportunities for end -user beneficiaries.  
Knowledge exchanges will be organized to foster cross -pollination and the dissemination of  best practices 
at local, national and regional levels  and help leverage the lessons learned . The experience shows that events 
that involve experience sharing among different communities, institutions or countries sharing their experience 
with cooling is a proven and rich instrument to support continuity, dissemination of best practices and 
replication at a larger scale.  
Technical and implementation arrangements.    The World Bank  will help EEs  develop and put in place 
implementation arrangements with features (e.g., structure, budget and capacity requirements)  that can be 
sustained beyond the life of the respective projects. In order to ensure  the sustainability of the investments , 
the EEs will ensure that the beneficiaries receive adequate training to conduct O&M to ensure continuous 
operation of the equipment and infrastructure  and/or may subsequently enter into an O&M contract . A key 
area of focus will be contributing to the development of local technical capacity , taking into account gaps, 
needs and context relevant to each project . Further,  and importantly, the Facility will provi de support to 
strengthen EE’s enabling environments, including, for example,  the development and adoption technical 
standards, policies and practices for sustainable cooling that can be sustained, as well as expanded over time.


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  C. FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + 
iv + v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
157 million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  29 40 years  10 years  No interest  
(ii) Senior loans  96 20 years  5 years  0.75%  interest rate  
(iii) Equity      
 
(iv) Guarantees  - -   
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  - -   
(vi) Grants  32     
(vii
) Result s-base d 
payments    
   
(b) Co -financing 
information59 Total amount  Currency  
722.84 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor 
& 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
World Bank ( IBRD ) Senior 
Loans  
 130 million USD 
($) tbd tbd Options  
 
World Bank (IBRD ) Senior 
Loans  
 27.4 million USD 
($) 10 
years  
3 years  Floating i nterest rate  
0.25% front end fee 
0.25% commitment fee  Options  
 
World Bank (IBRD)  Senior 
Loans  
 20 million USD 
($) 25 
years  
5 years  Floating interest rate  
0.25% front end fee  
0.25% commitment fee  Options  
 
World Bank (IDA)  Senior 
Loans  
 86 million USD 
($)  38 
years  
7.5 
years  no interest  
0.75% service fee  
0.5% commitment fee  Options  
 
World Bank (IDA)  Senior 
Loans  
 150 million USD 
($) 30 
years  
5 years  0.71% interest  rate 
0.75% service fee  
0.5% commitment fee 
 Options  
 
World Bank (IDA)  Senior 
Loans  150 Million USD 
($) tbd tbd  
World Bank (IBRD)  Guarantee 
(TBD)  50 Million USD 
($) tbd tbd  
World Bank (IDA)  Grants  80.5 million USD 
($)    
Global Financing 
Facility  Grants  25 million USD 
($)    
Health Emergency 
Preparedness and 
Response Trust Fund  Grants  3 million USD 
($)    
Pandemic 
Emergency Facility  Grants  0.94 million USD 
($)    
Amount Currency  
 
59 The World Bank (IBRD/IDA /TF) co-financing  amounts are indicative and subject to approval by the World 
Bank Board and agreement with the EEs.


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  (c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)   879.84  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 
250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page)   
Not applicable.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Table  - Financing by Component  
Component  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing60 
Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1 – Policy, 
regulatory  and enabling 
environment support  91.6       
46.1 
 Senior loans  World Bank  
15.7 Grants  21.6 Grants  World Bank  
  0.25 Grants  Health 
Emergency 
Preparedness 
and Response 
Trust Fund  
  8 Grants  Global 
Financing 
Facility  
Component 2- Financing for 
cooling investments    
769.04  125 Senior 
loans  509.8  Senior loans  World Bank  
16.3 Grants  47.5 Grants  World Bank   
  50 Guarantee 
(TBD) World Bank  
  2.5 Grants  Health 
Emergency 
Preparedness 
and Response 
Trust Fund  
  0.94 Grants  Pandemic 
Emergency 
Facility  
  17 Grants  Global 
Financing 
Facility  
 
60 The World Bank (IBRD/IDA /WB-administered TFs) co -financing  amounts are indicative and subject to 
approval by the World Bank Board and agreement with the EEs.


---
*Page 48*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  Component 3 – Project 
management  19.2   7.5 Senior loans  World Bank  
  11.45  Grants  World Bank  
  0.25 Grants  Health 
Emergency 
Preparedness 
and Response 
Trust Fund  
Indicative total cost  (million 
USD)  879.84  157 722.84  
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
 
GCF funds will be used to support activities that aim to strengthen policy, regulatory and enabling environments 
that support scaling up and sustaining cooling -informed investments and building the capacity of key 
stakeholders. This includes inputs and learnings relevant for inclusion in cooling action plans as well as in the 
NDC revision process. Important co- benefits such as increasing resilience and adaptive capacity would also 
be highly relevant to inform national adaption and disaster risk strategies a nd plans. Activities linked to capacity 
building will be important and can take various forms, including, for example for the testing, labelling and 
standards for cooling technologies (e.g., different appliances and equipment for space cooling and/or cold 
chains), the labelling of energy efficient buildings . A key feature will be supporting the removal of barriers in 
order  to help increase the demand for efficient cooling technologies and investments and stimulate self -
sustaining markets in the relevant sec tors. Experiences and lessons will  be documented to contribute to building 
capacity even beyond the context of countries supported by the Facility.  
 
The Cooling Facility will be technology agnostic and support continued technological innovations, as long as 
the proposed technologies lead to more energy -efficient and climate- friendly cooling services and are in line 
with the criteria established for the Cooling Facility. The performance of proposed cooling solutions should 
have been dem onstrated through laboratory testing and/or field- based data.  
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
- Programme level  
The proposed F acility is designed as an innovative, multi -sector and multi -country programmatic financing 
mechanism with the goal of transforming the cooling sector  in the target countries .  With a cross cutting-  
adaptation and mitigation-  approach, t he Facility will bring about access to cooling which is essential in a 
warming world and especially critical to help build resilience in countries facing risks of extreme heat hazards, 
as well as help chart a  sustainable path to low ca rbon development (impact potential).   
- Adaptation


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  In the Facility  countries at high risk of facing extreme heat hazards - Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi, and 
Somalia - the impact of the Facility -supported sustainable cooling investment are expected to reach over 8 
million  direct (and over  16 million  indirect)  beneficiaries61.  It is estimated that the expected direct 
beneficiaries will amount to approximately 0.44 million  in Bangladesh (a nd more than 4.5 million indirect 
beneficiaries), 1.3 million in El Salvador (and almost 4 million indirect beneficiaries), 251 thousand in Malawi 
(and 1.7 million indirect beneficiaries) and 2.2 million in Somalia (and 6.6 million indirect beneficiaries)62.  
The Facility ’s projects will increase resilience to climate impacts of buildings in Bangladesh, of agriculture 
cold chains in Malawi, and of health cold chains and facilities in El Salvador and Somalia. These climate -
resilient  cooling assets (more than 16,000 cooling assets)  will also contribute to the Facility’s mitigation 
impact (along with the cooling investments in the Facility’s 5 other countries).  
- Mitigation  
Overall , it is conservatively estimated that the Cooling Facility will lead to approximately 1  million ton of 
avoided or reduced GHG emissions (compared to BAU) per year  across the sustainable cooling investments 
made in the 9 countries that are part of the Cooling Facility.  This amou nts to over 10.7 MtCO2e over the 
10-year implementation lifetime of the Facility , and over 18 Mt CO2e over the lifespan  of the cooling assets  
(which represent s about 2% of today’s global cooling- related emissions ). This estimated GHG mitigation 
potential for the Facility is calculated based on an ex -ante assessment of each of the identified project in the 
different cooling target areas utilizing best -practice and publicly available tools  and methodologies  and 
conservative assumptions . The program’s impact potential stems from the combination of interventions of 
different types of projects that engage different business, financing and delivery models based on the barriers 
faced in different markets .  The program encompasses projects that, for example,  
• promote passive measures to provide comfort while avoiding the need for mechanical cooling (for 
example, advanced thermal protection in building envelope, natural ventilation and cool roofs)  – 
space c ooling;  
• increase energy efficiency by deploying energy -saving cooling technologies in buildings (for example, 
super -efficient air conditioners, energy -efficient chillers) –  space cooling;  
• promote sustainable refrigeration and cold chain infrastructure –  refrigeration and cold chains ; or  
• promote the deployment of renewable energy to power  cooling such as solar refrigerators  and 
agriculture chillers – refrigeration and cold chains .  
Given the diversity in the types of projects /sectors  covered under the t wo target cooling areas , different 
calculation models and resources are required to estimate GHG  emissions reductions , complemented by 
empirical data to derive assumptions . The  main tools used to calculate GHG emissions are consistent with 
the I nternational Financial Institution Technical Working Group ( IFI-TWG)  Guidelines for Harmonized 
Approaches to GHG Accounting.  These tools are: 
1) IFC EDGE “Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies” software application to estimate  (EEff 
buildings )63 
2) HOMER Powering Health (vaccines cold chains and health facilities)64 
Annex 23  of the funding proposal outlines in more detail the GHG calculations  for each of the projects 
covered by  the Facility  and Annex 24 describes the methodol ogy and assumptions considered to perform 
the calculations . 
 
61 Initially the supported climate- friendly and heat resilient health cold chains and facilities will support health 
system strengthening for the countries’ COVID -19 response, but later in the life of the assets potentially for 
vaccines and treatments to combat other existing and new diseases, including possible climate induced 
diseases  
62 See Annex 17 as well as Annex 23 for an overview of the assumptions and methodology to estimate the 
projects’ beneficiaries.  
63 See https://app.edgebuildings.com  
64 See https://poweringhealth.homerenergy.com


---
*Page 50*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  The Facility’s experience and approach in assessing and achieving significant GHG impact through its 2 
cooling target areas in different countries and sectors  will contribute to building the information and know -
how basis to facilitate and stimulate the ex pansion of sustainable cooling more systematically in climate 
change plans and strategies more broadly.  
- Space cooling 
 Through the Facility’s support, space cooling projects will be promoting both higher efficiency and low er 
GWP refrigerants uses, thereby shift ing the BAU trajectory of cooling GHG impact towards sustainable high 
efficiency/low GWP cooling.   It is expected that the largest share ( more than t hree quarter , i.e. 12.6  MtCO2e  
from energy efficiency in space cooling)  of the program’s GHG mitigation impact over its lifespan65 will be 
achieved from EEff space cooling –  in line with the large contribution of this cooling target area to global 
emissions (amounting to 1,135 MtCO2e/yr worldwide and growing significantly to about 2,070 Mt Co2e in 
2050 – representing 18% of the increase in the total CO2 emissi ons associated with global electricity 
consumption to 205066) and the significant potential to shift downward that global space cooling emissions 
curve67. The GHG impact is further enhanced when adding the lower and lower GWP refrigerant use, 
considering t hat refrigerants are powerful GHGs in their own right.  
The space cooling proj ects under the program assume a minimum energy efficiency improvement  of 
20% compared to BAU, with ex -ante calculations for EEff  buildings projects using the internationally 
recognized IFC “EDGE ” green buildings software  application68 to calculate energy savings for different types 
of buildings .  The EDGE software  and methodology  has been customized to the specific local circumstances  
providing base cases  for typical buildings by using empirical data from actual buildings reflecting current 
practice and taking into account climatic conditions of the location, building type and occupant use, with  
assumptions updated as the market evolves69.   
- Refrigeration and c old chains  
The Facility will help catalyze a greening of the cold chain by improv ing the efficiency of refrigeration,  storage  
and distribution infrastructure  for agriculture and health using low GWP refrigerants.  
The Facility aims to also support climate f riendly cooling in the context of health facilities and cold chains to 
safely store vaccines and medicine.   Some of the cold chain investments will involve solarization to meet 
cooling needs of the heal th facilities and cold chains .  To estimate the energy requirements (to be provided 
by renewable energy), the energy savings, the lower GWP refrigerants and the overall GHG impact, the 
following well known known tools will be used: the IFC EDGE tool; the HOMER (Hybrid Optimization of 
Multiple Energy Resources) Powering Health tool70 (for the assessment of distributed solar power) . 
 
65 The lifespan of the program – the estimated period during which the impact of the program will be felt) is 27 
years .  This is different from the program’s implementation period (10 years) which is the basis for calculating 
the Facility’s indicators.  
66 IEA (2018) The Future of Cooling.  
67 In fact, it is estimated that the current global emissions from space cooling could have been less than half 
with more efficient buildings and efficient cooling appliances (ESMAP 2020) .  The IEA estimates that EEff 
space cooling –  as represented in its “Eff icient Cooling Scenario” , would lead to less than half of the energy 
used for space cooling under the Baseline Scenario.  
68 See https://edgebuildings.com/ .  The EDGE software can be used for free to help design an energy and 
resource efficient building in more than 160 countries.  The EDGE software calculates utility savings and 
reduced carbon footprint of a buildings.  (A building achieving a minimum projected reduction of 20% in energy, 
as well as water use and e mbodied energy in materials compared to a standard BAU building in that same 
market may be eligible for EDGE certification.)  
69 More information on the EDGE methodology can be found here: 
https://edgebuildings.com/ learning/ methodology / / 
70 Information on Homer Powering Health Tool is publicly available on their website: 
https://poweringhealth.homerenergy.com/ .  The tool is free online and can be used to create initial designs of 
electric power systems for health care facilities that have no other power supply or have grid electricity available 
for a predictable period of hours each day.


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  The GHG emissions reductions associated with the promotion of more climate -friendly refrigeration and cold 
chain through the Facility’s projects are estimated to reach about 2.7 MtCO2e  over the lifespan of the 
program , accompanied by important co -benefits  (see below).  
- Off-grid cooling powered by renewable energy  
 Enabling the expansion of  affordable cooling in off -grid contexts will help  reach some of the poorest 
communities  and to contribute to enhancing their resilience to the impact of climate change.  Indigenous and 
non-GHG emitting renewable energy (solar)  will mostly power ( 126 MW)  these critical cooling services .    
- Kigali Amendment and Refrigerants .    
The Facility will also support the goals and requirements of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol  
by helping countries in the transition to more climate- friendly refrigerants  by catalysing more energy efficient 
cooling equipment ( air conditioners and refrigeration)  in parallel with HFC phase down.   The more climate -
friendly refrigerant for specific projects would be determined based on the specific market and application of 
the more efficient cooling application and guided by t he May 2019 Report of the Technology and Economic 
Assessment Panel (TEAP)  to the Montreal Protocol  Parties  Report on Cost and Availability of Low -GWP 
Technologies and Equipment that Maintain/Enhance Energy Efficiency  71.  The GHG benefits from this 
refrigerant transition supported by the Facility have been estimated ex -ante, in line with global estimate s 
indicating that  GHG emissio ns from the refrigerants represent about 20 percent of cooling equipment’s  
overall GHG emissions.   These GHG reductions achieved under the Facility’s projects are estimated to 
amount to about  1.1Mt C O2e over the lifespan of the Facility . 
- Other impacts   
The Cooling Facility is expected to generate a number of co -benefits, notably  in terms of health.  The 
Facility’s support for expanding and retrofitting the climate friendly vaccine cold chains in 3 countries (El 
Salvador, Sao Tome and Principe and Somalia) will help them respond to the current COVID -19 pandemic, 
increasing the capacity to store vaccines and lower the incidence of wasted vaccines  and help reach larger 
shares of their populations in different parts of the country –  which is critical for ensuring equity in their 
vaccination efforts.  Health co -benefits – albeit of a different nature are also expected from the Facility’s 
support for more sustainable space cooling ( in Bangladesh, Panama, and Sri Lanka) .  These investments 
will help lower the incidence of heat -related illnesses72, as well as mental stress73. 
Other expect ed co- benefits are linked to improved local air quality through the displacement/avoidance of 
diesel generators, especially in the context of support going towards the solarization of cold chains.  
The Cooling Facility’s support in sustainable cooling in the agriculture sector in Malawi as well as Kenya, will 
also contribute to efforts to lower current high rates of food loss and indirectly to help boost efforts to address 
malnutrition.  
As countries’ face economic downturns associated from the COVID -19 pande mic, investments in 
sustainable cooling supported by the Cooling Facility will contribute to countries’ efforts to address 
unemployment and efforts to build back better. In fact, s pace cooling investments in new buildings and 
retrofits in particular have been identified in several countries to help boost local employment opportunities74. 
D.2.  Paradigm shift  potential (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
71 Volume 4: Decision XXX/3 Task Force Report on Cost and Availability of Low -GWP Technologies and 
Equipment that Maintain/Enhance Energy Efficiency ( https://ozone.unep.org/science/assessment/teap )  
72 Heat stress starts to occur when the human body reaches a temperature above 38oC (i.e., 1oC above its 
normal temperature of 37oC).  (Steffan, Hughes and Perkins 2014 , as reported in ESMAP 2020).  
73 Experts have found links between heat and aggressive or violent behavior, which also has implications for 
domestic violence, with women and children bearing the brunt of such situations (Cooper 2019; Anderson and 
DeLisi 2011.  Discussion also reported in ESMAP 2020)  
74 For example, see the IEA December 2020 report on Energy Efficiency 2020 
(https://www.iea.org/reports/energy -efficiency -2020/energy -efficiency -jobs-and-the-recovery ) and IRENA 
(https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Apr/Global -Renewables -Outlook -2020)


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  At a time when the needs for cooling are intrinsically linked with efforts to meet SDGs and to build resilience 
to impacts from a dangerously warming planet , and when the global cooling demand is increasing 
exponentially, but on a trajectory that is costly , inefficient and high in GHGs, there is an opportunity now to 
set the stage for changing course and support a paradigm shift.   The potential is huge: maximizing energy 
efficiency in the cooling sector (refrigeration and space cooling) while simultaneously  phasing down HFCs 
contained in refrigerants, the world can potentially avoid close to 1oC by 2100.  
The Cooling Facility proposes to catalyze a paradigm shift by working across key cooling target areas and 
with a range of  countries from different parts of  the developing world to amplify the potential to leverage its  
experiences and learnings.  In so doing, the Facility seeks  to provide pioneer ing examples  that can be 
emulated through development  and demonstrat ion o f models and approaches that can be scaled up and  be 
fit-for-purpose in more countries with similar circumstances, and thus further stimulate scaling-up the shift to 
sustainable cooling investments.  Through a combination of targeted technical assistance an d policy 
dialogue offered in conjunction with investment support for country -identified national priority sectors, the 
Facility seeks to build evidence and generate  a track record , working  with local leaders and champions to  
elevate  sustainable cooling as a multi -focal investment and regulatory , administrative and policy  action area 
at national level  that can contribute  to – and has synergies  with – key climate and development goals  
(including efforts to respo nd to the COVID -19 pandemic and to build back  better) . The investment component 
will allow governments to see how the policy activities  are delivering at sector level, put in place 
implementation structures and financial mechanisms that can be scaled up and/or see their scope 
broadened, and ensure th at valuable lessons are learned while technology to enable achievement of 
ambitious objectives at country level is being transferred.  In order to shift from one- off investments to 
financially sustainable and scaled-up investments, the Facility includes projects adopting  different  
implementing models that aim at (i) revolving -financing that allow financing to continue after the end of the 
projects and (ii) enabling private sector entities to engage and invest in project activities  in the longer term , 
as well as (iii) sending strong market signals for shifts towards sustainable cooling through public 
procurement (in the case of the health sector in particular) and incentives .  
For example, credit lines  help local banks develop a business line for cooling- investments and build their 
capacity to identify, assess, and originate loans for cooling- investment s so that local banks can continue 
supporting these investments beyond the project duration.  Developing  ESCO s that provide financing as well 
as services to design and implement cooling and energy efficiency  measures would address both the 
financing and capacity barriers that prevent cooling- investments from being implemented. EERFs  collect 
energy cost savings to recover the capital expenditure for cooling- investments  so that the funds can be re-
invested and the EERF can become a sustainable entity . In addition, the EERF sustains its staff over the 
long term and builds  its capacity  – in contrast to project management  units that are usually dissolved after 
the project  end. The development , implementation, and demonstration of such models  will allow investments 
to continue and scale -up and create experience that  can be shared with and replicated in other countries  
after tailoring the solutions to the specific context.  
Moreover, the Facility will help countries mainstream sustainable cooling into development and climate 
plans, procurement strategies  and policy/regulatory frameworks and also help train and build the capacity of 
relevant stakeholders, while also helping raise awareness of the availability and benefits of sustainable 
cooling measures and technologies .  These efforts are aimed at building an enabling environment for further 
scale -up of sustainable cooling beyond the Facility’s investments.  
The Facility’s support to El Salvador, Sao Tome and Principe, and Somalia  is targeting efficient and climate 
friendly cooling in the health sector , seeking to internalize sustainable cooling in efforts to strengthen health 
systems to leave countries better prepared for current and any future  public health emergencies with greater 
sustainability .


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  In the buildings and cooling appliances sectors  (e.g., in Bangladesh, North Macedonia, Panama,  Sri Lanka ), 
the Facility also seeks to facilitate and mainstream better access to cooling by supporting enabling 
environments and sustainable implementation mechanisms  adapted to local institutional and policy 
frameworks, working with st rong local partners  and mobilizing private sector capacity and financing.   The 
pioneering examples are designed to be taken to scale, and with positive results, the expectation is that 
these examples would inspire others to emulate them.  
In the agriculture and off -grid sectors (Kenya, Malawi ), the Facility will support new financing mechanisms 
and help build capacity and awareness and greater affordability  highlighting contribution to productivity .  
Positive results with these projects  are expected to provide powerful ammunition for scaling up with the 
countries and beyond.  As many African countries ’ economies have high reliance on the agriculture sectors 
and also vulnerable to climate change, the ground is literally fertile for a push for sustainable cooling if we 
can demonstrate practical mechanisms that can bring greater affordability.   
At the same time the Facility ’s projects are supportive and aligned with each country’s climate change 
priorities  and can support further ambition.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The delivery of cooling efficiently is essential for both Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG 7) and Climate 
Action (SDG 13). If cooling efficiency remains unchanged, additional power generation capacity of 2,500 
GW will be needed to meet electricity demand for air conditioning by 2050 – an estimated cost of ~US$1.7 
trillion. Increased access to cold chains is critical to ensuring food safety and reducing food loss and waste. 
Climate fr iendly technologies are necessary to reduce associated GHG emission (estimated at 4.4 GT CO2e, 
i.e., 8% of global GHG emissions).  By maximizing energy efficiency in the cooling sector (refrigeration and 
space cooling) while simultaneously phasing down HFC s contained in refrigerants, the world can potentially 
avoid close to 1oC by 2100.  In addition to climate mitigation, increasing access to sustainable cooling in 
developing countries, especially those located in the tropics and sub- tropics, will also cont ribute to SDG 13 
by supporting greater resilience and improved health and livelihood of vulnerable people, communities, and 
regions.  
 
Protecting workers and communities from extreme heat is critical in order to achieve Decent Work and 
Economic Growth (SDG 8) and Sustainable Cities and Communities (SDG 11). Higher temperatures 
and lack of cooling negatively impact performance labor produc tivity. It is estimated that by 2050, work hours 
lost due to heat may be as high as 12 percent in the worst affected regions of South Asia and West Africa –  
representing 6 percent of annual GDP.  In urban environments, average temperatures have been increasing 
at twice the rate of global change, largely due to the Urban Heat Island (UHI) effect. Annual mean air 
temperatures of cities can be 1- 3oC higher than their surroundings (at night, the temperature difference can 
be as high as 12oC). The need to reduce excess urban heat is one of the key resilience and sustainability 
challenges of the 21st century.  
 
Cooling and thermal comfort are also key to Zero Hunger (SDG 2), Good health and well -being (SDG 3, 
and Gender Equality (SDG 5).  
As noted in Section B, in  developing countries, many with undernourished populations, around 40 percent 
of food produced (amounting to more than 250 million tons), including 1 in 4 fish caught, is lost between 
harvest and market.  
• Heat is now the deadliest global natural disaste r in an average year, posing the greatest risk for vulnerable 
populations. High temperatures increase the risk of heatstroke, breathing issues, heart attacks, asthma and 
kidney problems. Unreliable medical cold chains put at risk the effectiveness of vacci nes and other medical 
supplies  
• While more data and analysis are needed to better understand the gender aspect of access to sustainable 
cooling, gender risks are evident (SEforALL 2019). Women and girls are often disproportionately impacted 
by a lack of access to  sustainable cooling and enhanced access could lead to lower vulnerability to mortality


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  risk and p overty. Furthermore , through the Facility ,  has a unique opportunity to pro -actively address gender 
gaps across entrepreneurs, employees and at the consumer level.  
There are numerous examples of potential contributions to support of the SDGs from possible projects. For 
example, the support to cooling appliances in Panama would lead to multiple benefits for consumers 
including cost -savings for households, particularly women, who  typically spend more time homes , reduced 
food waste, and lower electricity bills. There are also significant health benefits associated with access to 
refrigeration in health care from the safe -storage of vaccines and other t emperature -sensitive medication.  
Access to refrigeration will also reduce food waste for agricultural, dairy and livestock farmers, whilst 
agricultural and commercial refrigeration will boost revenues and incomes, and agricultural cold chains will 
reduce hunger and malnutrition.  
The proposed North Macedonia project will also have significant gender benefits through increased women’s 
representation in the engineering professions with a focus on EE ff, by providing targeted training program 
for women and increasing awareness about em ployment opportunities under the Project investments. The 
Project includes an indicator —the percentage of female staff hired under service contracts for technical and 
design work under the Project —to measure these impacts.   The Malawi project seeks to spec ifically target 
women- owned enterprises.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Recipient needs  to adapt to rising temperatures vary with the country  context.  For example,  from the energy 
perspective,  countries such as Bangladesh, North Macedonia, Sao Tome and Principe are  fossil -fuel 
dominant. Others face rapidly growing peak energy demand, including for cooling, which strain already 
unreliable electricity systems and increase the use of high carbon -emitting sources of supply (e.g., 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Panama, El Salvador)75. Finally, countries such as Somalia, Malawi76, El Salvador, 
Sao Tome and Principe and Kenya are likely to default to carbon -intensive cooling solutions, as they focus 
on providing universal access to electricity services .  
The Facility -supported interventions would enable these countries to meet their cooling needs in a more 
climate -friendly way and contribute to lower GHG emissions by: (i) strengthening their institution s and 
implementation capacity to adapt the rising temperatures; and (ii) addressing the barriers (as outlined in 
Section B.177), including the absence of adequate sources of financing for climate- friendly cooling 
investments.  Instead of proposing a single solution to all , the Facility takes a bottom -up approach to 
sustainable cooling solutions , favoring measures, mechanisms and strategies that are grounded on each 
country’s institutional and policy framework  and building on countries’  priorities , the respective sector context 
and best suited to address the challenges and needs of the local recipients . The section below summarizes 
the Facility’s alignment with the individual countries’ needs.  
 
Bangladesh.  Bangladesh is among the World’s most vulne rable countries to the effects of climate change.  
The country is also facing both serious energy security challenges and severe heat stress, equally across 
its high -income residents, low -income neighborhoods and informal slum settlements. Challenges to 
mainstreaming sustainable cooling include making solutions affordable among poor populations, overcoming 
consumer resistance to the higher first cost of more efficient equipment, and enabling greater consideration 
of cooling in new building design and approval.  The share of energy consumption for space cooling, in 
buildings in particular, is rising rapidly due to increased urbanization and growing income and increased 
reliance on air conditioning in public, commercial and high- end residential buildings.  
Pressures to meet growing demand for sustainable cooling services, could result in significant increases in 
coal-fired generation by 2030 if nothing changes. Greater use of renewable energy and faster progress to 
scale -up energy efficiency will be needed to  help steer development in a more climate- friendly way. Buildings 
and appliances EEff are an important part of the EEff efforts under the Environment Conservation Act and 
 
75 See, for example, World Bank Open Data (data.worldbank.org).  
76 Malawi ranks among the top- 10 countries with rural poor at cooling risk (SEforALL, 2020).  
77 Section B.1 also outlines the key challenges from  a sector perspective.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  the Bangladesh Energy Efficient & Conservation Master Plan. Integrating EEff and pass ive building design 
features and energy efficient cooling at scale now is key for building a more sustainable infrastructure at 
lower costs and lower pressures on the electricity grid.  
 
El Salvador.  El Salvador is the smallest country in Central America w ith a poverty rate (based on a US$5.5 
per person per day poverty line) of 29% and extreme poverty (US$3.2 per person per day) of 8.5% as of 
2017. Given its tropical geographic location, biodiversity, and topography, El Salvador is particularly 
vulnerable t o increasing temperatures (which are predicted to increase between 1.4 and 2 degrees by 2050) 
and rising sea levels (a rise of up to 8cm by 2050 is predicted).  
The challenges to El Salvador’s health system and the Government’s ability to implement measures as a 
response to COVID -19 are exacerbated by the observed and anticipated impacts of climate change. These 
impacts are expected to lead to more frequent natural disasters, such as floods, droughts, and tropical 
storms. These disasters in turn could lead to increasing damages to health care facilities, possibly disabling 
them completely at times when their services are most required. A large proportion of El Salvador’s 
vulnerable population are the elderly (11.7%) and the adult population with underlying r isk factors such as 
obesity and non -communicable diseases (40%). These two groups are those also most at risk to COVID -19.  
 
To ensure an effective COVID -19 response and generate long -lasting resilience and be prepared to handle 
future health crisis, the G overnment of El Salvador seeks to strengthen the overall national immunization 
and related health delivery systems.  This includes a variety of issues, including safe and appropriate cold 
chain and relates services.  The key challenges are timing and financial means to enable the Government 
of El Salvador to take advantage of the window of opportunity of revamping its cold chain to ensure it is safe, 
as well as climate friendly.   
 
Kenya.   Demand for cooling is projected to grow significantly in the Nairobi and Mombasa markets --  1.8 
million cumulative unit sales between 2020 and 2030 for off -grid households alone. In addition, there are an 
estimated 3.4 million off -grid households in Keny a that could realize a direct net economic benefits from 
owning a refrigerator. Energy efficiency will help lower the projected energy consumption to meet Kenya’s 
cooling demand, and in doing so reduce utility bills for households and businesses, decrease the need for 
additional power supply, and increase energy access while also reducing GHG emissions in line with the 
country’s climate mitigation goals.  In the off -grid context, furthering access to cooling solutions will contribute 
to the development of p roductive uses of electricity, which is necessary for the viability of energy access 
efforts (with renewable energy). In the context of nearly 40% of food perishing before it reaches a consumer 
in Sub- Saharan Africa,  enhancing access to cooling will contr ibute to increasing overall climate resilience 
of the population by improving food security through reduced post -harvest losses, create employment 
opportunities, enhance resilience to shocks, and stimulate economic growth. Challenges include the need 
for innovative business models to make cold chains available to small farmers as well as financing for the 
higher first cost of more efficient AC systems for residential and business applications.  
 
Malawi.  Malawi is a small, low- income landlocked country in south -eastern Africa, with most of its people 
living below the poverty line. The country is subject to frequent macroeconomic and climatic shocks.  
Malawi’s private sector is mostly informal with a few largescale companies capturing most economic 
opportunities. Micro , small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) often operate in the informal sector, have low 
capacity, and are primarily concentrated in the service sector , such as wholesale, retail and trade. A key 
constraint indicated by MSMEs is the lack of access to financing and perceptions of risk for new technologies 
and innovative business models within the financial sector.  MSMEs can potentially drive employment ; yet, 
they face numerous challenges that constrain their ability to contribute to economic growth.   Lack of access 
to cooling, in particular more sustainable cooling solutions with lower operational costs, is hindering


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  economic opportunities for MSMEs involved in a number of important sectors, such as dairy and horticulture 
(fruits and vegetables).  
 
Many  firms, especially smaller ones, face capacity and capability gaps, going from attitude/mindset to skills 
with respect to financial literacy, management practices, business language, market assessment, and 
behavioral characteristics of successful entrepren eurs. The majority of MSMEs (89 percent) are informal, 36 
percent do not keep records, and 45 percent lack innovation and diversification (FinScope survey 2019). 
Among several challenges, most women and youth- led entrepreneurships are said to be unaware of  the 
process or the importance of formalizing their activity. Promoting investment opportunities in sustainable 
cooling investments, with a focus on women and the youth, will contribute to providing economic 
opportunities and strengthening the resilience t o climate change of vulnerable and marginalized population 
groups, while also avoiding expensive and polluting energy consumption.  In this context and given barriers 
mentioned earlier, Malawi is looking at credit lines as a suitable implementation model t hat can kick start the 
transformation towards more sustainable cold chains in its agriculture sector targeted at MSMEs by 
facilitating access to financing among MSMEs.  
 
North Macedonia.   North Macedonia is a landlocked country at the heart of the Balkans, characterized by 
its mountainous terrain that is intersected by valleys and lowlands. Many public buildings (including schools, 
health care centers/clinics, universities, etc.) are 50+ years old and classified as underheated, unsafe (due 
to structural instability and seismic risks) and dilapidated.  In fact, buildings, which consume about 39 percent 
of the energy, have been identified in the country as a major priority, with estimates of  savings from 20- 40 
percent. The public sector has the greatest potential, with about 35- 40 percent savings, mostly in the health 
and education sectors.  While the focus in the past has been on heating, projected increases in summer 
temperatures in Europe are expected to substantially increase the demand and need for cooling, especially 
in schools and hospitals. Improving thermal renovations of public buildings will substantially reduce their 
future cooling loads, which will contribute to the country’s adaptation to the changing climate.  
 
Several challenges need to be addressed for the public sector to invest in sustainable cooling. Central 
government buildings typically have very limited budgetary provisions for capital improvements, if any, and 
usually ar e not allowed to borrow. Municipalities must  undergo the fiscal decentralization process and, even 
then, have stringent debt limitations which many have already reached. Few have formal credit ratings. Thus, 
while energy efficiency investments can pay for themselves through cost savings, traditional debt financing 
has been difficult to mobilize for the public sector, effectively forming a barrier to EEff renovations in public 
buildings. A combination of capacity building, institutional reforms, and demonstr ation, along with a financing 
mechanism designed specifically for the public – including municipal – context, will be needed to overcome 
these barriers. In the context of the COVID -19 situation, rehabilitation of health care facilities, with adequate 
air conditioning systems, are expected to become higher priorities.  Given the specific conditions and barriers 
mentioned above, North Macedonia is seeking to tackle space cooling in the public sector –  and lower its 
energy consumption and associated GHG emissi ons - through the establishment of an energy efficiency 
fund, a sustainable financing mechanism that is well suited for its circumstances and targeted sector.  
 
Panama.  In the past ten years, Panama´s cooling appliances market has been growing rapidly for  both ACs 
and refrigerators technologies. AC penetration in the residential sector is relatively low but is expected to 
rapidly increase in line with the country’s dynamic economic development (e.g., residential household AC 
ownership stood at 8.9 percent in 2000, compared to 15.6 percent in 2010 and is expected to grow to an 
estimated 66 percent in 2050).  According to the National Energy Plan of Panama (Plan Energético Nacional 
2015- 2050), cooling systems´ consumption currently represent about 40 percent of the overall electricity 
consumption in Panama. The electricity sector is facing serious challenges in keeping up with rising 
electricity demand, which is growing at an average annual rate of 8.5 percent per year mainly due to an 
increased use of cooling equipment in the residential and commercial sectors.  In order to align with 
Panama’s climate change objectives and commitments (NDC), the pace of energy demand growth needs to 
be reduced from an average 6 percent in the business -as-usual scenario to around 4 percent, which would 
reduce the need of capacity additions by 38 percent.


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  Several barriers must be addressed to respond to this rapidly growing problem. Though Panama has a 
sophisticated banking sector, the absence of i) dedicated EEff credit lines priced to incentivize investments 
in EEff and ii) local long term capital market for mortgages (access of local banks to capital markets is limited 
to up to 5 -years bonds), and iii) limited technical capacity in local banks to assess EEff products and 
investments, represent a major barrier for EEff in Panama. The higher initial cost of EEff equipment and lack 
of access to affordable financing are hindering the adoption of more sustainable cooling solutions and could 
lock-in large quantities of inefficient, polluting but cheaper (on a first cost basis) cooling equipment.  Law 69-
12 mandates the establishment of  an energy  efficiency fund.  The national Fondo de Eficiencia Energética  
(UREE Fund) aims to be transformational by catalyzing private investment, reducing the high- risk perception 
associated with green buildings and energy efficient cooling appliances, and improve market liquidity for 
energy efficiency initiatives. Credit lin es facilities will help transform the residential and commercial sectors 
and leverage private sector capital.    
Sao Tome and Principe.  The Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is a small low -middle -income country 
comprised of two main islands. It has a total population of approximately 200,000 people, 42.6% of whom 
are 14 years of age or younger. In addition to having a small population and a remote location, there is a 
high fixed cost of public goods — all factors that affect the country’s trade, fiscal accounts and human 
development outcomes.  
 
With 1,054 COVID -19 confirmed cases as of January 8, 2020, Sao Tome and Principe showed one of the 
highest contamination rates (441/100,000 people) in the region and still has limited capacity to handle the 
COVID -19 outbreak. The Government was unable to quickly establish laboratory capacity to diagnose 
COVID -19 due to the interruption of commercial flights to the island in the begging of the p andemic. After 
several months without having laboratory capacity to diagnose COVID -19, early efforts to contain local 
transmission (first case diagnosed in early April) were hindered by incapacity to confirm diagnosis and isolate 
cases, perform contact tracing and slow transmission. This capacity was finally established in July , alongside 
with improved hospital capacity to manage cases and trained surveillance teams to perform contact tracing. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the country is now better prepared to diagnose, isolate, treat and track COVID -
19 contacts, a significant and more comprehensive strategy to strengthen the public health systems will be 
key in ensuring that COVID -19 and future epidemics will be properly managed. As highlighted by the WHO, 
the investments and expenditures for COVID -19 should also lead to longer -term, wider benefits, in line with 
national needs for sustainable capacities. International collaboration and support to the Government will be 
crucial to continue mitigations measures to contain the spread of the pandemic in the country and to design 
and implement its National COVID- 19 Immunization Plan.  
 
Somalia.  Somalia has experienced prolonged conflict beginning in 1991 and is among the poorest countries 
in the world with a per capita GDP of US$819 in 2019. An estimated 69% of the Somali population liv e in 
poverty (below US$1.9 per day, 2018 estimate) with many more living just above the poverty line. Somalia’s 
struggling health outcomes reflect the country’s insecurity, vulnerability and deep- rooted poverty, limiting 
opportunities for people to access basic social services, including education and health. Health service 
delivery data indicate weak health systems. The most recent reliable health service delivery data are from 
the recently released 2019 Somalia Health and Demographic Survey (SHDS). While geographically 
disaggregated SHDS are only available for Puntland and Somaliland, national -level and the limited 
disaggregated data show tremendous service delivery gaps. Health service utilization is low, particularly in 
the public sector, estimated at 0. 23 outpatient visits per person per year and 0.81 hospital discharges per 
one hundred people per year (SARA, 2016). Clan structures are believed to have major impacts on service 
utilization, dictating which facilities people visit.   
 
The global COVID -19 p andemic is a pressing problem in Somalia, exacerbated by an extremely weak 
primary health system, inadequate surveillance and laboratory capacity, and limited hospital services. As of 
January 7, 2021, Somalia had 4,726 confirmed coronavirus cases and 130 deaths, with anecdotal reports 
of additional, unconfirmed cases and quickly rising deaths. The government and development partners have 
taken important steps to improve Somalia’s COVID -19 response, including establishing testing capacity at 
the National Pub lic Health and Reference Laboratory in Mogadishu, constituting rapid response teams, and


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  increasing intensive care unit bed capacity from 15 early in the outbreak to 47. However, very weak health 
system capacities in Somalia severely constrain the response.   Moreover, pharmaceuticals and medicines 
expire and become ineffective more quickly in the very hot climactic conditions  experienced in Somalia.  
There are major gaps in cold- chain capacity, which prevents expanding the currently extremely low vaccine 
coverage and will make distribution of COVID -19 vaccines difficult.   Moreover, without support, it is expected 
that  kerosene and p etrol / diesel generator fueled equipment will be moved to increase cold storage capacity  
 
Sri Lanka.   Commercial  (including government buildings)  and industrial buildings contribute 60% of the 
electricity consumption in the country . Driven by economic growth, increasing income, rapid urbanization, 
and an expanding middle class , buildings also represent the fastest growing source of energy consumption 
in Sri Lanka.  This rapid growth in the building sector also has significant implications for the power sector.  
Despite commendable progress in the last decade, development of the energy sector faces major challenges 
that, if not addressed, could bring into question its sustained long- term viability. 78  With inefficient energy 
consumption typical of existing buildings, there is a large untapped potential for energy efficiency 
improvement, estimated to be 30- 50% across the public, commercial, industrial, and residential sectors. Air 
conditioning and ventil ation are main energy uses. A large share of the commercial building stock is old and 
uses chillers that can be replaced with much more efficient and more climate friendly equipment.  
In view of the above developments, the Sustainable Energy Authority (SEA ) has identified the commercial 
buildings sector –  where a large stock of existing buildings has old, inefficient chillers for space cooling –  as 
one of the key targets for achieving its EEff improvement goals.  SEA also has defined an ambitious Demand 
Side Management (DSM) program that includes chillers, fans, refrigerators, air conditioning and green 
buildings (including the potential of nature -based solutions such as green roofs and green walls).  The key 
investment barriers are: lack of suitable financi ng, resistance to the higher initial cost of efficient equipment, 
and insufficient public awareness. Dedicated Eff credit lines, capacity building and enabling environment 
support would help address these concerns.  Sri Lanka’s selection of suitable implem entation model needs 
to be applicable to commercial, residential as well as public buildings, enable greater energy efficiency space 
cooling at scale and foster the development and strengthening of the national ESCO (Energy Sector 
Companies) market in the country, and thereby establish the foundation for the transformation of space 
cooling.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Each of the proposed projects in the Facility has been discussed with relevant local authorities  (usually line 
ministries ) and has been presented to  the relevant GCF National  Designated Authorit ies (NDA s) who have  
issued no-objection letters .  Engagements with several local stakeholders and partners to discuss issues 
related to the project have also occurred  (as outlined Annex 7) , although the extent and format  of these 
engagements have had to take into account the disruption and restrictions linked to the COVID -19 pandemic . 
 
The alignment of the Facility with the policy  and strategy context of the beneficiary countries  is summarized 
below:  
• Bangladesh: The Government has prepared the Energy Efficiency  Conservation Master Plan 2015 -
2030, which describes the adoption and implementation of EEff  and conservation regulatory 
measures . In addition, the p roject will inform the Government ’s efforts in  developing  a national 
Cooling Action Plan. These efforts are  aligned with the Facility’s support of space cooling and EEff 
measures in buildings.  
• Kenya:  Under the Paris Agreement, Kenya has committed to reducing GHG emissions by 30%, or 
142 MTCO2e , by 2030. The National Electrification Strategy presents a roadmap f or achieving 
universal access to electricity by 2022. Supporting o ff-grid cooling appliances and access under the 
 
78 World Bank and International Finance Corporation 2019. Sri Lanka Energy InfraSAP © World Bank, 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/843901561438840086/pdf/Sri -Lanka- Energy -Infrastructure- Sector -
Assessment -Program- Executive -Summary.pdf


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  Facility will contribute to both of these goals. Kenya is also in the process of developing a National 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy, which includes targets for energy savings in 
households, buildings and industry . 
• Malawi : Promoting the use of energy efficient technologies and designs is one of the strat egies 
advocated for in the Government’s priority areas under the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 
(MDGS III ). Since agriculture is one of the major  contributors to GHG emission, the Facility’s support 
of clean and sustainable cold chains in agriculture will contribute to the achievement of the MDGS III 
goal.  
• North Macedonia : As a contracting party of the Energy Community Treaty , the Government has 
committed to reduce energy use by 12% (about 200 ktoe) by 2018 in its 2020 Energy Efficiency 
Strategy (based on a 2010 baseline), more than the 9% required under the ECT’s National Energy 
Efficiency Action Plans. Buildings, which consume about 39 % of the energy, have been identified in 
the country as a major priority, with estimates of energy savings from 20 -40%.  The Facility will support 
achieving the Government’s energy saving commitments through establishing a financing 
mechanism and investing into efficient space cooling of buildings.  
• Panama:   In 2012, the Government made a national commitment to EEff by approving the Law 69 -
12 “Rational and Efficient Use of Energy”. In 2015, the National Secretariat of Energy published the 
National Energy Plan 2015- 2050, which contemplates the design and implementation of the Rational  
and Efficient Use of Energy Program, as one of the key actions to meet the sector objectives . The 
country also ratified the Kigali Amendment in 2017, which aims to phase -down 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons  (HFC).  Panama  is currently implementing the Stage II of its HFC Phase -
out Management  Plan (HPMP)  under the Montreal Protocol.  The Facility will support achieving the 
Government’s commitments through its support for efficient space cooling.  
• El Salvador : The Government is i ntegrating climate friendly investments in its national programs  and 
its NDC includes health as a sector affected by climate change and the promotion of a larger use 
renewable energy. This is aligned with the Facility’s support for  climate friendly health facilities and 
cold chain, which will help develop a more sustainable and resilient health system in the country to 
be able to respond to the COVID -19 pandemic as well as future public health crisis and challenges.  
• Sao Tome and Principe : The country’s NDC include promoting the greater use of renewable energy 
and list health as one of the sectors negatively impacted by climate change. The Facility will 
contribute to the Government’s NDC through supporting space cooling and cold chains in the health 
sector, including through the increased us e of solar power.  
• Somalia:  Somalia’s NDC related to scaling up the use of solar energy is consistent with the Facility’s 
to support for more climate friendly health facilities and cold chain, including through greater use of 
solar power.  
• Sri Lanka: Demand Side Management is identified as one of the seven mitigation actions of the 
energy sector NDC of Sri Lanka to be implemented during 2020- 2030. Regarding the regulatory 
framework, the Energy Efficiency Building Code was first introduced in 2002 and revised in 2008 . 
The code sets standards for EEff  in design and retrofits in buildings, at the same time providing 
methods for determining compliance. These efforts are aligned with the Facility’s support of space 
cooling and EEff  measures in buildings.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The financial structure of the Facility adequately balances the need to support low -carbon cooling 
investments, leverage additional resources from private and commercial investors, and enhance the 
enabling environment for cooling. The facility’s requested level of concessionality from GCF is in line 
with providing the minimum level required to successfully address market failures. A more detailed 
justification of GCF funding is provided in section B5.  
I. Co-financing and leverage


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use         The US$ 157 million from GCF will be complemented by an expected US$ 722.8 million in World Bank79 
co-financing.  
Cost -effectiveness 
According to the International Energy Agency’s Energy Technology Perspectives 2008 Report , a 
marginal cost of reducing a ton of carbon dioxide -equivalent of $200 is the lower -end estimate of the 
incentive needed to achieve the objectives of the “BLUE Map Scenario. ”80 The Facility provides a cost -
effective way to reduce GHG emissions with a n overal l cost-effectiveness ratio of $54.2 per ton of 
carbon dioxide equivalent avoided or reduced  (accounting for the total investment, i.e. GCF plus World 
Bank co- financing) . 
 
II. Economic viability  
An economic analysis was prepared for the cooling facility to assess its economic net value. The analysis 
considered the following costs and benefits: (i) investment outlays to the supported projects; (ii) reflows from 
the funds  provided through the facility; (iii) avoided or reduced greenhouse gas emissions ; and (iv) recycling 
and/or disposal of cooling appliances . Other economic outcomes such as improvement in health conditions 
of people living in underser ved areas,  or reduced food loss and waste due  to efficient cold chains, have not 
been monetized. However, they are expected to significantly drive the economic viability of the proposed 
program. The results of the analysis show that the program yields a  financial and an economic internal rate 
of return  of -0.8 and 16.3 percent , respectively. The economic value add of the Facility is largely due to its 
contribution to GHG emission reduction potential of the Funded A ctivities. Further, the economic value of is 
very sensitive to the estimated cost of recycling  (otherwise conducting environmental remedial actions) for 
appliances that have exceeded their useful lives. This finding highlights the importance of disposing of 
appliances in a climate -friendly  and economic manner.  The following table presents a summary of the results 
of the analysis.   
Table 3: Economic Model Spreadsheet Summary81 
 
The detailed calculations,  underlying inputs and assumptions are presented in Annex 3 .  
 
 
 
79 The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) co -financing amounts are indicative and subject to approval by the World Bank 
Boar d and agreement with the EEs.”   
80 IEA BLUE Map scenario explores a reduction of global GHG to 50 percent of current levels by 2050.  
81 The model considers the economic benefits of the assets over their economic lives. Such economic li fespan 
may exceed the implementation period of the Facility.  Facility total financing Core indicator targets Financial value add 
Grant $M 32 20.4% Financial discount rate 3.0%
Loan $M 125 80%Total project financing $M 879.8       PV of cash outlays $M (151.5)     
Guarantee $M 0 0%Total public financing leveraged $M 722.8       PV of cash inflows $M 90.6
Total $M 157 100% Total private financing leveraged $M -             Financial net present value $M (61.0)       
Financial internal rate of return -0.8%
IBRD/IDA/TrustFund co-financing Expected lifetime emmis. reduction MtCO2eq 16.2           
Grant $M 109.4 15.1% Est. total cost per tCO2eq $ 54.2           
Loan $M 563.4 78%Est. GCF cost per tCO2eq $ 9.7             Sensitivities
Guarantee $M 50 7%Total leverage ratio times 4.6 Unit cost of recycling/disposal $ 375.0      
Total $M 722.8 100% Public co-financing ratio times 4.6 Economic net present value $M 504.2      
Private sector funds lev $M 0 Private co-financing ratio times 0.0
Facility cash inflows Economic value add Economic discount rate 5%
Loan repayment $M 125.00    Economic discount rate 1.0% Economic net present value $M 248.8      
Interest payment $M 9.00         PV of economic benefits $M 792.4       
Service charge $M 4.13         PV of economic costs $M 407.4       
Reflows from guarantee $M -                Net present economic value $M 385.0       Economic discount rate 15%
Total $M 138.13    Economic internal rate of return 16.7% Economic net present value $M 19.6


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  E. LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme 
contributes  as a whole, including in respect of  any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
82 The lifespan of the Facility is 27 years based on the l ifetime of the sustainable cooling assets (15 years for 
appliances and cold chains and 20 years for buildings)  and the distribution of funds per year (See Annex 4 on 
Budget) . 
83 Direct beneficiaries estimated only for the projects in 4 countries at high risk of extreme heat hazard.  See 
Annex 23 for calculations and Annex 24 for explanation of methodology  
84 Indirect beneficiaries for the projec ts in 4 countries at high risk of extreme heat hazard E.2. Core indicator targets 
 
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  912, 658 
 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime82 16,240,20 1  
 t CO 2 eq 
 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing   879,840,000  USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  157,000,000   USD   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  16,240,201    t CO 2eq 
 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)   54.18 USD  
    
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)   9.67 USD     
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of  the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  922,840,000   USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  722,840 ,000   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  -    
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) 5.9 
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  4.6 
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  - 
 
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  4.22  million  (of which  2.15 million  are femal e)83 
Indirect  16.85 million  (of which  8.51 million  are female)84 
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 1 7. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct   
Indirect


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and  corresponding  
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in s ection A.4 above.  Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid- term  Final 
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  M3.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or 
avoided - 
buildings, cities, industries, and 
appliances  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses 
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor – 
calculations 
of annual  
CO2e 
reduced or 
avoided 
associated 
with energy 
savings ; 
procurement documents
85; 
energy 
audit/ assess
ments 
reports  
 0 3.65 Mt  
(assumin
g 40% of final 
target to 
be 
achieved 
at mid -
term)   9.13 Mt 
CO 2e  Target defined as the 
ex-ante GHG impact 
expected from Facility 
projects targeting 
EEff in space cooling, 
and cold chains  
compared to BAU 
over a 10 year period 
(i.e., the Facility’s 
implementation 
period)86 .  See D.1  
and Annex 23  for 
more details  
Main assumptions:  
Methodology87: IFI 
Guidelines for a 
Harmonized 
Approach to 
Greenhouse Gas Accounting, IFC 
EDGE and HOMER 
Powering Health Tools  are applied.  
Lifespan of the Cooling Facility: 27 
years  
Lifetime  of assets : 15 
years for appliances 
and 20 years for 
buildings  
Annual emission 
reductions
88: 912,589 
tCO2eq  
 
85 Procurement documents will be used to verify, for example, energy efficiency investments in buildings, as 
well as number and types of space cooling and refrigeration/cold chain appliances procured.  
86 Estimates calculated based on the implementation period of the Cooling Facility.  However, over the lifespan 
of the cooling appliances and equipment (15 years) and energy efficient buildings (20 years), the investments 
are estimated to reduce emissions by 18.6 MtCO2e  
87 See Annex "A24. Methodology” for more details  
88 This is the annual average number. The distribution of GHG emissions savings per year is included in Annex 
23 (GHG calculations)  For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in annex 1 7.


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  Lifespan  emission 
reductions: 
16,240,201 tCO2eq  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of intrastructure and the built 
environment to 
climate change  A3.1 Number and 
value of physical assets made more resilient to 
climate variability 
and change 
considering 
human benefits  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses 
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor  
Procurement documents
89;  0 
Physical 
assests 
0 USD million  7,223  
physical 
assets   
(USD 
121.7 
million)   
of which:  
681 are 
resilient 
buildings (USD98 
million), 5,669 are 
agricultur
e cold chains 
(USD19.
1 million), 
and 872 
are 
health cold 
chains 
(USD4.8 million)  18,057 
physical assets  
(USD 304.
4 million ) 
of which:  
1,703 are resilient 
buildings 
(USD244.
7 million), 
14,173 are agriculture cold 
chains 
(USD47.7 
million), 
and 2,181 
are health 
cold 
chains 
(USD11.9 million)  Value target   based 
on (i) estimate cost of 
equipment and appliances and (ii)  
estimated cost of 
building retrofits . 
Target defined as the 
number (and 
estimated value) of 
the more heat 
resilient cooling 
assets in the 4 
countries in the 
Facility facing high 
risk of extreme heat 
hazard (Bangaldesh, 
Malawi, Somalia and 
El Salvador) .  
90  
Number and value of 
assets derived from 
GHG calculation 
model (Annex 23).  
 
89 Procurement documents will be used to verify, for example, ener gy efficiency investments in buildings, as 
well as number and types of space cooling and refrigeration/cold chain appliances procured, along with the 
costs.  
90 This actually under -estimates the value of the entire building, which is dependent on local market conditions.  E.4 Fund -level  outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome (s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes  and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome.  Add rows as needed.  
 
Expected 
Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final  
M7.0 Lower 
energy intensity of 
buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances  
 M7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances as a 
result of Fund 
support   Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
energy audits 
and 
energy/market 
assessments 
reports   - 
Annual 0  5,936 
GWh  
energy 
saved  
Share of 
energy 
savings 
from 
space 
cooling =  14,841  
GWh  
energy 
saved  
Share of 
energy 
savings 
from 
space 
cooling Facility -funded 
projects 
supporting improvements in 
energy efficiency 
of space cooling 
( buildings and 
cooling systems ) 
and cold chains by at least 20%  
compared to BAU.  The target 
value is


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
91 Estimates calculated based on the duration of the Cooling Facility.  However, over the lifespan  of the cooling 
appliances and equipment (15 years) and energy efficient buildings (20 years), the investments are estimated 
to save  a total of 3 1,676  GWh.  
92 E.g., applications for sustainable cooling- related financing are received/accepted; energy efficient/green 
buildings certifications/labelling . calculations  of 
energy 
savings resulting in 
lower energy 
intensity  of 
project -
supported 
EEff cooling 
activities  5,249 
GWh  
 
Share 
from cold 
chains = 
687 GWh  =13,122 
GWh  
 
Share 
from cold 
chains = 
1,718 
GWh.  cumulative, 
assum ing  
Cooling Facility’s implementation 
period of 10 
years
91  
 
See D1 and 
Annex 23 for 
more details.  
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory 
systems M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low -emission 
planning and development and their effective 
implementation  planning and 
policy 
instruments 
developed in 
each country ;  
surevys, consultant reports  
 
 
 0 ( no 
incentive 
mecha-
nism in 
place)   6 
countries 
adopt 
policy or 
decision 
to 
introduce incentive 
mechanis
m or 
regulatio
n 
promotin
g 
sustainab
le cooling  6 policies 
or 
incentive 
mechanis
ms to 
incentivize 
sustainable cooling 
are 
operationa
lized
92  
[target to 
be re-
assessed 
at the 
Interim 
Evaluation 
stage]  By mid -term, with 
TA support provided through 
the Cooling 
Facility for 
necessary 
assessments, consultations and 
design work, 
assume 6 
countries adopt 
policy or decision 
to introduce 
policy or 
incentive 
mechanisms for 
more climate 
friendly cooling-
related 
investments/purc
hases.  By end of 
project, expect 6 
policies or 
incentive 
mechanisms to 
be in place and 
operational ,  but 
this target will be 
re-assessed at 
the Interim 
Evaluation Stage  
and updat ed 
accordingly  
Number of 
technologies and 
innovative 
solutions Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses ; 0 1 (out of 
the 3 types 
outlined 3 (out of 
the 3 types 
outlined in Assessments 
confirm suitability of technologies.


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  transferred or 
licensed to 
support low -
emission 
development as a 
result of GCF  procurement 
documents   
 in the 
assumpti
on column)  the 
assumption column)  Technologies and 
innovative solutions are the following: (i) solar 
based efficient 
cooling solutions 
for health, (ii)  
solar based 
efficient cooling 
solutions for 
agriculture, and 
(iii) innovative 
solutions for cool 
roofs.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  
 
  
A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
business and 
public sector 
services of GCF -
supported tool , 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to climate 
change and 
variability.   Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ; 
surveys (surveys will 
be designed 
and adapted 
to each 
specific 
project and 
target 
beneficiaries, 
including 
participants in 
trainings and 
workshops)  
 0 people  8,020enti
ties 
6,000 
farmers, 
2,000 
househol
ds and 
business 
in the 
buildings 
sector, 
and 20 hospitals 
and 
clinics 
have 
received 
informati
on 
through 
the GCF 
tool, 
have 
impleme
nted at 
least 1 sustainab
le cooling 
measure 
(installati
on of 
EEff 
equipme
nt and/or practice)  
and have 
reported 
benefits  
(e.g., 
enhance20,050enti
ties 
15,000 farmers, 
5,000 
household
s and 
business 
in the 
buildings 
sector, 
and 50 hospitals 
and cl inics 
have 
received 
informatio
n through  
the GCF 
tool, have 
implement
ed at least 
1 
sustainabl
e cooling 
measure (installatio
n of EEff 
equipment 
and/or 
practice) 
and have 
reported 
benefits  
(e.g., 
enhanced 
comfort, 
reduced 
operationa
l costs, The indicator will 
be counted in 
countries at high 
risk of extreme 
heat hazard. 
Targets based on  
farmers, 
households, 
commercial buildings, 
hospitals and 
clinics benefitting 
from the Facility.  
The 
communications 
tool/activities will 
inform of: (i) agriculture 
sustainable 
practices and 
efficient 
equipment to 
improve 
agriculture 
production, (ii) 
cooling 
sustainable 
practices and 
efficient 
equipment to 
improve comfort 
levels in 
buildings, and (iii)  
cooling 
sustainable 
practices and 
efficient equipment to


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
 
93 In some cases, entirely new legal/regulatory/policy instruments may be drafted; in others, where t here is 
already a basis, we may see amendment (e.g., we may see an update to a building code/ procurement strategy 
or Minimum Energy Performance Standard).  d 
comfort, 
reduced operation
al costs, 
reduced 
wastage 
of 
vaccines/
medicine 
or food, 
and/or 
increase
d 
income)  reduced 
wastage 
of 
vaccines/
medicine 
or food, 
and/or 
increased 
income)  optimize vaccines 
conservation  
  
 
 
E.5. P roject/programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baselin
e Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Result 1: 
Strengthened 
capacity of state 
and non- state 
actors (for 
example, banks, 
energy service 
companies, off -
grid-distributors) 
to assess and 
deploy climate-
friendly cooling 
solutions  
 1.1Number  
health,financial 
and energy 
institutions 
integrating  
climate -friendly 
cooling solutions 
in 
procurement/lendi
ng/bidding 
documents  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
surveys; 
procurement 
documents; 
supervision 
mission 
reports   0  9 countries 
conduct 
capacity 
building and 
training 
activities on 
sustainable 
cooling  9 
institutions/a
gencies 
integrate 
provisions for  
reliable and 
climate 
friendly 
cooling in 
procurement/
bidding/lendi
ng 
documents.  
At least four 
also develop 
provisions/gu
idelines for 
O&M of 
cooling 
equipment.  Capacity building and 
training is provided to 
officials and 
stakeholders in health 
sectors of 3 countries 
and to financial 
institutions and energy 
agencies in 6. TA to 
support development 
of procurement 
documents and O&M 
guidelines for well 
functioning, 
sustainable cooling.    
1.2 Number of 
legal/re gulatory/p
olicy instruments 
drafted/amended
93 Planning and 
policy 
instruments 
developed in 
each country  0 1 3 Legal/regulatory 
instruments (e.g., 
code/standard/ green 
or energy efficient 
procurement) drafted


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  (or amended/updated) 
in at least 3 countries  
Result 2: 
Increased public 
awareness of 
the benefits of 
climate -friendly 
cooling  
 2.1 Number of 
people ado pting/  
switching to 
climate friendly 
cooling facilities 
compared to 
baseline at home 
or at the 
workplace.  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ; 
surveys  0 1.26 
million   of 
which:  
0.7 million 
are people 
living in 
improved 
homes, and 
0.56 million 
are people 
working in 
improved 
workspaces  3.15 million ,  
of which:  
1.74 million 
are people 
living in 
improved 
homes, and 
1.41 million 
are people 
working in 
improved 
workspaces  Target based on 
estimated (i)  people 
living/working in 
green/retrofitted 
buildings in space 
cooling projects, (ii) 
farmers and 
households 
purchasing climate 
friendly cooling 
equipment/appliances  
Result 3: New or 
rehabilitated 
climate -friendly 
cooling 
infrastructure 
and equipment  
 3.1  Number of 
health facilities 
(clinics, hospitals) 
with improved 
cooling and 
refrigeration 
operating as a 
result of the 
project.  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conduct ed by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
reports from 
supervision 
missions 0  69 
  172  Target based on 
estimated  health 
facilities (hospitals and 
clinics) in the 3 
countries over the 
project lifetime having 
more reliable and 
climate friendly 
equipment that is 
functioning   
 
3.2 MW of solar 
power installed 
through the 
solarization of 
cooling as a 
result of Cooling 
Facility support  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
Bidding 
documents  0 50MW  126 MW  Solarization of cooling 
services in the 
Facility’s cooling 
investment in 
agriculture and health 
sectors  (in 5 
countries).   
3.3 Number of 
energy efficient 
buildings 
financed through 
the Cooling 
Facility  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
Bidding 
documents  
 0 941 
buildings  2,354 
buildings  
 Target based on 
number of energy 
efficient buildings in 4 
countries targeting 
space cooling (i.e., Sri 
Lanka, Bangladesh, 
Panama and North 
Macedonia) . 
(Multi -family buildings 
are considered as one 
building)  
3.4 Number of 
energy efficient 
space cooling Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   0 0.21 million 
appliances   0.53 million 
appliances  Target based on 
number of space 
cooling appliances (air


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
94 See Annex 23 (GHG Calculations) for estimates for individual countries and data sources.  appliances 
deployed  conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ;  
procurement 
documents   
 conditioners)  in four 
countries targeting 
space cooling.  
(Note: where 
appliances are 
included in the new 
EEff buildings above, 
they are not counted 
here).  
3.5 Energy 
expendi ture 
savings  by users 
($) Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by 
an independent 
contractor   ;  
energy audits/assess
ment reports  0 $712 million  $1,781 
million  Target  refers to all 
Facility countries and is based on: E stimated 
energy savings per country (kWh) * Energy source price 
per country ($/kWh)  
94 
over the program implementation period 
(10 years) . 
 3.6 Percentage of 
priority population vaccinated  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analysis   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor ; 
ministry of 
health reports;  [to be 
determi
ned for 
each 
project during 
project 
prepara
tion] [x% - to be 
determined 
during project 
preparation 
for each country]  [50% - to be 
confirmeddur
ing project 
preparation 
and refined at Interim 
Evaluation 
stage]  This indicator is 
relevant for El 
Salvador, Sao Tome 
and Principe, and 
Somalia.  Priority 
population will be 
determined according 
to each country’s 
national plans during 
project preparation, 
along with targets .   
Targets will be 
updated in annual 
performance reports 
and finalized by 
midterm.  
 3.7  Improved  
thermal comfort   Building 
occupant surveys and/or 
building 
measurements  Occupa
nt 
survey 
and/or 
Ex-ante 
indoor air 
tempera
ture and indoor  
humidit
y 
measur
ements  Majority of 
building 
occupants 
(disaggrega
ted by gender) 
expressing 
improvemen
t in thermal comfort; 
[XX]% of 
total 
renovated 
buildings 
with 
improved Majority of 
building 
occupants 
(disaggregat
ed by 
gender) 
expressing 
improvement 
in thermal comfort;  
 [YY]% of 
renovated buildings with 
improved 
indoor air For Bangladesh 
(country at high risk of 
extreme heat hazard 
with Cooling Facility 
intervention targeting 
space cooling), 
surveys will be 
prepared for building 
occupants (gender disaggregated).   
This can be complemented with ex-ante and ex -post 
measurement of ambient temperature;


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  To be 
determi
ned during 
project 
prepara
tion indoor air 
temperature 
and indoor 
humidity 
measureme
nt temperature 
and indoor humidity measuremen
t 
 ex-ante and ex -post 
measurement of 
indoor air temperature (dry-bulb temperature 
(DBT) and indoor air 
humidity (wet - bulb 
temperature)  
The targets will be defined during project 
preparation and 
updated  in annual 
performance reports 
(starting when 
completion of first EE 
building renovation 
works)and finalized at 
mid-term (Interim 
evaluat ion stage)  
 3.8 Proportion of 
agriculture 
production stored 
in  cold chain 
equipment/ 
facilities  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
surveys with 
farmers 
(disaggregated 
by gender)   
conducted by 
an 
independent 
contractor.  Proporti
on of 
agricult
ure 
producti
on 
stored 
in cold 
chain 
equipm
ent/ 
facilities 
[baselin
e to be 
determi
ned 
during 
preparation] [x]% of 
agriculture 
production 
stored in 
cold chain 
equipment/f
acilities  [x]% of 
agriculture production 
stored in cold 
chain 
equipment/fa
cilities]  For Malawi (country at 
high r isk of extreme 
heat hazard, the 
baseline will be 
determined with 
country statistics and 
surveys during project 
preparation and 
targets will be defined 
during project 
preparation and 
updated  in annual 
performance reports 
and finalized at mid -
term (Interim 
evaluation stage)  
Result 4: 
Financing 
mobilized for 
cooling 
investment  
 4.1Additional 
public and private 
capital for climate-
friendly cooling 
investments   
mobilized by the 
GCF through 
programmatic 
Cooling Facility  Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses   
conducted by an 
independent 
contractor ; 
disbursement reports  $0 $0.38 billion  
(24% 
private 
sector)  $0.95 billion  
(24% private 
sector)  Target based on 
expected financing to be m obilized for 
climate friendly cooling 
(all target areas and 
sectors)   in the 
countries included in 
the Facility.  
This includes 
government own 
funds; IBRD/IDA; 
other WB administered trust 
fund; and private capital


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
 
95 Deliverables are indicative.  E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
 
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables95 
Component 1: Policy, regulatory and enabling environment support  
Activity 1: Capacity 
building of key 
stakeholders  (for 
example, on technologies, 
business models, 
cooling project 
appraisal, 
implementation 
and evaluation)  Activities that help 
strengthen the 
capacity of  state 
and non- state 
actors (such as  
commercial 
banks, energy 
service 
companies  and 
off-grid 
distributors )  - Technical and economic 
assessments  
- Review of procurement documents and technical 
specifications  
- Survey development and 
administration  
- Development of training 
materials  - At least 15 training 
events/workshops  
- Training material linked to 
assessment, financing, 
procurement, design and/or operation and maintenance of sustainable cooling solutions 
developed/used in at least 8 countries
 
 
 
Activity 2:  
Technical 
assistance for 
enabling plans  
strategies, policies, 
regulations, and standards  Activities that 
support the 
preparation of 
relevant plans, 
strategies, policy 
and regulatory 
instruments and 
that promote 
gender equality in  
cooling- related 
sectors  - Advisory services  
- Market assessments  
- Policy analys es 
- Regulatory review  
- Measures to address  
sustainable cooling included in 
NDCs and other national 
policy documents  
- Assessment of options to 
advance gender equality  
(data, policy reform, finance 
and skills 
development/employment)  
 
 - Regulatory/legal/institutional assessments (including, e.g., 
labeling and certification of energy 
efficient buildings/equipment) and 
recommendations for development and/or implementation of 
sustainable cooling in at least 4 
countries
 
- Recommendation and input 
towards development of National or 
local climate/adaptation/cooling 
plans and/or strategies in at least 4 
countries  
- Gender  assessments in 9 
countries.  
- Guidelines for procurement and/or design/implementation of programs 
for sustain able cooling in at least 3 
countries  
- Monitoring and evaluation 
mechanisms developed in at least 
4 countries.  
Activity 3: 
Designing   
sustainable market  
mechanisms and 
business models  Activities that 
support the 
planning and 
development of 
context -specific  
business models 
and 
financing /impleme
ntation - Advisory services  
(for example, for auction 
design, to establish dedicated 
financing windows, or to 
design sustainable financing 
schemes)  
- Technical, legal, financ ial due 
diligence for cooling 
investments  - Assessments and designs of 
cooling- related 
financing /implementation 
mechanisms/business models in at 
least 4 countries  
- Market assessments (which may 
include baseline context  and 
willingness to pay ) in at least 2  
countries.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  mechanisms  
climate -friendly  
cooling 
deployment   - Consultations with 
stakeholders  
- Cooperation with other global initiatives, financiers, think 
thanks, universities, etc.   
Activity 4:  
Communication 
and awareness 
campaigns  Activities that 
increase public 
awareness and 
promote behavior 
change  - Survey development and 
administration  
- Opinion research  
- Public consultations  
- Focus group discussion  
- Message design and testing 
- Market assessments  
- Gender gap analyses  
 - At least 5 countries will develop and 
implement at least 1 
communications/awareness 
campaigns  
 
 
Component 2: Financing for cooling investments  
Activity 5: 
Financing of climate -friendly 
cooling investment  Financing of 
public and private stakeholders of investment  
cooling infrastructure 
equipment  - Engineering, procurement  and 
construction of cooling 
infrastructure  
- Procurement, installation and 
maintenance of cooling 
equipment including 
operations and maintenance 
arrangements  
- Provision of loans and grants 
to public and private 
stakeholders for cooling 
investment  
- Coordinati on with other public 
and private financiers, 
technical partners and 
investors   - Financing mechanisms that engage 
private sector designed in at least 6 countries.
 
- Public procurement documents of 
cold chains integrate climate-
friendly features in 3 countries . 
Activity 6 : Credit 
lines to financial 
intermediaries  Design and 
implementation of credit lines for 
cooling 
investments and 
equipment  - Advisory services  
- Analytical support  
- Provision of credit lines  
- Coordination with other public 
and private financiers, 
technical partners and 
investors   - Credit lines designed in at least 3 
countries.  
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Besides the arrangements laid out in the AMA  between the World Bank and the GCF, the implementation of 
the Cooling Facility involves (a) monitoring of program pe rformance indicators (as per Section E5); (b) periodic 
progress reports; and (c) midterm review of implementation progress.  It is noted that the end targets of the 
Program are best estimates as it is not known upfront exactly the results from each project  that will be financed  
and the targets  may be revised during AE ’s due diligence, project preparation and the mid-term review as 
necessary.  The AE will report to GCF the implementation status at both Facility and country level by aggregating 
specific countr y-level information and data.  
 
 Monitoring  
The implementation of each project under the Cooling Facility will be managed, monitored  and reported on at 
project level by the Executing Entities and the Project Management Units (which may include staff and 
consultants). The World Bank has dedicated staff in its sectoral teams, operation departments, Environment 
and Social departments and country offices that will conduct due diligence, monitor compliance and


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
96 See The Bank Guidance on Investment Project Financing: Implementation Support (2017) -  
https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com/sites/ppfonline/PPFDocuments/ee96edefb68040df8af93027280ab4e1.p
df performance risks, implementation of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plans and the stakeholder 
engagement plans.  
The World Bank will follow its standard monitoring and reporting policies and procedures, which will 
include semi -annual reports on the implementation status and performance of each project . By the end 
of each project supported by the Cooling  Facility, the Bank will conduct jointly with each respective Executi ng 
Entity an implementation completion assessment and prepare an implementation completion report (ICR) which 
will review the performance of the project, assess effectiveness and efficiency of project implementation, the 
achievement of the project developm ent objective, and provide relevant lessons learned. Financial reporting is 
further discussed in Section G3.  
 
 Reporting  
Reporting of Executing Entities to World Bank. As specified in the subsidiary agreements between the 
Executing Entities and the World Bank, the Executing Entities are obliged to report on the implementation of 
the Project and the use of the financing proceeds, as applicable. This reporting includes the environmental and 
social performance of the project and the achievement of the i ndicators agreed between the WB and the 
Executing Entity. For each project supported by the Cooling Facility, the respective Executing Entity will be 
responsible for overall M&E of the project, including collection of project performance information and reporting 
on project impacts and results.   
Reporting of World Bank to GCF.   The World Bank will provide to the GCF (i) annual activity performance 
reports  (APRs)  on the status of the Facility throughout the relevant reporting period, (ii) mid- term evaluati on 
report at the midpoint of the implementation period of the Facility and (iii) final evaluation report at the end of 
the implementation period of the Facility  as per the FAA provisions.  
 
 Evaluation  
The evaluation methods for mid- term and final evaluations will include:   
a. Key informant interviews with relevant beneficiary staff and clients, as well as other key stakeholders, 
based on stakeholder mapping; and.  
b. Desktop review of relevant Facility documentation, including Project Management Unit reports, based 
on an agreed lis t of evidence to be provided by the client.  
Please refer to Annex 11 for further details.  
 
As described earlier, each country’s cooling operation, a PMU will be established with a team expected to 
include at least a team lead, technical expert, procurement specialist, financial management specialist, 
environmental specialist and social/gender specialist, and a lawyer. Each project will have its own monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) and reporting process, and the EE will be accountable for its implementation.  
 
The Bank’s evaluation of projects included in the Cooling Facility is done in the context  of the Bank’s standard 
Implementation Status and Results (ISR) report96, which is the key tool used for internal reporting on the 
implementation performance and prospective outcomes of projects.    It is through this tool that the Bank’s 
project team leader conducts the evaluation of the project’s implementation status and performance, progress 
toward reaching its development objective, and evolution of risks. Safeguards, financial management, and 
procurement specialists advise the team leader on evaluation of project’s performance from a fiduciary and 
safeguards perspective.


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use   
 
97 The ISR is the Bank’s key tool  used for internal reporting on the implementation performance and prospective 
outcomes of projects. It is through this tool that the Bank’s project team leader conducts the evaluation of the 
project’s implementation status and performance, progress toward reaching its development objective, and 
evolution of risks . The Bank’s operational task team will document progress toward meeting project objectives by tracking and 
updating the project’s cooling or cooling -informed indicators  as outlined above through the Bank’s periodic 
Implementation Status and R esults reporting (ISR) process97. The Bank will draw on these inputs to report 
aggregate data annually across the portfolio as part of the AE’s agreed obligations to the GCF.   It is noted that 
the end targets of the Facility are best estimates as it is not known upfront exactly the results of each investment 
that will be financed, and the targets may be revised during AE’s due diligence, project preparation and the 
mid-term review as necessary.  
At the end of the project, the Bank will conduct jointly with each PMU, an implementation completion 
assessment and prepare and I mplementation Completion and Results (ICR) report which will review the 
performance of the project, assess effectiv eness and efficiency of project implementation, the achievement of 
the development objective, and provide relevant lessons learned.  The individual project ICR reports will form 
the basis of the Facility terminal evaluation report.


---
*Page 74*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 83 
  
   
 Official Use  
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, 
coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor  1: Project readiness r isk 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
There is a risk that some of the early stage projects do not mature and thus, are not able to mobilize 
funding from the Facility . Developing the relatively new concepts of cooling for some projects, may take 
significant time during the start -up phase, especially for activities that involve cold chain or mobile cooling 
where beneficiaries have limited experience and/or data and infor mation on technology and related cost 
savings are missing.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate this risk, the Facility is designed to leverage the ESMAP multi -sectoral Efficient, Clean Cooling 
Technical Assistance Program. The TA is intended to help beneficiaries and Bank operational teams in 
the design of cooling informed projects including activities such as cooling market studies, sector gap 
analy sis and strategies, knowledge sharing, stakeholder consultations, business models identification, 
etc. The TA will provide dedicated grants and tailored technical experts to ensure a solid pipeline of well -
prepared projects, designed to meet the eligibility  criteria of the Facility.  Continued dialog with national 
stakeholders will support the preparation of cooling project s aligned with the goals and criteria of the 
Facility.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 : Political Risk   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Political  Medium  Medium  
Description  
If project investments result in direct or indirect increases in tariffs, fees, consumer product prices, or 
other cost increases where constituents might bear the cost burden ( in order to ensure the financial 
sustainability of project investments), this may prove politically unattractive for client governments to 
adopt, especially with respect to reelection.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
WB mitigates this risk by ensuring that the design of the projects consider the affordability constraints of 
the end user beneficiaries. For example, the WB will ensure that low income groups are provided with 
financial support if affordability thresholds  are surpassed, and, whenever possible, c ombine  tariff/product 
increases with measures to improve the payback efficiency of the utility/supplier in order to ensure a 
positive impact on costs and reduce the cost passed on to consumers.  These efforts will be sustained to 
lower risk level to Low as much as possible for all projects under the Facility.  
Selected Risk Factor 3: COVID -19 risk   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Operational  High Medium  
Description


---
*Page 75*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 83 
  
   
 Official Use  Given the size and scope of the economic impact of the pandemic, there is a growing concern that 
developing countries will be hit the most which will cause disruptions in various economic and social 
sectors. There is a risk that client countries will shift their priorities to focus on immediate emergency 
response and recovery interventions to address the COVID crisis  and investment in cooling could be 
deterred . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The World Bank teams will closely monitor the current COVID -19 crisis and its potential impacts on the 
progress of the projects  supported by the Facility . In addition, the WB operational teams take part of the 
ongoing dialogue with the governments on the C -19 and will ensure to position the cooling agenda as 
part of the solutions to help client countries in the immediate response as well as in their economic 
recovery from the current difficult situation. The need for cooling will be even more critical in the current 
situation for instance in hospitals, warehouses and testing facilities, cold chains supply for food and/or 
pharmaceut ical/medical goods storage, etc.  The technical assistance activities provided through ESMAP 
will ensure continued engagement with the various countries as listed in this proposal.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Limited uptake of EE ff Clean Cooling technologies  
Category  Probabilit y Impact  
Operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The penetration of energy efficient and clean cooling solutions may be very low particularly in sectors 
such as residential and commercial as end -users often undervalue energy savings due to lack of 
information and awareness about the energy savings, reluctance to pay for a higher initial cost, etc. 
Therefore, the implementation of some of the projects could be exposed to the risk of a lack of m arket 
demand for efficient clean cooling solutions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk can be mitigated through dedicated capacity building activities targeting relevant stakeholders, 
awareness raising,  and communication combined with market studies that would identify and recommend 
policy options and business models adapted to the country circumstances to facilitate the rapid uptake of the EE ff clean cooling technologies. The World Bank has a longstandi
ng experience working with 
developing countries on EE ff, and the teams will build on the lessons learnt from these experiences as 
well. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 : Lack of technical capacity  
Category                  Probability  Impact  
Operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The lack of technical capacity, in some countries, could negatively affect the implementation of the 
projects , continuous operation of the equipment  and infrastructure,  and thus the expected outcomes. A 
proper installation, operating, and maintenance is key to ensure the projects are not underperforming, 
hence the results are not compromised . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The risk will be mitigated through the M&E framework that will be developed during the preparatio n phase 
and is an integral part of the project documentation and specific to each country. M&E arrangements will 
be used to assess periodically the project performance and impact as expected.  In order to ensure the 
sustainability of the investments, the EE s will ensure that the beneficiaries receive adequate training to 
conduct O&M to ensure continuous operation of the equipment and infrastructure and/or  may 
subsequently enter into an O&M contract  
Selected Risk Factor 6: Credit risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Low Medium


---
*Page 76*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 83 
  
   
 Official Use  Description  
GCF loans are provided to sovereign entities  and will not bear any  credit risk beyond that  the sovereign 
risk of the Borrowers.  In those projects where GCF loans are deployed, and where qualified PFIs on -
lend, they , not the GCF, will be exposed to the credit risk of their customers and will employ their risk 
management processes .   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The GCF credit exposure is limited to EE listed in Section A.20 .  As such, the GCF would only bear the 
sovereign risk of the countries in which the loans will be deployed.    
Selected Risk Factor 7: Risk of co -financing not materializing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Financial  Low Medium  
Description  
Risk of IBR/IDA co -financing not materializing or being lower than specified in this Funding Proposal  and 
its impact on the proposed target  for adaptation and mitigation. . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
About 54 percent (or $392.84 million of $722.84 million) of the co -financing amount has already 
materialized, with WB and WB -managed trust funds approved and the corresponding legal agreements 
signed with the recipient countries  for six of the nin e projects envisaged. Should the balance the 
rema ining projects  materialize albeit with a  ratio of GCF funds to IDA/IBRD funds  not greater than 1:1 
(the minimum level set in the  eligibility criteria ),  the Facility would achieve 71% of its mitigation target (as 
measured by GHG emissions reduced or avoide d) and reach 96% of the target direct beneficiaries. In 
the very unlikely case that none of the remaining projects take place (and this GCF counterpart financing 
is not provided)  the facility will only achieve 3 3% of its mitigation impact but  reach 90% of the direct 
adaptation beneficiaries . The risk is mitigated by (i) the strong alignment  of the objectives supported by 
the Cooling Facility, with the country needs as expressed in national strategies, policies and plan s; (ii) 
the country owner ship reflected through the non -objection letters received from each National Designated 
Entity ; and (iii) the robust  sector -level dialog led to the World Bank in the supported countries .


---
*Page 77*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
 
The main aspects considered from an E&S perspective are summarized below. However, each project under 
the Cooling Facility will have its own assessment completed at concept/appraisal stage. The ESMF will 
include a list of expected environmental and social impacts and suggest mitigation and monitoring measures 
for each potential impact due to the project activities.  
• ESS1  (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts)  
The Facility’s cooling- informed projects are expected to generate substantial direct social and environmental 
benefits by  increasing energy efficiency in buildings and cold chain infrastructure and deploying climate-
friendly cooling equipment including off -grid cooling solutions that use renewable energy. Environmental 
benefits include, inter alia: (i) reduced greenhouse gas  emissions due to energy savings and reduction or 
avoidance of food losses/waste which will ultimately contribute to climate change mitigation; (ii) reduced 
local air pollutants (fine particulates, SOX, NOX); and (vi) reduced emissions of ozone depleting s ubstances 
and/or high GWP chemicals used as refrigerants in cooling equipment.   
The projects also generate significant positive social impacts through job creation and market development 
for energy efficiency products and services; reduction in consumer el ectricity bills thus, improving 
affordability and increasing competitiveness and income of small businesses/farmers; increased comfort and well-being including a better overall working environment in buildings. By improving and expanding access 
to cooling solutions including cold chain, the projects will reduce the vulnerability to extreme heat events, 
increase access to vaccines and medicines as well as to nutritional food; hence generating positive impacts 
on health and food security.  
Some of the project s may cover geographically remote, politically sensitive and socially marginalized areas 
and communities. The projects therefore benefit not only mainstream communities, but also those that are often marginalized or maybe subject to discrimination. Improved cooling services and access to affordable 
energy efficient cooling products and increased employment opportunities are likely to also provide benefits 
to women and disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups. The E&S risks and impacts assessment 
of 
the projects will include impacts on gender and disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups. 
Differentiated measures will be adopted so that adverse impacts do not fall disproportionately on the 
disadvantaged or vulnerable, and that they are not dis advantaged in sharing development benefits and 
opportunities resulting from the project, which would enhance project development outcomes by promoting 
inclusion, equality and non- discrimination.  The Facility will work with countries to collect data and generate 
crucial knowledge of actions and design interventions needed to avoid or minimize gender impacts and 
impacts on the poor and vulnerable. Particularly, the actions will be guided by the WB Good Practice Notes 
(GPNs) on: (i) Gender; (ii)  Non-Discrimination and Disability; (iii)  Non-Discrimination: Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Identity (SOGI )98. 
 
If not properly managed, construction of new buildings and cold chain facilities may result in potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts associated with land acquisition or land conversion. During the 
construction or retrofitting of buildings, common risks are safety and health hazards on workers and the community, which are due to noise, dust, handling and disposal of old parts and equipment which may 
contain hazardous waste and materials.  
 
98 http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/158041571230608289/Good- Practice -Note -Gender.pdf   
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/573841530208492785/Environment -and-Social- Framework -ESF-
Good- Practi ce-Note- on-Disability -English.pdf   
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/590671570796800429/Good- Practice -Note -SOGI.pdf


---
*Page 78*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 76 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  However, these potential impacts can vary in terms of intensity/significance and are localized in nature. For 
each project, an assessment of environmental and social risks and impacts will be carr ied out and measures 
to address them will be identified in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy as described in the previous 
section. For example, some of the impacts can be prevented by aligning site selection for buildings with ESF 
requirements and m itigated by sound operational practice and consistency with ESS3 principles during 
operation.  
• ESS2  (Labor and Working Conditions)  
Project workers are expected to be mobilized under most projects. This will include direct workers and contracted workers. The Government will have to comply with the ESS2 requirements as specified in 
Labor Management Procedures (LMP) to be prepared for each project.  Occupational health and safety 
(OHS) plans will need to be prepared as per the World Bank Group EHS guidelines.  The labor influx 
would have a series of impacts, including labor conditions, health, safety, GBV, conflict etc., not only 
among the project workers but also upon local communities.   These risks need to be assessed as part of 
the E&S assessment  and managed in accordance with the LMP and other E&S documents.  All relevant 
measures will be reflected in the bidding and contractual documents.  A dedicated grievance redress 
mechanism for project workers needs to be established under  each  project.   This mechanism  is separate 
from the overall project Grievance  Redress  Mechanism.   
• ESS3  (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management)  
Construction of new buildings or retrofitting existing buildings are expected to generate typical construction 
impacts such as, dust; construction waste generation, transportation, transfer and disposal due to demolition; 
and handling, and disposal of asbestos waste, resulting in negative impacts on air quality and occupational 
and community health and safety. These risks will be assessed for each project. However, most of these 
potential impacts are low to moderate in intensity/significance and are reversible and localized in nature, and 
therefore can be mitigated.  
Other hazardous waste generation is  specifically associated with the dismantling and disposal of old cooling 
equipment and refrigerant gases. These gases could be ozone depleting substances or have a high GWP 
and if not properly handled, they risk to be released into the atmosphere. These i mpacts require appropriate 
mitigation assessments and management measures and include adequate and safe management of 
refrigerants (e.g. recovery, recycling or storage) in line with national legislation and countries’ obligations 
under the Protocol of Mont real and relevant Good International Industry Practice (GIIP).  
• ESS4 (Community Health and Safety)  
ESS4 requirements will be considered  in the implementation of project’s activities. During the construction 
works of the buildings (including cold chain buildings), potential risks may arise from noise, dust, labor safety, 
and disposal of old parts and equipment which may contain hazardous waste. In the case where the 
construction works are carried out in existing facilities used by employees or neighboring com munities, there 
may be a temporary transitional impact for these users. These impacts require appropriate mitigation 
assessment and management measures to contain them.   
Additional risks are associated with the type of refrigerants used in cooling equipment. Some can be to toxic 
and/or flammable and may result in accidents during their handling and installation. These safety risks can 
be minimized through proper mitigation assessments and management measures to contain them.  
• ESS5  (Land Acquisitions,  Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Settlements)   
Land acquisition for construction of new buildings or cold storage facilities will need to be done in a consistent 
manner with ESS5 requirements - to avoid, minimize, reduce/mitigate and compensate at  replacement cost 
land acquisition based on due diligence and plans prepared in accordance with ESS5.  An indicative 
outline of a resettlement policy framework  is presented in Annex  5 (in ESSF Annex).   The Executing Entities  
will be responsible for preparing, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Bank, the project -specific 
resettlement policy frameworks and/or  resettlement  action plans  in line with  ESS5 requirements


---
*Page 79*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 77 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  • ESS6 (Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resource s) 
Impacts, arising out of the siting and selection of land for the future cold storage facilities, may include loss 
of habitats and other adverse encroachment impacts, depending on the scale of the projects. Care should 
be taken by these future projects t o ensure that their impacts on natural habitats, terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems and species are well assessed and managed.  
• ESS7 (Indigenous  Peoples/Sub- Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local 
communities)  
The presence of indigenous people in the areas identified for the projects will be screened and confirmed by the World Bank in consultation with the national authorities.  Once it is confirmed, consistency  with ESS7 
objectives and requirements will be integrated into the design of the project and  E&S documents,  including 
the development of  an indigenous peoples’ plan or other types of plans depending on the country  and project 
context, and Free, Prior and Informed Consent in the circumstances specified in ESS7.  
• ESS8 (Cultu ral Heritage)  
 The project will screen the project area and assess potential impacts on cultural heritage, both tangible and 
intangible.  The site selection for each project will be mindful of cultural heritage and the application of ESS8 
will be further as sessed under each project.  In case of no apparent cultural heritage  in civil works sites, a 
chance find procedure will be a part of the E&S instrument.  
• ESS9 (Financial Intermediaries)  
The deployment of funds under the Cooling Facility will be tailored to t he needs of the projects. Some projects 
are expected to channel financing to Financial Intermediaries (FI). For such projects, ESS9 will be applied to the FIs going to receive financial support under the Cooling Facility.  In this respect the FI is required to 
establish and maintain an Environment and Social M anagement System (ESMS) to 
identify, assess, 
manage, and monitor the environmental and social risks and impacts of FI subprojects on an ongoing basis. 
The ESMS will be commensurate with the nature and m agnitude of environmental and social risks and 
impacts of FI subprojects, the types of financing, and the overall risk aggregated at the portfolio level.  Where 
the FI can demonstrate that it already has an ESMS in place, it will provide adequate documented evidence of such an ESMS, indicating which elements (if any) will be enhanced or modified. The FI’s ESMS will include 
the following elements: (i)   
environmental and social policy; (ii) clearly defined procedures for the 
identification, assessment and man agement of the environmental and social risks and impacts of 
subprojects; (iii) organizational capacity and competency; (iv)  monitoring and review of environmental and 
social risks of subprojects and the portfolio; and (v) external communications mechanism . An FI may be 
required to adopt and implement additional or alternative environmental and social requirements, depending on the nature of the FI, its activities, the sector or countries of operation, and the environmental and social 
risks and impacts of the potential FI subprojects .
99  
• ESS10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure ) 
The Project affected parties include implementing agencies at national level, regional level, local authorities 
of participating provinces, private investors and concerned communities. In addition, other interested parties 
include media, local/international NGO and development partners working in the same region.  
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed for each project, to ensure transpa rency and 
meaningful consultation with the affected and interested parties. Stakeholder engagement and consultations will be conducted throughout the project cycle. This will include discussions of project design and impacts 
as well as multi- stakeholder di scussions on these issues during the preparation phase. The SEP, along with 
other social and environmental instruments, will be subject to public consultation and disclosure per 
requirements of ESS10 and will be treated as a live document to be regularly updated along the pace of 
project implementation.


---
*Page 80*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 78 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  • WB Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities  
WB Performance Standards  (PSs)100 apply to activities supported by the Private Entities . For this purpose, 
a   Private Entity is a natural or legal person, whether publicly or privately owned, which is established for a 
business purpose and operates on a commercial basis, is financially and managerially autonomous, and 
whose day -to-day operations are not controlled by the government. Private Sector Acti vities refer to  activities 
(a) designed, constructed, operated and/or owned by Private a Entity (or consists of TA in preparation for such activity), and (b) for which the Private Entity is fully responsible for identifying, assessing and managing 
the envi ronmental and social risks associated with the activity it carries out or with the subprojects it finances 
in the case of FIs .   
PS1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts) applies to all projects 
that have environmental a nd social risks and impacts. Depending on project circumstances, other 
Performance Standards may apply as well. The Private Entity is responsible for developing an ESMS.  F Is 
are required to develop an ESMS, acceptable to the Bank, which the intermediary applies in identifying, 
assessing and managing environmental and social risks and impacts under its Bank -supported portfolio of 
subprojects. The Bank reviews the Private Sector Activity, the ESMS, and environmental and social 
assessment and management plans  prepared for activities under the ESMS for consistency with the WB 
Performance Standards. The Bank categorizes the activity based on the nature of the potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts of the Private Sector Activity. Finally, the Bank m onitors the 
social and environmental aspects of the Private Sector Activity .  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
The Facility aims to stren gthen women’s roles as emp loyees, entrepreneurs  and consumers  in 
cooling -related sectors  in project countries, including enhanced female economic participation in 
cooling -related  sector s and increased women’s access to services (e.g., energy, cooling, health, 
financial) and enhanced productivity and income generating opportunities for female -led businesses 
and women . Proposed interventions under the Gender Action Plan are both aligned with the World Bank 
Group Gender Strategy (2016 -2021):  (i) advancing equality between men and women through climate 
change mitigation and adaptation actions, and ( ii) minimizing gender -related risks in climate change actions . 
 
While more data and analysis are needed to better understand the gender aspect of access to sustainable 
cooling, gender risks are evident (SEforALL 2019). Women and girls are often disproportionately impacted by limited access to sustainable cooling and enhanced access could ensure gains 
in terms of 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and enhanced livelihoods.  
 
Taking into account the diversity of projects supported by the Facility ,  in terms of sectors (e.g., agriculture, 
buildings, energy etc) and geographies  (both in terms of countries and in terms of urban versus rural 
contexts) , the Facility’s gender approach will be adapted to each projects’ specific design, local 
barriers and circumstances, but   issues related to closing gender gaps in terms access to cooling -related 
services, economic participation, access to finance, a s well as opportunities to promote gender equality and 
inclusion  will be effectively  identified and embedded throughout each  project ’s cycle .  
 
99 These will be incorporated into the ESMS, the environmental and social procedures and/or set out in the legal 
agreement.  
100 These are: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts (PS1), Labor and 
Working Conditions (PS2), Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (PS3), Community Health, Safety and 
Security (PS4), Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement (PS5), Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable 
Management of Living Natural Resources (PS6), Indigenous People (PS7), and Cultural Heritage (PS8).


---
*Page 81*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 79 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  These issues will be tackled in a sustainable manner, raising awareness, improving gender policies, 
building capacities and generating knowledge on the program’s differentiated impact on men and 
women . Preliminary gender assessments for each of the identif ied countries under the Facility highlighted 
the following gender gaps and their potential mitigation actions : 
 
• Entrepreneurship:  Women entrepreneurs often lack information about access to finance options in 
the country. In addition, development of enterprises requires technical assistance support tailored to 
women’s needs. Partnering with business networks, such as. female exporter s or associations under 
chambers of commerce, is key to creating awareness about credit lines among women 
entrepreneurs. From a consumer perspective they will also have different needs and wants in terms 
of cooling technology products and services and the sectors they operate in (e.g. agriculture or 
transport).  
• Financial services —not only accounts, but payments, savings, and credit —give women some basic 
tools they need to enhance their livelihoods and economic status. Under the current ecosystem, bank 
accounts are key to ensure payments for cooling technologies, and strategies need to be developed 
to ensure women’s participation to the financial sector and cooling market. The use of digital 
payments can further reduce access for women. Affordability is a key part of this focus.  
• Jobs and Skills Development:  Job creation and livelihood opportunities will be mapped out as part 
as part job creation and skills development aspects of the Facility. For instance, having women sales agents and local suppliers wil
l create opportunities in terms of jobs or looking at labor force 
participation gaps between women and men in the e.g. cooling sector and implementing entities.  
• Consumer Engagement: Growing evidence points to significant differences in the needs and wants  
of women versus men as e.g. consumers and entrepreneurs , as well as caregivers . For example, 
differences can be observed in how they use energy on a daily basis, how much they are willing to 
adopt cooling technology and measures e.g. in agriculture  sector ), and how they respond to 
campaigns marketing products and services. Differences have also been observed in the context of 
caregiving responsibilities in communities and families.  It is therefore essential to tailor any efforts 
toward consumers specific behaviours of men and women. This points to a need for communications 
strategies in these countries to look beyond written materials, communication mode (e.g. radio, 
television, internet) as they transmit information related to benefits of cooling- related services , 
consumption patterns, and so forth. It could also be advisable to leverage women’s groups.  
• COVID -19 response and health measures: Women often lack empowerment and autonomy to 
access services, sometimes related to health and decision making. Women must not be excluded 
from accessing services, as they can act as agents of change. Families and communities can benefit 
from informed actions taken by women to counter the negative effects of the global pandemic.  
• Data and information: collecting sex -disaggregated data and gender -specific information help to 
assess the projects’ results and impacts on gender equality and also help to scale- up refine activities 
for future interventions  
The Facility will follow a systematic approach and provide support t o projects interventions with a 
focus on data collection, policy engagement, project level actions and capacity- building activities.  
The Facility will leverage support for the gender -related activities from the ESMAP Gender and Energy 
Program, the ESMAP E fficient Clean Cooling Program, as well as from the Bank’s ecosystem of gender 
focal points for relevant WB Global Practices . The Facility will encourage the recruitment of a balanced 
female- to-male employment ratio recruitment of women within the project management  unit (P MU) teams.  
 
Obtaining stakeholders buy- in will be key in ensuring that interventions to promote women’s 
employment and enhance their livelihood are effectively implemented with measurable outcomes.  
Institutional and behavioral change are a long- time process that will require sustained support of all relevant


---
*Page 82*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 80 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  stakeholders (public and private) throughout the program cycle.  Countries adherence to international 
agreements and national normative frameworks on gender equality, will be a good starting point to 
strengthen government’s support  for gender interventions . 
 
 At the project and program level, the following approach will be followed:  
 
• Data collection to document the baseline situation and i dentify gaps. Baseline data will be 
collected to set targets and measure progress during implementation, it will also support existing efforts where baseline sex -disaggregated data are weak. Research will build upon existing country 
gender diagnostics and action plan when available, to ensure national priorities are understood and 
considered. To support project design and implementation,  stakeholders’ consultations will involve 
female participants, to understand men and women differentiated needs . In additi
on, initial 
assessments will include an analysis of the differentiated impact on men and women, through the 
involvement of gender and energy experts (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, 
Resettlement Action Plans etc.). Gaps could be identified but not limited to female labor issue or 
inadequate access to finance for the cooling- related  sector s, and design mitigation measures that 
minimize gender gaps such as enhanced productive uses of energy, enhanced knowledge and skills 
of small and micro -business, households and farmers.  
• Identifying and implementing relevant actions . Based on the initial diagnosis and inclusive 
stakeholders’ consultations, targeted activi ties will be identified to address key gender gaps. These 
may include (i) actions to promote female employment (including capacity building and programs for women to gain hands -on experience in the sector such as support for school -to-work transition), (ii) 
financing local communities projects empowering women in the area of implementation of the 
projects (such as activities generating revenues), (iii) implementation of prevention measures to mitigate associated incidents or risks in the area of implementat ion of the projects and (iv) facilitating 
energy access for female- headed households (including capacity -building workshops to maintain and 
develop energy services).   
• M&E and Knowledge management . In 2017, the WBG started implementing the “gender -tag” 
mechanisms to identify projects that effectively promote equality between men and women and are 
aligned with the WBG gender strategy. The Cooling Facility will adopt a gender perspective and aim 
to close key gaps in its supported projects. Results will be moni tored throughout the project and be 
used for real -time adjustments during implementation. To expand the knowledge base, projects will 
build on lessons learnt from prior projects as well as regional and country base knowledge production and exchange learning opportunities.  
• Engaging stakeholders with specific needs and risks of gender inequality in meaningful 
consultation, information disclosure and responsive grievance redress throughout the project life (as set out in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan).  Focu s will be  given to a ctivities to strengthen women’s 
participation and voice during consultations. Consultations and public meetings with stakeholders will 
be conducted throughout the project cycle in a participatory manner and with a special focus on engag
ing women. This will help gaining knowledge about community concerns during project 
preparation and help monitor impact and undertake real -time correction during implementation. 
Special attention will be paid to using local dialect, cultural concerns when relevant and including 
women from minority ethnic groups and other socially vulnerable groups.


---
*Page 83*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 81 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
Each project financed through the Cooling Facility will be required to conduct financial management and 
procurement according to the World Bank policies and procedures.  
• Procurement   
Each project  supported by the Cooling Facility  will follow the World Bank’s Procurement Framework and 
Regulations  (https://www.worldbank.org/en/projects -operations/p roducts -and-services/brief/procurement -
new-framework#framework ).   World Bank procurement staff support borrowers throughout the procurement 
process. They work with governments to achieve the highest bidding and contract management standards 
to get the bes t development results.  Each project is developed, designed and monitored  by the Executing 
Entity  (or PIE as applicable)  with support and supervision by a World Bank task team that includes a 
procurement specialist.    
For each project, a PMU will be established by the relevant Executing Entity (host countries or governments) 
– or PIE as applicable -  with a team expected to include a procurement specialis t. 
Each project , with the exception of the guarantee operation  (see below) , is also be subject to the ‘World 
Bank’s Anti -Corruption Guidelines, dated July 1, 2016’.  
• Financial Management   
Each project  supported by the Facility is required to maintain financial management arrangements (including 
planning and budgeting, accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing 
arrangements of the borrower and entities responsible for pro ject implementation)  acceptable to the World 
Bank.  A financial management specialist is expected to b e part of the team forming t he PMU established 
by each relevant Executing Entity  (or PIE as applicable) for its respective project.    
Moreover, f or each project, the World Bank task team includes an accredited Financial Management (FM) 
specialist who provides support during the entire project cycle (preparation, supervision and implementation) 
in accordance with the World Bank’s operational policies and procedures (to work with partner countries to 
design financial management and disbursement arrangements and to supervise and support the 
performance of World Bank -finance operations). The team’s FM specialist closely monitors the performance 
of the E xecuting Entity ’s (or PIE as applicable) FM arrangements and their continued capacity to provide 
reasonable assurance that loan proceeds are being used for the purposes intended.  
Financial reporting is also required for each project  which is specified in each project’s Disbursement and 
Financial Information Letter (DFIL). Unless otherwise agreed by the World Bank, the Executing Entity  must 
submit annual audited project financial statements six months after the close of the financial y ear and 
unaudited interim financial (IFR) reports periodically. Audits are  carried out by auditors with independence 
and capacity acceptable to the World Bank, under terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
The Access to Information Policy (201 5) governs the public accessibility of information of operational 
documents prepared by the World Bank. The policy can be accessed through the foll owing link : 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/393051435850102801/World- Bank -Policy -on-Access- to-Information -
V2.pdf  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence.


---
*Page 84*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 82 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosur e polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.


---
*Page 85*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 83 OF 83 
   
   
 Official Use  * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable   
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☒  Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework  (ESSF)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement framework   
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☐ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22   Project s information (confidential)  
☒ Annex 23  Greenhouse gas calculations  
☒ Annex 24  Methodology and assumptions f or greenhouse gas and beneficiaries calculations


---
*Page 86*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 90*
---

The Secretariat  
Green Climate Fund ( GCF ) 
175 Art Center -daero  
Yeonsu -gu, Incheon 406 -840 
Republic of Korea  
       Lilongwe , 29th April 2020  
 
Re: Funding proposal for  the GCF by The World Bank  regarding the Cooling Facility  
Dear Madam/  Sir, 
We refer to the programme , the Cooling Facility,  in Malawi  as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by The World Bank  to us on 28th April 2020 . 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Environmental Affairs Department, the 
National Designated Authority of Malawi . Pursuant  to GCF decision B.08/10 , the content of whic h 
we acknowledge to have reviewed , we hereby communicate our no -objection to  the programme  as 
included in  the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The Government of Malawi  has no -objection to the programme  as included  in the funding 
proposal ; 
(b) The programme  as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Malawi ’s national 
priorities, strategies and plans;  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, t he programme  as 
included in the fund ing proposal  is in conformity with relevan t national laws and regulations . 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the programme  as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the  programme . 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Kind regards,  
 
_________ _____  
T.G Mbale -Luka  
DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS  & GCF FOCAL POINT    
Telephone: 01 771 111  
Telefax No.: 01 773 379  
Our Reference No.: EAD/99/7/ 5 
Your Reference 
No…………………………………  
 
Commun ications should be addressed to:  
The Director of Environmental Affairs    
  ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT  
                    LINGADZI HO USE  
                              CITY CENTRE  
                                          PRIVATE BAG 394  
                                                    LILONGWE 3  
                                                            MALAWI


---
*Page 100*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Cooling Facility  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity World Bank  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country or 
location (s) of programme  The target countries are: Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, 
North Macedonia, Panama, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia,  and 
Sri Lanka.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, September 1, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Bengali, Macedonian, Portuguese, Sinhala , Somali,  and 
Spanish . 
Explanation on language English is an official language of Kenya , and the official language 
of Malawi ; 
Bengali is the  official language of Bangladesh ; 
Macedonian is the official language of North Macedonia;  
Portuguese is the  official language of Sao Tome and Principe;  
Sinhal a is an official language of Sri Lanka;  
Somali is an official language of Somalia;  
Spanish is the official language of El Salvador , and Panama .   
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap -
files/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26%20August%202021_Engli
sh.pdf   
 
Bengali:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Bengali.pdf  
 Macedonian:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Macedonian.
pdf  
 Portuguese:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Portuguese.p
df  
 Sinhal a: 
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27August2021_Sinhalese.pd
f


---
*Page 101*
---

Somali:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Somali.pdf   
 
Spanish:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27%20August%202021_Spa
nish.pdf   
Other link(s) N/A  
Remarks  An ESIA  template consistent with the requirements for a 
Category B project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Sustainability Framework  (ESSF) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, September 1, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Bengali, Macedonian, Portuguese, Sinhala , Somali, and 
Spanish .  
Explanation on language English is an official language of Kenya , and the official language 
of Malawi ; 
Bengali is the  official language of Bangladesh ; 
Macedonian is the official language of North Macedonia;  
Portuguese is the  official language of Sao Tome and Principe;  
Sinhal a is an official language of Sri Lanka;  
Somali is an official language of Somalia;  
Spanish is the  official language of El Salvador , and Panama.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap -
files/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26%20August%202021_Engli
sh.pdf   
 Bengali:  
https://esma p.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Bengali.pdf  
 Macedonian:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Macedonian.
pdf  
 Portuguese:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Portuguese.p
df  
 Sinhala:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27August2021_Sinhalese.pd
f  
 Somali:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Somali.pdf


---
*Page 102*
---

Spanish:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27%20August%202021_Spa
nish.pdf   
Other link(s) N/A  
Remarks  An ESMP template consistent with the requirements for a 
Category B  project is contained in the “ Environmental an d Social 
Sustainability Framework (ESSF) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of report/disclosure  
on accredited entity’s website The “Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework”  
includes the templates the following ESS reports: Resettlement 
Policy Framework (Appendix 5), Resettlement Action Plan 
(Appendix 6), Indigenous People Planning Framework (Appendix 
7) and Indigenous Peoples Plan (Appendix 8/ August 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Bengali, Macedonian, Portuguese, Sinhalese, Somali, and 
Spanish.  
Explanation on language English is an official language of Kenya, and the official language 
of Malawi;  
Bengali is the official language of Bangladesh;  
Macedonian is the o fficial language of North Macedonia;  
Portuguese is the official language of Sao Tome and Principe;  
Sinhala is an official language of Sri Lanka;  
Somali is an official language of Somalia;  
Spanish is the official language of El Salvador, and Panama.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esm ap-
files/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26%20August%202021_Engli
sh.pdf   
 
Bengali:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/ A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Bengali.pdf  
 Macedonian:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Macedonian.
pdf  
 Portuguese:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_26August2021_Portuguese.p
df


---
*Page 103*
---

Sinhala:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27August2021_Sinhalese.pd
f 
S
omali:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_31August2021_Somali.pdf  
S
panish:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/publication -
home/A6_Cooling%20Facility_ESSF_27%20August%202021_Spa
nish.pdf   
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  N/A  
Place  N/A  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s Board 
meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 4, 2021  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 104 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 177 
Proposal name:  Cooling Facility  
Accredited entity:  World Bank  
Country/(ies):  Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, 
Panama, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, and Sri Lanka  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
Cooling Facility is a multi -sector , multi -
country , cross -cutting proposal that  is 
designed to address key barriers to  scale by 
providing a focused and tailor  made  technical 
assistance to create enabling environment 
and develop multiple financial model for best 
adoption, scaling and replication of cooling solution s. This integrated approach can make 
a difference, particularly when countries are prioritizing the scarce resources available for an emergency response to COVID -19, 
focusing on healthcare.  The Cooling Facility and the 
projects  for investment  are at  an early 
development stage. P roper  assurances, 
including implementation arrangements , need to be  put in place to 
ensure  the achievement of the targeted 
impacts that the  Facility will deliver as 
indicated in the funding proposal . It is 
important that the Ac credited Entity  (AE)  
strictly compl ies with the agreed set of 
parameters in the term  sheet throughout the 
process.  
  
The nine (9) countries are representative of 
different types of cooling context and varied needs and challenges for cooling . The data 
generated, application of the models and lessons learned from these countries will  
inform the larger cooling community of the innovative and integrat ed approach .  
The programme has a h igh level of impact 
both on mitigation and adaptation, while meeting Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), planning for disaster risk reduction 
(e.g. from heatwaves) and supporting the 
goals of the Kigali Amendment.   
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of  proposed  conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively .  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 105 
 
 
2.1 Programme  background  
2.1.1.  Programme context  
3. Cooling is critical for health  and well -being , livelihood s and the environment . Cooling is 
an essential part of vaccines and food systems  to keep vaccines safe  and food fresh,  and is 
central to industrial and transport in frastructure . Cooling has also  become a mainstay for 
maintaining “comfort” in buildings for both work and leisure to ensure people  have comfortable 
buildings to live and work in.  Population growth, including a growing middle -class population , 
and chang es in lifestyles, rapid urbanization and rising ambient temperatures are  leading to an 
increase in cooling demand year on year. Therefore,  an estimated 3.6 billion cooling appliances 
currently in use is projected to increase to 9.5 billion by 2050, according t o Dreyfus et al.  2020, 
and the demand would be at around 14 billion if all people in need of cooling were to be catered 
for, as oppose d to only  those  who could afford it.  
4. According to SEforALL (2020) , over 1 billion people in developing countries are already 
facing an immediate risk from lack of access to cooling , of whom 699 million are slum dwellers 
living in hotter -climate urban areas where electricity services do not exist, are intermittent or 
are too expensive; and about 318 million are people liv ing in poor rural areas without access to 
cold chains for storage and preservation of food and medicine.  Therefore, cooling is not a luxury 
but a necessity for sustainable development . 
5. This new warming wor ld poses numerous climate challenges related to both mitigation 
and adaptation . First ly, the increase in cooling demand leads to high levels  of greenhouse gas 
(GHG)  emissions,  as the primary energy comes from carbon -intensive sources . Second ly, most 
of the  refrigerant s in use today for cooling are fluorinated gases (F -gases) – 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)  or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)  – these F -gases have a very 
high global warming potential (GWP)  ranging from 92 to 14 ,000 , and if leaked or vented will 
cause substantial emission s. Thirdly , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  in 2019 
reported that at 1.5°C of warming  – a threshold that could be reached as early as 2030 – 2.3 
billion people could be both exposed and vulnerable to heatwave events , which can cause 
illnesses including heat cramps, fainting, heat exhaustion , heat stroke and even death. Heat 
stress will also impact productivity . The International Labour Organization  (2019) estimates the 
productivity loss due to heat by 2030 to amount to the equivalent of 80 million full -time jobs.  
2.1.2.  Program me description  
6. As mentioned above , cooling has become a critical part of daily lives, be it in comfort, 
supply chain management, tr ansport or industrial process. However, cooling has always  been  a 
“part” of the overall sector and never a stand -alone initiative. Therefore, clear focus on cooling 
has not been given. For example, cold chains are part of the cooling action , but it is embo died 
within the overall a griculture  value chain.  
7. The Cooling Facility will be  one of the world’s first cooling -focused facilit ies with the  aim 
of provid ing key solutions to cooling from multiple angles,  including  regulation and policy, 
technical assistance , and most importantly financing  to address multiple barriers inhibiting the 
broader adoption of clean cooling solutions , which is energy efficient and with l ow-GWP 
refrigerant.  
8. Key barriers to be addressed by the Cooling Facility  are the following:  
(a) Lack o f regulatory/policy framework for sustainable cooling system s along with limited 
institutional capacity to design, implement, monitor, and enforce cooling standards ; 
(b) Lack of enforceable standards like Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS)  and 
Standar ds and Labels (S&L) , which target a specific sector – in this instance cooling.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 106 
 
 
MEPS and S&L can be further operationalized into government fiscal and monetary 
policy as indirect incentives and lead to better enforcement ; 
(c) Lack of awareness among users of c ooling equipment . Few users are fully aware of its 
emissions impact, energy consumption, maintenance requirements and operating costs 
over time. The driving incentive for users is price and not efficiency ; this locks in people 
into inefficient equipment fo r the life duration of that inefficient equipment ;   
(d) Lack of skills:  in many countries, there are not  enough  sufficiently trained 
engineers/technicians to install and maintain cooling equipment. Even t he most efficient 
equipment , if not installed and  maintained correctly,  will not perform in the manner it 
was designed  to;  
(e) Lack of data and credible forecasts for the future scaling up  of cooling needs including 
costs, benefits and climate impact. Quality baseline data about equipment stocks, 
equipment sales and refrigerant inventories in many countries are either not present or 
not organized for ease of access ; and  
(f) In addition, m arket barriers include  the following:  
(i) Lack of access to finance for cooling investment (greenfield and retrofit) ; 
(ii) Lack of innovation in business models ; most countries still have high collateral 
requirement and do  not offer other services ;  
(iii) Lack of technology choice ; generally most markets are dominated by few 
suppliers ; 
(iv) Lack  of bargaining p ower , as most projects are small in size and thus do  not have 
the leverage to bargain with financiers for better terms ; and  
(v) Lack of pipeline ; consumption patterns and consumer behavio ur ha ve to 
demand efficient services as opposed to accepting the lowest p rice principle . 
2.1.3.  Cooling Facility d esign  
9. The wide range of cooling needs and priorities implies an equally diverse set of 
challenges and solutions as outlined  above. Therefore, the Cooling Facility is uniquely designed 
based on the principle of “no one -size -fits-all solution or approach”. Given the nascent and still 
early stage focus on cooling , globally , to address both development and climate  change  
purposes, the Cooling Facility seeks to cater to different contexts – countries’ geographic  and 
socio -econom ic contexts,  and efforts and priorities to respond to the crisis caused by the COVID -
19 pandemic crisis (e.g. vaccination supply chain).  
10. In this context, the Cooling Facility will support activities that address and help remove 
regulatory/policy -related, institutional, market and behavioural barriers to the development of 
sustainable cooling investments by: 
(a) Providing technical assistance and building the capacity of state and non -state actors 
(such as commercial banks, private investors and technical compa nies, and end user 
beneficiaries) ; 
(b) Supporting the design of sustainable implementation mechanisms and business models;  
(c) Increasing end -user awareness of the benefits of low -carbon cooling solutions ;  
(d) Facilitating access to affordable sources of financing; and  
(e) Provid ing credit lines to financial intermediaries.   
11. In turn, these activities will : (1) strengthen the capacity of key stakeholders ; (2) 
stimulate the demand for climate -friendly cooling solutions ; (3) foster the penetration of


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 107 
 
 
climate -friendly equipment and infrastructure ; and (4) mobilize capital from public and private 
sources.  
12. These interventions will strengthen institutional and regulatory systems, improve 
access to cooling, improve the adaptive capacity of end -user beneficiaries to respond to rising 
temperatures, as well as increase energy efficiency of cooling buildings and cooling 
infrastructure. Ultimately, the climate change resilience of built infrastructure will be enhanced , 
while the  carbon intensity of buildings, cold chains and cooling appliances will decrease.  
13. In fact, the diversity of the selected countries targeted by the Facility is expected to 
provide pioneering examples for mitigation and adaptation activities related to cooling in 
different contexts. Aside from different cooling sub -sectors , many issues are country -specific, 
and thus the Cooling Facility aims to support different approaches and generate lessons that can 
then be adapted and scaled  up more broadly to enhance ac cess to affordable cooling , while at 
the same time kick start a transformation towards more sustainable cooling, particularly by 
offering examples to be emulated and ad apted in countries beyond the scope of the Facility.   
14. Where growing cooling demand is creating pressures on a country’s energy systems and 
upward pressures on GHG emissions, the priority is to support space cooling, in terms of both 
passive measures (e.g. building design and high -efficiency thermal envelopes) and energy -
efficient cooling equ ipment and systems (this is the case for Bangladesh, North Macedonia, 
Panama and Sri Lanka). In agriculture -dominant economies where there is a need to expand 
access to cooling into rural and off -grid areas, the priority is to support an efficient and climate -
friendly cold chain (e.g. through the Facility’s proposed support to Malawi and Kenya) . 
15. In hot climate countries, ensuring health infrastructure is adequate for patients and 
storage of pharmaceuticals is a priority, because pharmaceuticals expire and b ecome ineffective 
more quickly in hot climatic conditions. Efficient and solar -powered cold chain and health 
facilities can expand quality health services and ensure safe storage of vaccines while making them more resilient to warmer temperatures, as well as keeping their carbon footprint low (e.g. 
El Salvador, Sao Tome and Principe, and Somalia) . 
16. There is an urgent need to cut emissions and meet increasing demand for future cooling 
sustainably. The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, which has already been ratified by 
over 100 countries, and regional frameworks such as the E uropean Union  F-Gas Regulation, 
demonstrate how refrigerant emissions can be reduced, yet  further refrigerant phase -downs 
and phase -outs are needed. Meeting future cooling needs s ustainably can reduce the costs of 
renewable energy build -out by up to USD 3.5 trillion by 2030 and accelerate the net -zero 
transition by up to eight years. Hence,  the Cooling Facility will pioneer the way forward to 
meeting these targets.  
2.1.4.  Integrated and h olistic approach 
17. The scale of the cooling challenge and the window of opportunity to get on a path to 
affordable, efficient  and clean cooling require  an approach that integrates the development and 
strengthening of an enabling environment.  Doing this invol ves technical assistance,  capacity -
building,  and concessional  financing  to mainstream sustainable cooling and establish 
sustainable implementation and business models.  Moreover, in line with the Facility’s goals to 
support access to affordable, efficient  and clean cooling in a warming world, the Facility will 
integrate efficiency , starting with passive measures,  and low -carbon considerations and adopt a 
holistic approach to sustainable cooling consisting of  one or more of  the following elements:   
(a) Minimize : reduce and avoid cooling loads , for example, with passive building design, 
increase of thermal efficiency of buildings and cold storage warehouses/facilities,  and 
nature -based solutions such as green roofs ;


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 108 
 
 
(b) Shift to cooling  solutions with the lowest GH G emissions, for example solar cooling, 
climate -friendly (low GWP) refrigerant -based cooling systems,  
or centralized  cooling  solutions  where the right enabling conditions are in place;   
(c) Improve efficiency : use energy -efficient technologies to achieve cooli ng with less energy 
(and less GHG emissions), for example, super -efficient appliances and equipment and 
demand management to reduce peak demand and the need for new generating power 
capacity ;    
(d) Optimize : control cooling loads, for example, with smart sensing and behavio ural change 
approaches ; and 
(e) Protect the most vulnerable  in urban and rural areas from extreme heat and the 
consequences of unreliable or insufficient medical and agriculture cold chains . 
18. The total project budget is USD 879.84 million, of which USD 157 million are requested 
from GCF, of which USD 125 million is the form of loans, and USD 32 million is in the form of grants. The environmental and social safeguards categorization of this proposal is assessed to 
be I-2. 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1: Policy, regulatory and enabling environment support (total cost: USD 91.6 million; 
GCF cost: USD 15.7 million)  
19. This component will support activities that aim to strengthen institutional, policy and 
regulatory frameworks, raise awareness and stimulate behaviour al changes, as well as build the 
capacity of key stakeholders to plan, finance and implement sustainable cooling investments, 
and to plan for responses to increased heatwaves and other extreme events. Enabling activities 
will include cooling -specific inputs (related to both climate mitigation and adaptation) into the 
country’s nationally determined contributions planning process under the Paris Agreement such as Cooling Action Plans, as well as inputs on national policies and regulations that 
encourage sustai nable cooling. It will also support activities linked to the Facility’s Gender 
Action Plan.  
20. Activities relevant to the eligible cooling areas supported under Component 1 may 
include  the following:  
(a) Capacity -building of key stakeholders , for example, on tech nologies , business models,  
cooling project appraisal, implementation and evaluation;  
(b) Technical assistance for enabling plans, strategies, policies, regulations and standards;  
(c) Designing sustainable market mechanisms and business models; and  
(d) Communications  and awareness campaigns .  
Component 2: Financing for cooling investments (total cost: USD 769 million; GCF cost: USD 191.3 
million)  
21. In order to promote and accelerate the uptake of investments in innovative and climate -
friendly cooling technologies and sy stems, including in markets with low penetration and 
unmet cooling demand, the Cooling Facility aims to support increased access and deployment of 
sustainable cooling solutions performing better than current market practice and at the same 
time ensure that  the level of ambition is appropriate and relevant to each market (i.e. 
affordable) to expand access to – and deployment of -  more climate -friendly cooling at scale and 
avoid promoting a prohibitively expensive market niche, which would hinder the goals of  
scaling  up access and deployment.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 109 
 
 
22. The Facility will provide  concessional  funds  to foster the adoption or scale  up the 
sustainable cooling technologies, appliances’  deployment through financing  of climate -friendly 
cooling  investment  and credit lines to fin ancial intermediaries.  
23. The financial instruments will be calibrated to what is needed to make the cooling 
project viable and to overcome barriers to implementation, including addressing the 
incremental cost associated with the adoption of efficient coolin g solutions or serve remote off -
grid areas, which include higher upfront capital costs compared to baseline options, and market 
entry barriers arising from the underrepresentation of efficient  and clean cooling solutions in 
many developing country regions and sectors. The deployment of these funds will be tailored to the needs of the projects, through various financing modalities, for example, public financing  to 
sovereign or sub -sovereign entities  credit lines to commercial banks, loans or subsidies to 
households, municipalities and small, medium and large enterprises.    
24. This component will focus on different financing and implementation mechanisms and 
models suitable for different cooling sectors and different countries , which  may be deployed by 
different projects of the Facility based on specific country and sector conditions.  Examples of 
these financing and implementation mechanisms and models  are as below.  
2.2.1.  Public  procurement and contracting  for cooling  infrastructure service 
delivery and technical assist ance  
25. GCF funds  would be used  to support investments through  a traditional public 
procurement and contracting model. Interventions that promote the deployment of a public 
good (for example, refrigeration and cold chain for vaccines and medicines  such as in El 
Salvador,  Sao Tome  and Principe and Somalia). This model includes the following  activities:  
(a) Prepare the technical specifications and terms of reference of the cooling infrastructure 
or equipment to  procure;  
(b) Launch the procurement process to invite bids from suitable contractors;  
(c) award the procurement contract;  
(d) Sign contractual agreements with the winning bidders;  
(e) Monitor the delivery of the goods and services to ensure quality control using own 
resources or through an owner’s engineer procured by the project ; and 
(f) Remunerate the contractor according to the agreed terms.  
Figure 1. Public  procurement and contracting  model


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 110 
 
 
2.2.2.  Credit lines   
26. A key barrier to  investing in  energy efficiency,  in general , and sustainable cooling , in 
particular , is the limited availability of  commercial financing  for these projects.  The Facility will 
support the  provision of credit lines,  for example  in Malawi,  to help financial 
institutions establish business lines for sustainable cooling  investments.  Credit lines  can be well 
suited  in less mature markets;  they  help  mitigate  the perceived  high financial risk  of energy 
efficient and clean cooling, which may be carried  out by  energy service  companies (ESCOs).    
27. An ESCO is an organization that provides  a range  of servi ces to energy users to design 
and implement cooling and energy efficiency measures. The services may also include providing 
or arranging financing. Such services are provided by the ESCO using a performance- based 
contract under which the payments from the energy user to the ESCO are contingent upon 
achieving certain pre -specified performance levels. This approach allows energy users to 
transfer much of a project’s  technical, construction, and performance risks to the ESCO. The 
concept of energy savings performance contracts (ESPCs) implemented by ESCOs has been 
recognized as a promising approach to overcome some of the most intractable market barriers.  
  
Figure 2. Implementation arrangement for  credit lines  
  
  
2.2.3.  Energy efficiency financing  facility   
  
28. Under this model, the  GCF  proceeds  are channell ed through the executing entity  
(EE).  The EE either  directly, or through an entity that it designates  (the project implementing 
entity (PIE) ), on-lends the funds  to sub-borrowers (for example,  priva te ESCOs , cooling as a 
service  operators, municipalities, or small - and medium -sized enterprises ) to undertake eligible 
cooling investments.


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 111 
 
 
Figure 3. Energy efficiency financing facility model  
  
  
29. The energy efficiency financing  facility  imple mentation  arrangement  involves two main 
variations, as presented below.    
30. (3-a) Public  super ESCO  model . In this variation of the energy efficiency financing facility 
model, the host country designates a public energy service company (the public super ESCO ). 
The public super ESCO would typically be a public entity established by the government to (a) 
support cooling and energy efficiency investments in the public sector (public buildings and 
sustainable cooling projects) and (b) strengthen private sector ES COs through demand 
aggregation, bulk procurement of equipment (therefore reducing the cost of equipment for 
ESCOs), standardization of ESPCs, monitoring and verification  templates and capacity -building, 
project development, and facilitation.  This variation of the  energy efficiency  financing  facility 
arrangement  is envisaged in Bangladesh.   
Figure 3 -a. Public  super ESCO implementation model


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 112 
 
 
31. (3-b) Energy efficiency revolving  facilities (EERF).  Under the EERF  model,  the 
PIE uses  revolving mechanisms to recover its investment and operating costs based on 
contracts such as energy service agreements (ESAs)  or also uses  more traditional revolving 
financing mechanisms such as debt financing and budget capture.5 5 Under an ESA, the facility 
finances and undertakes the investment on behalf of the beneficiary. In return, the beneficiary 
makes regular payments based on the energy savings generated by the investments to the EERF 
over an agreed period so that the EERF can recover the investment and operating costs. For the beneficiaries, the recurring payment (consisting of the reduced energy bill and the payment to 
the EE or  PIE, as applicable) is equal to or lower than their pre -investment baseline energy bill. 
For No rth Macedonia it is envisaged that GCF funds will be deployed through the  EERF model.  
 
Figure 3 -b Energy efficiency revolving facility (EERF)  model    
  
  
Component 3: Project management (total cost: USD 19.2 million; GCF cost: USD 0 million)  
32. This componen t will support the EEs and project implementing entities in the 
management, coordination and implementation of their project activities, in compliance with the contractual obligations that are included or referred to in the legal agreements entered into 
with the AE. There is no funding request from GCF for project management.  
III. Assessment  of performance  against investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                      Scale: High  
33. The Cooling Facility has a mitigation impact potential of 16.24 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (MtCO 2eq) avoided for the lifetime of the project. A total of 4.22 million 
people will directly  of performance  benefit from the programme, in addition to 16.86 million 
indirec t beneficiaries. The Cooling Facility envisages enhancing the resilience of 18,057 physical 
assets , including buildings, agricultural and health cold chains.


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 113 
 
 
34. The Cooling Facility  is envisioned to increase access to cooling  that is needed in a 
warming world  and is especially critical to help build resilience in countries facing risks of 
extreme heat hazards, as well as help chart a sustainable path to low carbon development. As a 
cross -cutting facility the i mpact potentials are greatly heightene d as describe d below:    
(a) Adaptation  – The Cooling Facility will be engaged in countries facing a  high risk of 
extreme heat hazards : Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi and Somalia . The impact s of 
the Facility -supported sustainable cooling investment s are expected to 
reach  over  4 million  direct and  over  16 million  indirect  beneficiaries.  It will facilitate 
more than 16,000 climate -resilient  cooling assets ; and   
(b) Mitigation  – It is estimated that the Cooling Facility will lead to 
approximately  1 million  tonnes of avoided or reduced GHG emissions per year  across 
the sustainable cooling investments made in the nine  countries, and more than 14 
million ton nes of GHG reduced within the lifetime of the project. This amounts to nearly 
2 per cent  of the global co oling -related emission s, which is quite substantial  from a 
sector point of view.  
35. As a multi -sectoral facility , the impacts will be envisioned across these cooling sub -
sectors:  
(a) Kigali Amendment and refrigerants : The Facility will also  support  the goals and  
requirements of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol by helping countries  in 
the transition  to more climate -friendly refrigerants  by catalysing  more energy -
efficient  cooling equipment (air conditioners and refrigeration)  in parallel with  HFC 
phas e-down.  The GHG benefits from this refrigerant transition supported by the 
Facility  have  been  estimated ex ante, in line with global estimates  indicating 
that GHG emissions from  the refrigerants represent about 20 per cent of cooling 
equipment’s  overall GH G emissions;   
(b) Space cooling: Space cooling projects will promote a) passive measures to provide 
comfort while avoiding the need for mechanical cooling, and b)  both  higher efficiency 
and lower  GWP refrigerants’  uses, thereby  shifting  the business -as-usual t rajectory of 
cooling  GHG impact  towards  sustainable  high efficiency/low GWP  cooling;  
(c) Refrigeration and cold chains : This will help catalyse a greening of the cold chain 
by improving  the efficiency of refrigeration, storage  and distribution  infrastructure  for 
agriculture and  health  using low GWP refrigerants.  This will be of particular importance 
to health  facilities and  cold chains to safely store vaccines and medicine, reducing 
emissions by 2.7  MtCO 2eq over the  lifespan of the programme;  
(d) Off-grid cooling  powered by renewable energy : Enabling the  expansion of  affordable 
cooling  in off -grid contexts  will help  reach some of the poorest communities and 
contribute to enhancing their resilience to the impact of climate change.  Indigenous and 
non- GHG emit ting renewable energy (solar)  will mostly power (126 MW)  these critical 
cooling services; and  
(e) Other impacts:  (1) climate -friendly vaccine cold chains in three countries (El Salvador, 
Sao Tome and Principe, and Somalia) will help them respond to the current  COVID -19 
pandemic,  increasing the capacity to store vaccines and  lower  the incidence of wasted 
vaccines; (2)  investments will help lower  the incidence of  heat -related illnesses, as well 
as mental stress; and (3) improved local air quality through the disp lacement/avoidance 
of diesel generators . 
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                    Scale: High


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 114 
 
 
36. There is huge  climate potential for cooling by maximizing energy efficiency 
(refrigeration and space cooling) while simultaneously phasing down HFCs contained in 
refrigerants ; the world can potentially avoid close to 1° C by 2100. The Cooling Facility aims to 
contribut e to unlocking the climate potential.   
37. The Cooling Facility envisions work ing across key cooling sub -sectors and with a 
range  of countries  from different parts of the developing world via a combination of targeted 
technical assistance and policy dialogue offered in conjunction with investment support for country -identified national priority sectors to:  
(a) Develop an enabling environment for cooling, via policy/regulations such as MEPS, S&L, 
National Clean Air Program s; 
(b) Build and generate a track record in the cooling sector ; 
(c) Amplify the potential to leverage experience gained and lessons learn ed;  
(d) Provide pioneering examples  that can be emulated  through  different  models and 
approaches that can be scaled up and  be fit -for-purpose i n more countries;  
(e) Allow governments to see how the policy  activities are delivered and delivering at sector 
level via investments ; and  
(f) Further stimulate  scaling  up the shift to sustainable cooling investments.    
38. The Cooling Facility will work with countri es to mainstream sustainable cooling into 
their development and climate plans, procurement strategies  and policy/regulatory 
frameworks and also help train and build the capacity of relevant stakeholders, while 
also  helping raise awareness of the availabili ty and benefits of sustainable cooling  measures and 
technologies.  
39. The Cooling Facility will in parallel also focus on different  implementing models:  a) 
credit lines that help  local banks develop  a business line for cooling  investments and  build their 
capa city to originate cooling  projects ; b) ESCOs  that  provide  financing as well as  services to 
design and implement  cooling and  energy efficiency  measures , to address both the financing 
and capacity barriers ; and  c) EERFs  collect energy  cost  savings  to recover  the capital 
expenditure for  cooling  investments  so that the funds can be  re-invested  and 
the EERF  can become a sustainable entity.  
40. The combinations of policy and investment via the Cooling F acility will : (a) set up 
revolving  financing  that allow s financi ng to continue after the end of the  projects; ( b) enabl e 
private sector entities to engage and invest in  project activities in the longer term ; as well as ( c) 
send strong market signals for shifts towards sustainable cooling through public procurement , 
thus exemplifying the financial sustainability and scale -up potential within the cooling sector.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                        Scale : High  
41. The programme has a high potential to generate environmental and health benefits, 
including reduction in air pollution, increase in access to resources and cold chains for vaccines and health infrastructure development.  
42. The Cooling Facility will provide b enefits over multiple Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs ). For instance:  
(a) Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG 8) : Higher temperatures and lack of cooling 
negatively impact performance labo ur productivity. It is estimated that by 2050, work 
hours lost due to heat may be as high as 12 per  cent in the worst affected regions of 
South Asia and West Africa – representing 6 per  cent of annual GDP ;


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 115 
 
 
(b) Sustainable Cities and Communities (SDG 11) : In urban environments, average 
temperatures have been increasing at twic e the rate of global change, largely due to the 
Urban Heat Island effect. Annual mean air temperatures of cities can be 1 –3 °C higher 
than their surroundings (at night, the temperature difference can be as high as 12  °C). 
The need to reduce excess urban he at is one of the key resilience and sustainability 
challenges of the 21st century ; 
(c) Zero Hunger (SDG 2) : In developing countries around 40 per  cent of food produced 
(amounting to more than 250 million ton nes), including one  in four  fish caught, is lost 
betw een harvest and market ; 
(d) Good Health and W ell-being (SDG 3) : High temperatures increase the risk of heatstroke, 
breathing issues, heart attacks, asthma  and kidney problems. Unreliable medical cold 
chains put at risk the effectiveness of vaccines and other medical supplies;    
(e) Gender Equality (SDG 5) : According to SEforALL 2019, a gender equality risk is evident 
with regard to cooling but more data are needed. Women and girls are often 
disproportionately impacted by a lack of access to  sustainable cooling. The  Facility  will 
be able address gender gaps across entrepreneurs, employees and at the consumer 
level; and  
(f) Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG 7)  and Climate Action (SDG 13).  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                               Scale: High 
43. The Cooling Facility will enable the target countries to meet their cooling needs in a 
more climate -friendly way and contribute to lower GHG emissions  by: ( a) strengthening their 
institutions and implementation capacity to adapt to  rising temperatures; and ( b) addressing 
the barriers for clean cooling. The bottom -up approach taken by the Facility will provide 
favo urable conditions for local recipients to addre ss the issue of  sustainable cooling solutions 
by grounding mechanisms and  strategies  to each country’s  institutional and policy 
framework  and building on  countries’  priorities. The sub -sector and models are geared towards  
address ing the challenges and needs of the  local  recipients. The context for each country is as 
follows:  
(a) Bangladesh : The country faces serious energy security challenges and severe heat 
stress, equally across its population across different income level s. Integrating  energy 
efficiency a nd passive building design features and energy efficient cooling at scale now 
is key for building a more sustainable infrastructure at lower costs and lower pressures 
on the electricity grid and also in  line with the Environment Conservation Act and the 
Bang ladesh Energy Efficiency  and Conservation Master Plan ; 
(b) El Salvador : To ensure an effective COVID- 19 response and generate long -lasting 
resilience and be prepared to handle future health cris es, the Government of El Salvador 
seeks to strengthen the overall national immunization and related health delivery 
systems.  This includes a variety of issues, including safe and appropriate cold chain and 
relates services ;  
(c) Kenya : Demand for cooling is projected to grow significantly in the Nairobi and 
Mombasa markets, with a projected 1.8 million cumulative unit sales between 2020 and 
2030 for off -grid households alone. There are an estimated 3.4 million off -grid 
households in Kenya that could realize direct net economic benefits from owning a refrigerator. Energy effic iency will help lower the projected energy consumption to 
meet Kenya’s cooling demand, and in doing so reduce utility bills for households and businesses, and reduce GHG emissions in line with the country’s climate mitigation 
goals ;


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 116 
 
 
(d) Malawi : A lack of acc ess to cooling,  in particular more  sustainable cooling solutions with 
lower operational costs, is hindering economic opportunities for micro, small and 
medium- sized enterprises  involved in a number of important sectors, such as dairy and 
horticulture (frui ts and vegetables).  Promoting investment opportunities in sustainable 
cooling investments, with a focus on women and the youth, will contribute to providing 
economic opportunities and strengthening the resilience to climate change of vulnerable 
and margina lized population groups, while also avoiding expensive and polluting energy 
consumption ;  
(e) North Macedonia : Buildings consume about 39 per  cent of the energy  in the country, 
and represent a major priority. The public sector has the greatest potential, with about 
35–40 per  cent savings, mostly in the health and education sectors. In the past , the focus 
has been on heating, but increases in summer temperatures in Europe have  increased 
the demand and need for cooling, especially in schools and h ospitals. Improving thermal 
renovations of public buildings will substantially reduce their future cooling loads, 
which will contribute to the country’s adaptation to the changing climate. In the context 
of the COVID -19 situation, the rehabilitation of health -care facilities, with adequate air 
conditioning systems, is expected to become a higher priorit y;  
(f) Panama : According to the National Energy Plan of Panama, cooling systems ’ 
consumption currently represent s about 40 per  cent of overall electricity consumption. 
The electricity sector is facing serious challenges in keeping up with rising demand 
coupled with increased air conditioning  penetration jumping from 8.9  per cent  in 2000 
to an estimated 66  per cent  by 2050 ; the need for efficient cooling system s is a priority 
for Panama;  
(g) Sao Tome and Principe : The Government was initially unable to quickly establish 
laboratory capacity to diagnose COVID -19. Notwithstanding the fact that the country is 
now better prepared to diagnose, isolate, treat and track COVID -19 contacts, a 
significant and more comprehensive strategy to strengthen  the public health systems is 
needed to continue with the mitigation measures to contain the spread of the disease  in 
the country and to design and imp lement the national COVID -19 immunization plan, 
which  includes a robust vaccine cold chain ;  
(h) Somalia : The global COVID -19 pandemic is a pressing problem in Somalia, exacerbated 
by an extremely weak primary health -care  system, inadequate surveillance and 
laboratory capacity, and limited hospital services. There are major gaps in cold -chain 
capacity, which prevents expanding the currently extremely low vaccine coverage and 
will make distribution of COVID -19 vaccines diff icult . Likewise pharmaceuticals  and 
medicines expire and become ineffective more quickly in the very hot climatic  
conditions. Moreover, without support, it is expected  that kerosene,  petrol  and diesel 
fuelled generator equipment will be moved to increase  cold storage capacity ; and   
(i) Sri Lanka : Commercial  buildings (including government buildings)  and industrial 
buildings contribute 60  per cent  of the electricity consumption in the country. The 
Sustainable Energy Authority has also has defined an ambitious De mand Side 
Management program me that includes chillers, fans, refrigerators, air conditioning and 
green buildings (including the potential of nature -based solutions such as green roofs 
and green walls). But the major barrier to meet the needs of the people for these 
technolog ies has been access to the right type of financing ; the Cooling F acility via the 
EER F with ESCO model could be a solution.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                      Scale: High


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 117 
 
 
44. The Cooling Facility is strategically aligned with the countries’ nationally determined 
contributions, the Montreal Protocol and its Kigali Amendments, and countries’ strategies. The 
relevant country engagements have been  discussed with relevant local  authorities and also 
presented to na tional designated authorities (NDAs),  which  have  issued  no-objection 
letters.  Also, stakeholder engagements have been undertaken and will be further expanded 
while developing country -specific intervention.  The following describes the government’s 
efforts a nd strategic vision for the energy efficiency sector.  
(a)  Bangladesh: The Government has prepared the Energy Efficiency  Conservation Master 
Plan 2015 -2030, which describes the  adoption and implementation of  energy 
efficiency  and conservation regulatory measur es. In addition, the  project will inform 
the Government’s efforts in developing  a national Cooling Action Plan ;   
(b) Kenya:  Under the Paris Agreement, Kenya has committed to reducing GHG emissions by 
30 per cent , or 142 M tCO 2eq, by 2030. The National Electrification Strategy presents a 
road  map for achieving universal access to electricity by 2022. Supporting off -grid 
cooling appliances and access under the Facility  will contribute to  both  of these  goals ;  
(c) Malawi:  Promoting  the use of energy -efficient technologies and designs is one of the 
strategies advocated for in the Government’s  priority areas under the Malawi Growth 
and Development Strategy (MDGS III). Since agriculture is one of the  major  contributors 
to GHG emission s, the Facility’s support of clean and sustainable cold chains in 
agriculture will contribute to the  achievement of the MDGS III goal;   
(d) North Macedonia:  The Facility will support achieving the Government’s energy saving 
commitments through establishing a financing mechanism and investing into efficient 
space cooling of buildings ;  
(e) Panama:  Panama has ratified the Kigali Amendment in 2017, which aims to phase 
down   HFC s and is currently implementing Stage II of its  HFC  Phase -out Management 
Plan under  the Montreal Protocol.  The Facility will support achieving the Government’s 
commitments through its support for efficient space cooling ;  
(f) El Salvador:  The Government is integrating climate -friendly investments in its 
national  program mes and its  NDC  includes  health as a sector affected by clima te 
change  and the promotion of a larger use renewable energy. This is aligned with  the 
Facility’s support for  climate -friendly health facilities  and cold chain s; 
(g) Sao Tome and Principe: The country’s NDC include promoting the greater use of 
renewable energy  and list s health as one of the sectors negatively impacted by climate 
change. The Facility will contribute to the Government’s NDC through supporting space 
cooling and cold chains in the health sector, including through the increased use of solar 
power ;  
(h) Somalia:  Somalia’s NDC related to scaling up the use of solar energy is consistent with 
the Facility’s aim to support for more climate -friendly health facilities and cold chain s, 
including through greater use of solar power ;  
(i) Sri Lanka: Demand Side Managem ent is identified as one of the seven mitigation actions 
of the energy sector NDC of Sri Lanka. The Energy Efficiency Building Code sets 
standards for  energy efficiency  in design and retrofits in buildings, at the same time 
providing methods for determinin g compliance. These efforts are aligned with the 
Facility’s support of space cooling and  energy efficiency measures in buildings.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                    Scale: High


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 118 
 
 
45. The project has a co-financing ratio of 1:4.6. The cost of mitigation is USD 54.2/tCO 2eq 
for the total project cost and USD 9.7/tCO 2eq in terms of GCF funding.  
46. The financial structure of the Facility balances the need to support low -carbon cooling 
investments, leverage add itional resources from private and commercial investors, and enhance 
the enabling environment for cooling. The Facilit y’s approach of matching the model to the 
context of the country and sector will provide the right solution at the right place instead of a 
“one size fits all” approach  which is never the case and generally not appreciated by countries.  
47. The economic analysis show s that the facility  yields a  financial and  economic internal 
rate of return  of -0.8 and 16.3  per cent,  respectively. The  economic v alue add ed of the  Facility 
is largely due to its contribution to GHG emission reduction  potential of the f unded  activities. 
Further, the economic value is  very sensitive to the estimated cost 
of recycling  (otherwise  conducting environmental remedial action s) for appliances that have 
exceeded their useful lives ; this would need to be tackled as part of component 1 .  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
48. Programme background . The programme aims to suppo rt subprojects in the areas of 
space cooling and cool/green surfaces (including passive cooling strategies in the built 
environment, cooling equipment; building automation and controls; and solar and vegetative 
roofs and walls); and refrigeration, cold cha ins and logistics (including refrigeration, storage, 
and distribution activities, along with associated equipment and logistics). The programme 
consists of three components that focus on (1 ) supporting policy  and the regulatory and 
enabling environment to  strengthen institutional, policy and regulatory frameworks, among 
others; (2) provide financing for eligible cooling investments through financing modalities that 
will promote the adoption or sca ling-up of sustainable cooling technologies, appliances and 
business models; and (3 ) project management to support the EEs and PIEs perform their project 
management functions.  
49. Environmental and s ocial (E&S)  risk category and s afeguards instrument . The AE 
has assessed that the activities under the Cooling F acility will have potential for limited adverse 
E&S  risks and impacts which,  individually or cumulatively, are few, generally site -specific, 
largely reversible, and can be readily addressed through mitigation  measures. The supported 
activities are likely to have l ow/ moderate to s ubstantial risk as per the AE’s risk definition. The 
Secretariat confirms that the classification correspond s to the GCF’s E&S  risk classification of 
category B and that it is within t he risk accreditation of the AE. An e nvironmental and s ocial 
sustainability framework (ESSF) is prepared in accordance with the AE’s safeguards 
requirements. The programme’s environmental and social co -benefits include those relati ng to 
health s ince  the su pport for more sustainable space cooling will help lower the incidence of 
heat -related illnesses and mental stress. Improved local air quality through the 
displacement/avoidance of diesel generators b y replac ing them with  solar -powered cold chains 
is also expected. 
50. Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS ) standards . The 
following discussions describe the programmes compliance with the GCF ESS standards:  
51. ESS1: Assessment and Management of E&S Risks and Impacts . The programme has 
submitted an ESSF that provides a description of how the E&S risks and  impacts will be 
assessed, managed, and supervised at both the framework level and the operational level. The 
ESSF describes the necessary instruments and information  related to environmental and social 
impact assessment or audit and management at the programme level. The ESSF also outlines the


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 119 
 
 
impacts of the proposed programme as well as possible mitigation measures to address these 
impacts. The potential E&S risks an d impacts that will be considered in the conduct of due 
diligence for the sub -projects include those related to community health and safety; climate 
change and other transboundary or global risks and impacts; and threat s to the protection, 
conservation, ma intenance and restoration of natural habitats and biodiversity and those 
related to ecosystem services and the use of living natural resources. P otential social risks and 
impacts, include threats to human security through the escalation of personal, commun al or 
inter -state conflict, crime or violence; risks that impacts will fall disproportionately on 
disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups; prejudice or discrimination toward s 
individuals or groups in providing access to development resources and benefits; negative 
economic and social impacts relating to the involuntary land acquisition or restrictions on land 
use or  regarding land and natural resources; impacts in relation to occupational health and 
safety of workers; and risks to cultural herita ge. The programme is expected to channel 
financing through financial intermediaries, which  will be required to establish and maintain an 
environment and s ocial management system to identify, assess, manage, and monitor the E&S  
risks and impacts of the subp rojects.  
52. ESS2: Labour and working conditions . Construction and implementation of the 
subprojects will involve hiring workers which will include either direct -hired or 
contracted/sub -contracted workers. Occupational health and safety plans will be prepared  as 
per the World Bank Group environment, health and safety guidelines and implement ers will 
have to comply with these  requirements including the preparation of a l abor management 
procedure. Since an influx of migrant labour  will also have potential impacts in relation to 
worker conditions, occupational health and safety, gender -based violence and potential conflict 
among the subproject workers as well as with the host local communities, these risks/impacts will be evaluated as part of the E&S risk assessments and will be managed in accordance with 
the labour management procedure  and other appropriate plans and procedures. These 
measures will likewise be included in the bidding and legal documents with contractors/sub -
contract ors. A dedicated grievance redress mechanism for subproject workers will also be 
established for each subproject.   
53. ESS3: Resource e fficiency and p ollution prevention.  While the interventions under 
the programme are generally expected to promote efficiency and resource conservation, 
construction of such facilities such as new buildings or retrofitting existing buildings is expected 
to generate typical construction impac ts such as dust and air pollution from excavations and 
vehicle exhaust; solid waste arising from construction and demolition including  the potential 
need to  handl e and dispos e of hazardous waste (e.g. asbestos and wastes from 
dismantling/disposal of old co oling equipment and refrigerant gases). These risks/impacts will 
be assessed in detail for each of the subproject s. However, given that these potential impacts are 
expected to be low to moderate and are reversible and localized in nature, appropriate 
mitig ation measures can be readily implemented in accordance with good international 
industry practice.  
54. ESS4: Community h ealth, safety and s ecurity . Constructing  facilities and 
implementing programme  activities will have potential to adversely affect the health , safety and 
security of the host communities. I mpacts may arise from noise and vibration;  dust emission ; 
and disposal of old parts and equipment which may contain  hazardous  waste. Traffic -related 
incidents as a result of vehicle transport in and out of co nstruction areas may also affect the 
nearby communities. Nevertheless, these risks and impacts which will be mainly on the communities’ safety , can be managed through proper implementation of adequate and 
appropriate mitigation measures as provided in the AE’s standards.  
55. ESS5: Land a cquisition and i nvoluntary resettlement . The programme may result to 
land acquisition for construction of new buildings or cold storage facilities and may have 
potential adverse environmental and social impacts associated with land acquisition or land


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 120 
 
 
conversion which will be managed consistent  with ESS5 requirements : that is,  avoid, minimize, 
reduce/mitigate and compensate at replacement cost lands that will be acquired based on due 
diligence and plans prepared in accordance with ESS5. An indicative resettlement policy 
framework and an outline of a resettlement action plan is provided in the ESSF to guide EEs in 
preparing specific resettlement action plan s (if required) in line with safeguard requirements.  
56. ESS6: Biodiversity c onservation and s ustainable management of l iving natural 
resources . Depending on the scale and location of the facilities that will be financed under the 
programme, there may be  potential loss of habitats and other adverse impacts to flora and 
fauna. Nevertheless, siting and careful selection of the area where these faciliti es will be 
constructed will dictate the extent of its impacts. To mitigate the impacts, care would be taken 
by the developers to ensure that the impacts on natural habitats, terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems and on sensitive species are well assessed and managed  through preparation of 
appropriate plans, as needed .  
57. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples . The AE stipulates 
that the presence of indigenous people in the areas identified for the projects will be screened and confirmed by t he AE in consultation with the national authorities.  The AE outlines that , 
once a project is  confirmed, consistency with ESS7 objectives and requirements will be 
integrated into the design of the project and E&S  risk documents, including the development o f 
an indigenous peoples’ plan or other types of plans depending on the country and project 
context, and f ree, prior and i nformed consent in the circumstances specified in ESS7. For 
consistency with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the sub -project screeni ng will need to be 
inclusive for groups such as “Afro -descendent communities of South America and the 
Caribbean”, “local communities”, “scheduled tribes”, “hill tribes” and “tribal groups ”. 
58. ESS8: Cultural h eritage. The ES SF indicates that subprojects will be screened and 
assessed regarding  potential impacts on tangible and intangible cultural heritage. Site selection 
for each subproject will consider the application of ESS8 and will be further assessed under each subproject . Should there be possibility for presence and/or discovery of items of 
archaeological, paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic and religious value in the civil works 
sites during construction, a “ chance find procedure ” will be a part of the E&S ri sk instrument.  
59. Implementation arrangements . In accordance with the ESSF, the AE will manage the 
overall environmental and social performance of the Cooling F acility and that of the sub -
projects as well as monitor their performance in accordance with the re quirements of the legal 
agreements, including those in the e nvironmental and s ocial commitment plan that will be 
agreed between the AE and the borrowers. The AE will likewise provide implementation support regarding the environmental and social performance of the subprojects, which will 
include reviewing the borrower’s monitoring reports regarding their compliance , and will share  
such information  with the GCF through the a nnual performance reports. For each sub -project, a 
project management unit will be est ablished by the relevant EE which will be expected to 
include a team of experts including environmental specialist and social/gender specialist that 
will be tasked with ensuring adequate implementation of the management measures as well as 
the monitoring, evaluation and reporting during implementation.  
60. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure . The programme has 
conducted preliminary stakeholder engagements in the targeted countries. These engagements 
included meetings and consultation workshops wit h representatives from implementing 
agencies at the national level  and regional level, local authorities of participating provinces, 
private investors, farmer representatives, and concerned communities. In addition, other 
interested parties include the med ia, local/international non- governmental organizations and 
development partners working in the same region. A detailed stakeholder engagement plan 
(SEP) will be developed for each of the subprojects to ensure transparency and meaningful 
consultation with t he affected peoples and interested parties. The SEP will include stakeholder 
identification, analysis, information dissemination, consultation and engagement thatwill be


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 121 
 
 
carried out during subproject design and implementation. The stakeholder identificatio n, 
analysis and engagement will be informed by the degree of potential risks and impacts of the 
subprojects and how these will affect the stakeholders.  
61. Grievance redress mechanism . The SEP for each of the proposed subproject under the 
facility  will include a g rievance redress mechanism that will be prepared and implemented by 
each implementing agency to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances from affected communities as well as broader stakeholders who may be affected or h ave interest in 
the subproject’s activities. The mechanism will be established to receive and record complaints 
as well as provide resolution and feedback on the status of the grievances to the complainants 
to ensure transparency and accountability. Communities and individuals may likewise submit 
complaints to the AE’s Grievance Redress Service that allows submission of grievances from 
affected communities and individuals. In addition, the GCF Indigenous Peoples P olicy states that 
the GCF indigenous peoples  focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including 
before a claim has been made.  
4.2 The revised SEAH Policy  
62. The Revised Policy on the Prevention and Protection from Sexual Exploitation, Sexual 
Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (Revised SEAH Poli cy) includes a guiding principle related to 
Fund -related activities. It states that the “ GCF and its Covered Individuals shall not enter into 
future engagements with those who condone, encourage, participate in, or engage in SEAH in Fund -related activities ”.  As a result, the AE was requested to include the relevant covenant in 
the Term Sheet. As a form of this provision could not be agreed  in the Term Sheet, a secretariat 
condition has been added on this matter.  
4.3 Gender policy  
63. The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal and 
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
64. The gender assessment presents the enabling environment in terms of applicable laws 
for non -discrimination and protection of women. Some  of the countries promote increased 
engagement of women in labour markets, including in the electricity, gas, steam and air 
conditioning supply sectors. Gender equality in terms of access to income, financial inclusion, 
access to health and education, repr esentation in political bodies is promoted in the countries. 
Although there are a number of laws enacted in all the countries to promote gender equality 
and prevent discrimination, women do not always have the same rights as men under some 
laws and they have lower access to resources compared with men. The assessment has fallen 
short of providing information on the existing national institutional frameworks that could support and ensure gender equality matters are integrated well in the programme’s benefici ary 
countries. The AE has not provided an in -depth analysis of the root causes for the inequalities 
and gender -based challenges faced by women, in particular from cultural, traditional and 
societal perspectives.  
65. The gender assessment is limited in that it  was compiled on the basis of  a review of 
literature available to the AE. The assessment does not include inputs from relevant 
stakeholders or has not benefited from a stakeholder engagement exercise that should have 
been undertaken during the preparation of the programme. The stakeholder engagement 
exercise to ensure relevance and effectiveness of the programme and project impacts on gender 
issues will be undertaken during the programme’s implementation.  
66. Information on gender -related issues on cooling is limited and descriptions of the 
preliminary identification of gender gaps do not articulate in detail the challenges faced by


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 122 
 
 
women and men in different countries or in the sectors that are likely to be supported by the 
Facility. With the limited information provided, understanding the probable impact on women’s 
participation and access to benefits of the programme as well as drivers of change is difficult. 
Despite that, some gender issues have been identified which may indicate impact, the level of 
engagem ent and benefit s to women , such as lack of access to jobs and skills development, access 
to finance and entrepreneurship. In addition, a list of possible interventions for women’s 
economic empowerment, such as access to services and leadership and decision -making , which 
may be implemented to address gender gaps. These actions could potentially be included in 
individual project -level gender action plans. The funding proposal further indicates that the 
programme will aim to enhance the knowledge base of gender issues associated with access to 
cooling and reduce gender gaps in cooling -related sectors . 
67. The assessment indicates that additional gender analyses will be undertaken at the 
project level, which will involve relevant stakeholders and which would have to address and 
include the many actions identified through the current gender assessment, address gaps and provide insight into the likely differentiated cooling needs and priorities based on defined 
responsibilities. Additionally, further work will need to be undertaken to ensure that various 
components of the programme mainstream gender and take gender issues as an important 
eligibility criterion in financing of projects.  
68. The programme will establish a grievance redress mechanism for each project , which 
will be made available for reporting and addressing grievances associated with sexual 
exploitation, abuse and harassment.  
69. The AE has provided a programme -level gender action plan that includes activities, 
indicators, some targets, responsibilities a nd timelines. As part of the budget for c omponent 1, 
financial resources have been set aside for undertaking further gender assessments al though 
there are no budget allocations for the implementation of the other activities in the action plan. 
Several targ ets have not been set and the setting of targets has been outlined as country 
dependent. The AE has proposed to collect baseline data during implementation which should be used to rationali ze and establish targets across all activities.  
70. Activities listed in the gender action plan are too general and set at a high level and fail 
to link and reflect the nature of the projects that have been identified and presented in a 
separate annex with the funding proposal, such as space cooling, cool surfaces, refrigeration, and cold chains in sectors such as health and agriculture. A few important gender co -benefits 
are outlined in the gender assessment and are reflected in the gender action plan , such as 
employment opportunities for women and access for women -owned bus inesses to cooling 
services, in an effort to ensure that direct benefits of the programme are reali zed by women. 
The activity on improving access for men and women to new cooling, refrigeration, cold chains, 
logistics and green solutions has not articulate d how this will be achieved and a corresponding 
indicator will track the number of both male and female beneficiaries, although no targets have 
been set. Activities also included in the programme -level gender action plan are related to 
participation in sta keholder engagement, capacity -building and awareness -raising events. Other 
activities in the gender action plan are actions that contribute to the development of further 
gender analyses and action plans at the project level,  which will be done by the AE th rough its 
EEs and do not warrant inclusion in the action plan as standalone activities (e.g.  identifying 
barriers that need to be addressed to promote the participation of women and prioriti ze actions 
that contribute to clos ing gender gaps ). The AE has  failed to include activities such as skills 
development in the cooling sector, entrepreneurship and access to finance/addressing 
affordability constraints, consumer engagement, addressing different needs of women and men 
for cooling technology products and se rvices in various sectors such as fisheries and agriculture, 
under component 2.


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 123 
 
 
71. Gender specialists are included in the project management unit for each project. Each 
specialist will be responsible for overseeing the implementation and reporting on activit ies in 
each respective action plan.  
72. The AE is advised to improve its gender mainstreaming approach to ensure that all 
components of the programme address the needs of women and men equitably. The AE is 
recommended to ensure that additional gender analyses at the project level for each of the nine 
countries integrate the needs and priorities of women and men, particularly closing the gender gaps in interventions that are dedicated to cooling. This should include opportunities to address 
them, in the priority  areas of intervention of the programme as would also be identified through 
stakeholder engagement. Stakeholder engagement should provide space for all relevant 
stakeholders and at all levels , including communities,  to engage and influence the design of th e 
gender action plans. Additionally, the AE is required to ensure that an action plan is prepared for each country not for just six when there are nine participating countries. The programme-
level gender action plan will need to be updated based on the fin dings of the aggregate, country 
and sector -based gender assessments and will need to reflect expected benefits and impacts. 
The updated programme -level gender action plan should include indicators, targets with 
baseline, timelines, responsibilities and all ocated budget s for their implementation. The GCF 
expects to monitor progress based on the updated programme -level gender action plan. The 
criteria for the selection of women -owned business es will need to be defined and activities to 
support women -owned bus inesses should be included in a revised gender action plan for the 
programme.  
4.4 Risks  
4.4.1.  Overall programme assessment : medium risk  
73. The funding proposal requests USD 125 million in sovereign loans and USD 32 million in 
grants. The programme targets support to the participating host countries to mainstream and 
bring to scale sustainable cooling solutions across key sectors. The host cou ntries of the 
programme are Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, Panama, Sao Tome 
and Principe, Somalia and Sri Lanka. The programme consists of three components: (1) policy, 
regulatory and enabling environment support (USD15.7 million of GCF grant); (2) financing for 
cooling investments (USD141.3 million of GCF funds, of which  USD125 million in loan and USD 
16.3 million in grant); and (3) project management (no GCF funds requested). The AE envisions 
co-financing of USD 722.84 million o f which USD 50 million in guarantees, USD 109 million in 
grants and USD 563 million in loans. All co- financing amounts are indicative and co -financing 
tenor does not match GCF tenor. If the programme raises a lower amount of co -financing, the 
programme’s c limate impact may also get reduced while maintaining the same level of financing 
from GCF.  
4.4.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme : 
medium risk 
74. The World Bank is the AE for the proposed programme. Given the structure of the 
programme, the broad eligibility criteria, and limited visibility at this stage regarding the end 
projects, the success of the programme depends to a great extent on the capabi lity of the AE. 
The AE has a strong institutional capacity and experience in executing similar programmes.  
75. For the purposes of the loans and grants, the respective host countries will be the EEs. 
They will either act through the relevant ministries or des ignate a PIE. The AE has at this stage 
not assessed the capacity of all EEs involved. It is advised that the AE shall complete such 
assessment before disbursement of the funds to such an entity.


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 124 
 
 
4.4.3.   Programme -specific execution risks : medium risk  
76. Demand risk : The impact achieved by the project will depend on the financing 
opportunities and early -stage projects maturing. Also, impact depends on continued utilization 
of GCF funds in such opportunities. Demand risk is partially mitigated by technical assistance 
under to programme to help beneficiaries and World Bank operational teams in the design of 
cooling informed projects including activities such as cooling market studies, sector gap analysis and strategies, knowledge sharing, stakeholder consultations, busin ess models identification. It 
is advised that the terms and conditions of the project require that GCF low concessional loans 
shall be invested in sub- projects for the duration of the programme.  
77. Sovereign credit risk : GCF will provide up to USD 125 millio n in sovereign loans under 
the programme. GCF will not benefit from the preferred credit status of the AE. The credit risk of 
the countries under the programme varies from lower medium grade (BBB by S&P, Panama) to 
substantial risks (CCC+ by S&P, Sri Lanka ). Several countries in the programme do not have a 
rating by a major rating agency (e.g. Somalia and Sao Tome and Principe). The AE has included in the term sheet that GCF loans will not enjoy the AEs preferred creditor status.   
78. Co-financing risk : Lower than indicative funding amounts provide by the AE and 
related entities could affect the impact of the programme. Co -financing presented in the funding 
proposal is indicative. The terms sheet contains no requirements on commitment of co -
financing before funded activity agreement (FAA) execution. A minimum co -financing ratio of 
1:2 is included in the term sheet on a per project basis, but this is below the co -financing ratio of 
1: 4.6 in section E.2 of the funding proposal. However, the AE notes that 54 per c ent of the co -
financing has already materialized. The World Bank and World Bank -managed trust funds have 
approved and signed the corresponding legal agreements with the recipient countries for six of the nine projects envisaged.  Achieving a lower amount of co-financing may result in reducing 
the climate impact of the project. It is recommended that a minimum co -financing ratio of 1:4 on 
a programme basis is included so that the efficiency of GCF funding remains as envisaged.  
79. Operational environment : Execut ion of the project will depend on the  technical 
capacity on the ground as well as political factors relating to affordability. The AE will develop a 
monitoring and evaluation framework  during the preparation phase to address technical 
capability risk and w ill take into account impacts on affordability of the interventions.  
80. Carbon credits : The termsheet includes no limitation on the sale of carbon credits. Sale 
of carbon credits could reduce the impact attributable to GCF. It is advised that limitations on 
the sale of carbon credits are included in the terms and conditions of the programme  
4.4.4.  Compliance risk : medium  risk  
81. Of the countries involved in this proposal, it is confirmed that Somalia is subject to 
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 751 (1992) . However, the World Bank, as 
the AE, has  advised that it is not aware of any UNSC resolutions affecting Somalia that would 
impact on the proposed project being considered under the Cooling Facility. The World Bank 
acknowledges Resolution 751 (para. 14) insofar as it urges the international commu nity to 
facilitate humanitarian assistance to the Somali population, and it does not list/exclude any 
particular territory.  
82. In confirming that no individual or entity that is listed on any UNSC Sanctions list will be 
involved in any manner with the projec t or its activities, the World Bank referred to its 
obligations in this regard as stated in paragraph 4.05(a)(ii) the accreditation master agreement (AMA): 
(a) In preparing each Funding Proposal, the Accredited Entity shall:


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 125 
 
 
(i) contractually require the Executin g Entity in accordance with the Accredited 
Entity’s policies and procedures in the Subsidiary Agreement  
(1) to comply and to oblige compliance by all other persons and entities 
involved in the use of GCF Proceeds with the Accredited Entity’s 
standards relatin g to fraud, corruption and other sanctionable practices 
(as defined in the Accredited Entity’s policies and procedures regarding 
sanctions), and  
(2) to ensure that the GCF Proceeds are not being used for any payments 
prohibited by a decision of the United Nat ions Security Council taken 
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, if and when the 
Subsidiary Agreement is entered into with the Executing Entity.  
83. The requirements for assessing capacities of counterparties are as summarized in the 
World B ank’s Policy, Directive and Procedure on Investment Project Financing, to ensure that 
counterparties have the technical, financial management, procurement and environmental and social capacity to implement the project in accordance with the requirements of  the policies. 
The assessment for a particular project will be documented in a project appraisal document, including capacity -building measures/action plans based on the assessment.  
84. The World Bank confirmed that, as a multi -country programme covering sever al 
projects, project appraisal documents will be prepared at the project level rather than the 
Facility level. Such documents will be drafted during the project preparation phase, finalized 
during negotiations with host countries and publicly disclosed once the project is approved by 
the World Bank.  
85. The World Bank confirmed that anti -money laundering and combatting the financing of 
terrorism (AML/CFT) are very important and are comprehensively covered in the AMA and FAA 
template, which stipulate that the Wo rld Bank will apply its own policies and procedures on 
these matters. These policies and procedures require the World Bank to assess all the fiduciary 
risks and develop mitigation measures, which is undertaken during project preparation.  
86. The World Bank ha s confirmed that controls mechanisms to ensure materials or 
technology are not diverted or misused for prohibited practices are covered in the AMA and 
FAA templates, and that the World Bank will apply those standard covenants to the projects 
through the FA A. For example, clause 11.01 of the FAA template provides, as follows : 
(a) The Accredited Entity’s AML/CFT procedures share the objective of the Fund’s AML/CFT Policy to ensure that the proceeds of any financing are used only for the purposes for which 
the fin ancing was granted, it being understood that the Accredited Entity shall be solely 
bound to apply its own AML/CFT procedures in accordance with the AMA and this 
Agreement.  
87. The World Bank has confirmed that the GCF funds will not support the distribution of  
cash, vouchers, commodities, or items of value to end user beneficiaries, whether directly or 
indirectly.  
88. The World Bank has advised that communities and individuals who believe that they are 
adversely affected by the project may submit complaints to existing project -level grievance 
redress mechanisms or the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service.  
89. The Grievance Redress Service ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed 
in order to address project -related concerns. Project -affected communities and individuals may 
submit their complaint to the World Bank’s Independent Inspection Panel, which determines 
whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of non -compliance with World Bank policies 
and procedures.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 126 
 
 
90. The World Bank has confirmed that,  for each of the proposed projects under the Cooling 
Facility, a grievance redress mechanism is to be prepared and implemented by each EE to 
receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances of project -affected communities as 
well as broader sta keholders who may be affected or have interest in the project or its activities.  
91. Recommended risk rating : The Office of Risk Management and Compliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance Team has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board approv ed policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘medium’ and has no objection to this 
reque st proceeding to the next steps.  
92. The ORMC/Compliance Team would like to remind the World Bank, as the AE, of its 
continuing obligations and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks 
for money laundering, terrorist financing, or prohibited practices among the intended 
counterparties, EEs, beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities.  
4.4.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk : low risk  
93. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains within 
the risk appetite.  
94. Project viability and concessionality: The AE will differentiate the level of 
concessionality between the reimbursable instrument in each project by applying either low or 
high concessional loans. If the host country is in external debt distress,  it will receive GCF non -
reimbursable funds and will only receive co -financing exclusively on grant terms. A combination 
of high concessional loans and grants will be offered if (1) the host country is in high risk of debt distress; (2) the project does not generate any revenue or the reflows from the ultimate 
beneficiaries are not cost - reflective; and/or (3) the project targets vulnerable communities or 
groups that are more vulnerable than the overall population.  Any other projects will receive 
low conces sional loans.  
95. Within the above parameters, GCF shall rely on the AE to appropriately deploy the 
concessionality. It is advised that the terms and conditions include a covenant that require the 
AE to apply the minimum concessionality principle and to contr actually require of the AE that a 
substantial part of the concessionality is passed on to the end beneficiaries.  
4.4.6.  Recommendation  
96. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall program me Medium  • The AE has a strong institutional 
capacity and experience in executing 
similar programmes.  
• GCF is exposed to sovereign risk.  
• Co-financing information in the funding 
proposal is indicative. It is 
recommended that clauses are included 
to ensure co -financing materializes.  
• GCF shall rely on the AE , within the  
stated parameters to appropriately 
deploy the concessionality. It is advised Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 127 
 
 
that the terms and conditions include a 
covenant that requires the AE to apply 
the minimum concessionality principle and to contractually require of the AE 
that a substantial part of the 
concessionality is passed on to the end beneficiaries  
4.5 Fiduciary  
97. The World Bank will be the Accredited Entity for this programme. The AE will be 
responsible for ensuring that the Projects are developed and implemented by the relevant 
Executing Entities (EEs) and Project Implementing Entities ( PIEs) and approved by the A E in 
accordance with its policies and procedures and the relevant provision of the AMA and FAA, and 
selected in accordance with the Eligibility Criteria.  The AE will provide implementation support 
to the Projects including necessary monitoring, supervisio n, and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies and procedures and the relevant provisions of the AMA and FAA . 
98. Each Project will be carried out through different Executing Entities (EEs) and PIEs as 
further described below .  EEs are as listed on FP.  For indicative purposes, Table 1 on the TS, 
sets out certain Executing Entities and PIEs that are anticipated to carry out part or all of Projects in specific Host Countries. For the avoidance of doubt, the AE will not act as an  EE for 
the Projects and the PIEs will not be included within the definition of EEs for this Programme. 
Although the PIEs are not included within the definition of EEs for this Programme, as they will 
carry out part or all of Projects in specific Host Coun tries, the AE will undertake due diligence on 
them in accordance with clause 10.02(a)(i) of the AMA as if they were included within the 
definition of EEs for this Programme and the outcome of such due diligence will be included in 
the respective Project ap praisal document.  
99. In respect of each Project for which a disbursement is requested, AE will deliver to the 
Fund a copy of the Accredited Entity’s Project appraisal document (PAD), containing 
information about the relevant Project. PAD will include the capacity assessment of the EEs . 
100. Each project financed through the Cooling Facility will be required to conduct financial 
management and procurement according to the World Bank policies and procedures. Each 
project supported by the Cooling Facility will follow the AE’s Procurement Framework and 
Regulations.  
101. Each project supported by the Facility is required to maintain financial management 
arrangements (including planning and budgeting, accounting, internal control, funds flow, 
financial reporting, and auditing arrangements of the borrower and entities responsible for 
project implementation) acceptable to the AE.  A financial management specialist is expected to 
be part of the team forming the PMU established by each relevant Executing Entity (or PIE as 
applicabl e) for its respective project.   
102. Moreover, for each project, the AE task team includes an accredited Financial 
Management (FM) specialist who provides support during the entire project cycle (preparation, 
supervision and implementation) in accordance with the AE’s operational policies and 
procedures (to work with partner countries to design financial management and disbursement 
arrangements and to supervise and support the performance of World Bank -finance 
operations). The team’s FM specialist closely monit ors the performance of the EE’s (or PIE as 
applicable) FM arrangements and their continued capacity to provide reasonable assurance that 
loan proceeds are being used for the purposes intended.


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 128 
 
 
103. Financial reporting is also required for each project which is specified in each project’s 
Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL). Unless otherwise agreed by the World 
Bank, the Executing Entity must submit annual audited project financial statements six months 
after the close of the financial year and u naudited interim financial (IFR) reports periodically. 
Audits are carried out by auditors with independence and capacity acceptable to the World Bank, under terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank . 
4.6 Results monitoring and reporting  
104. As a cross- cuttin g initiative, the programme aims at generating both mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall GHG emission reductions of 16,240,201 tCO
2eq over a lifetime period of 27 years, as per the metrics 
of the GCF core indicator for mitigation based on GHG accounting methodology detailed under 
annexes 23 and 24 of the funding proposal.  
105. Regarding adaptation, the programme expects to benefit 4.22 million direct and 16.85 
million indirect beneficiarie s in the four countries at high risk of extreme heat hazard 
(Bangladesh, Malawi, El Salvador and Somalia)  through the implementation of space cooling, 
refrigeration and cold chain projects. The AE provided a robust methodology and rationale for 
defining b oth direct and indirect beneficiaries in annex 24 of the funding proposal.  
106. The theory of change adequately explains how change is understood to come about in 
the targeted countries. The goal statement is properly articulated, and the stated programme 
resul ts and outcomes are defined in a manner that is clearly supportive of meeting the ultimate 
project goal.  
107. The logical framework has been designed with relevant details, including the inclusion 
of solid means of verification and reporting on the appropriate core indicators for both 
mitigation and adaptation, as well as on the respective impact, outcome and programme -level 
indicators for the targeted results areas as per the GCF performance management framework and results measurement frameworks. At the design  stage the AE has not been able to provide 
credible baselines and targets for the three programme- level indicators for adaptation in 
section E.5, so the Secretariat has requested through a dedicate term sheet covenant, that those 
are updated every year in each annual performance report and finalized prior to the interim 
independent evaluation.  
108. The implementation timetable in Annex 5 of the Funding Proposal should be updated 
during the FAA negotiation when the exact timeline for submission of the initial APR  will be 
negotiated and agreed.    
109. The monitoring and evaluation plan (annex 11 of the funding proposal) has been found 
to follow the appropriate requirements because it includes the entire list of the programme logical framework indicators while ensuring alignment of the data/sources with established 
means of verification.  
110. The Secretariat considers, however, that the programme does not provide sufficient 
safeguards for the GCF mitigation impact and, therefore, has agreed to discuss further with the 
AE duri ng FAA negotiations the conditions on the potential issuance of carbon credits by the 
programme, while maintaining the integrity of the lifetime mitigation impact.  
4.7 Legal assessment  
111. The AMA was signed with the AE on 13 November 2017, and it became effective on 21 
February 2019.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 129 
 
 
112. The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme. It is 
recommended that, prior to submission of the fundi ng proposal to the Board (a) the AE has 
obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the GCF has received a certificate or legal opinion 
from the AE in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF confirming that all final internal 
approvals by the AE have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to implement 
the programme.  
113. The proposed programme will be implemented in nine countries in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities: Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Mace donia, Panama, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia and Sri Lanka. This means that, among 
other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this/these country(ies), 
which risks need to be further assessed.  
(a) Bangladesh : A draft agreement on  privileges and immunities is under negotiation. The 
Secretariat has liaised with the Ministry of Finance (Economic Relations Division) on the 
review of the draft agreement by the relevant involved ministries and agencies, as well 
as with the national desi gnated authority (NDA). In February 2020, the Secretariat 
resent the draft agreement, together with a background note on privileges and 
immunities, to the NDA; however, no formal response has been received thus far;  
(b) El Salvador : The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with background notes on 
privileges and immunities to the NDA in September 2015. The Secretariat met with the 
El Salvador delegation during COP  21 in December 2015, after which the draft 
agreement with backgr ound note was resent to the NDA. In October 2018, the 
Secretariat met with NDA to provide information about the draft agreement and the 
rationale for privileges and immunities, and clarified queries regarding the importance 
for the GCF of signing such agre ements. However, no formal response has been received 
so far;  
(c) Kenya : The Secretariat sent a draft agreement on privileges and immunities, together 
with a background note, to the Treasury Department of Kenya on March 2016, and 
several exchanges have taken p lace to respond to comments received from the Attorney 
General’s Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kenya. However, no formal response or written comments on the draft agreement have been received thus far;  
(d) Malawi : The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with background notes on 
privileges and immunities to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in September 2015 and met 
with the delegation of Malawi at COP  22 in December 2016 to provide information about 
the draft agreement and GCF status. However, no formal response has been received 
thus far;  
(e) North Macedonia : the Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with background 
notes on privileges and immunities to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Environment and Physical Planning in Apri l 2017, and met with the Macedonian 
delegation at the GCF structured dialogue held in Tajikistan on September 2018. 
However, no formal response on the draft agreement has been received thus far;  
(f) Panama: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with background notes on 
privileges and immunities to the Minister of Presidency in September 2017. In October 
2018, the Secretariat met with the NDA and provided information about the draft 
agreement and its rationale. The Secretariat has sent a follow -up emai l in November 
2020; however, no formal response has been received so far ; 
(g) Sao Tome and Principe : The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with 
background on privileges and immunities to the NDA in February 2017 and met with the 
Sao Tome and Principe ’s delegation at the Global Programming Conference in August


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 130 
 
 
2019. The Secretariat resent a draft agreement and background notes, both in English 
and French, to the Government in August 2019; however, no formal response has been 
received thus far;  
(h) Somalia : The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with background notes on 
privileges and immunities to the NDA and a meeting was held with an NDA’s 
representative during the Global NDA Conference held in October 2018. However, no 
formal response has been r eceived thus far; and  
(i) Sri Lanka : A draft privileges and immunities agreement is under negotiation with Sri 
Lanka and there have been multiple exchanges on the text of the agreement. In June 
2020, the Secretariat replied to inquiries from the Ministry of Finance in relation to the 
intent of entering into a host country agreement and the list of countries that have 
granted privileges and immunities to the GCF. Since then, the Secretariat has followed 
up with the Ministry of Development and Envir onment on the finalization of the text; 
however, no response has been received thus far.  
114. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress acti vities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection ag ainst litigation and 
expropriation in the country(ies), or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
115. The definition of the term “Executing Entities” in the AMA includes entities that channel 
GCF proceeds and/or carry out project impleme ntation. Under the proposed programme, for 
each project the AE will enter into a subsidiary agreement with the relevant host country that 
will carry out project implementation and/or channel the GCF proceeds to a “project 
implementing entity” that will imp lement all or part of the project . Therefore, as per the terms 
of the AMA, each of the host countries and the project implementing entities should be considered as Executing Entities for the purposes of complying with the obligations to be 
imposed on Execu ting Entities under the AMA and the FAA. During the course of negotiations on 
the proposed programme it has become clear that the AE will not accept the project implementing entities to be considered as Executing Entities and, therefore, they will not sign  a 
subsidiary agreement with each of them. However, i n terms of contractual arrangements, the AE 
has agreed that it will enter into a subsidiary agreement (as per the terms of the AMA) with 
each host country , and that it will also enter into a direct “proj ect agreement” with each project 
implementing entity  that will set out the relevant obligations of an Executing Entity set out in 
the AMA and the FAA.   
4.8 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
116. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any app roval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, 
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed programme;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.30 /02/Add. 09 
Page 131 
 
 
(c) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat .


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 132 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP177 
Proposal name:  Cooling Facility  
Accredited entity:  World Bank  
Country/(ies):  Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, 
Panama, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia,  and Sri Lanka  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Medium to low 
1. This is a large  size funding proposal submitted by the World Bank as the accredited 
entity (AE).  The programme covers nine countries from different regions: four  countries in 
Africa (Kenya, Malawi, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia);  two countries in Asia ( Bangladesh , Sri 
Lanka);  one country from Eastern Europe (North Macedonia); and two countries from Latin 
America ( El Salvador, Panama).  The funding proposal is for the establishment of  a cooling  
programme or/and facility1 with the aim of reduc ing greenhouse gas ( GHG)  emissi ons from the 
cooling sector . Energy consumption by the cooling sector is increasing as a result of  
urbanization, increas ing income of population s and increasing  demand for cooling due to global 
warming -related local processes.  This is a multi -sector and mu lti-country programm e to 
establish a financing mechanism to address the challenge s of providing access to cooling while 
minimizing negative climate impact s. 
2. The programme aims to c ontribute to shifting from less -efficient cooling systems/no 
cooling system s (the baseline situation ) to more efficient cooling systems,  through a number of 
subprojects. The f unding proposal is submitted as a cross- cutting project:  77 per cent  of GCF 
proceeds is for GHG mitigation activities in the GCF result s area “buildin gs, cities, industries and 
appliances” and the remaining 33 per cent  is for GCF adaptation activities in the result s area 
“infrastructure and built environment ”. 
3. Increas ing energy demand has various drivers and among them is  increasing cooling 
requirement s driven by urgent  adaptation needs caused by increasing trends of cooling degree 
days ( CDD ), heat waves and days with  extremely high  maximum  temperatures . Of the  nine 
countries covered by the funding proposal only four are considered eligible for adaptation 
activities due to high vulnerability: Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi  and Somalia.  
4. GCF Financial support . The total cost of funding proposal is USD 879 .8 million 
including USD 157 million GCF contribution, which is 17.8  per cent  of total cost. Twenty per cent  
(USD 32 million)  of the total GCF contribution is grant  for technical assistance , credit lines and 
concessional loans.  The rest , 80 per cent  (USD 125 million) , is for a senor concessional loan . This 
loan has two different conditions:  USD 29 million (23 per cent ) has high concession ( 40 years  
tenor with  10 years of grace period  and no interest rate ) and the rest USD 96 million ( 77 per 
cent ) will be issue d for 20 years  with  5 years ’ grace perio d and  an interest rate of 0.75 per cent . 
 
1 According to the definition in the funding proposal, “The Cooling Facility is essentially designed as an umbrella 
facility (a Program) that enables aggregating, through a programmatic approach, different types and sizes of 
sustainable cooling interventions”.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 133 
 
 
The total contribution from the AE is USD 722.84 million of which 15 per cent  is grant  
comprising contributions from the International Development Agency ( IDA), the Global 
Financing Facility , the Health Emergency Preparedness and R esponse Trust Fund  (HEPRTF)  and 
the Pandemic Emergency Fund,  and 7  per cent  is guarantee from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development  (IBRD ) which is not still decided at the stage of submission  
and review .2 The remaining 78 per cent  is sen ior loans from IBRD and IDA with different 
pricing, grace periods and tenors  (for details see section C.1 of the funding proposal ). 
1.1.1.  Implementation arrangements  
5. The funding proposal states that , for the purposes of  the loans and grants  execution, 
executing entities (EE) will be selected in  the host countries , acting through the relevant 
ministry(ies) , or the host country may designate a  project implementing entity (PIE) to 
implement components 1  and 2, as identified and confirmed during p roject preparation. 
Accordingly , the funding proposal provides the list of EEs:  Bangladesh (Ministry of Finance, 
acting through the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources), El Salvado r (Ministry of 
Finance, acting through the Ministry of Health), Kenya (National Treasury of the Republic of 
Kenya, acting through the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum), Malawi (Ministry of Finance, 
Economic Planning and Development, acting through the Mini stry of Industry, Trade and 
Tourism), North Macedonia (Ministry of Finance, acting through the Ministry of Economy), Panama (Ministry of Economy and Finance, acting through the Ministry of the Presidency) , 
Somalia (Ministry of Finance, acting through the M inistry of Health) and Sri Lanka (Ministry of 
Finance, acting through the Ministry of Power) .  
6. Three types of financial scheme  are considered for implement ing this programme : 
public procurement and contracting ; credit line ; and an energy efficiency financing facility . 
7. Public procurement and contracting : for cooling infrastructure service delivery and 
technical assistance. This mod el is relevant for components 1 and 3  of the funding proposal . 
This model will be practically implemented by th e AE and includ es contracting with providers 
of goods and service s, whereby contracts for services, works and goods could be submitted by 
an EE/PIE to the AE, which will assess them for relevancy and approve payments . Operation 
and maintenance contract s could be man aged by the EE/PIE or the EE could ensure that the 
final beneficiary ha s relevant capacity to maintain the equipment or infrastructure operation. 
GCF funding will be priced lower than and blended with W orld Bank funds, to reduce the overall 
financing cost , thereby absorbing the incremental cost of deploy ing efficient cooling solutions. 
Final beneficiaries , in this financial model, could be households, sole traders, micro, small and 
medium- sized  enterprises, or communities. Through these interventions, GCF concessional 
funds would play a catalytic role in creating a market for and increasing access to clean, efficient and sustainable cooling . 
8. Credit lines: these are considered for less mature markets . The Cooling  Facility will 
support the provision of credit lines for mitigation of the perceived high financial risk of energy -
efficient and clean cooling, which may be provided  through energy service companies (ESCOs). 
The AE will channel GCF finance along with its c o-financing to the EE ( i.e. the host country as the 
borrower/ recipient), through a subsidiary agreement. The EE would extend the credit line to 
one or more partner financial institutions (PFIs), which would typically be banks or micro -
lending institutions,  for on -lending to eligible sub -borrowers  such as  micro, small and medium -
sized enterprises (for example, industry and other private sector entities).  In doing so, the PFIs 
will select and approve sub -loan applications based on the agreed investment criteria . 
Subsidiary agreements would require the EE to ensure that the PFIs comply with the sublending 
and other terms, and that they monitor the performance of the PFIs.   
 
2 Together IDA and IBRD form the World Bank. IDA focuses on the world’s poorest countries, while IBRD assists 
middle -income and credit -worthy poorer countries.


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 134 
 
 
9. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) notes  that the implementa tion 
efficiency of this model depends significantly on the capacity of PFIs to manage climate change 
products  locally . The AE has  not yet conducted baseline studie s for each participant country , 
including the assessment of PFI market capacity, so the indep endent TAP  considers that this 
model has high risk. Moreover, barriers to improving the efficiency of the cooling sector vary 
from countr y to country  and this has  not been  thoroughly  assessed and presented in the funding 
proposal. The independent TAP  notes that an u nderstanding of the country -specific barriers to 
energy efficiency  products should be the basis for develop ing the standard investment criteria 
for lending. The i nformation provided in the funding proposal is general and does  not enable the 
independent TAP  to assess whether this model of credit line will be successful , because of the 
lack of well -developed investment criteria for country -specific cooling product s. Capacity -
building programmes for PFIs  and standard tools for th e assessment of product eligibility for 
lending could significantly reduce the risks related to the  capacities  of PFIs . Unfortunately , the 
funding proposal is not transparent on this subject. The independent TAP  notes the following 
transparency issues :  
(a) The AE  should transparently clarif y whether or not the PFIs are only local financial 
institution s. Such a clarification would provide information to assess the potential 
capacity of the PFIs;  
(b) The funding proposal states that the PFIs are assessed by the EEs using eligibility 
criteria and eight such criteria are provided in funding proposal (p.37) using Malawi  as 
an example of how the criteria are applied . However, the independent TAP  noted that 
none of these eight criteri a assess the capacity  and/or experience of a PFI to manage 
climate change related or energy -efficien t product s; and 
(c) A second set of criteria f or energy efficiency  product investment is mentioned in the 
funding proposal but transparent details are not provi ded.   
10. Energy efficiency financing facility : Under this model, the GCF proceeds are 
channelled  through the EE (the host country as the borrower) according to the terms of the 
subsidiary agreement signed with W orld Bank. The EE either directly, or through a PIE, on -
lends the funds to sub -borrowers ( e.g. private energy service companies, municipalities and 
small and medium -sized enterprises) to undertake eligible cooling investments. The PIE would 
extend subloans, partial guarantees or grants, as applicable, to sub -borrowers (e.g. energy 
service companies or cooling -as-a-service companies).  
11. The energy e fficiency financing facility  could have two implementation modalities:  
(a) Public super ESCO model : In this model , the h ost country designates a public energy 
service company (the public super ESCO) as the PIE. Th is super ESCO would typically be 
a public entity established by the government to ( 1) support cooling and energy 
efficiency investments in the public sector (public buil dings and sustainable cooling 
projects) ; and ( 2) strengthen private sector ESCOs through demand aggregation, bulk 
procurement of equipment (therefore reducing the cost of equipment for ESCOs), 
standardization of energy -saving performance contract s, monitor ing and verification  
templates and capacity -building, project development, and facilitation ; and  
(b) Energy efficiency revolving facilities : This modality combines the features of a plain  
(vanilla ) financing facility and the super ESCO model . In addition to providing financing 
to eligible sub -borrowers, the PIE would invest in energy efficiency activities using its 
own capital ( e.g. for retrofitting of existing buildings) . 
1.1.2.  Analysis of components  
12. The components described in the funding proposal  are structured to help countries 
remove the barriers to sustainable cooling by helping to address the financing barrier  and build


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 135 
 
 
an enabling environment through such activities as informing policy and regulato ry 
frameworks, reaching out to stakeholders through effective communication s, and supporting 
training and capacity -building. As such, the independent TAP  is of the opinion that this funding 
proposal is not a typical “programme” but is more of a facility, as reflected in the name of the 
proposal. As described in the funding proposal, the Cooling Facility will  consist of three main 
components , which will be calibrated according to countries’ needs and in a ccordance with the 
Facility’s criteria . Component 1 is mainly capacity -building, component 2 is the investment 
component and component 3 is the management component ( fully financed by the AE ). 
13. Component 1: Support to policy, regulatory and enabling environment . The total cost of 
this component is USD 91.6 million, of which USD 15.7 million  (17 per cent ) is GCF grant , USD 
46.1  million  (50 per cent ) is the senor loan  and USD 21.6  million (23.6 per cent ) is grant from 
the AE . The remaining USD 8.25 million ( 9.4 per cent ) will be  grant from the HEPRTF  and the 
Global Financing Facility.   
14. Activities supported under component 1 may include, for instance, ( 1) capacity -building 
of key stakeholders ( e.g. on technologies; business models; and cooling project  appraisal, 
implementation and evaluation); ( 2) technical assistance for developing plans, strategies, 
policies, regulations and standards; ( 3) designing sustainable market mechanisms and business 
models; and ( 4) communications and awareness campaigns.  
15. Com ponent 2 : Financing for cooling investments . The total cost of this component is 
USD  769.04 million , comprising  an USD 84.24 million ( 11 per cent ) grant  from GCF and the AE , 
and USD 50 million ( 6.5 per cent ) guarantee from the AE,  with USD 634.8 million ( 82.5 per cent ) 
as a sen ior loan ( 19.6 per cent  from GCF and  80.4 per cent  from the AE) . This component is the 
facility/financial scheme for financing of climate change eligible mitigation and adaptation 
projects. The deployment of these funds will  be tailored to the needs of the projects, through 
suitable financing modalities for each project’s context ; for example, credit lines to financial 
intermediaries, or loans to households, municipalities and small, medium and large enterprises, 
or subsidies. The s econd and third financial models are eligible for this component. Component 
2 will finance the projects that comply with  the following condition and project eligibility 
criteria:  
(a) Condition . The funding proposal states that the Cooling Facility will allocate a maximum 
amount equivalent to an aggregate of 30  per cent  of the total GCF proceeds to any given 
host country /project3, regardless of the financial instrument(s) deployed . The 
independent TAP  consider s that this condition could be a threat for some countries 
among these nine  wishing to participate but with  relatively  low capacities, if four or five  
leader developing countries take up over half of this  cap. The funding proposal does  not 
clarif y how this 30  per cent  maximum threshold per country was  calculated. The d raft 
term sheet demonstrates that th is criterion  balanced by the S ecretariat having 
establish ed an indicative amount for each GCF eligible country which has already 
provided a no -objection letter. Th e indicative amounts of the GCF proceeds are also 
secured by the term sheet, which establish es the cap for eligible  reallocation of 
indicative amount s (15 per cent ). According to the term sheet , a new country cannot be 
added to these nine countries  and – crucially – the eligibility criteria  (items (b) –(i) 
below)  are no longer  relevant for selection of a new country/ project (as it is defined by 
 
3 On the request  for clarification from  iTAP, the AE clarified that one country is eligible only for one project , hence, the 
Cooling Facility will support one project per country and nine projects in total. Annex 22 of the funding proposal 
provides example projects. The independent TAP  is of the opinion that the AE’s understanding of a project format 
differs from the independent TAP ’s understanding, because the provided project examples are combinations of 
different subprojects, with different baselines, different methodologies for calculating GHG reductions and different monitoring indicators. Some of  the subprojects are even independent programmes, although the common target for 
all considered subprojects is the cooling sector. In response to a request for clarification made by the independent 
TAP , the AE clarified that one country is eligible only fo r one project:.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 136 
 
 
the AE) . However, these criteria c ould be applied by the AE to replace  sub-projects 
within these nine countries ; 
(b) Cooling investments . Projects selected under the Cooling Facility will support 
investments in the following target areas: ( 1) space cooling and cool/green solutions; 
and ( 2) refrigeration, cold chain  storage  and logistics. In the case of ( 1), projects should 
demonstrate a pathway towards financially sustainable models that reduce the need for 
public resources over time and eventually leverage commercial and private sector 
funding . In the case of investing in off -grid cold storage capacity additions (under ( 2) 
refrigeration, cold storage), the EE will need to demonstrate that the main source of 
energy to power these additional cold storage facilities is renewable energy (e.g. solar);  
(c) World Bank operation linkag e. A Cooling Facility -supported project may (1 ) co-
finance a new IDA or IBRD operation; or ( 2) be additional financing to an existing IDA or 
IBRD operation. The ratio of GCF funds to IDA/IBRD funds for each supported project 
will be at least 1:1 . The indep endent TAP  noted that i t should be made very clear how 
the GCF proceeds that are spen t for cooling purposes will be monitored when proceeds 
are added to the existing funds , even if those funds are for energy efficiency . Energy 
efficiency measures for heati ng purposes not always efficient for cooling. In some cases, 
it might be vice -versa and heating energy efficiency measures facilitate the increase of 
cooling energy consumption (due to location of building in favour of heating EE or other heating EE measur es). For example, i n the case of North Macedonia , the GCF proceeds 
are planned to be  added to the existing energy efficiency  fund. The independent TAP  
notes that c ooling efficiency monitoring indicators should be transparently described  
and separated from other monitoring indicators ; 
(d) Perform ance threshold . The threshold is stated as “a t least 20  per cent  energy 
efficiency improvement and/or at least 20  per cent  avoided/reduced GHG  emissions” . 
According t o a clarification provided by the AE this 20  per cent  will be results for the 
total project. A project , according to the definition confirmed  during the review , is in 
most cases a group of different activities . The funding proposal clarifies that for each 
project an estimate of GHG reduction impact should be developed based on publicly 
available GHG methodologies and calculation tools , and consistent with guidelines 
outlined in a nnex 24  of the funding proposal . Regarding this criteri on, the independent 
TAP notes  that 20 per cent  energy savings in some low -emission countries will not have 
any tangible impact on emission reduction and therefore the word “or” in the statement 
of performance threshold is not relevant : the 20 per cent  GHG reduction should be 
obligatory and the 20 per cent  energy savings should be regarded as desirable . As 
mentioned above , the monitoring and verification  of the results of this programme will 
be complicate d. Country baseline s and national statistic s related to the cooling process 
should be developed for each participant country;  
(e) Alignment with the transition to low g lobal warming potential  (GWP ) 
refrigerants :(Note that this is not a general criterion and should be applied only  to the 
subprojects considering refrigerators in the cooling process -TAP)  Projects  supported by 
the Cooling Facility will be aligned with the goals and requirements of the Kigali 
Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, under which hydrofluorocarbon ( HFC ) 
refri gerant s are being phased down and replaced with refrigerants that do less damage 
to the climate . Investments will support  the following activities: (1) providing cooling 
services without the use of refrigerants (e. g. fans and passive cooling solutions); and/or 
(2) using refrigerants that are aligned with the Kigali A mendment and meet relevant 
safety standards, as commercially available in respective local markets ;4  
 
4 This criterion takes into account that very low GWP refrigerant alternatives may not be readily available in all local 
markets for all the applications considered in the project.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 137 
 
 
(f) Adaptation to climate change . (Note that t his criterion should be applied onl y for 
adaptation projects  -TAP.) The host country will be considered vulnerable to climate 
change  if facing extreme heat risk hazards, and  in severe need of cooling services. The 
Cooling Facility  will support projects that will bring cooling -related benefi ts associated 
with services provided by the buildings, cold chain  storage and logistic s, health facilities 
and other related cooling investments . As mentioned above , four countries (Bangladesh, 
El Salvador, Malaw i and Somalia ) are considered countries eligible for adaptation 
countries . The independent TAP  questioned the AE on the performance threshold for 
adaptation cases. The response from the AE clarified that there is no threshold  to entry  
for adaptation projects as far as f ocus of the programme is mitigation activities. The 
independent TAP  is of the opinion that if a  funding proposal claims adaptation impact as 
well , this adaptation effect should be more transparent and a threshold should be 
established  such as  the number of  direct beneficiaries that will have improved  access to 
cooling. The independent TAP  further noted that, for example,  El Salvador is not listed 
among most vulnerable countries in the latest report about high -risk countries5 and it 
should be clarified why this country considered under adaptation eligible countries.  
(g) Paradigm shift potential . Supported projects will propose activities/technolog ies/ 
applications that aim to achieve market transformation, create new markets and 
business activities at the local, national or international level, and can potentially be 
replicated in other sectors or geographic areas.  The independent TAP  is of the opinio n 
that this criteri on is formulated  appropriately , though some of the ex ample 
interventions/  measures provided in annex 22 of the funding proposal do  not have such 
potential , but among them are activities related to cold chains  storage and logistics , 
refri gerators and COVID -19 vaccination processes  which could have transformative 
effect  if successful ly implement ed;  
(h) Country ownership and alignment with country priorities . Facility -supported 
projects will be aligned with country priorities and climate change /cooling action plans 
as presented in national development plans or other policy documents . This criteri on is 
in line with GCF criteria ; however , cooling needs as such are not mentioned separately 
in countries’  strategies and action plans related to climate change or energy efficiency. 
Of the nine countries, o nly Bangladesh  and Panama  target efficient cooling measures in 
their building energy efficiency programme s; and 
(i) GCF concessionality level . The funding prop osal states that concessionality levels 
would be assessed based on the pricing of the W orld Bank co-financing, risk of external 
debt distress of the  host country as published by the I nternational Monetary Fund  under 
the joint W orld Bank-IMF debt sustainabi lity framework, and the financial analysis of 
the projects  using  the following principles:  
(i) Grant only . Countries in external debt distress and for which the W orld Bank co-
financing is exclusively grant -based, would receive 100  per cent  grant from the 
Facility;  
(ii) Combination of high concessional loans and grants . Projects would meet any of 
the following three criteria: (1) host country in high risk of debt distress; (2) 
non-revenue generating project or where the reflows from the ultimate 
beneficiaries are not cost -reflective ; and (3) projects that target vulnerable 
communities or groups that are more vulnerable than the overall population 
(e.g. refugees, people in rural ar eas with low economic income);  
(iii) Financing terms:  40-year maturity, 10 -year grace period with an all -in fee of 0.25 
per cent  (i.e. 0.00 per cent  interest rate, 0 .00 per cent  commitment fee, 0.25 per 
 
5  Sustainable Energy for All (2021)  Chilling Prospects: Tr acking Sustainable Cooling for All 2021, available at  
https://www.seforall.org/chilling -prospects -2021 .


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 138 
 
 
cent  service fee). Low concessional loan. Projects not meet ing the conditions set 
out in ( i) or ( ii) above would be eligible for low concessional loans for 
investment ; and  
(iv) Financing terms:  20-year maturity, 5 -year grace period, 0.75 per cent  interest 
rate, 0.5 per cent  service fee, 0.75 per cent  commitment fee . 
16. The independent TAP  is of the opinion that not all of these eligibility criteria are suitable 
for project/subproject selection because they are a mix of investment criteria, conditions, and 
so on . The independent TAP  considers that the se criteria should be regrouped and titled and 
revised according to the term sheet terminology.  
17. Component 3: Project management. The total cost ( 100 per cent ) of this component is 
covered by the AE and it equates to USD 19.2 million or 2 per cent  of the total project cost. Some 
39 per cent  of this cost is the W orld Bank senior loan and the remainder ( 61 per cent ) is grant 
from the AE and HEPR TF. 
18. This component will support the EEs and PIEs in the management, coordination and 
implementation of project activ ities, in compliance with their  contractual obligations with the 
AE. 
1.1.3.  Expected impact  
19. The independent TAP  notes that the project management unit, described in f igure 4 of 
the funding proposal,  is not appropriate for achiev ing the climate change related results  
anticipated . Instead , the climate change team  responsible for implement ing the subprojects 
selection criteria and design ing the monitoring process should be added to the AE’s 
management unit  and similar representation  should be required fro m each EE.  
20. The programme could significantly contribute to the health -care sector of most 
vulnerable countries facing the lack of capacit y to deal with  COVID -19 vaccination  
requirements.   
21. Annual GHG emission reduction s estimated by the funding proposal am ount to 912,659 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq) per year , or 16,240,202 tCO 2eq for the 27-year 
lifetime of the actions funded under the Cooling F acility (15  year s lifespan for appliances and 
cold chains,  storage and logistic and 20 years for buildings). The funding proposal calculates 
that there would be 4.22 million d irect beneficiaries and 16.85 million indirect beneficiaries. 
However, these estimated beneficiaries relate only to the projects in four vu lnerable  countries  
(Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi and Somalia)  at high risk of extreme heat hazards.  The 
independent TAP  notes that this approach is conservative , considering  that other countries also 
have beneficiaries that will receiv e improved cooling  appliances and cold chain  benefits . 
22. The independent TAP  scores this criterion as medium  to low , taking account of the fact  
that the impact of the funding proposal as a programme is not expected to be high. For example, 
some individual countries asking for  support for the health sector could  benefit from  a relatively 
high impact but for the other countries, without relevant baseline information the expectation is 
that impact will be low.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential     Scale: High  
23. According to the feasibility study  provided by the AE,  global energy use for space cooling 
is projected to grow three -fold  between 2016 and 2050 , with a majority of this growth 
occurring in developing countries. While the growing need for space cooling is in alignment 
with  the developmental needs of countries, this growth must be addressed with effectively  
designed strategies and solutions to avoid severe economic, power system and environmental 
impacts.


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 139 
 
 
24. The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol entered  into  force  in 1 January  2019. 
The phase  down  of HFC refrigerants  under  the amendment  has the potential  to avoid  up to 0.1˚C  
of warming  by 2050  and up to 0.4˚C by 2100 .6 
25. The independent TAP  recognize s that an increase in cooling demand could be regarded 
as a climate change adaptation process that is particularly important for th ose countries most 
vulnerable  to the increasing trends of heat indexes  (maximum daily temperature, CCD s and heat 
waves). Mitig ation of this increas ing rate of cooling demand  through implementation of energy 
efficiency measures or by replac ing conventional fuel sources with renewable sources in th e 
cooling supply process will contribut e to the low -emission sustainable development pathway , 
with the potential of global  impact.  The independent TAP  shares the AE’s rationale that enabling 
those countries most vulnerable to climate change to meet the increasing cooling requirement 
should be considered as adaptation. Hence, the independent TAP  confirms that the concept 
considered within the funding proposal has  paradigm sh ift potential  in each country and 
globally . 
26. The Cooling Facility considered in the funding proposal plans  to demonstrate different 
options and in -country potentials for paradigm shift by proposing  investments across th e 
different but key cooling target areas and with a range of countries from different continents  of 
the developing world having different barriers and national priorities. Diversity of financial 
mechanism s for implement ing measures is another testing point in operation. I n the opinion of 
the AE such a diversified approach could amplify the potential of the AE to leverage its 
experiences and learning. The AE’s understanding is that in so doing, to provide pioneering 
example models and approaches, results can be scaled up and be fit -for-purpose in more 
countries with similar circumstances.  
27. The independent TAP  does not fully agree with the AE on its position that the selected 
approach of putting under one programme a  variety of  countries with different national 
circumstances and priorities and a variety of GHGs mitigation measures , as well as a number of 
complicate d financial schemes for implementation will be a more efficient way to put this 
subsector on a transformation al/sust ainable pathway compared with the traditional 
programmatic approach whe re countries and measures are concentrated  around the narrower 
concept than  cooling demand in general, in different sectors and with different sources.  Thus , 
the independent TAP  conclu des that the funding proposal is the pilot case for testing the 
effective approaches for mitigation of GHG emission s from th e cooling sector in a way that does 
not limit but fully satisf ies the climate change adaptation demand s of vulnerable population s 
and countries.  
28. Based on the above analysis the independent TAP  concludes that this funding proposal 
as a pilot programme could  not be rated as hav ing a high paradigm shift impact ; rather, more 
demonstration impact  is expected , providing examples of succe ss and fail ure and reasons  for 
these outcomes . The concept itself has high transformational potential.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential      Scale:  Medium  
29. Space cooling is increasingly recognized as a development priority and an issue of equity 
in a warm ing world. The i ncreasing trend of cooling demand and the increasing gap between 
energy supply and cooling demand is significantly exacerbated by COVID -19 management 
requirements.  
30. As mentioned in the feasibility study  (annex 2a),  meet ing cooling demand in a business-
as-usual way leads to increas ing GHG emission s, but providing cooling  is unavoidable if 
countries are to sustain resilience to climate change trends. The funding proposal describes how 
 
6 See the Climate & Clean Air Coalition website at https://www.ccacoalition.org/en/initiatives/efficient -cooling .


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 140 
 
 
the Cooling Facility contributes to susta inable development by demonstrating the options for 
slowing the increasing trend of energy consumption through supporting energy efficiency and 
clean energy development processes in pilot countries , transfer of clean technologies and 
solutions, and strengt hening capacity  in and awareness of cooling technologies.  At the country 
level this programme is particularly important for countries that are highly vulnerable to 
increasing temperature and heat stress as well as for countries with energy supply challenge s. 
From the global perspective the concept considered in the funding proposal on sustainable 
cooling supply deserves the urgent attention from global financial institutions.  
31. Supply of sustainable cooling d irectly contribute s to four  of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs):  
(a) SDG 3 – Good health and well -being . From the sample pro jects  attached to the fun ding 
proposal  three are for mitigation of health sector stress due to the necessary COVID -19 
management processes ; 
(b) SDG 7 – Affordable and clean energy . Off -grid solar panels provide clean and affordable 
energy to households and small farmers mainly in rural areas , ensuring the cold chain 
for food security purposes;  
(c) SDG 11 – Sustainable cities and communities. The programme’s contribution to this g oal 
is significant , particularly for countries focusing on energy efficiency in the building s 
sector;  and 
(d) SDG 13  – Climate actions. Increase in cooling demand  is exacerbated by climate change , 
and should be manag ed in a sustainable way in order to avoid further contribut ing to 
climate change process es. According to the information provided in the funding 
proposal if cooling efficiency remains unchanged, additional power generation capacity 
of 2,500 GW will be needed to meet electricity demand for air conditioning by 2050 – an 
estimated cost of US D 1.7 trillion. Increased access to cold chains is critical to ensuring 
food safety and reducing food loss and waste. By maximizing energy efficiency in the 
cooling sector (refrige ration and space cooling) while simultaneously phasing down 
HFCs contained in refrigerants, the world can potentially avoid close to 1 °C temperature 
increase by 2100.  
32. The programme offers different financial schemes  to counties and clean technology 
develo pers  for implement ing/disseminat ing highly  efficient cooling technologies ; thereby  
strengthen ing the capacities of local financial institutions for manag ing funding for cooling.  
33. Refrigerants in vapour compression -based equipment used in refrigeration and air 
conditioning account for a bout 20 per cent  of the climate impact associated with cooling, owing 
to direct emissions of HFC s.7 The Kigali Amendment targets global consumption of HFCs ,8 and 
could avoid up to 0.5°C of warming by 2100. The independent TAP  notes that this  is the first 
funding proposal  in the GCF process  targeting new industrial gases.  
34. The independent TAP  considers that the role of this subsector in the sustainable 
development p rocess is crucial and should have high  priority , although the independent TAP  is 
not sure that this particular programme , as it is designed , could have high impact at the country 
level and therefore scores this criterion as medium  to low .  
 
 
7 G20 agreement to reduce greenhouse gases vital to tackle climate change – UN agency | | UN News  
8 The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol requires countries to phase down HFCs, beginning in 2019 for 
developed countries, and for most developing countries five years later. Its initial phase -down schedule will achieve 
a reduction in HFC consumption of more than 80 per cent by 2047. Most developed countries begin in 2019, 
whereas mos t developing countries will freeze consumption and production in 2024 and begin the phase  down five 
years later. The aim is for developing countries’ susceptible to high ambient temperatures will freeze at 2028 and 
begin to phase down in 2032.


---
*Page 141*
---

G
CF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 141 
1.4 Needs of the recipient  Scale:  High  
35. The rise in temperature and lack of access to cooling will impact the health, education ,
p
roductivity  and economic development of nations. In 2019, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change reported that at 1.5 °C of warming, 2.3 billion people could be both exposed and
vulnerable to heat wave events .
36. The c ooling n eeds of the nine countries  involved in the programme  significantly differ
from each other , as described  below .
37. Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi and Somalia are particularly vulnerable to heat
hazards , increasing their adaptation needs  as follows .
38. Bangladesh  is highly exposed to extreme heat, dr ought and wildfires. Extreme heat
hazard is classified as high throughout the country, which indicates that prolonged exposure to
extreme heat, resulting in heat stress, is expected to occur at least once in the next five years .9
T
he seasonal frequency of  days with T max ≥ 36°C has been on the increase since 1986 in most
parts of Bangladesh . Average temperatures have been increasing more rapidly during th e
m
onsoon season , from June to August, according to historical data for the p ast 30 years (1991 –
2020). Forecast s show that  extreme temperatures are expected to occur with high frequency,
duration, or severity. Most notably, the total number  of hot days in a year (where dai ly
m
aximum temperature is above 35°С) is projected to increase by 13 days by 2039, by 22 days
by 2040 -59, and by 41 days by 2099. By mid -century, annual CDD s are projected to rise from
482 CDD (2020–2039) to about 778 CDD by 2059, and 1210 by the end of the century. Overa ll,
t
his will impact the energy sector because any time the temperature rises above 18.3°C, there is
an expected increase in power demand for cooling .10
39. Bangladesh is among the w orld’s most vulnerable countries to the effects of climate
change. The country is also facing serious energy security challenges and severe heat stress ,
w
ith the impact reaching its high -income residents, low -income neighbourhoods and informal
slum settlements. In its GCF country programme, for the mitigation secto r Bangladesh mainl y
f
ocus es on capacity -building needs for develop ing bankable projects , which need relevant dat a
a
nd tools for assess ing project parameters. Developing strong public –private partnership s,
leveraging private sector resources , and access to competitive and inclusive value chain
financial products and services are priority areas highlighted by the country.
40. The Climate Facility will support investments in sustainable cooling solutions for the
building sector as essential adaptation measures delivered through low- carbon efficient
solutions .
41. El Salvador is highly exposed to extreme heat, hurricanes, droughts and wildfires.
Extreme heat hazard is classified as high throughout the country, which indicates thatprolonged exposure to extreme heat, resulting in heat stress, is expected to occur at least onc
e
i
n the next five years .11 El Salvador has experienced a sustained increase in monthly
temperature s over the p ast 30 years (1991 –2020). In particular, the summer months  (i.e. April
to August) have  witnessed consistent increase s in temperature. According to the future  trends ,
mo
st notably, the number of days where the daily maximum temperature exceeds 35°C wi ll
i
ncrease by 36 days by the end of the 21st century, and the probability of heat waves will
increase by 30  per cent. The annual CDD s are projected to rise by 4 7 CDD by 2050, and 1 ,370.68
CDD by the end of the century .12 El Salvador is situated in the dry corridor of Central America,
9 ThinkHazard! website,  Bangladesh  report . See https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/23 -bangladesh/EH . 
10 WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Bangladesh – Climate Data: Historical and Projections. See 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/bangladesh . 
11 ThinkHazard ! website,  El Salvador  report. See  https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/75 -el-salvador . 
12 WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal: El Salvador – Climate Data : Historical and Projections . See 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/el -salvador/climate- data- projections .


---
*Page 142*
---

G
CF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 142 
and prolonged dry periods often result in significant economic  losses. Droughts put significant 
stress on the energy system, because they increase energy demand while decreasing the 
reliability of energy supply.  
42. To ensure an effective COVID -19 response and to generate long -lasting resilience and b e
p
repared to handl e future health cris es, the Government of El Salvador is seek ing to strengthe n
t
he overall national immunization and related health delivery systems. This includes a variety o f
i
ssues, including safe and appropriate cold chain and relate d services. The key  challenges ar e
t
iming and financial means to enable the Government of El Salvador to take advantage of th e
w
indow of opportunity for revamping its cold chain to ensure it is safe, as well as climate
friendly.
43. El Salvador has asked for support for its health sector through a “ Covid -19 Emergency
Response Project ”. The investments in sustainable cooling solutions supported by the Cooling
Facility will help not only with demand -side adapt ation  to extreme temperature s (for spac e
co
oling and cold chains), but also with reduc ing system stress due to hydropower variability ,
w
hich in turn will help to safeguard the efficacy of vaccines and med icines, as well as essential
medical services necessary for the health and well -being of the population .
44. Malawi  is prone to adverse climate hazards including extreme temperatures, dry spells ,
s
easonal droughts, intense rainfall and flash floods. Extreme heat hazard is classified as medium
to high risk throughout the country, which indicates that prolonged exposure to  extreme heat
resulting in heat stress is likely to occur at least once in the next five years.13 The southern
region is particularly highly exposed to extreme temperatures and heat stress. Between 1960
and 2006, mean annual temperature increased by 0.9°C . Climate trends over this period show
that the total number of hot days in a year has increased by 30 days. By mid -century, annual
CDDs  are projected to rise by 953, with the number of hot days in a year expected to increase by
about 21days .14
45. In August 2020, “Malawi Financial Inclusion and Entrepreneurship Scaling” project  for
agriculture sector , was approved by the World Bank Board.  Refrigeration, cold storage and
logistics for agriculture and food security are planned  to be supported by the Cooling F acility
within the framework of this project . Additional funds from the Cooling Facility would help
strengthen climate change policy framework of the Government of Malawi to promote the use of
low- carbon cooling technologies  in other interventions  as well as  support cold chains for rural
farmers .
46. Somalia  is generally arid and semi -arid with two rainfall seasons. The country’s climat e
i
s influenced by the Inter -Tropical Convergence Zone. Between 1960 and 2020  mean annual
temp erature s have increased by about 0.5°C in the hottest months (April and May) and 0.3°C in
the coldest months (January and December). M uch of Somalia is at risk of several natur al
h
azards, including extreme heat and droughts. Risk of e xtreme heat hazard is considered high ,
w
ith prolonged exposure to extreme heat resulting in heat stress expected to occur at least onc e
i
n the next five years .15 The number of days where the daily maximum temperature exceeds
35°C is expected to increase by about 70 days by 2059  compared with  1986 –2005, and by 93
days by the end of the 21st century. Annual CDD s are expected to rise by more than 836
between 2040 and 2059, and by 1182 CDD s by the end of the century. This significant increas e
i
n temperatures will impact the energy s ector because there will be higher power demand for
cooling .
47. The Cooling Facility will support financing and implementing solar power systems for
space cooling and cold chains in primary - and secondary -level health -care facilities to addre ss
13 ThinkHazard! website, Malawi  report. See  https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/152 -malawi . 
14 WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Malawi – Climate Data: Historical and Projections . See  
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/malawi/climate -data- projections . 
15 ThinkHazard ! website,  Somalia  report. See  https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/226 -somalia/EH .


---
*Page 143*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 143 
 
 
the lack of access to electricity in Somalia’s health -care  facilities. This will also include solar 
direct -drive refrigerators that can stand up to Somalia’s harsh climatic conditions to expand 
climate -friendly cold storage capacity for vaccines.  
48. Kenya  has included e nhancement of energy and resource efficiency as one of the 
priorit ies among mitigation options  in its nationally determined contribution ( NDC ). Despite the 
priority given to adaptation in Kenya’s NDC, the country recognizes the importance of clean, 
efficient and sustainable energy technologies to reduce over -reliance on fossil and non -
sustainable biomass fuel s. Kenya intends to include non- CO 2 gases such as HFCs and 
perfluorocarbons in its updated NDC.  
49. Off-grid  solar  access  for underserved  countie s is targeted by the Cooling F acility.  Such  
support  would  be used  for innovative  business  models  to make  cold  chains available  to small  
farmers  and to provide  financing  to mitigate  the high  up-front  cost  of efficient  air conditioning 
and refrigeration  systems  (solar powered  in off-grid  contexts)  for residential  and business  
applications.  In doing  so, it will promote  sustainable  refrigeration  and protect  against  extreme  
heat  in underserved  areas  of Kenya.  
50. In North Macedonia  most of  public buildings (including schools, health -care 
cent res/clinics and universities) are over 50 years old and classified as under -heated, unsafe 
(due to structural instability and seismic risks) and dilapidated. In fact, buildings, which 
consume about 39 p er cent  of the energy, have been identified in the country as a major priority, 
with estimates of savings ranging from 20  to 40 per cent . The public sector has the greatest 
potential, with about 35 –40 per cent  savings, mostly in the health and education se ctors . 
Several challenges need to be addressed for the public sector to invest in sustainable cooling. Central government buildings typically have very limited budgetary provisions for capital 
improvements, if any, and usually are not allowed to borrow. Municipalities must undergo the 
fiscal decentralization process and, even then, have stringent debt limitations which many have 
already reached. Few have formal credit ratings. In the context of the COVID- 19 situation, 
rehabilitation of health -care  facilities, with adequate air -conditioning systems, is  expected to 
become a higher priorit y.  
51. North Macedonia is seeking to tackle space cooling in the public sector – and lower its 
energy consumption and associated GHG emissions – by establish ing an energy efficiency fund, 
a sustainable financing mechanism that is well suited for its circumstances and targeted sector.   
52. Panama ’s cooling appliances market has been growing rapidly over the past decade, for 
both air condition ing and refrigerat ion technologies. Air conditioning penetration in the 
residential sector is relatively low but is expected to rapidly increase in line with the country’s dynamic economic development (e.g. residential household ownership of air -conditioning 
equipment stood at 8.9 per cent  in 2000, compared with 15.6 per cent  in 2010 and is expected 
to grow to an estimated 66 per c ent in 2050). According to the National Energy Plan of Panama 
(Plan Energético Nacional 2015 –2050), energy consumption for cooling systems currently 
represent s about 40 per cent  of the overall electricity consumption in Panama. The electricity 
sector is facing serious challenges in keeping up with rising electricity demand, which is growing at an average annual rate of 8.5 per cent  per year mainly due to the increased use of 
cool ing equipment in the residential and commercial sectors. In order to align with Panama’s 
NDC, the pace of energy demand growth needs to be reduced from an average of 6 per cent  in 
the business -as-usual scenario to around 4 per cent , which would reduce the need of energy 
generation capacity additions by 38 per cent . Several barriers must be addressed to respond to 
this rapidly growing problem. Although Panama has a sophisticated banking sector, the absence 
of (1) dedicated credit lines priced to incentivize investments in energy efficiency, and (2) a 
local long -term capital market for mortgages (access of local banks to capital markets is limited 
to up to 5 -year bonds), as well as (3) limited technical capacity in local banks to assess energy 
efficiency produ cts and investments, represent a major barrier for energy efficiency in Panama. 
The higher initial cost of energy -efficient equipment and lack of access to affordable financing


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 144 
 
 
are hindering the adoption of more sustainable cooling solutions and could lock -in large 
quantities of inefficient, polluting but cheaper (on a first -cost basis) cooling equipment. Law 69 -
12 mandates the establishment of an energy efficiency fund. The national Fondo de Eficiencia 
Energética (UREE Fund) aims to be transformational by cataly sing private investment, reducing 
the high  risk perception associated with green buildings and energy- efficient cooling appliances, 
and improv ing market liquidity for energy efficiency initiatives. Credit line facilities will help 
transform the resid ential and commercial sectors and leverage private sector capital.  
53. The Cooling Facility will channel GCF funds through the Government of Panama to 
provide credit lines to the Panama Energy Efficiency Fund and support the enabling 
environment.  
54. Sao Tome and  Principe  is a small low - to middle -income country compris ing two main 
islands. It has a total population of approximately 200,000 people, 42.6  per cent  of whom are 14 
years of age or younger. In addition to having a small population and a remote location, there is 
a high fixed cost of public goods  – all factors that affect the country’s trade, fiscal accounts and 
human development outcomes. The p ublic health sector is underdeveloped and this is a 
significant barrier to deal ing with COVID -19. International collaboration and support to the 
Government of Sao Tome and Principe will be crucial to continue mitigation measures to 
contain the spread of the pandemic in the country and to design and implement its National 
COVID -19 Immuni zation Plan . 
55. The Cooling Facility will support the health sector services through financing and 
implementing climate -friendly space cooling and cold chains in the country’s health -care 
network, with the overall objective that every health facility receives  a solar power system. 
Investments will include, for example , solar photovoltaics and battery systems to offset existing 
backup diesel generation, energy efficiency improvements in health facilities, walk -in cold 
rooms or cold -storage warehouses , and solar  direct -drive refrige rator s/freezers or other low -
GWP cold chain equipment . 
56. Sri Lanka . The introduction of d emand -side management activities is one of the priority 
areas  of Sri  Lanka’s NDC. Sri Lanka has recently taken strong initiatives to implement effic ient 
and effective sustainable energy programmes. Promotion of solar power generation has been 
initiated through different modalities such as solar rooftops and solar parks. This will provide 
approximately 500 MW in the short term and has the potential to expand to a considerably 
high er level by 2030. In addition to the interventions concerning power generation, the 
Government of Sri Lanka has also identified demand -side management as one of the priority 
areas, and a Presidential Task Force has been appointed for implementing an island -wide 
demand -side management programme encompassing all the related sectors.  
57. Improv ing energy efficiency in the building sector is the focus of  a sample project. The 
proposed project will finance and promote the impleme ntation of energy -efficient, climate-
friendly chillers and other energy efficiency measures in Sri Lanka’s commercial and industrial 
building sector.  
58. The independent TAP considers that the needs of the recipient countr ies are high but 
are not adequately es timated for most of the participant countries . Limited baseline details are 
provided for few countries. The i nformation provided above , extracted from the funding 
proposal and NDCs should be supported by and updated through  a baseline study. The 
independen t TAP scored this criteri on as high mainly based on the information provided for 
three highly vulnerable participant countries identified in the assessment report, “Tracking 
Sustainable Cooling for A ll”.16  
 
16 See note 5.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 145 
 
 
1.5 Country ownership                Scale:  Medium  
59. All n ine countries involved in the programme have provided no -objection letters . In 
addition:  
(a) All of these countries have submitted their u pdated NDC;  
(b) All of these countries have energy efficiency as one of the priorit ies for implement ing 
their NDCs through their climate action plans;   
(c) Bangladesh and Panama are the only countries among these nine that have 
transparently claimed the cooling sector as priority for energy efficiency measures;  and  
(d) Only Bangladesh has finali zed and adopted a GCF country programme. Most of the other 
participant countries  are at different stages of application and preparation.  
60. Bangladesh : The Government has prepared the Energy Efficiency Conservation Master 
Plan 2015 –2030, which describes the ado ption and implementation of energy efficiency and 
conservation regulatory measures. Bangladesh is  developing a national Cooling Action Plan. 
These efforts are aligned with the Cooling Facility’s support of space cooling and energy 
efficiency measures in bu ildings.   
61. El Salvador : The Government is integrating climate -friendly investments in its national 
program mes, and its NDC includes health as a sector affected by climate change and the 
promotion of wide r use of renewable energy. This is aligned with the Cooling Facility’s support 
for climate -friendly health facilities and cold chain s. 
62. Kenya : Under the Paris Agreement, Kenya has committed to reducing GHG emissions by 
30 per cent , or 142 MtCO 2eq, by 2030. The count ry’s National Electrification Strategy presents a 
roadmap for achieving universal access to electricity by 2022. Supporting off -grid cooling 
appliances and access under the Cooling Facility will contribute to both of these goals. Kenya is 
also in the proce ss of developing a National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy, which 
includes targets for energy savings in households, buildings and industry.  
63. Malawi : Promoting the use of energy -efficient technologies and designs is one of the 
strategies advocated in the Government’s priority areas under the Malawi Growth and 
Development Strategy.  
64. North Macedonia : As a contracting party of the Energy Community Treaty, the 
Government has committed to reduce energy use by 12  per cent  (about 200 kilo tonnes of oil 
equivalent ) by 2018 in its 2020 Energy Efficiency Strategy (based on a 2010 baseline), more 
than the 9  per cent  required under the Treaty’s National Energy Efficiency Action Plans. 
Buildings, which consume about 39  per cent  of energy  in the country, have b een identified as a 
major priority, with estimates of energy savings ranging from 20  to 40 per cent .  
65. Panama : In 2012, the Government made a national commitment to energy efficiency by 
approving Law 69 -12 on “Rational and Efficient Use of Energy”. In 2015, the National Secretariat 
of Energy published the National Energy Plan 2015 –2050, which contemplates the design and 
implementation of the Rational and Efficient Use of Energy Program me as one of the key actions 
to meet the sector objectives. The country al so ratified the Kigali Amendment in 2017. Panama 
is currently implementing stage II of its HFC Phase -out Management Plan under the Montreal 
Protocol. The Cooling Facility will support achieving the Government’s commitments through its 
support for efficient  space cooling.  
66. Sao Tome and Principe : The country’s NDC include s promoting the greater use of 
renewable energy and list s health as one of the sectors negatively impacted by climate change. 
The Cooling Facility will contribute to the Government’s NDC throu gh supporting space cooling 
and cold chains in the health sector, including through the increased use of solar power.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 146 
 
 
67. Somalia : Somalia’s NDC on  scaling up the use of solar energy is consistent with the 
Cooling Facility’s support for more climate -friendly health facilities and cold chain s, including 
through greater use of solar power.  
68. Sri Lanka : Demand -side management is identified as one of the seven mitigation actions 
of the energy sector NDC of Sri Lanka,  to be implemented during 2020 –2030. Regarding the 
regulatory framework, the Energy Efficiency Building Code was first introduced in 2002 and 
revised in 2008. The code sets standards for energy efficiency in design and retrofits in 
buildings, while also  providing methods for determining compliance. 
69. According to the funding proposal, for the purposes of the loans and grants execution, 
energy efficiency will be selected in the host countries . This approach increase s countr ies’ 
ownership of the programme , although  the independent TAP  notes that the capacity of the EE s 
for implement ing cooling energy efficiency projects should be  regularly  assessed and capacity -
building support should be provided where gaps are identified.  
70. Based on the information provided in the count ries’ NDCs t he independent TAP 
considers that country ownership at this stage is medium. Almost all participant countries have 
energy efficiency as a priority , but they are not clearly focus ing on cooling needs at the strategy 
and policy levels. Exceptions among these ni ne countries are Bangladesh and Panama. A 
comprehensive baseline study might change this conclusion.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale:  Medium to low 
71. The share of the GCF total contribution  to the total co -financing from the AE  and other 
donors is 1:4.6. For the loan , this proportion is 1:4.5 (USD 280 million is reported as  TBD  ) and 
for the grant , the  ratio is 1:6.3. Allocation of 100 per cent  of GCF loan and 51 per cent  of grant to 
component 2 is considered by the independent TAP  as eff ective  distribution of the investment  
by components . The GCF concessional loan fully supports the most risky investment for 
component 2.  
72. As already mentioned in section  1.1, the independent TAP ’s concern regarding the 
maximum 30 per cent  of GCF proceeds as a cap per country, is effectively  balanced  by the 
Secretariat in the term sheet and now all countries have some indicative budget. The 
independent TAP  welcome s this approach , as it considers t hat all GCF eligible countr ies issuing 
no-objection letters should have equal opportunity to participate in the prog ramme. Securing 
each country’s opportunity for equal participation makes the programme more effective from 
the countries ’ perspective.  
73. As me ntioned above , the projects and measures to be implemented through the Cooling 
Facility are too diverse and therefore it is not possible, or efficient , to design unique eligibility 
criteria and the associated climate change impact monitoring methodology. E nergy efficiency, 
renewable energy (solar) and GHG -free refrigerators are considered as eligible activities for this 
Cooling Facility ; these systems are  quite diverse , with each having  specificities that should be 
taken into consideration when design ing measures, financial schemes and monitoring 
modalities. Technical details are not provided for the  attached  example projects but  the main 
focus is on financial schemes.  These are important for GCF  but only if balanced with  
technical /technological elements and the funding proposal results . Therefore , it is difficult for 
the independent TAP to confirm that , even in the case of success of the proposed financial 
models , the mitigation and/or adaptation  results will be adequately  successful. Such diversity of 
the scope and technologies of the C ooling Facility as well as of the financial schemes  in one 
programme could have a negative impact on the programme’s overall efficiency and 
effectiveness as well as at the individual country  level. Grouping of nine  projects  (countries)  
considered in funding proposal is as follow:


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 147 
 
 
(a) Energy efficiency in the building sector , in some cases appliances are also included : 
Bangladesh, North Macedonia, Panama and Sri Lanka. Type s of buildings are not 
specified for  Bangladesh  but appliances are included ; only public buildings are the focus 
for North Macedonia ; 
(b) Efficient cooling facilities (HFC -free refrigerators, cold chains, logistic s): Kenya (off- grid 
solar energy  and energy access to  refrigeration, cold chains and logistics)  for cooling 
purposes, and Malawi  (refrigeration, cold chains and logistics in agriculture ); and  
(c) Strengthening the health sector within the context of COVID -19 requirements: El 
Salvador, Sao Tome and Principe, and Somalia.   
74. The funding proposal (on page 28) states that n ine countries are currently considering 
potential investments to be supported from the Cooling Facility. The World Bank will work with 
each EE covered under this Facility to finalize the scope and co -financing of these investment 
opportunities, taking into account ( 1) the needs of the clients as they may evolve;  (2) the results 
of the ongoing market assessments ; and ( 3) stakeholder consultations . As mentioned above , in 
the absence of proper market analysis and stakeholder consultations that includes the needs of 
the clients and without a final decision on the scope of activities,  the independent TAP is not 
disposed to assess and confirm the efficiency of programme to each participant countr y. 
75. Regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of the whole programme,  the independent 
TAP is of the  opinion that,  due to the broad diversity of the energy efficiency scope , the 
programme efficien cy is not expect ed to be high , in comparison  with some of the effect s in the 
individual countries asking for support in the health sector or cool chain for food security. Thr ee 
types of  findings could be considered in th e context  of the programme efficiency :  
(a) Cooling energy efficiency is a part of energy efficiency , but it should be treated 
separately and not mixed with traditional energy efficiency measures when building 
sector  efficiency  is being considered. This is a sector whe re efficiency measures for 
heating and cooling do not always coincide ; indeed, they  could contradict each other 
depending on the orientation of building s and type s of measures designed for heating 
energy efficiency . Therefore, to  automatically add  GCF  inve stment to an Energy 
Efficiency  fund ( as it is stated in the implementation modalities and demonstrated in the 
case of North Macedonia ) which is dedicated to the energy efficiency of the building  
without relevant revisions of the fund’s investment eligibility criteria for the cooling 
sector, the expec ted effect of the programme could be negative;   
(b) In countries where existing less -efficient appliances (including refrigerators ) will be 
replaced , the old appliances should be monitored and if they stay in second -hand use the 
increase in energy consumption related to the programme activities should be calculated and deducted from the reduced amount; and   
(c) Although the independent TAP  recognizes the urgency of such programmes for high ly 
vulnerable countries th at have limited access to cooling facilities under the pressing 
requirement of cooling due to COVID -19, this programme does  not demonstrate any 
added value compared with individual country -level projects and particularly for highly 
vulnerable countries wit h increasing trends of heat indices (CCD s, heat waves, extreme 
daily temperatures, etc.). The independent TAP  considers that in planning a 
programmatic approach the scope of targeted cooling technologies and geography and 
type of countries’ needs should be  narrowed on the bas is of baseline studies conducted 
for each country , to ensure the added value of adopting a programmatic approach.  
76. The independent TAP would particularly like to highlight the role of well -designed 
monitoring  process es in reaching high e fficiency and effectiveness from a programmatic 
approach comprising various financial schemes, components and subprojects. The m onitoring 
arrangements provided in a nnex 11 to the funding proposal are not satisfactory to the 
independent TAP . The independent TAP  would be interested to see more details of monitoring ,


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 148 
 
 
particularly for component 2 directly contributing to the final results. The AE should submit a 
very transparent monitoring plan for component 2 demonstrating how the final beneficiarie s 
(not always borrowers) – consumers of energy – will be monitored in general and in particular 
when subproject s consider many buildings, many appliances and so on . 
77. Based on the available information the independent TAP  considers that the efficiency 
and effectiveness of this programme is expected to be medium to  low. The independent TAP  
would also like to highlight that this programme is really a  “financial facility ” rather than a 
programme having added value to individual project . The independent TAP  noted  that it is 
receiving more and more facility and subfund type funding proposals based , in most cases , on 
good concept s and idea s but not supported by relevant feasibility/baseline studies. Such 
proposals are not fully fit to the programmatic approach  and not always relevant to assess 
against the six investment criteria  of the GCF . 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
78. Despite the deficiencies identified by the independent TAP and commented on in the 
above assessment, the independent TAP  fully recognizes the urgent need to regulat e the cooling 
sector , which is not yet relevantly targeted as the most important subsector of the energy 
efficiency sector in terms of  successful implementation of the Paris Agreement and urgent 
mitigation -related  energy needs for COVID -19 vaccination -related cooling process es. The 
independent TAP  recomm ends this funding proposal for consideration and approval by the  GCF 
Board . Although recommending approval , the independent TAP also fully recognize s that the 
funding proposal has significant deficiences which should be addressed and improved prior to 
the execution of the funded activity agreement . The independent TAP recognizes that the 
ratings for the six crit eria are lower than usual for an endorsed funding proposal . However, the 
independent TAP  considers that, once the condition for endorsement is met, these ratings will 
go up. Hence, the independent TAP  recommends this funding proposal for approval under the  
following con dition:  
(a) Conditions to be met prior to the execution of the FAA:  
(i) Delivery by the AE to the GCF , in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat, of the following set of annexes, together with a relevantly revised 
funding proposal  pursuant to those annexes:  
(1) A cooling sector -related baseline study for each host country, which shall 
take into consideration (i) all the comments and recommendations 
expressed by the independent TAP  in this assessment report and (ii) the 
methodology for cooling sector baseline assessment considered  as the 
“guid ance ” in annex 02a ( Pimer for Space Cooling ) provided by the AE as 
part of the original submission;  
(2)  The baseline study for each host country  referred to in item (1) above 
shall estimate, take into account and set out: (i) ongoing  trends of 
cooling degree days and other heat indexes, for the last decades; (ii) 
correlation between the heat indexes and energy consumption trends for 
sectors where  activities are planned, taking into consideration impact of 
COVID -19 on energy demand; and (iii) trends of energy consumption by 
cooling sector and related trends of GHGs where statistics are available;   
(3) A comprehensive monitoring and verification plan f or demonstrating the 
mitigation of energy consumption and reduc tion of GHGs from the 
cooling sectors of the respective host countries compared with  the 
baseline situation. The monitoring methodology shall consider (i) 
monitoring of potential leakage and re lated  mitigation measures, and (ii)


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 09 
Page 149 
 
 
methodologies for monitoring the mitigation of power consumption at 
the final beneficiary level; and  
(4) Updated sample projects with description s of the baseline situation in 
the sub -sector specific to the relevant sample p roject and monitoring 
methodology specific to such sub -sector.


---
*Page 150*
---

 
 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.09  
Page 150 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment (FP177)  
 
Proposal name:  Cooling Facility  
Accredited entity:  World Bank  
Country/(ies):  Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, 
Panama, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, and Sri Lanka 
Project/programme size:  Large  
 
 
Impact  potential  
Scale: We consider the rating of “medium to low” (especially “low) as under -estimating the  
Facility’s  potential  impact.  The World  Bank  as AE is presenting  an innovative,  multi -sector  and 
multi -country  (covering  9 countries)  programmatic  financing  facility  to help  demonstrate  how  to 
address  the key sustainable  development  challenge  of providing  access  to cooling  in diverse  
contexts  while  minimizing  negative  climate  impacts.  We would  like to highlight  iTAP’s  
observation  that the approach  to estimating impact  in the FP is “conservative”.  
 
- Corrections/clarifications:  
o iTAP  notes  that “only four  countries  are considered  eligible  for adaptation  
activities ”. We would clarify that each of the 9 countries in the Facility are counted  
against  mitigation -related  indicators.  While  each  of the countries  covered by the 
Facility face the need to adapt to a warming world as they are exposed  to risks of 
extreme  heat  hazard, albeit  at different  intensity  levels, only the 4 countries  facing  
“high  risk”  of extreme  heat  hazard  (the  other  5 countries  face  “medium  risk”)  are 
counted  against  the Facility’s adaptation indicators.  
o In all projects, EE would be the Host country (“the Borrower”) acting through  the 
relevant ministry(ies) and/or designated Project Implementing Entities (PIEs).  
o The public  procurement  and contracting  model  may  be relevant  for components 1, 
2 and 3. This model will be implemented by the EE, or the PIE as may  be designated  
by the EE, (NOT  the AE) and as such,  already  corresponds  with  ITAP’s  
recommendation.  
o Rather than representing examples of projects, Annex 22 provides, for each  
country,  a summary  description  of the actual projects  that  are being  considered  
under the Cooling Facility, If the Facility is approved by the GCF Board and in  line 
with the notion of a program supporting projects are early development  stage, the 
AE, in consultation with each Host Country, will refine the scope the proposed  
activities considering  the agreed parameters.  
o The AE has provided GHG calculations for each country’s project. For each  country, 
“base case” (i.e., baseline) assumptions were provided in Annex 23  (GHG  
Calculation)  of the Funding Proposal.  
o We agree that TA to support implementation of credit lines is important. TA is  
envisaged  for every  project  supported by  the Facility.


---
*Page 151*
---

 
 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.09  
Page 151 
 
 
 
 
 
 o Component  2 can be implemented  through  all the 3 implementation  models  
(i.e. public  procurement,  credit  lines  and energy  efficiency  financing  facility)  
depending on  the country  context  and the identified  barriers.  
o Adaptation to climate change: The AE will report on beneficiaries associated  
with the 4 projects that count against the Facility’s contribution to 
adaptation  efforts. In reality, the impact of the Facility may be greater as the 
Facility will  also generate resilience benefits in countries at medium risk of 
extreme risk  hazard  (even  if they  are not “counted”).  
o El Salvador  is a country  facing  high  risk of extreme heat  
(https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/75 -el-salvador/EH ). iTAP  may  be 
conflating  this with  the SEforALL’s  listing  of countries  that face  high  risk of 
lack  of access  to cooling.  
o Figure 4: structure of a typical project management unit established by the 
EE (not  AE).  
- We do not share iTAP’s assessment that there is a “threat” that a country would not be  
supported. Rather, we believe that there are provisions  and safeguards, including  
amount of GCF financing required for each country (in Annex 17) and description of  
activities envisaged per c ountry, that seek to give assurance that none of the 
proposed  countries would  be excluded from  the program.  
Paradigm  shift  potential  
-- 
Sustainable  development  potential  
-- 
Needs  of the recipient  
Clarification:  
- iTAP  refers  to “sample  projects”  giving  the impression  that the project  
descriptions are completely hypothetical. In fact, the FP package provide a  
summary  description  of the actual  projects  that are being  considered  under  
the Cooling  Facility,  based  on consultations  with  the Host  Countries  and in 
coordination  with the  National Designated  Authorities.  
Country  ownership


---
*Page 152*
---

 
 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.09  
Page 152 
 
 
-- 
Efficiency  and  effectiveness  
- As noted above, there should be no doubt that the intention of the AE is that  
each  country  listed  in the funding  proposal  (each  has provided  a NOL)  will have  
access to funding support under the Cooling Facility.  This is a fundamental  
aspect of the Cooling Facility. Annex 17 presents the amount sought for each  
country and annex 22 describes the p roposed supported activities. Because of  
the varying  absorption  capacity  and needs  across countries,  the cap of a 
maximum of 30% of GCF proceeds going to any one country represents an  
additional measure to ensure that all countries can be supported through the  
Facility.  
- The Cooling Facility aims to address the barriers that have so far limited the  
deployment  of clean  cooling  technologies  and also  to put into  place  the support  
for a broader paradigm shift  by working across key cooling target areas and  
with  a range  of countries  from  different  parts  of the developing  world  to 
amplify the potential to leverage the experiences and learnings. The Facility  
seeks to scale and mainstream sustainable cooling applications in a number of  
key sectors (agriculture, health, buildings), thereby accelerating the potential  
for across -the-board deployment  of climate -friendly  solutions.  
- The Facility  adopts  a pragmatic  approach  to deal  with  the nature  of cooling  and 
take  advantage  of diverse  windows  of opportunity  appropriate  in each  country.  
- iTAP  expressed  doubts  regarding  the “added  value”  of the Facility  approach  for 
cooling (compared to individual country project). We would note that were it  
not for the opportunity  to aggregate cooling  projects  under  one Facility,  
especially  the smaller  countries  would  not be in a position  to access critical  GCF  
financial support for their respective cooling projects.  Moreover, we would  
note that the Facility approach offers the opportunity to provide pioneering  
examples  of countries,  cooling  sectors,  approaches,  technologies  and measures  
that can be scaled up including in other countries, beyond the Facility, that are  
facing  similar situations and opportunities.  
- iTAP  comments that”  Such  diversity  […] in one programme  could  have  a 
negative  impact  on the programme’s  overall  efficiency  and effectiveness  as well  
as at the individual country level”.  We would respectfully disagree.  The 
alternative to the support provided by the Cooling Facility, may be missed  
opportunities to enhance access to climate -friendly cooling.  As just noted a  
learning -by-doing facility, it also offers up an opportunity to test a range of  
technological applications, business models and implementation approaches  
for emulation, replication  and scale -up globally.  
Overall  remarks  from  the independent  Technical  Advisory  Panel:  
We thank  iTAP  for its assessment  and its recognition  of the urgent  need  to support  developing  
countries’  move  towards  to climate -friendly  cooling.  We appreciate  iTAP’s  favourable  
recommendation for the consideration and approval of the Cooling Facility’s funding proposal  
by the GCF  Board.


---
*Page 153*
---

 
 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.09  
Page 153 
 
 
 
We hope  that  the clarifications  provided  above  help  better  understand  the Facility,  its 
functioning, and its aims.  
We have  also  communicated  our concern  with  iTAP’s  recommended  conditions and shared  our 
suggested  edits.  
In addition to other points we raised and as we clarified in writing during ITAP’s assessment  
period,  the subsequent  call with  ITAP (8/18/2021),  and our comments to the iTAP’s  
assessment, each Project must not be assimilated to a national programme. The proposed  
Projects under the Cooling Facility support and contribute to the achievements of the Host  
Countries’ national programs but the scope of these Projects is more narrowly defined. In this  
respect, our main concerns are related to iTAPs’ requests for (i) the production of additional  
national/sectoral baseline  studies  and monitoring  plans  that  go beyond  the scope  of individual  
Projects; (ii) the overly onerous cost (and chall enge) associated with collecting yet more data,  
conducting the assessments, and producing additional documents to meet all the conditions – 
representing an even higher transaction cost associated with working with the GCF without  
commensurate  benefits;  and in particular  (iii) the overly  tight timing  (i.e., “prior  to the 
execution of the FAA”) to conduct the additional studies and plans for each of the 9 countries  
that are considered under the Cooling Facility, without giving any consideration to challenges  
and delays involved in collecting the requested information, especially during the current  
pandemic, and despite the fact that the Cooling Facility includes three COVID -19 emergency  
projects,  including  one in a fragile  and conflict  affected  situation.  
We regret to note that our comments have not been reflected in the final version of iTAP’s  
assessment  and in the conditions  iTAP  recommends  that they  are met  prior  to the execution  of 
the FAA.


---
*Page 154*
---

COOLING FACILITY 
ANNE
X 8 
G
ENDER ASSESSMENT 
AND ACTION PLAN 
A
ugust 2021 
D
isclaimer: The gender profiles were prepared, using publicly available sources. The World 
Bank does not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of the information provided in the 
present document. To the extent that it reflects opinions, they are the opinions of the individual 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, its staff or Directors. 
Nothing in this summary should be taken as legal advice.  Gender documentation for FP177


---
*Page 155*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 2 OF 54 
2 Contents  
1 Introduction  .................................................................................................................... 3 
2 Gender Gaps that Matter  ............................................................................................... 4 
3 Gender  Gap Assessment  ............................................................................................... 5 
3.1 Overarching Gender Gaps  ...................................................................................... 5 
3.2 Country -Specific Gender Gaps  ............................................................................... 8 
3.2.1 Bangladesh ...................................................................................................... 8 
3.2.2  El Salvador  .................................................................................................... 11 
3.2.3  Kenya ............................................................................................................ 15 
3.2.4  Malawi ........................................................................................................... 19 
3.2.5  North Macedoni a ........................................................................................... 22 
3.2.6  Panama  ......................................................................................................... 26 
3.2.7  Sao Tome and P rincipe  ................................................................................. 29 
3.2.8  Somalia  .......................................................................................................... 31 
3.2.9  Sri Lanka  ....................................................................................................... 33 
4 Sector Gender -Specific Gaps Summary  ...................................................................... 37 
5 Strategic Approach  ...................................................................................................... 39 
5.1 Facility Level:  ........................................................................................................ 39 
5.2 Project Level:  ........................................................................................................ 40


---
*Page 156*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 3 OF 54 
3 1 Introduction 
 
The Cooling Facility is proposed as an innovative, multi -sector and multi -country 
programmatic financing mechanism with the goal of transforming the cooling sector. 
The program will increase energy efficiency , reduc e or avoid GHG emissions  , and accelerate 
access to cooling for economic growth and human capital development.  
To achieve this, the Facility will channel concessional climate finance from the GCF to 
co-finance IBRD and IDA cooling -related operations  that: (i) support investments in  
efficient, affordable, and sustainable cooling; (ii) catalyze technology and business model 
innovations across cooling value chains and sectors to reduce barriers for private sector 
investment; and (iii) help build an enabling environment for sustained, l ong-term systemic 
changes for example, for productive uses of energy, in buildings energy efficiency, nutrition, 
health, and agriculture ; as well as (iv) support the integration of sustainable cooling into 
climate change and SDG plans  
The present Gender A ssessment and Action Plan provides an overview of issues 
affecting men and women related to the Facility’s implementation in the nine  countries : 
Bangladesh, El Salvador, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia,  Sao Tome e Principe, 
Somalia , Panama  and Sri Lanka.  It details the strategic approach that will be adopted under  
the Cooling  Facility to effectively address these challenges and contribute to promoting female 
development  at different dimensions , for insta nce through employment in the cooling- relatedly  
sector s, while enhancing women and men’s livelihoods in affected communities , and 
supporting  COVID -19 responses . Planned interventions under the present Gender Action Plan 
(GAP) are aligned with the GCF third  policy objective to “contribute to reducing the gender 
gap of climate change -exacerbated social, economic, environmental vulnerabilities and 
exclusions through GCF climate investments that mainstream gender equality issues.”  
The Cooling Facility’s gender activities will focus on strengthening women's roles as 
employees, entrepreneurs and consumer in energy and cooling- related sector s. The 
work under the Facility will tangibly assist relevant stakeholders (such as ministries, utilities and businesses) across various sectors such as energy access, energy efficiency and 
renewable energy, agriculture, health etc.  to support the designing  and implement ation of  
intervention in cooling- informed operations on the ground.  The Facility will work with countries 
to collect data and generate crucial knowledge of actions and design interventions needed to 
help close gender gaps in areas  that are a ligned with the  cooling- related sectors  and directly 
support the World Bank Group 2016- 2023 Gender Strategy and its four pillars of action
1.  The 
broad experiences and track -record of the ESMAP Gender and Energy Program –  which is 
funding 6 regional energ y programs consisting of activities that directly support the 4 pillars of 
the Strategy - combined with the ESMAP Efficient Clean Cooling Program – which is providing 
TA support to cooling- informed activities across sectors ( working with relevant World Bank 
Global Practices) - will be leveraged to support  activities aimed at helping achieve progress 
on gender equality  through the various cooling projects included in the Facility .  The Bank’s 
ecosystem of gender focal points for relevant Global Practices  will need to be engaged.  
Appropriate gender entry points for the Facility’s cooling- informed operations will  be 
case specific, span over a number of sectors (e.g. agriculture, buildings, health, energy, 
etc), and different geographies (both in terms of countries and in terms of urban versus rural 
contexts) . The Facility’s activities will also offer opportunities to tackle the World Bank Group 
2016- 2023 Gender Strategy and its four pillars of action. For example, ensuring key public 
services such as clinics or hospitals  have access to cooling (in medical facilities and for 
 
1 The WBG Gender Strategy has 4 objectives: i) improving Human Endowments ii) Removing 
Constraints for More and Better jobs, iii) Removing Barriers to Women’s Ownership and Control of 
Assets and iv) Enhancing Women’s Voic e and Agency and Engaging Men and Boys


---
*Page 157*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 4 OF 54 
4 storage of vaccines and medicine) to reduce infant mortality rates (pillar 1 of the WBG Gender 
Strategy) ; and tackling barriers to women’s leadership and participation in the e.g. energy  and 
agriculture sector  through implementing interventions that e.g. address child care service gaps and increase girls and young women’s exposure to jobs in the energy efficiency/cooling 
sectors (pillar 2). Other areas of support may include, applying new approaches with banks 
and micro -finance institutions to design financial products and services that meet the needs 
of female enterprises and consumers in cooling technologies (pillar 3); and enhancing women’s voice through inclusion in policy development and participation in project design, 
including engaging men and boys in gender -based violence (GBV) prevention and response 
in energy project sites (pillar 4). In addition, the Facility , through the projects it supports,  is 
expected to contribute to meet ing the World Bank  corporate gender target, measured through 
the “Gender Tag ”
2.  Also, some of the interventions will help countries  address the impacts of 
the COVID -19 global pandemic . 
In addition, as described in Annex 6 (Environment and Social Sustainability Framework) , 
environmental and social risks and impact of all projects included in the Cooling Facility will 
be assessed and managed in accordance with the Bank’s Environmental and Social 
Framework (ESF).  At the project -level, provisions on gender in the ESF are focused on 
gender equality and inclusion, particularly in the context of addressing disadvantaged or 
vulnerable groups, including the risks of gender -based violence.   As per Bank policy, each 
project also needs to set -up a Grievance Redress Mechanism to ensure any grievances, 
including regarding sexual exploitation and abuse , are reported and addressed.  
The Facility’s gender approach will be adapted to each projects’ specific design, local barriers and circumstances, but in general the entry points for gender are expected to 
involve one of more of the following:  baseline establishments and data collection; diagnostics 
barriers; stakeholder engagement; identification of specific actions  that are contributing to 
closing gender gaps ; knowledge management (see below). The Cooling Facility will seek to 
contribute to enhancing the knowledge base on gender issues associated with access to 
cooling and will seek to contribute to reducing gender gaps in cooling- related  sectors 
(including agriculture, buildings, health and energy) by (i) identifying gaps relevant to the four 
pillars of the World Bank Group (WBG) Gender Strategy, and (ii) aiming to address these gaps 
through specific actions supported by the project . 
   
2 Gender Gaps that Matter  
 
While more data and analysis are needed to better understand the gender aspect of 
access to sustainable cooling and energy efficiency , gender risks are evident 
(SEforALL 2019). Women and girls are often disproportionately impacted by limited access 
to sustainable cooling and enhanced access could help make gains in terms of 
entrepreneurship opportunities  and enhanced livelihoods. There is very little evidence that 
shows what work s to close gender gaps in interventions that are dedicated to cooling, however 
this proposal will extrapolate approaches that are proved to work from other sector s in 
particular in regards to identify entry points (after a gender assessment) .  
Gaps that may impact projects under the Facility are outlined briefly below:  
• Jobs and Skills Development  
• Entrepreneurship  
 
2 Since 2017, the WBG strengthened its monitoring system with regards to gender, focusing on results 
and outcomes.  A “gender tag” was launched to identify projects that effectively promote equality 
between men and w omen and are aligned with the WBG gender strategy.


---
*Page 158*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 5 OF 54 
5 • Consumer Engagement  
• Financial services  
• COVID -19 response and health measures  
• Data and information   
 
Alignment with the WBG’s Gender Strategy  and achieving gender tag: the Bank 
implements systematically a mechanism to identif y operations that aim to close gender 
gaps in human endowments, more and better jobs, ownership and control of assets, and 
women’s voice and agency. This mechanism is called Gender Tag . For a WB lending 
project to be “gender tagged”, it must meet two criteria: (1) explicitly address one or more 
of the dimensions of the Gender Strategy , and (2) the include a vertical logic with (i) an 
analysis of the specific gender issues; (ii) actions that seek to address the issues; and (iii) 
indicators that show the advancement towards closing the gender gaps.  
 
 
3 Gender Gap Assessment  
 
3.1 Overarching Gender Gaps  
When designing cooling projects and programs with a gender equality focus, there are 
many opportunities to consider issues around access to finance, entrepreneurship, 
employment and consumer engagement . These may include, for example, working toward 
government targets for closing gaps between men and women that might be addressed 
through increasing access to climate -friendly cooling; or including sex -disaggregated 
information in data collection or survey  processes; or making sure that both men and women 
take part in related consultation processes.  
Growing evidence points to significant differences in the needs and wants of women 
versus men as consumers and entrepreneurs . For example, differences can be observed 
in how they use  energy on a daily basis, how much they are willing and able to adopt cooling 
technology and measures  e.g. in agriculture sector , and how they respond to campaigns 
marketing products and services. It is therefore essential to tailor any efforts toward consumer -
specific behaviors of men and women. For example, women may have lower literacy rates or receive communication through more informal channels then men to e.g. word of mouth versus 
town meetings etc. This points to a need for communications strategies in these countries to 
look beyond written materials as they transmit information related to  benefits of cooling, 
consumption patterns, and so forth.  
The agriculture sector in a number of developing countries employs a larger proportion of 
economically active women than is the case for men. Despit e their critical role in ensuring food 
security, women (in particular rural) still face constraints to enter fully and in the same conditions as men in the agriculture sector. Women, as both producers and consumers, have 
less access to productive resources , technologies (for harvesting and preservation), and 
markets. These barriers inhibit their potential across the sector, and also limit their economic empowerment and decrease their health , resulting in significant gender gaps that trickle down 
to families  and communities.


---
*Page 159*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 6 OF 54 
6 Other g ender gaps, such as in access to finance or affordability constraints (e.g., women have 
equal access to financial services in only 60 % of the world’s countries3), may make it relatively 
difficult for female -headed households or female business owners or farmers to adopt energy -
efficient appliances. To reach policy objectives, it is important to consider these dynamics in 
the design of relevant programs.  
Men and women t end to have different metabolisms, and thus experience air temperature 
differently, with ramifications for the world’s increasing use of air conditioning. In a field study 
of thermal comfort in offices in India, females were found to accept a wider range of 
temperatures than males, and require less mechanical cooling (Indraganti, Ooka, and Rijal 
2014). Beyond India, a 2019 study conducted in Germany, found that women performed better 
on certain cognitive tests at higher temperatures than at lower ones, and that overcooled 
offices had a negative impact on women’s productivity (Chang and Kajackaite 2019).  
Research has demonstrated that men and women respond differently to information and 
marketing campaigns. Surveys across countries and different economic conditions show that 
men tend to display higher levels of awareness and knowledge of environmental issues 
relative to women, though women exhibit a more positive attitude and behavior toward saving 
energy than men, suggesting that women are more willing to practice energy -saving behaviors 
(Huang and Chao 2017). It is likely that there are opportunities to improve the outcomes of efficient cooling programs through information  campaigns that are shaped by a better 
understanding these differences, and through the  targeting of approaches to achieve desired 
results.  
An “energy clinic” conducted by the Energy Management Centre in Kerala, India, demonstrated that women can be key agents of change in utilizing more efficient appliances. 
Women organized demonstration cl asses on energy conservation in their own villages, and 
attracted large numbers of attendees, including housewives, teachers, and local 
administrators (Unnithan 2018). Some energy companies e.g. Tata Power Delhi Distribution 
Ltd. has documented similar experiences by successfully appointing women as “brand ambassadors” to raise awareness about the benefits of legal connections, help facilitate new 
connections, and educate consumers on consumption patterns and bill payments, with each 
brand ambassador coveri ng an area of about 300 households (Shrivastava 2017; World Bank 
2017).  
Other opportunities to tackle gender equality issues include looking at how cooling institutions 
can tackle gender gaps apparent in labor force participation rates and during women’s 
recruitment, retention, and promotion. Issues to be addressed include legal barriers to women 
entering an industry or advancing to certain roles; limited transport and insufficient workplace 
infrastructure; inadequate institutional sexual harassment polici es and reporting mechanisms; 
a regressive organizational culture in male- dominated fields; gender pay gaps resulting from 
occupational segregation and unequal pay for equal work; and a lack of care services tailored to women. Such issues are being tackled by India’s Energy Efficiency Services Ltd. (EESL)  
with support from the World Bank’s India Energy Efficiency Scale -up Program (P162849) and 
the ESMAP -funded Women in Power Sector Network in South Asia (WePOWER).  
School -based education programs promoting energy efficiency can be an effective way to 
drive behavior change among households, as children can learn to integrate energy and 
sustainability in their own habits. They can also be an important entry point to engage young 
women in high schools to increas e their interest in the science and engineering fields. An 
example is the Girls of Energy initiative conducted by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office 
 
3 The Global Gender Gap Report , published by t he World Economic Forum,  benchmarks 144 countries 
in their progress toward gender parity across four thematic dimensions: economic participation and 
opportunit y, educational attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment. It has been 
published annually since 2007.


---
*Page 160*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 7 OF 54 
7 of Economic Impact and Diversity, whose activities include creating opportunities for more 
girls to explore the research and technology being developed at the department’s National 
Laboratories. The program also covers energy efficiency, among other topics, in an interactive 
e-learning book.4 It is likely that there are further opportunities to include energy efficiency in 
curricula focused on promoting women’s participation in research and technological 
innovation.  
An enabling environment is crucial  to improve women’s empowerment and reduce 
gender gaps . An enabling environment is critical to improve women’s empowerment and 
reduce gender gaps. Despite the fact that many countries are improving gender disparities, 
such as the inclusion of more women in the labor forces, those efforts are not being translated 
into decent jobs as women are still overrepresented in low productivity and informal jobs. A lot 
of the constraints women face are a result of behavioral and social norms in each country: 
labor segregation, time poverty, violence and gender roles. The C ooling Facility will support 
foster ing the participation of women by integrating gender -specific activities to be carried out.  
A robust legal framework and regulations protecting women rights and their access to services 
are also key for the implementation of activities that aim to close gender gaps. The following 
section includes a summary of laws and regulations for each country based on the publication 
Women, Business and the Law’s (World Bank, 2021)5 assessment. This assessment is an 
annual study that measures the laws and regulations that affect women’s economic 
opportunities. For instance, the COVID -19 has affected women’s social and economic 
capabilities, and the gap between men and women widened due to its impacts. The 
importance of legal equality is not limited to disaster preparedness or mitigation of the effects, 
but it is associated with better development outcomes such as lower rates of vulnerable 
employment and extreme poverty among female workers.  
The gender activities will be developed with each Executing Entity to support  local institutions 
having the tools and skills to achieve the proposed objectives. Activities will be in line with  
each country ’s respective policy and regulatory context and promote the implementation of 
assessments to identify the main barriers and constraints that inhibit gender equality. I t is 
important to create awareness among the institutions’  personnel to implement all activities 
effectively . A gender action plan per country  is not proposed, but rat her the integration of 
gender consideration in key activities, including ensuring that any data collected will be 
gender -disaggregated and, when relevant,  that vaccine and health outreach campaigns also 
be targeted at women. In all cases, the EE and the Bank should make sure that consultations 
consider all relevant stakeholders and include their concerns and suggestions. Finally, during 
the implementation, tools for monitoring and evaluation should be in place to enable capturing 
progress, make adjustments as needed and learn  from the implementation of gender 
activities.  
Linkages to climate change: gender inequality is one of the inhibitors for development, and 
the impacts of climate change perpetuate it. As previously mentioned, women have less 
economic, political, and legal power than men resulting in a more considerable inability to cope 
with the adverse effects of climate change. The differences according to vulnerabilities such 
 
4 For m ore information on  the U.S. Department of Energy’s Girls of Energy initiative, see 
https://www.energy.gov/diversity/girls -energy ; for the  e-book  “Girls of Energy,” see 
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/10/f33/GOE_eBook.pd f. 
5 “Women, Business and the Law 2021 presents an index covering 190 economies and structured 
around the life cycle of a working woman. In total, 35 questions are scored across the eight indicators. 
Overall scores are then calculated by taking the average of each indicator, with 100 representing the 
highest possible score. Data refer to the laws and regulations that are applicable to the main business 
city” (World Bank. 2021. Women, Business and the Law 2021. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
doi:10.1596/978- 1-4648-1652 -9. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO)


---
*Page 161*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 8 OF 54 
8 as poverty, jobs’ quality, quality of housing, among others, make women more susceptible to 
climate change, causing them forcibly being displaced, stop working in producti ve activities, 
and spend more time in non- paid tasks. Women’s empowerment is key to addressing climate 
change because women play a significant role in natural resources management (e.g., for 
productive uses such as in farming or cooking activities such as fuel collection).  Where 
pertinent, t he Facility will support women in improving their farming productivity (such as 
offering financial services that allow women to be more efficient, access better technology, and reduce food waste), provide sustainable cooling solutions for buildings that provide 
services, employment or housing to women.   
 
3.2 General Country- Specific Gender Gaps  
A preliminary gender gap assessment was conducted across the countries to be supported 
by the Facility. A n overview  of gender gaps id entified is outlined below , along with the 
preliminary identification of potential gender entry points for intervention (at the project level) , 
which will be explored during project design:  
 
‘ 
 
3.2.1  Bangladesh 
Bangladesh obtained a score of 0.726 in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, which 
puts the country in the 50th position. This suggests a substantial improvement in comparison 
to the 2006 edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0.627 and ranked 91st. 
The country has the high est score in its region, South Asia.  
The Constitution of Bangladesh states that women and men have equal rights in all spheres of public life. However, the same legal framework recognizes religious personal laws, which 
position women in an unequal situation and worse than men. The country has been investing 
and working in gender equality issues and regulations, including designing,  and implementing 
the National Women Development Policy led by the Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 
(created in 1972 and acting as the women’s rights machinery ). The following are some of the 
laws and rules applicable for women in the country:   
• Legal framework: Bangladesh has laws and r egulations  that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize  their rights. The publication Women, 
Business and the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that Bangladesh scores 49.4 
out of 100. It means the country is lower than the regional average achieved in South 
Asia (63.7). Employment  and payment : The country does not have a law that restricts 
women to work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way 
as men). Also, women at workplaces are protected by a legislation that  prevents sexual 
harassment in employment (Supreme Court of Bangladesh, BNWLA v. Government of Bangladesh, 14 May 2009, Petition No. 5916 of 2008). Women are not able to work in 
some industrial jobs i n the same way as men (including mining, water , and fact oring 
(Labor Act, Secs. 42 and 87) ), but some sectors do not have restrictions  for women  
(construction, agriculture, energy, transportation, and others). Women are also 
prevented from working in jobs that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, 
Bangladeshi women does not have a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal 
value.  
• Maternity Rights:  laws regarding maternity rights are broadly absent. The country 
lacks parental leave and fathers do not have the option or right to enjoy a paid leave.  
Also, the government does not administer 100% of the maternity leave benefits ( Labor 
Act, Sec. 47 ).


---
*Page 162*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 9 OF 54 
9 • Assets: the  Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, Art. 2  concedes women 
to have equal ownership rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal 
administrative authority over assets during marriage. However, the same law states 
that sons and daughters  do not  have equal rights to inherit assets from their parents ; 
and widowed women also do not have the same rights to inherit their spouses assets 
as men.   
• Access to credit: Bangladesh does not have a law that prohibit s discrimination in 
access to credit based on gender .  
• Marriage:  women cannot obtain a judgment of divorce in the same way as men and 
also women do not have the same rights to remarry as men.  
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita in Bangladesh amounts to 2,373 in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 42%  of the male 
GNI per capita (5,700 2011 PPP $).  
Table [1]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male 
Bangladesh 2,373  5,700  42 
Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation is Bangladesh is much lower for women than men; From 
the whole labor force, women represent only 30.7%. The share is even lower when looking at 
the share of female employees in the industry (25.3%), manufacturing (32.7%), electricity gas, 
steam, and air conditioning, supply (8.5%) or professional, scientific and technical activities 
8.9%. These gaps are partly explained by labor regulations in the country that forbid women 
from participating in certain sectors of the economy (Table [2]).  
 
Table [2]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2018 unless stated differently)  
Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturing  Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional, 
scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to  work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
Bangladesh  Female  25.3  32.7  8.5 8.9 30.7  No 
Male  74.7  67.3  91.5  91.1  69.3  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Financial inclusion. Men in Bangladesh present higher levels of financial inclusion than 
women when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution (50 versus 20%), 
a mobile account (33 versus 10%) or saving money (29 versus 26%) (Table [3]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at f inancial 
institution or a mobile money -service provider is 36%, well below the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), or South Asia (65.1%).  
Table [3]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)


---
*Page 163*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 10 OF 54 
10 Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Bangladesh  20%  50%  10%  33%  26%  29%  
Source: World Bank Littl e Book of Gender 2019  
Education. Women in Bangladesh are more likely to be enrolled in secondary education than 
men (68.9 of women versus 58.8% of men). However, this gap is reverted when looking at 
tertiary education (17 versus 24%). Consequently, men report a higher average number of 
schooling years (6.8 versus 5.3). In addition, women amount to only one fifth of STEM graduates (Table [4]).  
Table [4]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
Bangladesh  Female  91.5  68.9  17 5.3 20 
Male  93.7  58.8  24 6.8 
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Bangladesh is 176 per 100,000 live births, which ranks 
128th among 182 countries included in the Human Development Report. This figure is below 
the average in developing countries (231) and in line with its region, South Asia (176). 
However, more than 10 times the maternal mortality ratio in OCDE (14) or Very high human 
development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development Report. In addition, 
female life expectancy at birth in Bangladesh is almost 4 years higher than the same figure for 
males (74.3 versus 70.6 years) (Table [5]).  
Table [5]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Bangladesh  176 128 74.3 70.6 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
 
Agency. Only one out of five members in Bangladesh’s parliament are women (20.6%). The 
share of women in ministerial positions is even lower, below one in 10 (8%).6 
Gender Based Violence. According to the  United Nations Development Report,  more than 
half of Bangladeshi women aged 15 or older have experience gender -based violence by their 
partners.7


---
*Page 164*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 11 OF 54 
11 Gender gaps associated with the current project in Bangladesh 
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  efficient use of energy and resources in 
buildings and appliances . 
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
• Women are underrepresented in the energy sector . A recent study by the World 
Bank found that in 13 surveyed power sector organizations, only 16 out of 276 (6%) 
total board members are female. Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB) has 
the highest representation of women with 1,500 out of 16,040 total staff (9%) and 217 
out of 2,455 technical staff (9%). Data on the energy efficiency sector are not readily 
available but are assumed to roughly align with the l abor participation observed in the 
power sector.  
• Women in Bangladesh usually do not have adequate information on 
technologies available and access to financing or collateral. The gendered power 
relations in the household can influence decision- making, behavior change, and/or 
adoption of improved energy services like implementing renewable technology and/or 
energy -efficient appliances.  
• The private sector plays an important role to foster women’s economic 
empowerment. It may thus be important to partner with national and local 
nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and private companies to implement pilot 
livelihood programs. Activities that aim to train on use of labor and energy -saving 
appliances, and to offer financial and business management, credit, market access, 
marketing strategies.  
• Women face constraints in decision -making at home. Both women and men would 
be benefited from efficiency improvements in energy use and buildings and appliances. 
However, women are less likely to be legal owners or occupiers of their homes, and 
housing titles tend to be registered in the name of male household members. This 
limits agency in terms of decision making and also ability to gain access to finance due 
to collateral constraints for the purchase of energy technologies.  
 
 Suggested gender entry points and activities include : (i) develop (or review/enhance/) 
gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender assessment’s 
presentations; (iii) engage policy dialogues to raise awareness about the linkages between 
cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awareness about gender equality; (v) develop 
agender action plan that includes responsibilities, activities and budgets; (vi) develop and 
implement a communication/outreach campaign. - 
 
3.2.2  El Salvador  
 
El Salvador  obtained a score of 0.706 in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, which 
puts the country in the 80th position. This suggests a substantial improvement in comparison 
to the 2006 edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0.684  and ranked 39th. 
The country has  the sixth lowest score in its region, Latin America and the Caribbean.  
The Cons titution of El Salvador  states that women and men have equal rights at all levels . 
The country has been investing and working in gender equality issues and regulations, 
including designing, and implementing the National Policy for Women led by The Salvador an 
Institute for the Development of Women  (created in 1996 and acting as the women’s rights 
machinery ). The following are some of the laws and rules applicable for women in the country:


---
*Page 165*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 12 OF 54 
12  
Legal framework: El Salvador has laws and regulations that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize their rights. The publication Women, Business and 
the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that El Salvador scores 88.8 out of 100. It means 
the coun try is higher than the regional average achieved in Latin America (80.1).  
• Employment and payment: The country does not have a law that restricts women to 
work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way as men). 
Also, women at work places are protected by a legislation that prevents sexual 
harassment in employment (Código Penal, Art. 165; Ley General de Prevención de Riesgos en Lugares de Trabajo, Art. 7) and sexual harassment at work is consider a 
crime (Código Penal, Art. 165). A S alvadorian law prohibits discrimination in 
employment based on gender (Código del Trabajo, Art. 30(12); Código Penal, Art. 
246). Women are able to work in all industrial jobs in the same way as men (including 
mining, water and factoring, construction, agri culture, energy, transportation, and 
others ). Women are not prevented from working in jobs that are considered hazardous. 
In regards of payment, Salvadorian women does not have a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal value.  
• Maternity Rights: Moth ers in El Salvador have 112 days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Código del Trabajo, Art. 309 ). The country lacks 
parental leave, but fathers enjoy a 3- day paid leave after labor. Also, the government 
administers 100% of the maternity leave benefits ( Ley del Seguro Social, Arts. 1 y 12). 
It is also prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  (Código del Trabajo, Art. 113)  
• Assets: the Código de Familia, Art. 70  concedes women to have equal ownership 
rights to immovable prop erty and grant s spouses equal administrative authority over 
assets during marriage. Código Civil, Arts. 983 y 988(1)  states that sons and daughters  
have equal rights to inherit assets from their parents ; and widowed women also have 
the same rights to inher it their spouses assets as men.   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: El Salvador does not have a law that 
prohibit s discrimination in access to credit based on gender . Women also have no 
restrictions when registering a new business, open a bank account  or signing a 
contract.  
• Marriage: El Salvador does not have a legal provision that requires a married woman 
to obey her husband ( Código de Familia, Art. 36(1) ); women can be called the head of 
household in the same way as men. The country has specific legislation for addressing 
domestic violence ( Ley Contra la Violencia Intrafamiliar; Ley Especial Integral para una 
Vida Libre de Violencia para las Mujeres, Art. 8(k) ); and women can obtain a judgment 
of divorce in the same way as men, but they do not have t he same rights to remarry 
as men  (Código de Familia, Arts. 17, 23(5) y 115(1) ). 
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita in El Salvador  amounts to 6,471  in 2017  PPP $, which corresponds to 6 2% of the male 
GNI per capita ( 10,501 2017 PPP $).  
Table [ 6]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2017  ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1


---
*Page 166*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 13 OF 54 
13 Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male  
El Salvador 6,471 10,501 62 
Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation i n El Salvador  is much lower for women than men; women 
represent about the 60% of the labor force. The WEF (2019) indicates that women’s rate in 
the labor force participation is 50% while men’s is 83%. Women are less represented as 
professionals and technical workers (47.6% compared to 52.4% of men). Wom en are 
overrepresented in sectors such as services (commerce, hotels, restaurants –  45.5% or 
women vs. 17.8% of men), manufactures (17.5% vs 14.3% of men), domestic paid work (10.9% vs 0.8% of men) and education (4.3% vs. 1.6% of men) (Table [ 7]). 
Women tend to be included more often in temporary jobs as only 37.3% of them are 
considered full time formal workers, a number much lower than the 45.1% registered for men.  
 
Table [ 7]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2017  unless stated differently)  
Country  Sex Services  Manufacturing  Women are able to 
work in the same 
industries as men  
El Salvador  Female  45.4  17.5  yes 
Male  21.4  14.3  
Source: labor for shares from MTPS  https://www.mtps.gob.sv/wp -
content/uploads/descargas/BoletinesEstadisticos/mtps -boletin -laboral -mujeres -2019.pdf   and labor restrictions 
from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Financial inclusion. Men in El Salvador  present higher levels of financial inclusion than 
women when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution ( 36 versus 24%), 
a mobile account ( 2.2 versus 5.2%) or saving money ( 36 versus 40%) (Table [ 8]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at financial institution or a mobile money -service provider is 24%, well below the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), or Latin America and the Caribbean (51%). 
Table [ 8]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  
Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
El Salvador  24%  36%  2.2%  5.2%  36%  40%  
Source: World Bank Littl e Book of Gender 2019  
Education. Women in El Salvador  are more likely to be enrolled in secondary education than 
men at all level (80.6% vs. 79.9% for primary education; 60.8% vs. 59.5% for secondary 
education; 30.2% vs. 27.0% for tertiary education, for women  and men respectively ). However, 
women present a lower literacy rate than men (86.7% vs. 90.6%) . In addition, women amount 
to only one f ourth of STEM graduates (Table [ 9]). 
Table [ 9]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%)


---
*Page 167*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 14 OF 54 
14 El Salvador  Female  80.6  60.8  30.2  24 
Male  79.9  59.5 27 
Source: enrolment  from WEF  http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  and STEM graduates  from 
World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in El Salvador  is 46 per 100,000 live births, which ranks 
91st among 182  countries included in the Human Development Report. This figure is below 
the average in developing countries (231) and below  with its region,  Latin America and the 
Caribbean (72.7 ). However, more than 3  times the maternal mortality ratio in OCDE (14) or 
Very high human development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development 
Report. In addition, female life expectancy at birth in El Salvador  is more than 9 years higher 
than the same figure for males ( 77.8 versus 68.5 years) (Table [ 10]). 
Table [ 10]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
El Salvador  46 91 77.8 68.5 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
 
Agency. Only 31% members in Salvadorian’s parliament are women. The share of women in 
ministerial positions is  slightly higher ( 33.3%).8 
Gender Based Violence. According to the  United Nations Development Report,  14.3% of 
women aged 15 and older have experience intimate partner violence9. Other sources10 
suggests that 24.2% of women have suffered of physical part ner violence at some point of 
their lives and 11.5% have experienced sexual violence by a partner at some point. Also, El 
Salvador have one of the highest femicide rates in region, per year 3.311 per 100.000 die by 
gender -based violence.   
Gender gaps associated with the current project in El Salvador  
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  health- oriented projects  
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
• Women in El Salvador face some constraints when accessing maternal health 
services: At early stages of pregnancy or after giving birth, women do not visit health 
professionals.  Complications and risks are not being identified on time resulting in the 
reduction o f women’s health or deaths.12. Also,  global data show that about 30% of 
women who are pregnant are likely to be infected with  SARS- CoV-2. Most of women  
who test positive for COVID -19, will not develop serious complications, however they 
can infect their new borns.13 Health authorities recommend that pregnant women to 
receive the COVID -19 vaccine.  
• Women live longer than men:  women live longer than men, also they represent a 
largest proportion of vulnerable population over the age of 65. While women over the 
age of 65 add to 4.64%, men only account for 3.37%.     
 
8 Source: WEF Global Gender Report 2020. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  
9 Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
10 Source: PAHO https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/3471   
11 Source: ECLAC: https://oig.cepal.org/en/indicators/femicide- or-feminicide   
12 Ministerio de Salud. Línea de base de mortalidad materna en El Salvador. Junio 2005 -  mayo 2006. 
El Salvador. En: https:/ /www.salud.gob.sv/archivos/pdf/documento_LBMM/CONTENIDO_PARTE4.pdf  
13 https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/special -populations/pregnancy/


---
*Page 168*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 15 OF 54 
15 • Women face high levels of gender -based violence:  On average, 26. 3% of women 
report physical and/or sexual abuse by partners at some point in their lives. Victims 
are usually unemployed, who live in urban areas and also mothers of multiple children.  
The country  also has limited capacity to address gender -based violence cases. Most 
of the health facilities that are dedicated to examining and serving victims of gender -
based violence are not adequate or insufficient.  Women who work in domestic task  
face more often gender -based violence than women who work outside their homes.  
When entering an emergency service at clinics or hospitals, victims of gender -based 
violence. Also lockdown measurements increase the incidence of GBV at home.        
• Reverse gender gap is found in COVID -19 cases in the country:  By January 2020, 
49539 COVID -19 cases have been recorded in El Sal vador. While 51% of the cases 
correspond to male  patients, 49% of the cases are being detected in wo men.  
 
Suggested gender entry points and activities include : (i) develop a gender assessment 
(identify priority areas such as maternal health facilities  and to capture sex -disaggregated data 
and information about better access to vaccine); (ii) stakeholder consultations /presentation; 
(iii) develop and implement a communication /outreach campaign.   
 
3.2.3  Kenya 
Kenya obtained a score of 0.671 in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, which puts 
the country in the 109th position. This suggests a minor improvement in comparison to the 
2006 edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0.649 and ranked 73rd.14 The 
country ranks 20th among 34 countries in its region, Sub- Saharan Africa.  
The Constitution of Kenya  states  that w omen and men have the right to equal treatment, 
including the right to equal opportunities in political, economic, cultural and social spheres.  
The country has been investing and working in gender equality issues and regulations, 
including the creation and implementation of the National Policy on Gender and Development 
led by the Ministry of Public Service and Gender. (created in 2015  and acting as the women’s 
rights machinery ). The following are some of the laws and r ules applicable for women in the 
country:   
 
Legal framework: Kenya has laws and regulations that protect women against discrimination 
and violence and recognize their rights. The publication Women, Business and the Law 2021 
(World Bank, 2021) indicates that Kenya scores 80. 6 out of 100. It means the country is higher 
than the regional average achieved in Sub -Saharan Africa  (71).  
• Employment and payment: The country does not have a law that restricts women to work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way as men). 
Also, women at workplaces are protected by a legislation that prevents sexual 
harassment in employment ( Sexual Offences Act, 2006, Sec. 23; Employment Act, 
2007, Sec. 6 ) and sexual harassment at work is consider a cri me ( Sexual Offences 
Act, 2006, Sec. 23). A Kenyan law prohibits discrimination in employment based on 
gender ( Employment Act, Art. 5(3)(a)) . Women are able to work in all industrial jobs in 
the same way as men (including mining, water and factoring, constr uction, agriculture, 
energy, transportation, and others ). Women are not prevented from working in jobs 
that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, Kenyan  women are protected 
by a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal value (Employment Ac t, Art. 
5(5)).  
 
14 Many countries were added between the two vintages; thus, the drop in the ranking does not 
necessarily signals the performance of the country.


---
*Page 169*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 16 OF 54 
16 • Maternity Rights: Mother s in Kenya have 90 days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Employment Act, Sec. 29(1) ). The country lacks 
parental leave, but fathers enjoy a 14 -day paid leave after labor  (Employment Act , Art. 
29(8) ). The government  does not  administer 100% of the maternity leave benefits 
(Employment Act, Art. 29). It is also prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  
(Employment Act, Art. 29 ) 
• Assets: the Matrimonial Property Act, Sec. 4(a)  and 12 respec tively  concede women 
to have equal ownership rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal 
administrative authority over assets during marriage. Law of Succession Act, Art. 35(5)  
states that sons and daughters  have equal rights to inherit assets from their parents ; 
but widowed women do not have the same rights to inherit their spouses assets as 
men (Law of Succession Act, Art. 36(1) ).   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Kenya does not have a law that prohibit s 
discrimination in access to credit based on gender . Women also have no restrictions 
open a bank account or signing a contract  (Matrimonial Property Act, Art. 4(b) ). 
However, women experience barriers to register a business as they cannot do it in the 
same way  as men ( Registration of Business Names Act, Art. 6(1)(h) ) 
• Marriage: Kenya  does not have a legal provision that requires a married woman to 
obey her husband; women can be called the head of household in the same way as 
men. The country has specific legislation for addressing domestic violence ( Protection 
Against Domestic Violence Act, 2015); and women can obtain a judgment of divorce 
in the same way as men , but they do not have the same rights to remarry as men.  
 
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita in Kenya amounts to 2,619 in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 75% of the male GNI 
per capita (3,490 2011 PPP $).  
 
 
 
 
Table [ 11]. Female and male gross national income per  capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male 
Kenya  2,619  3,490  75 
Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation is Kenya is slightly lower for women than men; From the 
whole labor force, women represent 49.0%. However, the share is much lower when looking 
at the share of female employees in the industry (13.4%), manufacturing (26.8%), or electricity 
gas, steam, and air conditioning, supply (19.8%) (Table [ 12]). 
Table [ 12]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2018 unless stated differently)


---
*Page 170*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 17 OF 54 
17 Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturing  Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional, 
scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
Kenya  Female  13.4  26.8  19.8  NA 49.0  Yes 
Male  86.6  73.2  80.2  NA 51.0  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat -files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019. Note: Kenya's numbers are from ILO Modelled Estimates.  
Financial inclusion. Men in Kenya present higher levels of financial inclusion than women 
when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution (47 versus 65%), a 
mobile account (69 versus 77%) or saving money (65 versus 77%) (Table [ 13]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at financial 
institution or a mobile money -service provider is 78%, well above the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), and more than double the share in South- Sahar an Africa (36%).  
Table [ 13]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  Women with account at 
financial inst. or with 
mobile money -service 
provider (% age 15+)  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Kenya  47%  65%  69%  77%  65%  77%  78%  
Source: World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Education. Women in Kenya are more likely to be enrolled in primary education than men 
(81.7 of women versus 78.3% of men). However, this gap is reverted when looking at 
secondary or tertiary education. Consequently, men report a higher average number of 
schooling years (7.2 versus 6). In addition, women amount to less than one third of STEM 
graduates (31% ) (Table [ 4]). 
Table [ 14]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
Kenya  Female  81.7  45.8  9.7 6 31 
Male  78.3  49 13.2  7.2 
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Kenya is 510 per 100,000 live births, one of the highest 
in the world, ranking 164th among 182 countries included in the Human Development Report. 
This figure is more than twice the average in developing countries (231) but close with its 
region, South- Saharan Africa (550). In addition, female life expect ancy at birth in Kenya is 
more than 4 years higher than the same figure for males (68.7 versus 64.0 years) (Table [ 15]). 
Table [ 15]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Kenya  510 164 68.7 64.0 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report


---
*Page 171*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 18 OF 54 
18  
Agency. Only one out of five members in Kenya’s parliament are women (21.8%). The share 
of women in ministerial positions is slightly higher, one in four (25%).15 
Gender Based Violence. According to the United Nations Development Report,  41% of 
women in Kenya aged 15 or older have experience gender -based violence by their partners.16 
Gender gaps associated with the current project in Kenya  
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted: efficient and sustainable cooling appliances 
to both off -grid and on- grid consumers, targeting household end- users, small businesses and 
manufacturing supply chains.  Expansion of credit facility for providers of energy efficient 
cooling systems.  
 
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
• Female -headed households are less likely to have access to energy, for all, grid 
and off -grid users, in urban and rural areas17. Female- headed households are more 
deprived from electricity than their male counterparts. 16.3% and 50.4% of female 
headed households in urban and rural areas do not have any source of electricity 
compared to 9.3% and 45.3% of male- headed households in urban and rural areas, 
respectively.  
• Financing options may be important to close the access gap for rural female-
headed households.  Across Kenya, households where women are primary decision 
makers are generally less willing (or able) to pay for off -grid solar solutions up front but 
were more willing to purchase a solar solution if the repayment period was over a 
longer period of time (6– 12 months).  
• Women’s income is limited. For instance, when offered an off -grid solar home 
system, only 17% of female -headed households were willing (or able) to pay its full 
price up front, compared to 31% of male- headed households. H owever, when a 
payment plan of 12 months was offered, more female- headed households (26.8%) 
than male- headed households (16.3%) were willing to pay for this solar -solution.  
• Regardless of their willingness to pay of energy access, women in Kenya have 
less access to financial options than men.18 For example, when looking at the 
shares owning an account (77.7% of females versus 85.8% of males), saving money 
(64.7% versus 76.6%) or borrowing money (61.7% versus 67.4%). Moreover, women 
tend to rely more on infor mal sources of credit. 13.8% of adult women borrowed from 
a financial institution or used a credit card, compared to 25.3% of adult males. 
Meanwhile, 24.2% of adult women borrowed through a savings club compared to 
14.6% of adult men.  
 
Suggested ender entr y points and activities include : (i) develop (or review/enhance/) 
gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender assessment’s 
presentations; (iii) engage in policy dialogues to raise awareness about the linkages between 
cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awareness about gender equality; (v) ) develop 
agender action plan that includes responsibilities, activities and budgets  (vi): impart 
informational sessions for female- led firms; (vii) assessment on financial barriers female-
 
15 Source: WEF Global Gender Report 2020. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  
16 Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
17 Source: World Bank (2020) Kenya - Multi -Tier Framework (MTF) Survey  
https://energydata.info/dataset/kenya- multi- tier-framework -mtf-survey  
18 World Bank (2017) Findex Survey https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/


---
*Page 172*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 19 OF 54 
19 enterprises face; (viii) develop training/capacity/skill building activities for women, (ix) develop 
and implement a communication/outreach campaign.    
3.2.4  Malawi  
Malawi obtained a score of 0.664 in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, which puts 
the country in the 116th position. This is the same score the country received in the 2006 
edition of the report ; however, a lower ranking. Malawi ranked 91st in the 2006 vintage.19 The 
country ranks 23rd in its region, South -Sharan Africa.  
The Constitution of Malawi states  that women have the right to fully participat e in all spheres 
of Malawian society on the basis of  equal opportunities with men;  and that women are 
protected by the implementation of the principles of nondiscrimination.  The country has been 
investing and working in gender equality issues and regulations,  including the creation for 
gender equality coordination of the Ministry of Gender, Children, Disability and Social Welfare  
(created in 1996 and acting as the women’s rights machinery ). The following are some of the 
laws and rules applicable for women in the country:   
 
Legal framework: MAlawi has laws a nd regulations that protect women against discrimination 
and violence and recognize their rights. The publication Women, Business and the Law 2021 
(World Bank, 2021) indicates that Malawi scores 77.5 out of 100. It means the country is higher 
than the regi onal average achieved in Sub -Saharan Africa (71).  
• Employment and payment: The country does not have a law that restricts women to 
work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way as men). Also, women at workplaces are protected by a legislation that prevents sexual 
harassment in employment and sexual harassment at work is consider a crime 
(Gender Equality Act, 2013, Secs. 6(2) and 7(2) ). A Malawian  law prohibits 
discrimination in employment based on gender ( Employment Act, Sec. 5 ). Women are 
able to work in all industrial jobs in the same way as men (including mining, water and 
factoring, construction, agriculture, energy, transportation, and others ). Women are not 
prevented from working in jobs that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, 
Malawian  women are protected by a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal 
value (Employment Act, Sec. 6 ).  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in Malawi have  56 days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Employment Act, Sec. 47(1) ). The country lacks 
parental leave, and  fathers  cannot  enjoy a paid leave after labor. The government does 
not administer 100% of the maternity leave benefi ts (Employment Act, Sec. 47 ). It is 
also prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  (Employment Act, Sec. 49)  
• Assets: The Married Women's Property Act, Secs. 1, 2 and 5 respectively concede 
women to have equal ownership rights to immovable property and gr ants spouses 
equal administrative authority over assets during marriage. Deceased Estates (Wills, 
Inheritance and Protection) Act, Sec. 17 states that sons and daughters  have equal 
rights to inherit assets from their parents ; and widowed women have the sam e rights 
to inherit their spouses ’ assets as men.   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Malawi does not have a law that prohibit s 
discrimination in access to credit based on gender . Women also have no restrictions 
open a bank account or signing a contract  (Constitution of Malawi, Art. 24(1)(a)(i ). 
 
19 Many countries were added between the two vintages; thus, the drop in the ranking does not 
necessarily signals the performance of the country.


---
*Page 173*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 20 OF 54 
20 • Marriage: Malawi does not have a legal provision that requires a married woman to 
obey her husband; women can be called the head of household in the same way as 
men (Marriage, Divorce and Family Relations  Act, Arts. 48 -50). The country has 
specific legislation for addressing domestic violence ( Prevention of Domestic Violence 
Act); and women can obtain a judgment of divorce in the same way as men, but they 
do not have the same rights to remarry as men . 
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita in Malawi amounts to 925  in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 6 % of the male GNI 
per capita ( 1,400  2011 PPP $).  
Table [ 16]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male  
Malawi  925 1,400  66 
Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. The l abor force participation rate for women in Malawi  is slightly below the 
participation rate for men; from the whole labor force, women represent only 48.1 %. However, 
the share is significantly even lower when looking at the share of female employees in the 
industry ( 36.0%), manufacturing ( 40.7%), or electricity gas, steam, and air conditioning, supply 
(9.2%) (Table [ 17]). 
 
Table [ 17]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2 018 unless stated differently)  
Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturing  Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional, 
scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to  work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
Malawi  Female  36.0  40.7  9.2 NA 48.1  Yes 
Male  64.0  59.3  90.8  NA 51.9  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Financial inclusion. Men in Malawi present higher levels of financial inclusion than women 
when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution ( 29 versus 19%), a 
mobile account ( 23 versus 18 %) or saving money ( 53 versus 51%) (Table [ 18]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at financial 
institution or a mobile money -service provider is 30%, well below the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), or South -Saharan Africa (36%). 
 
Table [ 18]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  Women with account at 
financial inst. or with 
mobile money -service 
provider (% age 15+)  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Malawi  18%  29%  18%  23%  51%  53%  30%


---
*Page 174*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 21 OF 54 
21 Source: World Bank Little Book of Gen der 2019  
Education. Women in Malawi are more likely to be enrolled in primary or secondary education 
than men. However, this gap is reverted when looking at tertiary education ( 0.6 versus 1%). 
Due to these difference and gaps in education attainment , men report a higher average 
number of schooling years ( 5.1 versus 4.1). 
Table [ 19]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
Malawi  Female  97.1  34.8  0.6 4.1 NA 
Male  92 33.7  1 5.1 
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Malawi is 634 per 100,000 live births, which is one of 
the highest in the world, 170th among 182 countries included in the Human Development 
Report. This figure is above the average in developing countries (231) or Malawi’s region, 
South- Saharan Africa  (550). In additi on, female life expectancy at birth in Malawi is almost 6  
years higher than the same figure for males ( 66.9 versus 60.7 years) (Table [ 20]). 
Table [ 20]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Malawi  634 170 66.9 60.7 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org /en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
Agency. Only around one out of five parliament members in Malawi are women ( 22.9%). The 
share of women in ministerial positions is even lower, (16.7 %).20 
Gender Based Violence. According to the  United Nations Development Report,  more 38% 
of women in Malawi aged 15 or older have experience gender -based violence by their 
partners.21 
Gender gaps associated with the current project  in Malawi 
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  agriculture value chain products; MSMEs in 
which cooling activities  are relevant to their business,  such as diary, horticulture (fruits and 
vegetables)  
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
•  Women’s entrepreneurship  is booming.  At the entrepreneurship level, despite 
being less wealthy, less developed and lagging in terms of knowledge assets, financial 
access and supporting entrepreneurial conditions, female -led businesses in Malawi, 
representing 30.3% of the country’s business es, were ranked  no 7 globally according 
to the Mastercard Index of Women Entrepreneurs index .  
• In Malawi, women farmers have lower levels of education compared to male 
farmers. Women have less access to agricultural productive endowments and 
financial resour ces, which severely affects productivity.  
 
20 Source: WEF Global Gend er Report 2020. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  
21 Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data


---
*Page 175*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 22 OF 54 
22 • Women’s productivity is lower than men.  Agricultural productivity on female 
managed plots has been estimated to be 25%  lower than on male- managed plots due 
to limited access to productive endowments.  Also, data fro m the  UN shows that women 
have lower access to agricultural machinery and production technologies.  
 
Suggested ender entry points and activities include : (i) develop (or review/enhance/) 
gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender assessment’s 
presentations; (iii) engage in policy dialogues to raise awareness about the linkages between 
cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awareness about gender equality; (v) ) develop 
agender action plan that includes responsibilities, activities and budgets  (vi): impart 
informational sessions for female- led firms; (vii) assessment on financial barriers female-
enterprises face; (viii) develop training/capacity/skill building activities for women, (ix) develop 
and implement a communication /outreach campaign.    
 
 
3.2.5  North Macedonia  
North Macedonia  obtained a score of 0.711  in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, 
which puts the country in the 70th position. This suggests a small improvement in comparison 
to the 2006 edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0.698 and ranked 
28th.22 The country ranks 16th among 26 countries in its region, Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia. 
The Law on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men establishes that in North Macedonia  
women and men have equal rights at all levels. The country has been investing and working 
in gender equality issues and regulations, including designing, and implementing the National 
Strategy for Gender Equality led by Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (acting as the 
women’s rights machinery ). The following are some of the laws and rules applicable for women 
in the country:   
Legal framework: North Macedonia has laws and regulations that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize their  rights . The publication Women, Business and 
the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that North Macedonia scores 85 out of 100. It 
means the country is higher than the regional average achieved in Europe and Central Asia  
(83.4).  
• Employment and payment: The country does not have a law that restricts women to 
work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way as men). 
Also, women at workplaces are protected by a legislation that prevents sexual 
harassment in em ployment and sexual harassment at work is consider a crime (Law 
on Protection Against Harassment at the Workplace, Arts. 1 and 7; Law on Equal 
Opportunities for Women and Men, Art. 3(3) ; Law on Prevention and Protection against 
Discrimination, Art. 41; Law  on Protection Against Harassment at the Workplace, Art. 
36, 36а and 37) . A N. Macedonian law prohibits discrimination in employment based 
on gender ( Labor Relations Act, Arts. 6 and 7 ). However, w omen are  not able to work 
in all industrial jobs in the sam e way as men (including mining, construction and 
factories are not allowed ( Labor Relations Act, Art. 160  and 131) while water, 
agriculture, energy, transportation, and others  are allowed) . Women are not prevented 
from working in jobs that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, N. 
 
22 Many countries were added between the two vintages; thus, the drop in the ranking does not 
necessarily signals the performance of the country.


---
*Page 176*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 23 OF 54 
23 Macedonian  women are not protected by a law that mandates equal remuneration for 
equal value.  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in North Macedonia have 270 days of paid time during a 
period between  pregnancy and after labor (Labor Relations Act, Art. 165 ). The country 
lacks parental leave, but fathers can enjoy a paid leave after labor  (2 days) ( Labor 
Relations Act, Art. 146; General Collective Bargaining Agreement for the Private 
Sector in the Field of Economy, Article 42 ). The  government administer s 100% of the 
maternity leave benefits ( Law on Health Insurance, Arts. 14 and 17 ). It is also 
prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  (Labor Relations Act, Art. 101 ) 
• Assets: Constitution of the Republic of North Macedonia, Art. 9  and the Law on 
Ownership and Other Real Rights, Arts. 70 -72 concede women to have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal administrative 
authority over assets during marriage respectively . The Law on Inheritance of 1996, 
Arts. 3 and 13  states that sons and daughters  have equal rights to inherit assets from 
their parents ; and widowed women have the same rights to inherit their spouses’ 
assets as men.   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: North Macedonia prohibit s discrimination in 
access to credit based on gender  (Law on Prevention of and Protection Against 
Discrimination, Art. 11 ). Women also have no restrictions open a bank account , signing 
a contract,  and register a business in the same way as men.  
• Marriage: North Macedonia does not have a legal provision that requires a married 
woman to obey her husband; women can be called the head of household in the same way as men. The country has specific legislation for addressing domestic violence 
(Law on Prevention, Suppression and Protection from Domestic Violence; Criminal 
Code, Art. 122(21) ); and women can obtain a judgment of divorce and have the same 
rights to remarry as men.  
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per  
capita in North Macedonia amounts to 9,464 in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 58% of the 
male GNI per capita ( 16,279 2011 PPP $).  
Table [ 21]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male  
North Macedonia  9,464  16,279  58 
Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation in  North Maceonia is much lower for women than men; 
From the whole labor force, women represent only 39 .6%. The share is even lower when 
looking at the share of female employees in the  industry ( 33.8%), electricity gas, steam, and 
air conditioning, supply ( 16,7%). However, closer to parity when looking at manufacturing 
(47.6%)  or professional, scientific and technical activities (54.8%). These gaps are partly 
explained by labor regulati ons in the country that forbid women from participating in certain 
sectors of the economy (Table [ 22]).


---
*Page 177*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 24 OF 54 
24  
Table [ 22]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2018 unless stated differently)  
Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturing  Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional, 
scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
North Macedonia  Female  33.8  47.6  16.7  54.8  39.6  No 
Male  66.2  52.4  83.3  45.2  60.4  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat -files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Financial inclusion. Men in North Macedonia present higher levels of financial inclusion than 
women when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution ( 73 versus 80%), 
a mobile account ( 11 versus 13%) or saving money ( 33 versus 38%) (Table [ 23]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at financial 
institution or a mobile money -service provider is 73%, well above the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), or Europe and Central Asia (54%). 
Table [ 23]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  Women with account at 
financial inst. or with 
mobile money -service 
provider (% age 15+)  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
North Macedonia  73%  80%  11%*  13%*  33%  38%  73%  
Source: World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019 .  
*For North Macedonia, this indicator reflects usage of mobile phone or the internet to access an account in 2017 
(% age 15+)  
Education. Women and men in North Macedonia are almost equally likely to be enrolled in 
primary education, however, a gap favoring men appear when looking at secondary an tertiary 
education. Consequently, men report a higher average number of schooling years ( 10.2 
versus 9.2). Women encompass a lower share of of STEM graduates (45%) (Table [ 24]). 
Table [ 24]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
North Macedonia  Female  91.9  77.6  45.9  9.2 45 
Male  91.5  80.2  36.7  10.2  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in North Macedonia is 8 per 100,000 live births, which 
ranks 29th among 182 countries included in the Human Development Report. This figure is 
well below the average in developing countries (231) or its region, Europe and Central Asia  
(25). The ratio is even lower than the mater nal mortality ratio in OCDE (14) or Very high human 
development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development Report. In addition, 
female life expectancy at birth in North Macedonia is 4 years higher than the same figure for 
males (77 .7 versus 7 3.7 years) (Table [ 25]). 
Table [ 25]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)


---
*Page 178*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 25 OF 54 
25 100,000 live 
births)  
North Macedonia  8 29 77.7 73.7 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
 
Agency. Close to 40%  of parliament members in North Macedonia are women. However, t he 
share of women in ministerial positions is  only 16% ).23 
Gender Based Violence. According to the United Nations Development Report,  10% of 
women in North Macedonia aged 15 or older have experience gender -based violence by their 
partners.24 
Gender gaps associated with the current project  in North Macedonia 
Cooling activities  or sectors  targeted:  energy efficiency investments in public buildings 
(central government and municipal schools, health care facilities, universities, etc) to lower 
and avoid cooling loads through the development and implementation of a sustainable 
financing mechanism.  
Preli minary overview of relevant gender gaps  
• Gender -based violence represents a priority  public health issue: the country has 
established dedicated facilities administrated by the Ministry of Health that address 
and prevent victimization of women. Gender -based violence results on women’s 
physical and mental injuries and traumas. Also, evidence shows that women that 
experience physical or sexual violence report higher rates of depression, abortion and 
acquiring HIV compared to women have do not experience this type of violence.  
• Vocational differences can be spotted between male and female  students’ 
secondary qualifications. From all female students, only 1% choose mechanical 
engineering and 5% chooses electrical engineering. Meanwhile 16% of male students 
choose mechanical engineering and 20% choose electrical engineering.  
• Women are underrepresented in the STEM careers. Overall, 10% of all female 
students choose an engineering qualification compared to 35% of male students.  
Women in North Macedonia account to only 17.5% of all researchers in science, 
technology, and innovation working on the field of engineering and technology.  
• The labor market is also clustered by sex in North Macedonia.  From all female 
workers, only 0.4% are in the electricity; gas, steam and air conditioning supply, 
compared to 2.8% of male workers. Moreover, the male labor  force is bigger due to 
higher male labor  participation. Consequently, male workers account for 91% of the 
employees in electricity; gas, steam and air conditioning supply.  
 
 Suggested gender entry points and a ctivities include:  (i) develop (or review/enhance/) 
gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender assessment’s 
presentations; (iii) engage policy dialogues to raise awareness about the linkages between 
cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awareness about gender equality; (v  develop 
agender action plan that includes responsibilities, activities and budgets ; (vi) develop and 
implement a communication campaign.    
  
 
23 Source: WEF Global Gender Report 2020. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  
24 Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data


---
*Page 179*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 26 OF 54 
26 3.2.6  Panama 
Panama obtained a score of 0.730  in the 2020 WEF Global Gender Report Index, which puts 
the country in the 46th position. This suggests a substantial improvement in comparison to the 
2006 edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0.693  and ranked 31st.25 The 
country ranks 12th among 25 countries in its region, Latin America and t he Carib bean.  
The Constitution of Panama establishes  that Panamanian women and men have equal rights 
at all levels. The country has been investing and working in gender equality issues and 
regulations, including the creation of the National Women’s Institute  (created in 2008 and 
acting as the women’s rights machinery ). The following are some of the laws and rules 
applicable for women in the country:   
 
Legal framework: Panama has laws and regulations that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize their rights. The publication Women, Business and 
the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that Panama scores 79.4 out of 100. It means the 
country is lower  than the regional average achieved in Latin America and the Caribbean (80.1).  
• Employmen t and payment: The country does not have a law that restricts women to 
work in in the same fields as men (and can work at night in the same way as men). 
Also, women at workplaces are protected by a legislation that prevents sexual 
harassment in employment and sexual harassment at work is consider a crime (Código 
de Trabajo, Arts. 127(12) y 138(15); Ley Núm. 82 de 2013, Arts. 4(20) y 45; and Ley 
Núm. 82 de 2013, Arts. 4(20) y 45 ). A Panamanian law  prohibits discrimination in 
employment based on gender ( Ley N úm. 82, Arts. 4(20) y 45 ). and women are  able to 
work in all industrial jobs in the same way as men (including mining, construction, 
factories , water, agriculture, energy, transportation, and others ). Women are not 
prevented from working in jobs that are c onsidered hazardous  (Código de Trabajo, Art. 
104). In regards of payment, Panamanian  women are not protected by a law that 
mandates equal remuneration for equal value.  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in Panama  have 98 days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Código de Trabajo, Art. 107 ). The country lacks 
parental leave, but fathers can enjoy a paid leave after labor ( 3 days) ( Ley Núm. 27, 
Arts. 1 y 3 ). The government administers 100% of the maternity leave benefits ( Código 
de Trabajo, Art. 107 ). It is also prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  (Código de 
Trabajo, Art. 106 ) 
• Assets: Código de Familia, Arts. 103 y 104 concedes women to have equal ownership 
rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal administrative authority over 
assets during marriage respectively. The Código Civil, Arts. 661 -663 states that sons 
and daughters  have equal rights to inherit assets from their parents ; and widowed 
women have the same rights to inherit their spouses’ assets as men.   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Panama does not have a law that  prohibit s 
discrimination in access to credit based on gender, but  women do not have no 
restrictions open a bank account, signing a contract, and register a business in the 
same way as men.  
• Marriage: Panama  does not have a legal provision that requires a married woman to 
obey her husband; women can be called the head of household in the same w ay as 
men. The country has specific legislation for addressing domestic violence ( Ley Núm. 
 
25 Many countries were added between the two vintages; thus, the drop in the ranking does not 
necessarily signals the performance of the country.


---
*Page 180*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 27 OF 54 
27 38 de 2001; Ley Núm. 82 de 2013, Arts. 2, 4(3) y (10) ); and women can obtain a 
judgment of divorce and have the same rights to remarry  (Código de Família, Arts. 
35(2) y 219 ) as men.  
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita in Panama  amounts to 16,107 in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 65% of the male 
GNI per capita ( 24,787 2011 PPP $).  
Table [ 26]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male  
Panama  16,107  24,787  65 
Source: UNDP http://hdr .undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation is Panama  is lower for women than men; from the whole 
labor force, women represent only 41.0 %. The share is even lower when looking at the share 
of female employees in the industry (21 .6%) and electricity gas, steam, and air conditioning, 
supply ( 17.0%)26. In addition, the country has labor regulations t hat forbid women from 
participating in certain sectors of the economy (Table [ 27]). 
Table [ 27]. Share of employment by acti vities and sex (%, 2018 unless stated differently)  
Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturin
g Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional
, scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to  work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
Panama Female  21.6  43.0  17* 48.6  41.0  Yes 
Male  78.4  57.0  83.0  51.4  59.0  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour 
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019.  
Note: Numbers with an asterisk are c onsidered unreliable by ILO due to small samples.  
Education. Women in Panama are more likely to be enrolled in secondary or tertiary 
education than men. O f all women in the corresponding education ages, 65.9%  are enrolled 
in secondary education and 58.6% in tertiary education.  In contrast, from all men in the same 
age groups, only 61.7% are enrolled in secondary education, an 37.3% are enrolled in tertiary 
education.  Consequently, women report a higher average number of schooling years ( 10.4 
versus 9.9). In addition, women amount to almost half of STEM graduates (Table [ 28]). 
Table [ 28]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
Panama Female  85.9 65.9 58.6 10.4 
49 
Male  86.6 61.7 37.3 9.9 
 
26 The estimate of the share of employees by sex in the Electricity; gas, steam and air conditioning 
supply  sector in Panama is considered unreliable by ILO due to small samples.


---
*Page 181*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 28 OF 54 
28 Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.il o.org/ilostat -files/Documents /Bulk_ilostat_en.html# and labour  
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Panama is 94 per 100,000 live births, which ranks 109th 
among 182 countries included in the Human Development Report. This figure is below the 
average in developing countries (231) but above its region, Latin America and the Caribbean 
(68). In addition, female life expectancy at birth in Panama  is more than 6  years higher than 
the same figure for males ( 81.6 versus 75.2 years) (Table [ 29]). 
Table [ 29]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Panama 94 109 81.6 75.2 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
 
Agency. Only one out of five members in Panama’s  parliament are women (21 .1%). 
Additionally, t he share of women in ministerial positions close to one in four (26.7%).27 
Gender Based Violence. According to the  United Nations Development Report,  almost one 
in seven women in Panama aged 15 or older has experience gender -based violence by their 
partners.28 
Gender gaps associated with the current project  in Panama  
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  implementation of innovative energy 
efficiency fund, working through the local banking sector, to channel financing towards energy 
efficient cooling appliances ; green building s. Policy and communications activities are also 
planned.   
Preliminary overview o f relevant gender  gaps  
• Financial inclusion. Men in Panama present higher levels of financial inclusion than 
women when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution (50 
versus 42%), a mobile account (5 versus 2%) or saving money (55 versus 42%) (Table 
[30]). In addition, the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an 
account at financial institution or a mobile money -service provider is 42%, well below 
the average in developing countries (58.3%), or Latin America and the Caribbean 
(52%).  
Table [ 30]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  Women with account at 
financial inst. or with 
mobile money -service 
provider (% age 15+)  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Panama 42%  50%  2% 5% 42%  55%  42%  
Source: World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
 
• Women are underrepresented in the STEM field.  
 
27 Source: WEF Global Gender Report 2020. http://www3.weforum. org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf  
28 Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data


---
*Page 182*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 29 OF 54 
29 o In 2013, 32% of all researchers in science, technology, and innovation in 
Panama were female.  In the same year, 19% of researchers in engineering 
were female.  
o The percent of share of tertiary -level STEM students in the country is 52%. 
However, the share drops to 44% by the time of graduation.  
o Male w orkers account for 83% of the electricity; gas, steam and air conditioning 
supply  employees . 
•  Suggested gender entry points and activities  include:  (i) develop (or 
review/enhance/) gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender 
assessment’s presentations; (iii) engage policy dialogues to raise awareness about 
the linkages between cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awarenes s about 
gender equality; (v) develop agender action plan that includes responsibilities, 
activities and budgets ; (vi): impart informational sessions for female- led firms; (vii) 
assessment on financial barriers female- enterprises face; (viii) develop 
traini ng/capacity/skill building activities for women, (ix) develop and implement a 
communication campaign.    
 
3.2.7  Sao Tome and  Principe  
The Human Development Report 2020 and the Gender Development Index (GDI) define a 
ration of the female to male Human Development Index (HDI). The GDI shows gender 
inequalities in achievement health, education and economic resources. For 2019, the total 
GDI for Sao Tome e Principe was 0.906, identifying gender gaps against women.29  
The Constitution of Sao Tome and Principe guarantees equal rights and obligations to men 
and women in the country . The country has been investing and working in gender equality 
issues and regulations, including the design and implementation of the  National Strategy for 
Gender Equality and Equity  led by  the National Institute For The Promotion Of Gender Equality 
And Equity  (created in 2008 and acting as the women’s rights machinery ). The following are 
some of the laws and rules applicable for women in the country:   
Legal framework: Sao Tome and Principe has laws and regulations that protect women 
against discrimination and violence and  recognize their rights. The publication Women, 
Business and the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that Sao Tome and Principe 
scores 86.3 out of 100. It means the country is higher than the regional average achieved in 
Sub-Saharan Africa ( 71).  
• Employment and payment: The country has a law allows women to get a job in the 
same way as m en (Law No. 2/77, Art. 28) . Also, women at workplaces are protected 
by a legislation that prevents sexual harassment in employment and sexual 
harassment at work is consider a crime ( Penal Code, Art. 166(2); Labour Code, Art. 
18(2) ). A Santomean law prohibits discrimination in employment based on gender 
(Law No. 6/2019, Arts. 16, 17, 21 and 22 ). and w omen are  able to work in all industrial 
jobs in the same way as men (including mining, construction, factories, wa ter, 
agriculture, energy, transportation, and others ). Women are not prevented from 
working in jobs that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, Santomean 
women are not protected by a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal value.  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in Sao Tome and Principe have 60 days of paid time during 
a period between pregnancy and after labor ( Labor Law Art. 140(1) ). The country lacks 
parental leave, and fathers cannot  enjoy a paid leave after labor. The government 
admi nisters 100% of the maternity leave benefits ( Presidential Decree No. 3/2004, Art. 
 
29 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country -notes/STP.pdf


---
*Page 183*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 30 OF 54 
30 4; Decree- Law No. 25/2014, Art. 96(1)(b);  Law No. 6/2019, Art. 249 ). It is also 
prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker ( Law No. 6/2019, Art. 262)  
• Assets: Law No. 2/77, Arts. 35  & 36, and 38(2) concedes women to have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal administrative 
authority over assets during marriage respectively. The  Law No. 2/77, Art. 65  states 
that sons and daughters  have equal rights to inherit assets from their parents .   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Sao Tome and Principe does not have a 
law that prohibit s discrimination in access to credit based on gender, but women do 
not have no restrictions open a bank account, signing a contract, and register a 
business in the same way as men.  
• Marriage: Sao Tome and Principe  does not have a legal provision that requires a 
married woman to obey her husband; women can be called the head of household in 
the same way as men. The country has specific legislation for addressing domestic 
violence ( Law on Domestic and Family Violence); and women can obtain a judgment 
of divorce and have the same rights to remarry  (Law 19/2018, Art. 25(1) ) as m en. 
 
Income.  Sao Tome e Principe has low Gross National Income (GNI) per capita  and it is 
estimated for US$2,462 for women and US$5,439 for men. Also, 37.9% of households are 
headed by women and 62.1% by men. On average, the monthly household expenditure is 
16% lower for female- headed households than male- headed households. Female- headed 
households are also overrepresented in the lowest expenditure quintiles in the country. 
Women also  
Labor Markets. Labor participation i n Sao Tome e Principe is much lower for women than 
men women’s rate in the labor force participation is 43% while men’s is 76%.30 Also, only 44% 
of women in the labor force are waged and salaried workers, as opposed of 56% of men. 55% 
percent of women who belong to the labor f orce are considered as vulnerable employment. 
Only 3% of women work in the industry sector (vs. 25% of men) and women are overrepresented in the service sector (84% vs. 45% of men).  
Education. Women in Sao Tome e Principe are about the same to  be enrolled in primary 
education levels (96% for both boys and girls) and are slightly more likely to be enrolled in 
secondary education levels than men (68% vs. 61%).  
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Sao Tome e Principe  is 130 per 100,000 live births. 
This fi gure is below  the average in developing countries (231) and also below  the Sub-
Saharan Africa (547)  region. Also, it is more  than 10 times the maternal mortality ratio in OCDE 
(14) or very high human development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development Report. In addition, female life expectancy at birth in Sao Tome e Principe is 4 
years higher than the same figure for males ( 72.8 versus 68 years) . 
Agency. Only 18% members in Sao Tome e Principe’s  parliament are women. The share of 
women in ministerial positions is  about the same (18%).
31 
Gender -Based Violence: About 1 in 3 women have experience some form of GBV at the 
hands of their husbands or partners.  
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  in health- related projects  
 
30Source:  WBG . http://hdl.handle.net/10986/31689  
31 Source:  WBG . http://hdl.handle.net/10986/31689


---
*Page 184*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 31 OF 54 
31 Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
• COVID -19 global emergency has impacted the country at all levels:  Sao Tome e 
Principe is currently facing an economic crisis resulted from the effect of the COVID -
19 emergency, primary through losses in the tourism industry. COVID -19 cases i n the 
country represent one among the highest infection rates the Sub -Saharan Af rica 
region.   
• Gender -Based Violence: lockdowns and stay -at-home orders triggers potential 
increases of GBV ; it is important to provide women of tools for economic empowerment 
(including the most productive sectors  including the STEM field)  
 
Suggested gender entry points and activities include : (i) develop a gender assessment 
(identify priority areas such as maternal health facilities and to capture sex -disaggregated data 
and information about better access to vaccine); (ii) stakeholder  
 
3.2.8  Somalia  
Data and information regarding gender gaps in Somalia are limited. This situation represents 
a constraint to tackle issues that inhibits gender equality in the country. In the Gender 
Inequality Index (2012) report, the country has registered a scor e of 0.776 (with a maximum 
of 1 denoting complete inequality), placing Somalia at the fourth highest in gender inequality 
globally. Moreover, women in the country are being affected more by conflict and violence, inhibiting their potential to exit poverty.   
The Constitution of Somalia provides that all citizens have equal  rights and obligations  
regardless of sex, and that the State must not discriminate against any person on the basis of gender . The country has been investing and working in gender equality issues and regulations, 
including the design and implementation of the  National Gender Policy of Somalia led by the 
Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development  (created in 2014  and acting as the 
women’s rights machinery ). The following are some of the l aws and rules applicable for women 
in the country:   
 
Legal framework: Somalia has laws and regulations that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize their  rights. The publication Women, Business  and 
the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that Somalia  scores 46.9 out of 100. It means the 
country is lower than the regional average achieved in Sub -Saharan Africa ( 71).  
• Employment and payment: The country has a law that does not restrict women to 
work in in the same fields as men (Labor Code, Art. 4 ). However, w omen at workplaces 
are not protected by a legislation that prevents sexual harassment in employment. A 
Somalian law prohibits discrimination in employment based on gender ( Labor Code, 
Arts. 3 and 70)  but women are  not able to work in all industrial jobs in the same way 
as men (including mining, construction, factories, water, agriculture, energy, 
transportation, and others ; Labor Code, Art. 88 ). Women are not prevented from 
working in jobs that are considered hazardous. In regards of payment, Somalian  
women are protected by a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal value 
(Labor Code, Art. 70 ).  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in Somalia  have 98 days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Labor Code, Art. 91(2) ). The country lacks 
parental leave, and fathers cannot  enjoy a paid leave after labor. The government does 
not administer 100% of the maternity leave benefits  (Labor Code, Art. 91(2) ). It is also 
prohibited the dismissal of pregnant worker  (Labor Code, Art. 91)


---
*Page 185*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 32 OF 54 
32 • Assets: There are no restrictions that do not  concede women to have equal ownership 
rights to immovable property and Family Law, Arts. 1 and 29(3)  grant s spouses equal 
administ rative authority over assets during marriage. The  Constitution of Somalia, Art. 
2(3) states that sons and daughters  do not have  equal rights to inherit assets from their 
parents ; and widowed women do not have the same rights to inherit their spouses’ 
asset s as men (Constitution of Somalia, Art. 2(3) ).   
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Somalia does not have a law that prohibit s 
discrimination in access to credit based on gende r, but women do not have restrictions 
open a bank account, signing a contrac t, and register a business in the same way as 
men.  
• Marriage: Somalia  does not have a legal provision that requires a married woman to 
obey her husband; however, women cannot  be called the head of household in the 
same way as men  (Family Law, Art. 4(2) ). The country does not have a  specific 
legislation for addressing domestic violence; and women cannot  obtain a judgment of 
divorce and do not have the same rights to remarry . 
 
Income.  Somalia has one of the lowest Gross National Income (GNI) per capita in the world 
and it is estimated at US$400, however there is not recent data that shows the differences 
between men and women’s income. Women face high levels of poverty and this is translated 
to 49% of female -headed households are poor, a number slightly  lower than the 54% of male-
headed households.   
Labor Markets. Labor participation i n Somalia  is much lower for women than men;  the Gender 
Inequality Index (2012) indicates that women’s rate in the labor force participation is 19.1% 
while men’s is 74.3%. According to ILO 2017 data, 87.9% of women in Somalia are self -
employer, a higher number compared to men (70.2%). Also, the share of females employed 
in agriculture was 91.9 % when compared to 84.8% of men. Somalia is a predominantly a 
pastoralist economy, and livestock is considered family’s wealth and has traditionally been the 
property of men; women, on the other hand, manage the sale and exchange of livestock 
products such as milk and ghee and spend their earnings on household needs.  
Education. Women in  Somalia  are less likely to be enrolled in any education level than men . 
For every 10 boys enrolled in primary school there are only 7 girls and for every 10 young men  
enrolled in secondary education there are only 4  young women. While other educational 
reports might show parity in Somalia, the gender disparity in rural Somalia is higher than urban 
areas. It is important to note that the enrollment rates of girls in dis placed communities is 
higher than other rural areas . 
Health. The maternal mortality ratio in Somalia  is 732 per 100,000 live births, one of the 
highest in the world. This number  is above  the average in developing countries (231) and  
above the Sub-Saharan A frica (547) region. Moreover, the figure is more  than 52 times the 
maternal mortality ratio in OCDE (14) or very high human development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development Report. In addition, female life expectancy at 
birth in Somalia  is 3 years higher than the same figure for males ( 58 versus 55 years) (Table 
[31]). 
Table [ 31]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Somalia  732 58 55


---
*Page 186*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 33 OF 54 
33 Source: WBG . http://hdl.handle.net/10986/31689   
 
Agency. Only 24% members in Somalia ’s parliament are women. The share of women in 
ministerial positions is  ever lower (7%).32 
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps:  
• Women in Somalia face some constraints when accessing maternal health 
services: Most of the country has limited or no access to medical services and most 
of the remote communities rely on traditional birth attendants to handle deliveries. This 
scenario exacerbates  women’s vulnerabilities. As previously stated, evidence shows 
that about 30% of women who are pregnant are likely to be infected with SARS -CoV-
2. Most of women who test positive for COVID -19, will not develop serious 
complications, however they can infect their newborns.33 Health authorities 
recommend that pregnant women to r eceive the COVID -19 vaccine.  
• Women’s autonomy is limited for accessing health services: w omen lack of 
empowerment and tools to reach health care services. For instance, for emergency C -
section,  women have indicated that the prevailing norm is for women or providers to 
seek the consent of a male family member or clan leader, creating delays that can 
prove fatal to both the mother and the unborn child.34 
• Reverse gender gap is found in COVID -19 cases in the country:  By January 2020, 
4,726 COVID -19 cases have been recorded in the Somalian territory. While 26% of 
the cases correspond to female patients, 74% of the cases were  detected in men.  
 
Suggested gender entry points and activities include : (i) develop a gender 
assessment (identify priority areas such as maternal health facilities and to capture sex -
disaggregated data and information about better access to vaccine); (ii) stakeholder  
consultation.  
 
 
3.2.9  Sri Lanka  
Sri Lanka obtained a score of 0. 68 in the 2020 W EF Global Gender Report Index, which puts 
the country in the 102th position. This suggests a substantial drop in comparison to the 2006 
edition of the report, where the country obtained a score of 0. 72 and ranked 13th.35 The country 
has the third highest score among 7 countries in its region, South Asia.  
The Constitution of Sri Lanka states that all persons are equal before the law and are entitled 
to the equal protection of the law  and no citizen shall be discriminated against on the grounds 
of race, reli gion, language, caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or any such grounds.  
The country has been investing and working in gender equality issues and regulations, 
including the design and implementation of the  Bill of Women’s Rights and developed a 
National Plan of Action for Women led by the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs  (created 
initially in  1978 and consolidated in 2015  and acting as the women’s rights machinery ). The 
following are some of the laws and rules applicable for women in the countr y:   
 
Legal framework: Sri Lanka has laws and regulations that protect women against 
discrimination and violence and recognize their rights. The publication Women, Business and 
 
32 Source:  WBG . http://h dl.handle.net/10986/31689   
33 https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/special -populations/pregnancy/  
34 https://conflictandhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13031- 019-0241- x 
35 Many countries were added between the two vintages; thus, the drop in the ranking may 
overrepresent the change in the performance of the country.


---
*Page 187*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 34 OF 54 
34 the Law 2021 (World Bank, 2021) indicates that Sri Lanka scores 65.6 out of 100. It means 
the country is higher  than the regional average achieved in South Asia  (63.7).  
• Employment and payment: The country has a law that does not restrict women to 
work in in the same fields as men. W omen at workplaces are  protected by a legislation 
that prevents sexual harassment in employment  (Penal Code, Sec. 345(1) ) and sexual 
harassment at work is considered a crime ( Penal Code, Sec. 345 ). Sri Lank lacks a 
law that prohibits discrimination in employment based on gender . and women are not 
able to work in some industrial jobs in the same way as men (including mining (Mines 
and Mineral Act No. 33, Sec. 55; Employment of Females in Mines Ordinance N o.13, 
Sec. 2 ) and factories ( Factories Ordinance No. 45 of 1942, Secs. 25, 67 and 67A (2) ) 
are not allowed, while construction. Agriculture, energy, water, transportation, and 
other fields are allowed) . Women are not prevented from working in jobs that are  
considered hazardous. In regards of payment, Sri Lankan women are not protected by 
a law that mandates equal remuneration for equal value.  
• Maternity Rights: Mother s in Somalia have 84  days of paid time during a period 
between pregnancy and after labor ( Shop and Office Employees Act, Sec. 18B; Shop 
and Office Employees (Regulation of Employment and Remuneration) (Amendment) 
Act, No. 14 of 2018). The country lacks parental leave, and fathers cannot enjoy a paid 
leave after labor. The government does not adm inister 100% of the maternity leave 
benefits (Shop and Office Employees Act, Sec. 18B; Shop and Office Employees 
(Regulation of Employment and Remuneration) (Amendment) Act, No. 14 of 2018)  
• Assets: The Married Women's Property Ordinance, Sec. 5  concedes women to have 
equal ownership rights to immovable property and grant s spouses equal administrative 
authority over assets during marriage . The  Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance 
Ordinance, Sec. 24  and Sec 22 states that sons and daughters  have equal rights to 
inherit assets from their parents ; and widowed women have the same rights to inherit 
their spouses’ assets as men respectively.  
• Access to credit and entrepreneurship: Sri Lanka does not have a law that prohibit s 
discrimination in access to credit based on gende r, but women do not have restrictions 
open a bank account, signing a contract, and register a business in the same way as 
men.  
• Marriage: Sri Lanka does not have a legal provision that requires a married wom an to 
obey her husband . Women can be called the head of household in the same way as 
men. The country has  a specific legislation for addressing domestic violence  
(Prevention of Domestic Violence Act, No. 34 of 2005) ; and women can obtain a 
judgment of divo rce and have the same rights to remarry  as men.  
 
Income.  According to the UNDP’s estimates, the female Gross National Income (GNI) per  
capita in Sri Lanka amounts to 6,766  in 2011 PPP $, which corresponds to 40% of the male 
GNI per capita ( 16,852 2011 PPP $).  
Table [ 32]. Female and male gross national income per capita (2011 ppp terms)  
Country  Estimated gross national 
income per capita (2011 
ppp terms)/1 
Female  Male  Female 
as % of 
male 
Sri Lanka  6,766  16,852  40


---
*Page 188*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 35 OF 54 
35 Source: UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/123506#a . 1/ Definition: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wages, female and male shares of economically active populati on and gross national income (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms).  
Labor Markets. Labor participation is Sri Lanka is much lower for women than men; From the 
whole labor force, women represent only 35 .7%. The share is also lower when looking at the 
share of female employees in the industry ( 34.0%), manufacturing ( 48.0%), electricity gas, 
steam, and air conditioning, supply ( 11.4%) or professional, scientific and technical activities 
33.7%  (Table [ 33]). 
Table [ 33]. Share of employment by activities and sex (%, 2018 unless stat ed differently)  
Country  Sex Industry  Manufacturin
g Electricity; 
gas, steam 
and air 
conditioning 
supply  Professional
, scientific 
and 
technical 
activities  Total  Women are 
able to work 
in the same 
industries as 
men  
Sri Lanka  Female  34.0  48.0  11.4  33.7  35.7  No 
Male  66.0  52.0  88.6  66.3  64.3  
Source: lab or for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilost at_en.html# and labour  
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Financial inclusion. Men in Sri Lanka  present slightly higher levels of financial inclusion than 
women when comparing the ownership of an account at a financial institution ( 74 versus 73%), 
a mobile account ( 1 versus 4%) or saving money ( 42 versus 45%) (Table [ 34]). In addition, 
the share of women aged 15 or above in the country with either an account at financial 
institution or a mobile money -service provider is 73%, well above the average in developing 
countries (58.3%), or South Asia (65.1%).  
Table [ 34]. Indicators of financial inclusion by sex (2017)  
Country  Account at a 
financial institution 
(% age 15+)  Mobile account (% 
age 15+)  Saved any money 
last year (% age 
15+)  Women with account at 
financial inst. or with 
mobile money -service 
provider (% age 15+)  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  
Sri Lanka  73%  74%  1% 4% 42%  45%  73%  
Source: World Bank Li ttle Book of Gender 2019  
Education. Women in Sri Lanka are more likely to be enrolled in secondary or tertiary 
education than men. Of all women in the corresponding education ages, 90.4% are enrolled 
in secondary education and 23.4% in tertiary education. In contrast, from all men in the same 
age groups, only 87.7% are enrolled in secondary education, an 15.8% are enrolled in tertiary 
education. However, probably due to differences in attainment, women report a lower average 
number of schooling years (10.5 versus 11.6). In addition, women amount to 40% of all STEM 
graduates (Table [ 35]). 
Table [ 35]. Indicators of education by sex  
Country  Sex Enrolment in 
primary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
secondary 
education 
(%) Enrolment in 
tertiary 
education 
(%) Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)  Female share 
of tertiary 
graduates 
from STEM 
(%) 
Sri Lanka  Female  96.4  90.4  23.4  10.5  40 
Male  98.1  87.7  15.8  11.6  
Source: labor for shares from ILO https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/Documents/Bulk_ilost at_en.html# and labour  
restrictions from World Bank Little Book of Gender 2019  
Health. The maternal  mortality ratio in Sri Lanka  is 30 per 100,000 live births, which ranks 71st 
among 182 countries included in the Human Development Report. This figure is below the 
average in developing countries (231) and well below the average in its region, South Asia


---
*Page 189*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 36 OF 54 
36 (176). However, more than 2 times the maternal mortality ratio in OCDE (14) or Very high 
human development countries (15) according to the UNDP Human Development Report. In 
addition, female life expectancy at birth in Sri Lanka is almost 7  years higher than the same 
figure for males ( 80.1 versus 73 .4 years) (Table [ 36]). 
 
 
Table [ 36]. Indicators of health by sex  
Country  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births)  Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(ranking across 
countries)  Female life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)  Male life 
expectancy at 
birth  (years)  
Sri Lanka  30 71 80.1 73.4 
Source: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data  
Note: rankings among 182 countries with data in UNDP report  
Agency. Only one out of almost 20 members in Sri Lanka’s  parliament are women ( 5.3%). 
Similarly, t he share of women in ministerial positions is only 6.7%).  
 
Gender gaps associated with the current project  in Sri Lanka  
Cooling- related activities or sectors targeted:  Energy efficient chillers and other energy 
efficiency and renewable energy measures in the commercial and industrial building sector 
through Energy Service Companies  (ESCOs) .   Policy and regulatory, as well as capacity 
buildings activities are also planned.  
Preliminary overview of relevant gender gaps  
• Sri Lanka has made good progress in achieving gender equity in health and 
education, brought about through giving women their right to vote, free 
education and health services.   Area that still needs attention is women’s 
engagement in labor , their economic empowerment, and their involvement in 
governance mechanisms, especially at higher levels .  
• Women are accessing fewer basic services than men.  While there is a high level 
of bas ic literacy among women, in practice traditional patriarchal attitudes limit the 
interaction of a vast majority of women in community decision making and in 
commerce.  
• For women, labor  force participation rates are low; they are paid less than men, 
a differ ence not explained by their productive capacity and holds true for all 
sectors.  A related area for improvement is women’s empowerment.  
 
 Suggested gender entry points and a ctivities  include: (i) develop (or review/enhance/) 
gender assessment; (ii) carry out consultations, workshops, gender assessment’s 
presentations; (iii) engage policy dialogues to raise awareness about the linkages between 
cooling and gender; (iv) capacity building/awareness about gender equality; (v) ) develop 
agender action plan that includes responsibilities, activities and budgets ; (vi) develop and 
implement a communication campaign.


---
*Page 190*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 37 OF 54 
37 4 Sector Gender -Specific Gaps Summary  
 
The following is a matrix that summarizes possible entry points  that could be addressed by country after producing a gender 
assessment. Countries face multiple dimensions of gender inequalities  and its possible to contribute to addressing them through 
cooling- related sector s. 
 Economic Empowerment  Access to services  Voice and Agency  
 Low labor 
force 
participation 
(all relevant 
sub-sectors)  Low Income 
Levels  Low 
productivity  Low 
entrepreneu
rship  Less 
Access to 
Energy  Low access 
to financial 
resources  Low access 
to 
Education 
(basic and 
STEM 
fields)  Low access/ 
ownership 
to inputs 
and proper 
equipment  Less 
decision-
making 
power  Gender -
Based 
Violence  
Countr ies           
Bangladesh  Yes   Yes  Yes   Yes  
El Salvador  Yes         Yes 
Kenya   Yes   Yes Yes     
Malawi    Yes Yes   Yes    
North 
Macedonia  Yes      Yes    
Panama       Yes Yes    
Sao Tome e 
Principe  Yes         Yes 
Somalia    Yes       Yes 
Sri Lanka  Yes Yes     Yes  Yes


---
*Page 191*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 38 OF 54 
38 Potential Gender Entry Points by Theme  
The following is a list of examples of possible interventions  that could be proposed, 
designed, implemented and monitored to address gender gaps found in the countries  to be 
included in individual gender action plans as relevant .  
 
A. Fost er Women’s Economic Empowerment  
• Implement employment initiatives for women in the sector to provide labor 
opportunities for both men and women. Carrying out consultations on gender 
employment issues and opportunities could engage with employers.  
• Create and implement Human Resources reforms or staff policies; hiring women for 
consumer or public facing marketing or advocacy aspects.  
• Incentivize data collection on male versus female partici pation in firm ownership and 
leadership at the MSME level.  
• Explore ways to best incorporate the needs of women and youth in project activities 
as a way of enhancing their livelihood.  
• Increased representation of women in the engineering/technical professi ons with a 
focus on energy efficiency  
• Track data on female staff hired under service contracts for technical and design work 
under the Project  
• Provide targeted training program for women and increasing awareness about 
employment opportunities under the Project investments.  
• Create jobs and develop skills for women and men in the cooling appliance sector.  
• Provide opportunities in most productive sector to reduce the incidence of GBV.  
 
B. Increase Women’s Access to services  
• Design and implement targeted approaches to reach female- headed households or 
female customers or business to expand affordable energy access to women.  
• Offer financial products and services that address women’s needs. Approaches might 
include e.g. consumer finance mechanisms include micro -consignment, revolving loan 
funds, and flexible repayment plans. Use of more concessional forms of financing or 
more intensive technic al assistance to  enhance gender inclusivity in financial services 
and products  
• Foster the financial inclusion of women throughout the support provided to local banks . 
• Ensure energy efficient cooling investment also cover health or financial facilities that 
provide services to women and address their needs.  
• Produce assessment s on what barriers and opportunities there are to closing gender 
gaps around access to  services,  education,  financial products and other  services for 
women.  
• Produce assessment s of needs of women and men around cooling e.g.  around 
transport or storage may differ and how livelihoods and income could be enhanced 
especially for women who may not be capturing potential catch to market value-
additions through cooling.  
• Produce assessment s of extent to which reduction of waste and  loss impacts the 
national food security, particularly for women and children.  
• Gather information for understanding different motivations for adopting cooling 
technologies and barriers to accessing finance to purchase products.  
• Foster the access of women t o health facilities and services (including the services to 
mitigate the effects of the  COVID -19 global pandemic  and the access to its  vaccine).


---
*Page 192*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 39 OF 54 
39 Improve leadership and decision- making by women  
• Include a baseline survey that  looks at gender differences in energy user behaviors, 
perceptions of energy efficiency, and awareness and attitudes on energy efficiency 
among employees and users of buildings.  
• Design and implement activities to address any potential gender gaps in the area of  
energy efficiency, such as conducting awareness raising campaigns on energy 
efficiency, considering the engagement of both men and women and tailor messages 
based on gender -differentiated concerns, priorities, and perceptions toward energy 
efficiency in b uildings.  
• Asses studies to understand  different motivations for adopting cooling technologies 
and barriers to accessing finance to purchase products   
• Design communication campaign to change consumer patterns and behaviors.  
 
5 Strategic Approach  
 
5.1 Facility Level:  
 
The Facility will support activities that contribute to closing gender gaps across sub- projects 
e.g. data collection, access to finance and skills development activities etc. In addition, a t 
every step of the project cycle, the Gender and Energy program of the World Bank Energy 
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) will be available to provide tec hnical 
assistance to the project team and the client country.  
The Facility will encourage the recruitment of a balanced female- to-male employment 
ratio within the Project Management  Unit (P MU) team to the extent possible.  The 
standard World Bank implement ation process will be put in place and include a P MU in each 
country, responsible for implementing and monitoring each project. If needed, P MU staff 
members including the Project Manager and the Environment and Social Protection 
Specialists may receive capacity -building trainings. For each project supported under the 
Cooling Facility , a social/gender specialist is expected to be included in each PMU team. In 
addition, the ESMAP Gender and Energy Program will provide complementary support to the Facility pro jects in the form of technical advice for the Bank’s implementation/supervision of 
Facility projects . 
This will provide support to consider  identified gaps (at all gender dimensions) throughout the 
project cycle. Obtaining stakeholders buy -in will be key i n ensuring that interventions to 
promote gender equality activities are effectively implemented with measurable 
outcomes . Institutional and behavioral change are a long- time process that will require 
sustained support of all relevant stakeholders ( public a nd private ) throughout the program 
cycle. Countries ’ adherence to international agreements and national legal frameworks on 
gender -equality, are a good starting point to strengthen a government’s support for gender -
interventions. The following strategy will be followed to increase stakeholders’ commitments , 
to the extent possible:  
- Engage in policy -dialogue with client countries through dedicated meetings, to build 
awareness and sensitivity about the benefits of promoting women’s economic 
empowerment  throughout interventions that foster their employment and their 
entrepreneurship;  
- Closely align proposed activities with each country’s national priorities and gender legal framework , such as community development or female employment;


---
*Page 193*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 40 OF 54 
40 - Identify an institutional gender -focal point to serve as interlocutor during project 
implementation, if appropriate;  
- Offer technical support to help invest ing in workforce diversification, building on 
existing internal gender strategies when available. This support may take the form of 
workshops on gender -related concepts with high -level stakeholders , or a review of 
training plans to better integrate female employees . 
- Promote the access of the COVID -19 vaccine in health facilities that address women’s 
needs.  
 
During projects design, the private sector can be involved in financing interventions to i) create 
income- generating opportunities for women , ii) implement mechanisms to prevent and 
respond to associated incidents  or risks , iii) increase rising awareness rates among female-
headed households, for instance through capa city-building workshop , communication or 
social media campaigns, etc.  
5.2 Project Level:  
Considering the diversity of pre -identified projects to be supported by the F acility, as well as 
the fact that they are at different stages of maturity, there is no single model for all project s.   
- Data collection to document the baseline situation and identify gaps. Baseline 
data will be collected to set targets and measure progress during implementation, it 
will also support existing efforts where baseline sex -disaggregated data are weak. 
Research will build upon existing country gender diagnostics and action plan when 
available, to enable the understanding and consideration of  national priorities. To 
support project design and implementation,  stakeholders’ consultations will involve 
female participants, to understand men and women differentiated needs . In addition, 
initial assessments will i nclude an analysis of the differentiated impact on men and 
women, through the involvement of gender and energy experts (Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment, Resettlement Action Plans etc.).  Gaps could be identified 
but not limited to female labor issue or inadequate access to finance for the cooling sector , and design mitigation measures that minimize gender gaps  such as enhanced 
productive uses of energy, enhanced knowledge and skills of small and micro-business, households and farmer s.  
 
- Identifying and implementing relevant actions . Based on the initial diagnosis and 
inclusive stakeholders’ consultations, targeted activities will be identified to address 
key gender gaps. These may include (i) actions to promote female employment 
(including capacity building and programs for women to  gain hands -on experience in 
the sector such as support for school -to-work transition), (ii) financing local 
communities projects empowering women in the area of implementation of the projects 
(such as activities generating revenues), (iii) implementation of prevention measures 
to mitigate associated incidents or risks in the area of implementation of the projects 
and (iv) facilitating energy access for female -headed households (including capacity -
building workshops to maintain and develop energy services).   
 
- M&E and Knowledge management . In 2017, the WBG started implementing the  
“gender -tag” mechanisms  to identify projects that  effectively promote equality between 
men and women and are aligned with the WBG gender strategy. The Cooling Facility 
will adopt a gender perspective and aim to close key gaps in its supported projects. 
Results will be monitored throughout the project and be used for real -time adjustments 
during implementation. To expand the knowledge base, projects will build on lessons


---
*Page 194*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 41 OF 54 
41 learnt from prior projects as well as regional and country base knowledge production 
and exchange learning opportunities.  
- Engaging stakeholders with specific needs and risks of gender inequality in 
meaningful consultation, information disclosure and responsiv e grievance redress 
throughout the project life (as set out in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan) . The 
Cooling Facility will support carry ing out activities to strengthen  women’s participation 
and v oice during consult ations.  Consultations and public m eetings with stakeholders 
will be conducted throughout t he project cycle in a participatory manner and with a 
special focus on engaging women. This will help gaining knowledge about community 
concerns during project preparation and help monitor impact and undertake real -time 
correction during implementation. Special attention will be paid to using local dialect, 
cultural concerns when relevant and including women from minority ethnic groups and 
other socially vulnerable groups . 
 
5.3 Expected Gender Co- Benefits Result ing from projects :  
 
The Facility includes projects in different countries that are at different stages of development.  
Three of them are at early stages of development  (Bangladesh, Panama and Sri Lanka) ; while 
the other cooling- related projects supported by the Facility will build on a World Bank -approved 
parent project  (and be processed as “additional financing” to the parent project) , which already 
includes a framework for addressing gender36.  They are summarized below  (the expected 
gender co -benefits of the early stage projects will be defined during project preparation, along 
with gender -related indicators in line with the WB Gender Strategy mentioned above , and will 
be included in the respective Project Appraisal Doc ument ):   
 
Kenya:  The parent project intends to contribute to closing the relevant gender gaps in Kenya, 
particularly in access to electricity, by (a) ensuring women’s access to solar products and 
cleaner and more efficient cookstoves; (b) increasing women’s awareness about solar energy 
use and the productive uses of solar power; (c) ensuring women’s participation in decision 
making around the installation and management of the solar systems; (d) providing women 
with employment opportunities in marketing and installation of solar products; and (e) 
mitigating potential risks such as displacement or gender -based violence (GBV) that women 
might face due to project implementation. In addition, the project M&E system will adopt and integrate several results indic ators to monitor and assess both progress in implementing 
gender -related activities and the project benefits for women and men . 
 Malawi:  The parent  project is expected to generate significant benefits for Malawi’s economy. 
The proposed project will contribute to generating positive fiscal returns by increasing the tax 
and government revenues the government receives from the registration of new businesses 
and the expansion of existing businesses and by leveraging private sector financing, thereby 
reducing the fiscal burden associated with government -funded SME finance programs.  A 
critical expected outcome of this project is to encourage the participati on of youth and women-
owned businesses. Hence, firms will be selected into Stage 1 of the program based on 
experimental design and stratified by age and gender. In addition, training programs will be 
customized and will be informed by evidence (firm survey ) to meet the needs of the youth and 
women- led firms, with an emphasis on personal initiative skills training. Some of the other 
topics that may be covered in the life skills training modules are likely to include a combination 
of socioemotional skills training and information related to gender -based violence (GBV), 
 
36 The exception is El Salvador, where the inclusion of gender elements into the design of interventions 
will be done in the context of the Additional Financing project , including meeting the Bank’s Gender -
Tag corporate commitment (an exception was granted for the Parent project given its emergency 
nature).


---
*Page 195*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 42 OF 54 
42 returns to education, job readiness, financial literacy, and cross -cutting topics, such as 
nutrition and civic engagement.  
 
North Macedonia:  The parent  project will address an employment gap in the energy sector 
through providing women a targeted training program and increasing awareness about employment opportunities under the project investments. The project will engage with industry associations and technical universities to increase awarenes s and information about the 
project’s offerings, in particular employment opportunities created under technical and design work related to project investments. Furthermore, the project will offer skills training to women, 
which will be based on skills requirements needed for technical and design work under the 
project. The Project will monitor the impact through the following indicators: (i) number of women attended skills training activities and certifications obtained and (ii) percentage of 
female staff hired under service contracts for technical and design work  
 Sao Tome and Principe:  In the context of COVID -19, the parent project  will continue to support 
communication campaigns, including messages regarding appropriate care for sick family 
members, resources available, coping strategies, etc. to minimize the health and psychosocial 
impacts of COVID -19 on caregivers and to disseminate targeted community messages on 
GBV. The project will ensure that guidelines for pandemic preparedness, response, and 
planning consider the unique needs of the most vulnerable populations, as well as gendered 
roles and responsibilities. As such, the pro ject will ensure capture of vaccine coverage data 
disaggregated by gender to ensure coverage is equitable by gender. Special attention will be 
paid to capturing information on the population of female health workers and volunteers 
vaccinated. Furthermore, the project will ensure that all training opportunities (surveillance, 
epidemiology and laboratory diagnostics) will be gender sensitive and the outputs of such trainings will be tracked by gender disaggregated indicators being revised.  
 
Somalia:  The parent p roject emphasizes addressing persistent gender challenges and 
monitoring the progress in the gender aspects of the p roject. First, given high gender 
disparities in Somalia, as previously noted, the Project will support the implementation of a 
package of  GBV services (awareness raising, case identification, counselling, and 
management), with service providers to track the status of GBV service utilization by women 
and any challenges that arise. As the Project is expected to be gender -tagged, this will be 
tracked through the Project’s intermediate results indicator (IRI) focused on tracking the 
number of GBV services delivered to facilitate course correction. The Project will also closely 
monitor another IRI on the number of outpatient department visit, whi ch is disaggregated to 
track the percentage pf female outpatient department visits, to monitor whether the Project contributes to an increase in women’s service utilization. The Project Grievance Redress 
Mechanism ( GRM ) will also be sensitized to receive and respond to sexual abuse, 
harassment, exploitation, and disproportionate use of force among females.  
 
 
6 Gender Action Plan  
 
The Gender Action Plan proposed below is indicative at this stage and may be further 
amended and adapted according to knowledge gathered during the project inception phase, 
to reflect local and project context.  
 This gender action plan will cover all activ ities within the facility and are intended to close 
gender gaps women face at different levels. Some of the areas on which the facility may focus 
(but will not be limit to) are:  
• Entrepreneurship:  Women entrepreneurs often lack information about access to 
finance options in the country. In addition, development of enterprises requires


---
*Page 196*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 43 OF 54 
43 technical assistance support tailored to women’s needs. Partnering with business 
networks, such as. female exporters or associations under chambers of commerce, is 
key to crea ting awareness about credit lines among women entrepreneurs. From a 
consumer perspective they will also have different needs and wants in terms of cooling 
technology products and services and the sectors they operate in (e.g. agriculture or 
transport).  
• Financial services —not only accounts, but payments, savings, and credit —give 
women some basic tools they need to enhance their livelihoods and economic status. Under the current ecosystem, bank accounts are key to process payments for cooling 
technologies, and strategies need to be developed to facilitate women’s participation 
to the financial sector and cooling market. The use of digital payments can further 
reduce access barriers for women. Affordability is a key part of this focus.  
• Jobs and Skills Developm ent: Job creation and livelihood opportunities will be 
mapped out as part as part job creation and skills development aspects of the Facility. 
For instance, having women sales agents and local suppliers will create opportunities 
in terms of jobs or looking at labor force participation gaps between women and men 
in the e.g. cooling sector and implementing entities.  
• Consumer/stakeholder Engagement: Growing evidence points to significant 
differences in the needs and wants of women versus men as e.g. consumers  and 
entrepreneurs , as well as caregivers . For example, differences can be observed in how 
they use energy on a daily basis, how much they are willing and able to adopt cooling 
technology and measures e.g. in agriculture sector ), and how they respond to 
campaigns marketing products and services. Differences have also been observed in 
the context of caregiving responsibilities in communities and families.  It is therefore 
essential to tailor any efforts toward consumers specific behaviors of men and women. 
This points to a need for communications strategies in these countries to look beyond 
written materials as they transmit information related to benefits of cooling- related 
services, consumption patterns, and so forth. It could also be advisable to leverage women’s groups.  
• COVID -19 response and health measures: Women often lack empowerment and 
autonomy to access services, sometimes related to health and decision making. 
Women must  not be excluded from accessing services, as they can act as agents of 
change. Families and communities can benefit from informed actions taken by women  
to counter the negative effects of the global pandemic.  
• Data and information: collecting sex -disaggregated data and gender -specific 
information help to assess the projects’ results and impacts on gender equality and 
also help to scale- up refine activities for future interventions.  
 
Available Funding:  Funding under Component 1 of the Facility will be dedicated to support 
gender -relevant activities
37 in the countries in the Facility , taking into account the particular 
context and needs of each country/project and  in line with the Facility’s Gender Action Plan.  
This includes  at least  USD200,000 per country (i.e., USD 1.8  million  at the Facility -level) to 
support the develop ment of  a gender assessment. This gender assessment will identify 
relevant gender gaps in each country including barriers women have to access to services associated with cooling such as jobs, finance, assets, etc. , and countries will have the 
opportunity to identify priorities to develop specific activities that will contribute to close gender gaps.    
 Beneficiaries : Men and women are the Facility’s beneficiaries;  all activities are gender 
informed and created in coordination with the IBRD/IDA parent projec t (where applicable) , 
which will include gender mainstreaming activities . Each of the projects are pending to finalize 
their design and the details about specific beneficiaries. For five of the Facility’s cooling 
 
37 This funding complements WB -funding dedicated to gender -related activities under each project.


---
*Page 197*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 44 OF 54 
44 projects, t he parent projects are already aligned with the gender -tag WB’s corporate 
commitments (see footnote 2). WB’s projects that are investing in gender equality issues are 
focusing in three  dimensions: human endowments (health and education); economic 
opportunities (participation in economic activities and access and to control ok key productive 
assets); and voic e an agency (freedom from violence, political participation etc.). The World 
Bank Gender Strategy  (which applies to the Cooling Facility’s projects)  focuses on addressing 
socially determined gender inequalities, which are rooted in behaviors, institutions,  and market 
forces. Women and men are heterogenous groups (that are also stratified by race, ethnicity, 
disability, sexual orientation, and gender identity and overlap with income level, geographic location, migratory status, etc.). The WB understands  that most inequalities based on gender 
have put females at a disadvantage. Therefore, transformative actions that aim to close 
gender gaps are planning to target and improve women’s status by working with relevant 
stakeholders to empower women.


---
*Page 198*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 45 OF 54 
45 Activities   Indicators and Targets  Timelin e Responsibilities  
Impact Statement:  
 
The Cooling Facility will follow a systematic approach and provide support to individual projects interventions to contribute to closing gender gaps with a focus 
on data collection, policy dialogue, capacity building and training and skills development activities. The expected impact includes enhanced female economic 
participation in cooling related sectors, increased women’s access to services (energy, cooling, financial) , and enhanced productivity and income for female-
led businesses.  
 
Outcome Statement:  
 
The Facility will focus on 4 key areas a) generating  sector specific country -level data collection that looks at gaps between women and men; b) policy dialogue 
activities to help recognize and embed actions to close gender gaps; c)  project and program support to promote gender equality in the projects and program 
that are supported by the facility and d)  exchange  and learning opportunities.   
 
Implementation of the Facility  Number of direct 
beneficiaries:  
Total: 8 .1 million  
Number of women: 4 . 1 
million (51%)  At the end  of 
the program . Executing Entities with 
the support of the WB team
. Gender 
Specialist will be 
responsible to 
implement and report 
on the activities  
Output(s) Statement:  
 Output 1: Gender Analysis: Sector specific country- level data collection that looks at gaps between women and men  
Men and women have different motivations and priorities about the use of energy services and adoption of energy technologies and products and make 
decisions differently. Collecting baseline information about the sex of prospective beneficiaries and respondents (e.g., by household) in surveys or other 
information- gathering activities can provide useful input to policy and program design. In addition, a focus on gender gaps with regards to access to finance, 
entrepreneurship and employment , as well as health services  will be key  
 
To contribute to close a knowledge gender gap for the cooling -related  
sector s in each country: by conduct ing a gender -sensitive gender assessment 
that describes different  needs , cultural constraints,  and perspectives of women 
and men in terms of access to cooling- related  services/ products, access to 
finance and employment , health services , including those associ ated directly or 
indirectly to immunization (including COVID -19)  . The f indings of the gender 
assessments will be  presented and discussed at country -level multi- stakeholder  
events (e.g. consultation, workshops ) and will help develop  recommendations on • Number of gender 
assessments  
developed or On a rolling  
basis, at the  
time of project  
design  
Gender 
assessments: 
(2023: 3; 2024: 
3; 2025: 3)  Executing Entities  with 
the support of the WB 
team . Gender 
Specialist will be 
responsible to oversee 
implement ation  and 
report on the activities.


---
*Page 199*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 46 OF 54 
46  
38 Countries have to develop a gender assessment at an individual basis.  
39 The extent of assessment may vary by country and may be more limited, especially, in the context of countries where the Cooli ng Facility is supporting COVID -19 
emergency response operations and countries in a FCV (fragile, conflict and violence) situations (Somalia).  the design of the Facility projects and help generate gender and cooling insights 
more generally at the Facility level  that may be helpful for .  
 
 improved . Baseline: 
038. Target: 939.  
 
• Number of multi -
stakeholder  event 
(e.g. consultation, 
workshop)  held, 
including awareness 
raising on gender 
equality issues . 
Baseline: 0,  Target: 9. 
 
 
  
Multistakehold
er events: 
(2023: 3; 2024: 
3; 2025: 3)  
 
Output 2:  Policy dialogue activities to recognize and embed actions to close gender gaps In many cases, policy targets for closing gaps between 
men and women can be addressed through actions in cooling- related  projects.  For example, national or sector targets for enhancing engagement with 
women’s groups and enhancing the voice and agency of female citizens in service delivery or development programs could be met  through relevant 
approaches in project design. Looking at the interplay between policy and opportunities i n the design of projects and supported interventions  is therefore key . 
Activities under this output will include 
 
To identify barriers, constraints,  and opportunities to foster the economic 
participation of women in the cooling- related  sector s at the country level by 
produc ing and disseminat ing insights  and opportunities  from regulatory and policy 
framework assessments   
 To train and create capacity within the PMU  through workshops and trainings 
targeted at  the PMU staff on gender and cooling- related issues ) 
 
To create specific gender action plans with relevant gathered information that 
promot e equal access of  women and men to opportunities connected to  
• Number of relevant 
policy dialogue 
engaged with client 
countries to build 
awareness and 
sensitivity , on gender 
equality issues , 
including benefits of 
promoting women’s 
economic By the 
Facility’s  
end date  
 
Policy 
dialogues: 
(2025: 3; 2026: 
3) 
 
 Executing Entities  with 
the support of the WB 
Team  Gender 
Specialist will be 
responsible to oversee 
implement ation  and 
report on the activities.


---
*Page 200*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 47 OF 54 
47  
40 Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, Panama, and Sri Lanka  
41 IDEM  
42 IDEM  operations in  terms of direct technical and operations skills and  employment  or 
bids/contracts etc.  
 empowerment, 
removal of barriers to 
female employment in 
cooling- related sectors 
and enhancing gender considerations in 
service delivery . 
Baseline: 0 Target: 
6
40.  
 
• Number of capacity -
building workshops 
organized with P MU 
staff. Baseline: 
0Target: 641 
 
• Number of 
beneficiaries:  
• Share of women in 
capacity building 
activities:  Baseline 0; 
Target: country dependent  
• Share of men in 
capacity building 
activities:  Baseline 0; 
Target: country 
dependent  
 
• Number of gender 
action plans 
developed: Baseline: 
0, Target: 642 Workshops 
(2025: 3; 2026: 3) 
 
Gender action 
plans (2025: 3; 2026: 3)


---
*Page 201*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 48 OF 54 
48  
43 Gender Tag (see page 5 for an explanation) is a WBG’s corporate requirement as a percentage of lending operations. Baseline i s set as the number of gender tagged 
Energy projects during the fiscal year 18 (July 2017 to June 2018)  
44 A business qualifies as a woman- owned business if it meets the following criteria: (A) ≥ 51% owned by woman/women; OR (B) ≥ 20% owned by woman/women; AND (i)  
has ≥ 1 woman as CEO/COO/ President/Vice President; AND (ii) has ≥ 30% of the board of directors composed of women, where a board exists (IFC)  
45 Kenya, Malawi   
 
Output 3: Project support to promote gender equality in the projects that are supported by the F acility .  At the project level,  gender support will be 
provided (in coordination with/led by the World Bank staff and/or carried out by consultants) at the design and implementation phases . The proposed general  
approach that will be followed  is outlined below.  
 
To assist projects to meet the WB’s corporate commitments of the gender 
tag by including an analysis, actions and indicators that aim to close gender gaps 
in the cooling- related sector s and are aligned with vertical logic of the project:   
 
To assess barriers  and constraints : by identifying barriers that need to 
be addressed  to promote the participation of women  e.g. from national 
policies and programs that directly address female labour issue in the 
cooling- related sector s, down to main entity  level (e.g., ministry, utility, 
regional bank)  HR policies, recruitment , awareness raising  and promotion 
processes.  
To engage with key stakeholders:  by organizing events /consultation 
activities.  Relevant stakeholders (e.g. policy makers, private/government 
, institutions, NGOs, schools , and universities)  aim to closing gender gaps  
(including in the COVID -19 vaccination process  and in  reduction of GBV ).  
To identify and prioritize actions that contribute to close gender 
gaps:  Possible actions include e.g. enhance the productive uses of 
energy in agricultural, industrial and service sectors by  enhancing the 
knowledge and skills of small and micro- business, households and 
farmers on how to use newfound access for profitable enterprise or 
addressing the barriers that need to be addressed e.g. from national 
policies and programs that directly address female labor  participation 
issues in the cooling and related sector sector s (including the health 
sector  and its cold chain for vaccines and medicine ).  
 • Number of projects 
that will meet the WB 
Gender Tag (Baseline: 
44% Target 60% of 
total number of 
projects )43 
 
• Number of information 
sessions held with 
female- led firms44 to 
share information on opportunities in 
contracts/tenders in 
projects.  Baseline: 0  
Target: 2.
45  
 
• Number of 
assessments conducted to 
determine access to 
finance barriers for 
female enterprises 
and for product 
adoption at the On a rolling  
basis, as 
projects and 
programs  
come  
through  
 
Gender tag: at 
the end of the 
program 
(monitored on 
yearly basis)  
 
Informational 
sessions 
(2025: 1; 2026: 
1) 
 
Assessments 
(2025: 1; 2026: 
2) 
 
Campaigns: (2024: 3; 2025: 
3; 2026: 3)  Executing Entities  with 
the support of the WB 
Team  Gender 
Specialist will be 
responsible to  oversee  
implement ation  and 
report on the activities.


---
*Page 202*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 49 OF 54 
49  
46 Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, Panama and Sri Lanka  
47 The extent and type of information campaigns, outreach or behavior change initiative may vary by country and may be more limited, especially, in the context of countries 
where the Cooling Facility is supporting COVID -19 emergency response operations and countries in a FCV (fragile, conflict and violence) situations (Somalia).  consumer level 
Baseline: 0, Target: 3.  
 
• Number of 
companies/institutions 
benefiting from 
capacity building and 
training opportunities 
provided by the 
Facility  on women’s 
employment issues. 
Baseline: 0 Target: 
646.  
 
• Number  of information 
campaigns , outreach  
or behavior change 
initiatives conducted 
that tailor messages 
that target both men 
and women . Baseline: 
0, Target: 947.  
 
 
 
Output 4: Exchange and learning opportunities through the Cooling Facility  Enhance knowledge and learning of stakeholders  by providing knowledge 
building opportunities to integrate a focus on gender equality in cooling and  
investment, through:  
 
 
To raise awareness and leverage the gender equality dialogue  at the 
country level  by the organization of fora  where gender will be the  focus of panels, 
workshops and discussions. Events will be organized that will invite beneficiaries, • Number of panels and  
discussions focusing on gender  held 
through Facility At the time of  
the delivery of  
workshops, on  
a rolling basis  Executing Entity  with 
the support of the WB Team Gender 
Specialist will be


---
*Page 203*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 50 OF 54 
50 potential future beneficiar ies, key country representatives  and partners under the  
Facilit y to share best -practices and agreed commitments on gender under 
projects.    
 
To strengthen  capacity and technical skills at the country level  by the 
provision of gender focused capacity building workshops,  
 
To contribute to create global knowledge on gender equality in context of  
cooling -related projects by  developing case studies from insights from Facility 
project s.  
 support . Baseline: 0, 
Target: 4.  
 
• Number capacity 
building training that 
includes gender and 
cooling/EE entry points . Baseline: 0, 
Target: 6.  
 
Number of 
beneficiaries:  
• Share of women in 
capacity building 
activities: Baseline 0; 
Target: country dependent  
• Share of men in 
capacity building 
activities:   Baseline 0; 
Target: country 
dependent  
 
• Number of case 
studies produced on gender by the Facility . 
Baseline: 0, Target: 3.   
Panels: (2025: 
2; 2026: 2)  
 
Trainings: 
(2025: 3; 2026: 
3) 
  
Case studies: 
(2026: 3)  responsible to  oversee  
implement ation  and 
report on the activities.  
Output 5: Facilitate benefit access of cooling, refrigeration, cold chains, logistics, and green solutions: At the project level, each team  will work on 
activities that aim to close gender gaps with a mainstreaming approach. The country -specific gender gaps have been or will be assessed and incorporated 
within each proposal's vertical logic  considering their context and resources . Each project will benefit men and women, and each country/project will be 
respons ible for monitoring specific indicators and activities.  The following approach would be adopted and tailored according to each project context. Selection 
of specific activities /interventions  will be made  during project preparation .  
 
Improve access for men and women to new cooling, refrigeration, cold 
chains, logistics and green solutions by designing interventions that aim to • Number of 
initiatives/programs At the time of  
the delivery of  Executing Entities with 
the support of the WB 
Team  Gender


---
*Page 204*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 51 OF 54 
51  
Additional Information:  
 
Knowledge - Links between Gender and Energy and other Sectors   
 
48 Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, North Macedonia, Panama and Sri Lanka  
 reduce a gender gap  in employment and entrepreneurship  and/or access to 
cooling- related service.  
 that facilitate  women’s 
access to new 
solutions . Baseline: 0; 
Target: 648 
• Number of beneficiaries:  
• Number  and 
percentage  of female  
benef iciaries. 
Baseline: 0; Target: country dependent.  
• Number and percentage of male 
beneficiaries. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 
country dependent.  
• Number of new jobs for women: Baseline 
0; target: country 
dependent.  
• Number or women-
owned businesses 
benefited. Baseline:  
Target: country -
dependent  workshops, on  
a rolling basis  Specialist will be 
responsible to oversee 
implementation and 
report on the activities.


---
*Page 205*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 52 OF 54 
52  
The ESMAP Gender and Energy Program has produced various reports and products over the years on issues of gender and energy acros s sectors based 
on case studies and best practices. A brief summary of reports and guidance is summarized below .  In addition, the Bank has also produced reports and 
guidance related to gender in the context of different sectors.  A number of these are listed below.  
 
Resource  Summary  
Cooling for All and Gender – Towards 
Inclusive, Sustainable Cooling 
Solutions (SEforALL, 2021)  This knowledge brief is the first such analysis of the gender -based impacts of a lack of access to cooling.  
It examines the gender -related challenges that should be considered, analy zed and addressed to ensure  
cooling interventions and finance acknowledge gender -differentiated impacts and adapt to maximize  
equitable access. This brief offers a series of recommended steps to address these challenges while pursuing  
universal sustainable cooling and gender equality. Governments, development finance institution s and 
nongovernmental  organizations should raise awareness regarding the gender -based impacts of a lack of access  
to cooling, bolster policies for protections, drive research to understand gender disparities and increase 
investments to gender -transformativ e solutions that also deliver sustainable cooling.  
Integrating Behavior  Change in Energy 
Efficiency  Programs  in Developing 
Countries : A Practitioner’s Guide 
(ESMAP 2020 )  
 The purpose of this guide is to provide practitioners in the field of energy efficiency with an overview of the 
opportunities available to integrate behavior change strategies in demand- side energy efficiency programs. The 
guide offers relevant suggestions, references, and examples, with a focus on communication and gender equality  
considerations. While behavior change principles can be applied to energy efficiency programs in various sectors 
(public, commercial, industrial, residential, and transportation), this guide centers particularly on the residential 
sector . 
Mini Grids for Half a Billion People: 
Market Outlook and Handbook for 
Decision Makers  (ESMAP 2019)  Approximately 1.2 billion people will need to gain access to electricity to achieve universal access by 2030. The 
only way to achieve this is through a combination of t he main grid extension, mini grids, and off -grid solar. This 
report shows that about half a billion people can be cost -effectively provided with electricity through mini grids. 
The combination of falling costs, dramatic increase in the quality of service, and favorable enabling environments 
have made modern mini grids a scalable option to complement grid extension and solar home systems. The report 
is the most comprehensive study on mini grids to date. It takes stock of the global mini grid market and indus try; 
analyzes in detail the solar -hybrid mini grid costs and technological innovations; shows the importance of 
introducing income -generating machinery and micro- finance early in the planning process; and provides policy 
makers, investors and developers wi th insights on how mini grids can be scaled up.


---
*Page 206*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 53 OF 54 
53 Gender Equality in the Geothermal 
Energy Sector -Road to Sustainability 
(ESMAP 2019)  
 The report is a primer on advancing gender equality in the geothermal energy sector. Based on good practices 
and lessons learned, it introduces ways that geothermal projects can mitigate risks and pursue opportunities to 
address gender gaps within the proj ect cycle. It outlines the risks and opportunities associated with (i) changes in 
land and natural resource use, (ii) changes to employment and economic patterns, and (iii) changes to the 
environment and health. Beyond mapping risks and opportunities in another energy sector, the report makes the 
case for focusing on the gaps between men and women from a project’s outset.  
Key Entry Points for Gender Equity in 
Energy Access, Energy Policy, 
Renewable Energy, and Transmission 
and Distribution (World Bank 2019c)  Short one -pagers provide hands -on, practical guidance to help task teams close gender gaps in energy 
operations. They address four energy subsectors —energy access, energy policy, renewable energy, and 
transmission and distribution—and provide entry points for achieving objectives of the Gender Strategy.  
Getting to Gender Equality in Energy 
Infrastructure: Lessons from Electricity 
Generation, Transmission, and 
Distribution Projects (ESMAP 2018)  The report examines the social and gender footprint of large -scale electricity generation, transmission, and 
distribution projects to establish a foundation on which further research and replication of good practices can be 
built. The main impact pathways analyzed are access to land and labor markets, along wi th social sustainability 
considerations, including health and education.  
Integrating Gender Considerations into 
Energy Operations (World Bank 2013)  Provides project teams with basic tools for integrating gender considerations into energy sector activities  with 
country examples and a focus on monitoring and evaluation.  
Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook  
(World Bank , FAO, IFAD 2009)  The document  combines descriptive accounts of national and international experience in investing in agriculture 
with practical operational guidance on to how to design agriculture- for development strategies that capitalize 
effectively on the unique properties of agric ultural growth and rural development involving women and men as a 
high- impact source of poverty reduction. It looks at gender equality and women’s empowerment, and the 
associated principles have the potential to make a difference in the lives of hundreds o f millions of rural poor.  
The Cost of the Gender Gap in 
Agricultural Productivity – in Malawi, 
Tanzania and Uganda (World Bank, 
UN Women, UNEP, UNDP 2015)  The report provides a unique quantification of the costs in terms of lost growth opportunities and a n estimate of 
what societies, economies, and communities would gain if the gender gap in agriculture is addressed. The findings 
of this report are striking and send a strong signal to policy makers in Africa as well as development partners that 
closing the gender gap is smart economics.


---
*Page 207*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL ANNEX 8 |  PAGE 54 OF 54 
54 Gender in fisheries and aquaculture – 
Module 13 (World Bank - 
http://sitere sources.wo rldbank .org/INT
GENAGRLI VSOUBOOK/Resources/M
odule13.pdf ) This Module  details investments that address livelihood problems arising from the ongoing changes in production 
systems, marketing, and technology  in the fisheries and aquaculture sector and examines investments that reflect 
gender inequities that exist in many societies. These gender inequities include the comparatively low value 
attached to work done by women, and women’s limited access to essenti al resources such as ponds, new 
technology, education, and information and skills. These inequities reflect societal norms of masculinity and 
femininity that determine who can and should do what and are visible in local communities, in institutions serving  
these communities, and in the way many national and international organizations operate 
Gender Data Portal ( World Bank  - 
https://datatop ics.worldbank.org/ge nder
/) The Gender Dat a Portal is the World Bank Group’s comprehensive source for the latest sex-disaggregated data 
and gender statistics covering demography, education, health, access to economic opportunities, public life and 
decision- making, and agency.  
_____________________