=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210912190642+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/ModDate: D:20210913204535+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 October 2021  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B.30/0 2/Add.05 
14 September 2021  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum V 
Funding proposal package f or FP 173 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private
capital by valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate mitigation and
adaptation results in the Amazon ";
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or foc al
p
oint(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.30/02 /Add.05 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 87 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  97 
Secretariat’s assessment  100  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   128 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  142 
Gender documentation  144


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/ Programme  title: The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by 
valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon  
Country(ies):  Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname  
Accredited Entity:  Inter-American Development Bank   
Date of first submission:  2021/ 03/31 
Date of current submission  2021 /09/08  
Version number  V.005


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 0 OF 82  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and Programme  funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.   
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 82 
 
 PROJECT/ PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
Programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals ( RFP) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed 
project/ Programme  targets. For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the 
estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. The total of the percentages 
when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:  
  
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☒ Forestry and land- use:    
   
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and 
regions:    
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water 
security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:   
  
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
 
 
 
 
 
50% 
  
 25% 
  
 
 
25% 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation impact  123 million  tCO 2eq A.6. Expected 
adaptation impact  Direct beneficiaries: 
191,952 (~50 % female)  
Indirect beneficiaries: 
485,375 (~50 % 
female)1 
0.64% (direct 
beneficiaries) and 1 .62% 
(indirect beneficiaries)  
relative to Amazon 
population  (30 million)  
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co- finance)2  598.1 million  USD  
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  279 million  USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts 
should be consistent with A.8.  
☒ Grant  137.5 million   
☒ Loan  135 million   
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☒ Equity   6.5 million  
☐ Results -based   
  payment   Enter number  
 
1 The methodology and assumptions used for estimating the beneficiaries are described in detail  in section D.1.  
2 GCF resources, IDB (AE) and Executing Entities (EE) co- financing (see Section C.1) .


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 82 
 A.11. Implementation 
period  
 
 
 7 years3 A.12. Total lifespan  27 years4 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  1/31/2022  A.14. ESS category  I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒ No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been 
used to prepare this 
FP? Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work Programme ? Yes ☒ No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the country 
Programme ? Yes ☐  No ☒5 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒ No ☐ 
 
3 IDB investment loan operations generally have a maximum execution period of 5 years. As multiple countries and country approval 
processes are involved, the AE requests 7 years to allow for different approval dates of each individual country program by t he IDB Board 
and by the national congress, where applicable, of each target country.  
4 Total lifespan considers the 7 years expected for implementation to include the latest investments with funds from the Programme. Overall, 
investments are estimated to have effective impacts for up to 20 years, in average.  
5 GCF Country programs are not available, except for Brazil where the Amazon is marked as a strategic priority.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 82 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Throughout the Funding Proposal, Executing Entity (EE) refers to any entity that 
signs a Subsidiary Agreement6 with IDB to execute, carry -out, or implement a 
part of the Funded Activity. The IDB will assess the capacity of each EE prior to 
entering into any Subsidiary Agreement , following its policies and procedures. 
Information on such policies and procedures and the track record of selected 
EEs is provided in Section B.4 . IDB, as Accredited Entity  (AE), may also carry 
out the functions of an EE for technical cooperation activities . More specifically : 
- For the execution of sovereign loans and investment grants  referred to  
in Component I.1 , each EE will be responsible for the full execution of the 
loan and/or investment grant in accordance with  the Subsidiary Agreement and 
its Operational Regulations (see Section B.4  and Annex 21). Eligible EE s will 
be identified jointly with national governments based on the relevance of their 
public mandate to the Programme activities, experience in finance structuring 
and fiduciary management, and track record, including with the IDB. EEs may 
include National Development  Banks (NDBs) or other government agencies, 
such as FINAGRO (Colombia), CONAFIPS (Ecuador), COFIDE (Peru), 
Suriname National Development Bank Ltd. (Suriname) and Banco da 
Amazonia (Brazil ). 
- For the execution of equity investment s referred to in Component I.2 , 
eligible EE s include: for the Regenerate Accelerator, Kaete Investimentos , an 
entity  already institutionally assessed by IDB, a local reputable fund 
management company with vast experience in identifying sustainable early -
stage bioeconomy businesses; and other direct investees ( growth tech -based 
start-ups) to be defined and assessed by IDB’s innovation laboratory ( IDB Lab) 
that will receive  funding support  for activities relat ed to climate -tech and bio-
tech investments . 
- For the execution of investment grants referred to in Component II.2,  IDB 
will transfer GCF grant resources to a  public entity issuer acting as EE,  for it to 
defray the financial charges costs associated with the portion of the guarantee 
funded with IDB resources.  As part of its project preparation cycle, and prior to 
the approval of the relevant guarantee operation, the IDB will conduct an 
institutional capacity assessment of such public entity, as further detailed in Annex 20b.  
- For all Technical Cooperation activities  (Components I.3, II.1  and III) IDB 
may be the EE and/or it may enter into a Subsidiary Agreement with other EEs.  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The Amazon region is highly vulnerable to climate change because of its direct exposure to climate risks, its 
high sensitivity to such risks, and its low adaptive capacity.  Global warming may induce a higher frequency 
of extreme climate events and fires, directly impacting forests and agricultural productivity. In parallel, 
changes in land- use linked to unsustainable practices in agriculture and other land- use are a primary cause 
of forest loss, exacerbating the degradation of Amazon ecosystems and global climate. Temperatures have 
increased by 0.5ºC on average s ince 1980 in the region, and some 23% of its GHG emissions were driven 
by the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land -use (AFOLU) sector between 2007 and 2016. Deforestation and 
forest degradation, land- use, anthropogenic fires, biodiversity loss, and ecosyst em fragmentation, among 
other factors, create adverse climate feedback loops. Without intervention, growth on demand of 
unsustainable use of agricultural land and forests will continue to raise deforestation and degradation in the Amazon, critically affect ing ecosystems over the long- term. Altogether, impacts on natural capital stocks and 
future health of ecosystems could be severe.  
 
6 As defined in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA) between IDB and the Fund, dated 29th of August,2017, a Subsidiary Agreement 
means “any agreement  entered into by the Accredited Entity, in its capacity as Accredited Entity and administrator of the GCF Proceeds, on 
the basis of or in connection with this Agreement, unless expressly agreed otherwise in an FAA, with an Executing Entity (that is not the  
Accredited Entity )”.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 82 
 In 2019, the governments of Bolivia , Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname signed the 
Leticia Pact for the Ama zon Region, seeking cooperation among Amazon countries for the conservation of 
the region to generate opportunities for the sustainable development and well -being of its population. The 
Pact includes action related to the fight against deforestation and forest degradation; the conservation, 
recovery and resilience of biodiversity and ecosystems; sustainable productive systems; active participation 
by women, by indigenous and tribal peoples and by local communities in the sustainable development of the 
region; as well as the promotion of financial mechanisms to implement the Pact . 
Because of the Amazon’s diverse biological, land and water resources, the bioeconomy provides a robust  
framework for promoting sustainability in the AFOLU sector.  Shifting to business models and technologies 
that sustainably use natural capital and forest assets (i.e., bio -businesses) can contribute to lower the 
impacts of climate change, reducing GHG emissions and increasing the region’s resilience. The potential for private investm ent in bio- business is significant and tapping it can be determinant of the ability of economies 
to sustainably leverage natural capital . The financial sector can play a significant role, along with boosting 
processes such as incubation and accelerating businesses and promoting comprehensive regulatory tools to adequately value natural and forest assets involved in bio- businesses.  
With a regional, multi -stakeholder approach (including investors, banks, project developers, producers and 
specialized advisory institutions) the Programme focuses on enabling the conditions to increase the flow of 
private funds to bio- businesses that can reduce the impact of climate change, safeguard local livelihoods 
and promote more inclusive development. The Programme focuses on addressing some of the most critical barriers specifically faced by bio -businesses (namely, risks of lending to bio- businesses, immature capital 
and financial markets, weak institutional environment for bio- business development, lack of st andardized 
frameworks to monitor biodiversity impacts, and knowledge and capacity gaps) to encourage private 
investment. Programme activities are expected to help effectively overcome these barriers, ensuring 
financing becomes available and projects are suitable for financing, and enabling the use of thematic bonds 
to further support the development of these businesses. Targeted financing schemes and channels, such as 
blended finance, high- risk capital investment, bond issuance and shared- risk models designed to meet bio-
business needs can make financiers more willing to serve the sector and developers more willing to invest without risking profitability. Knowledge and institutional mechanisms can help ensure a continued flow of 
quality and inclusive project
s that can be financed successfully, including innovative ways to structure 
partnerships between public and private actors through concessions.  
Activities under the Programme are expected to reduce 6.2  million  tCO 2e annually ( 123.4  million  tCO 2e over 
a 20- year lifespan of investments)  from forest and land- use, enhance carbon stocks of forests under 
improved management, leverage US$719.1  million  resources additional to GCF funding ( including US$319.1 
million  Programme co- financ e as per Section C.1.b plus US$400 million  from other  sources), and increase 
resilience and adaptation of some 677 ,327 beneficiaries  (direct and indirect ). 
Overall, the Programme is conceived as an important contribution to kick -start the change of entrenched 
behaviours (i.e., unsustainable practices in business in the Amazon),  helping create the foundation for 
markets that value the fundamental role of natural capital in business, enabling the development of profitable, scalable and climate -friendly production models in which p rivate entities will be more willing to participate. 
Jumpstarting private participation in bio-
businesses should produce demonstration effects, highlighting 
biodiversity as an intrinsic element of economic success beyond GCF support .


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 82 
 
  
7 The majority of the Amazon biome is located in Brazil (59.2%), followed by Peru (11.3%), Colombia (7.9%), Venezuela (6.7%), B olivia 
(6.0%), Guyana (3.5%), Suriname (2.4%), Ecuador (1.8%), and French Guiana (1.3%) . The Amazon basin i s 6.3 million km2, the Amazon 
biome is 6.7 million km2, the extended Amazon (Pan Amazon) is 8.03 million km2. 
8 The monetary value of the Amazon’s natural capital and ecosystem services is estimated in US$11 trillion per annum (IPBES, 2018).  
9 USAID, 2018.  
10 Perkins -Kirkpatrick and Lewis 2020.  
11 Magrin et al. , 2014.  
12 More detailed information on climate variability is provided in the Feasibility Study.  
13 USAID , 2018.  
14 Pabón- Caicedo et al. , 2018.  
 PROJECT/ PROGRAMME  INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
1. Covering over 6,000,000 km2 and portions of 9  countries in Latin America and the Caribbean ( LAC)7, the 
Amazon is the world’s largest river system, containing a tenth of the world’s known species8. The Amazon 
biome hosts over 40% of the existing dense moist tropical forest  globally  and about 10%  to 15% of 
terrestrial  biodiversity , being fundamental for carbon sequestration (stores approximately 150 -200 billion 
tons of carbon)  and resilience to global climate change. While it contains  many different ecosystems, the 
Amazon forms a single bio -geophysical  entity,  and its many parts depend on the integrity of the whole. It 
is home to  34 million people,  including more than 350 indigenous groups.  
Climate change  and the Amazon basin : observed trends and projected impacts . 
2. On average, temperatures have increased by 0.5ºC since 1980 in the Amazon Biome, with the largest 
increments observed in the southwest Amazon (USAID, 2018 )9. A significant increase in heatwaves has 
been observed in the r egion during the period from 1950−201710. Rainfall anomalies and variability have 
also been recorded continually over the past decades . Nonetheless, the following trends have emerged:  
3. Evidence shows that the dry season intensity (i.e., dry periods beginning earlier and ending later in the 
year), as well as the frequency of drought events has been increasing in the Amazon during the period 
1951- 2014 (Marengo and Souza 2018; USAID 2018). Over the last 35 years there has been  an increasing 
tendency towards more extreme wet months and extreme dry months (Marengo and Souza, 2018).  
4. Espinoza et. al (2019) observed a significant increase in dry -day frequency in the southern Amazon 
during SON (September -November), and a decline in total annual precipitation, estimated at 18% during 
the period between  1981 and 2017. In the northern Amazon, a diminution of dry -day frequency was 
observed, especially during MAM (March -May) season. Rainfall increases  of 17% during MAM, along 
with an increase in wet -day frequency during the same period and throughout the year , were  observed 
in the northern Peruvian and Brazilian Amazon.   
5. In the period 1981– 2018,  Funatsu et al. (2021) found a statistically significant increase in the number of 
consecutive dry -days in the Southern Amazon (defined as south of 5°S) during  November -March, 
whereas the Northern Amazon (defined as north of 5°S) had statistically significant increases in very 
heavy precipitation day s, and the maximum number of consecutive wet -days from February until June.  
6. According to the IPCC 5th Assessment Report for Central and South America11, rainfall dynamics in the 
Amazon region are influenced either by interannual fluctuations linked to ‘El Niño -Southern Oscillation’ 
(ENSO) or decadal variability12. Recycling from the Amazon rainforests is responsible for 50 -75% of its 
annual rainfall, where deforestation and land- use can play an important role in changing the regulating 
role of forests13. 
7. Table 1 provides a reference on the various climate- related hazards to which the region is exposed.  In 
terms of climate -related natural hazards, t he main ones  observed in the Amazon biome between 1970 
and 2015 were floods (50%), landslides (27%), droughts (19%), and forest fires (4 %)14. As shown in the 
table, all countries have at least one administrative area in the basin characterized as “high risk” of 
floodi ng, and nearly all countries are considered high or medium risk for wildfires. Fires are not only 
attributed to drought and extreme heat, but they are largely linked with anthropogenic activities , especially 
the use of fire for clearing forest and agricult ural land.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 82 
 
  
15 Data builds on country -level profiles for each of the target countries, based on available literature and using Government Reports (including 
national communications to the UNFCCC, NDCs, NAPs, among others), the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal,  and other studies 
by international and national organizations working on climate change ( see Annex 2 Feasibility Study and Annex 21  Climate risk and 
vulnerability assessment at the country level in the bioeconomy product chains ). 
16 Magrin et al., 2014.  
17 Lyra and Sampaio , 2016.  
18 Marengo and Souza,  2018.  
19 Data collected from CORDEX South America predictions show variations and ensemble disagreement in terms of precipitation.  More 
detailed information is provided in Annex 2;  Marengo et al. , 2018; Lyra and S ampaio, 2016 ; Magrin et al. , 2014 . Table 1.- Climate -related hazard in the Amazon region, by country15 
Country  River flood  Landslide  Extreme heat  Wildfire  Water scarcity  
Brazil  High Medium -low Medium  High Low-very low  
Colombia  High High-low Medium  High-low Very low  
Ecuador  High High-medium  Medium -low High-medium  Very low  
Guyana  High Low Medium  High Very low  
Peru  High-low High –low Medium  High Low-very low  
Suriname  High-low Low Medium  High-medium  Very low  
Source: GFDRR , No date, https://thinkhazard.org/   
8. The Amazon Basin is projected to have some of the highest increases in temperature due to climate 
change within South  America, with the central Amazon area particularly affected. According to RCP 
projections using CMIP5 models, the average annual temperature in the Amazon b asin could increase 
between 0.6°C and 2°C by the end of the century for RCP2.6 scenario,16 between 3°C and 4°C in RCP 4.5 
scenario17, and 6°C under RCP8 .518. Positive temperature trends are projected for all countries in the 
Amazon basin (Figure 1).  
9. According to RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 projections, the average annual precipitation in the Amazon 
could decrease as much as 40% in some areas of  the central -north Amazon, while the central region 
could experience a decrease in precipitation of up to 20 %19. Precipitation is expected to increase by 15% 
(RCP4.5) and 20 % (RCP8.5) in some areas and decrease by 11% (RCP4.5) and 25%  (RCP8.5)  in others  
by the end of the 21st century. Increases in aridity , as well as in the longest dry spell , are projected.   
Figure 1 A.- Projected changes in annual average temperature (left) and annual precipitation (right) for the 
period 2046- 2065 and 2081- 2100 (RCP2.6 and RCP 8.5)  
  
Source: Magrin et al., 2014, p. 1513 (cited in Marengo et al., 2014 )


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 82 
 
  
20 Marengo et al. 2013 in Prüssman et al. 2016  
21 Andrade Abe et al. 2018 
22 Duffy et. al 2015; Sorribas et. al 2016 
23 USAID 2018. De Faria et al. 2017 
24 Lyra and Sampaio 2016  
25 USAID 2018.  Figure 1 B.- Projected changes in annual average temperat ure (left) and annual precipitation (right) for the 
period 204 1-2070 relative to 1961- 1990 (RCP 4.5) 
  
Source: Marengo et al., 2014 . 
10. Floods are also projected to increase in the future in t erms of frequency and intensity20. This is likely to 
affect all countries in the Amazon basin. The western Amazon is expected to experience more frequent 
flooding in the rainy season, due to projected increases in precipitation. Zulkafli et al. (2016) project  an 
increased severity of the wet season flood pulse in the western A mazon by 7.5% and 12% for RCPs 4.5 
and 8.5 , respectively , for the 100 -year floods. Deforestation further exacerbate s these trends and 
contribute s to intensified flooding21.  
11. CMIP5 projections from Duffy et al. (2015) and Sorribas et al. (2016) project that by 2100, the area 
affected by mild and extr eme drought will nearly double and triple, respectively, for the entire Amazon 
basin22. Wildfires are expected to increase due to increasingly dry conditions and continued use of fire 
for clearing forest in the Amazon23. The southern  and eastern  Amazon are  particularly at risk of wildfires, 
and the risk will increase due to climate change projections indicating drier and warmer conditions. Lyra 
and Sampaio (2016) further project a possible substitution of some areas of rainforest in the Amazon by 
deciduous forest types and grassland under the RCP4.5 scenario, and especially grassland in RCP8.5 
scenario by the end of this century24. 
Climate change exposure, vulnerability and risk 
12. Scientific evidence and information point out that climate variability and change pose a great risk to the 
Amazon region.  The Amazon is particularly at risk due to its direct exposure to climate risks, and its high 
vulnerability (high sensitivity and low capacities). There are over 34 million people living in the Amazon 
basin, including over 3 million indigenous peoples25, many of which are dependent on agriculture, forests 
and other natural resources for their livelihoods. At the same time, poverty levels in the Amazon region 
tend to be above national averages of most countries, which limits the populations’ ability to prepare for 
and respond to climate change.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 82 
 
  
26 Global Forest Watch.  
27 Deforestation rates in Guyana and Suriname are relatively lower. It is estimated that forest loss in Guyana reached 9,227 ha in 2019 (Benn 
et al., 2020). No forest loss data is available for Suriname, although it has been documented that forest logging reached 1 million m3 (Nimos, 
et al., 2017).  
28 IPBES, 2019 ; UNEP-WCMC, 2016; Curtis, P. et al, 2021. Other drivers of deforestation include mining, infrastructure development and 
large hydroelectric plants, as well as fires. These are not the focus of this proposal and thus are not covered in detail in this section.  
29 Bennett, L., “ Deforestation and Climate Change”, 2017.  13. Expected changes in temperature and precipitation , and associated risks , will have impacts in key 
economic sectors such as agriculture, fisheries and tourism, and natural ecosystems in the Amazon 
region. These changes will impact the suitability areas where crops are able to be produced, as well as 
loss of ecosystems and biodiversity , affecting the liv elihoods of people in these areas .  
Deforestation and forest degradation  
14. In addition to climate- related hazards, Amazon forest s are being depleted at an alarming pace, 
exacerbating dramatic nature loss and ecosystem degradation. Short -sighted, unsustainabl e 
development throughout the region has led to high levels of persistent deforestation rates over the last 
decade, threatening the integrity of the ecosystem and the global climate. Some 1.7 million hectares of 
Amazon forest s in South American countries were lost in 2019 (Table 2 )26. By mid -2020, deforestation 
had grown 55% compared with the previous year.  
Table 2.- Overview of forest loss in the Amazon in 2019, by country27 
Country  Forest Loss in hectares (ha)  Forest Loss in the Amazon relative to total 
national forest loss (%)  
Brazil  1,290,000  94.8%  
Colombia  91,400  79.4%  
Ecuador  11,400  93.2%  
Peru  161,600  100.0%  
Source: IDB’s elaboration, based on Global Forest Watch data.  
15. While underlying causes of deforestation in each country are distinct, changes in land- use to meet 
growing demand for food, fibres, timber and energy, are considered a primary cause of forest loss and/or 
severe degradation in the Amazon28. In general terms, agriculture (including large- scale, small- scale and 
colonization) and livestock are among the most significant causes of deforestation in the Amazon29. In 
the absence of alternatives, increasing agricultural and livestock production in forested regions involves 
the cutting down of trees to create new production areas –and then burning what remains – to make the 
soil more fertile  in the short term. Various  other industries dependent on forest -related activities, such as 
logging and plantation development, are clearing large areas of forest.  
16. In Brazil, commodity production and cattle ranching are major drivers of the conversion of forests to 
pastures and plantations (Piotrowski M. et al., 2019). In both Colombia and Peru, major drivers are the 
expansion of the agricultural frontier and pastures for cattle grazing, although illegal crops, mining and 
logging have also contributed (Clerici et al., 2020, Piotrows ki M. et al., 2019). In Ecuador, small -scale 
ranching and production expansion of commodities such as palm oil are key drivers (MAAP, 2019). In 
Guyana and Suriname, shifting cultivation and forestry activities also lead to degradation impacts, 
although mining and infrastructure prevail as main drivers (Benn et al, 2020, Nimos et al, 2017).  
17. Indeed, in Amazon countries, the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land- use (AFOLU) is at the same time 
economically significant and a major source of environmental degrada tion, and carbon emissions (Table 
3 and Figure 2 ). Overall, between 2007 and 2016, some 23% of the Amazon’s GHG emissions were 
driven by the AFOLU sector (IPCC, 2020).  
Table 3.- GHG emissions (Mt CO 2eq/year) by country (including AFOLU), 1990 -2020  
Country  1990  1995  2000  2005  2010  2015  2020  
Brazil  1642.3  1726.1  1807  2004.4  2105  1354.3  1431.6  
Colombia  217.1  231.7  233.1  228.4  245 233.8  270.3


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 82 
 
  
30 Marengo and Souza,  2018.  Ecuador  70.4 78 78.9 80.4 90.4 83.5 92.8 
Guyana  9.6 11 11.6 12.6 13.1 21.6 19.2 
Peru  103.9  112 122.1  133.2  149.8  183.9  187.5  
Suriname  6.1 6.7 6.2 6.8 7.3 12.7 13.2 
Figure 2 - Share of AFOLU sector (%) in total emissions by country, 1990 -2050  
 
Source:  IDB’s elaboration based on Climate Watch  Historical GHG Emissions. 2021. World Resources Institute.  
Assumptions:  (1) As of December 2019, 0.5% increase in CO 2eq emissions by energy sector above 2018 levels as in Friedlingstein et al., 2019. 
Global Carbon Budget 2019, Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 11, 1783– 1838 , AFOLU sector emissions remain as BAU; (2) As of December 2020, 2% 
increase in global CO 2eq emissions by energy sec tor above 2019 levels as in International Energy Agency, 2 March 2021 , AFOLU sector 
emissions remain as BAU;  (3) percentages for  the period 2021- 2050 predicted using exponential smoothing (ETS) algorithm. Brazil prediction 
based on records 2011 to 2020.  
Deforestation and forest degradation exacerbate climate change risk and bring the basin closer to 
its tipping point  
18. The findings of the  last few decades support climatological models' forecasts of a warmer Amazon 
scenario with more severe and sustained droughts, making the forest more vulnerable to degradation and loss of its ecological functions to sequester carbon, retain 
carbon reserves and biodiversity, and 
control hydrological and biogeochemical cycles30. Such trends towards ecosystem degradation and loss 
of ecosystem function are further exacerbated by deforestation and forest degradation (Marengo and 
Souza , 2018). Def orestation is closely linked with drought in the Amazon basin, where the conversion of


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 82 
 
  
31 World Economic Forum (WEF), “ The future of nature and business ”, New Nature Economy II, 2020.  
32 World Wide Fund for Nature, “ Living Forests Report Chapter 5: Saving Forests at Risk ”, 2015.  
33 Literature argues on the threat of two “tipping points” in the Amazon, namely:  i) an increase in temperature of 4°C or ii) deforestation 
exceeding 40% of the forest area. This analysis suggests that if transgressed, large- scale “savannization” of mostly southern and eastern 
Amazon may occur (Nobre, C. et al., 2016).  forests into non -forest land causes climate feedback loops that reduce precipitation and increase 
temperatures through changes in the albedo and surface roughness, and t hat reduce evapotranspiration 
and rainfall recycling (Figure 3). This process creates a general trend towards increasingly dry conditions 
during the dry season and could further drive  the Amazon rainforest to reach its tipping point, resulting 
in forest dieback and the conversion of forested ecosystems into a savannah- like landscape. Thus , the 
Amazon would becom e a net source of carbon emissions instead of a sink (Hubau et al. 2020).  
Figure 3. -: Overview of the Amazon tipping point and forest dieback  / “savannization ” mechanism  
 
Source: Marengo and Souza , 2018, p. 21  
19. Without intervention, growth on demand of unsustainable use of agricultural land supply (for crop and 
livestock) and unsustainable practices in forest activity (logging, plantation and services) is likely to raise 
the rate of deforestation and forest degradation in the region, critically affecting ecosystems over the 
long- term. According to the World Economic Forum (WEF), “business as usual in the food, land and 
ocean use system is no longer viable, not only because of its impact on biodiversity but also because of 
its broader challenges: adapting to a changing climate, mitigating GHG emissions and ensuring better 
health outcomes while addressing food insecurity and rural poverty”31. The Amazon is projected to have 
the largest potential for forest loss globally, with an estimated 23 -48 million hectares lost between 2015 
and 203032. Should these trends remain unchecked, impacts on natural capital stocks and future health 
of ecosystems could be severe. Preliminary estimates from the IDB suggest that reaching an Amazon 
tipping point33 would generate a cumulative GDP loss of over US$230 billion.


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 82 
 
  
34 European Union Science Hub, “ Climate change impacts and adaptation in Europe ”, European Commission, 2020.  
35 IMF, Special Series on Fiscal Policies to Respond to COVID -19, “Greening the Recovery”, April 2020; Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), “What Policies for Greening the Crisis Response and Economic Recovery? Lessons Learned fr om 
Past Green Stimulus Measures and Implications for the COVID -19 Crisis”, Environment Working Paper N° 164, May 2020.  
36 The Paulson Institute, “ Financing Nature: Closing the Global Biodiversity Financing Gap -  Paulson Institute ”, 2020; The World Bank, 
“Mobilizing Private Finance for Nature ”, 2020.  20. Climate change has economy -wide implications. No economic sectors are spared the impacts, whic h are 
yet to be fully understood and quantified, especially with regards to ecosystems, security and the potential 
of adaptation measures at a sectoral level. Nonetheless, the range of potential consequences of climate 
change is known to be broad, including impacts on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, impacts on food 
production, livestock, fisheries and aquaculture, impacts on human health, mortality and morbidity, air 
quality, changes in energy demand, as well as impacts on key economic sectors such as t ransport, 
tourism and labour productivity. Climate change could further induce the displacement of people, 
increasing the risk of conflicts and have effects on security34. Overall, this translates into reduced 
economic growth and higher levels of poverty.  
Curbing these trajectories requires  concerted regional efforts to increase private participation.  
21. There is a need for concerted efforts across the Amazon b asin to reduce deforestation, increase forest 
cover, and restore degraded ecosystems to strengthen cl imate change mitigation, improve the resilience 
of local populations, livelihoods and ecosystems, support species ’ recovery and the enhancement of 
biodiversity, and ultimately restore ecosystem functionality.  
22. On September 6th, 2019, the Heads of State and Heads of Delegation of B olivia , Brazil, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname signed the Leticia Pact for the Amazon Region, which reaffirmed 
that the cooperation among Amazon countries is an important condition for the conservation of the 
Amazon, to generate opportunities for the sustainable development and well -being of its population. The 
Pact established 16 areas of action related to the fight against deforestation and forest degradation; the 
conservation, recovery and resilience of Amaz on biodiversity and ecosystems; sustainable productive 
systems; the active participation by women, by indigenous and tribal peoples and by local communities 
in the sustainable development of the region; as well as the promotion of financial mechanisms to 
implement the Pact, underlining the importance of multilateral development banks and the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF)’s Amazon Sustainable Landscapes Program (ASL) II.  On August 11th, 2020, 
at the II Presidential Summit of the Leticia Pact, the signatory countries gathered virtually to discuss the repercussions of the COVID -19 pandemic and the urgent need for a financing initiative for the region’s 
sustainable development and bioeconomy . The pace  of change required  and the need to do it in a cost -
efficient way makes it impossible to think of  governments  as sole leaders on this agenda . The business  
community can engage  in activities  where they can lead this change, using their available resources to 
invest in more sustainable productive practices. In fact, The Leticia Pact includes specific action for the 
promotion of sustainable use of forests and production systems, including value chains, as well as 
sustainable business development.  
23. Investments in nature have traditionally come from public domestic budgets, official development 
assistance and philanthropy.  With t he recent  unfolding of the COVID -19 pandemic,  governments are 
facing important budget constraints resulting from record spending amidst the crisis and in preparation 
for the upcoming recovery phase . On the other hand, understanding the  need to direct efforts towards a 
"green recovery"35, various organizations and investors are rallying to counteract the degradation of the 
world’s natural capital. This momentum presents a unique opportunity for jumpstarting a shift to more 
efficient use of public funding to incentivize increased private in vestment.  In this regard, the international 
community  specifically highlight s the role of financial institutions in mobilizing private finance at the scale 
needed to protect nature and its services for human well -being36. 
24. Supporting private actors that sus tainably leverage nature’s assets, facilitating private investment and 
fostering private innovation, can help address the funding gap to protect natural capital and biodiversity. 
Because nature is very much linked to critical sectors of the economy (such a s agriculture  and tourism ), 
and rural and riverine communities, it offers great potential for entrepreneurs and investors willing to 
embrace sustainable use of natural capital and conservation as a business development opportunity.


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 82 
 
  
37 The bioeconomy refers to any economic activity based on the use of natural renewable biological resources, from both land and ocean, 
to obtain food, materials, and energy in a sustainable way without compromising their availability for future generations. It  comprises activities 
related to the invention, development, production, and use of biological products and processes . For the purposes of this proposal, in the 
Amazon the bioeconomy aims to be climate and nature- positive, encouraging sustainable land- use pract ices that lead to reduced emissions, 
higher carbon stocks, net gains in natural capital, and increased climate resilience of vulnerable populations and ecosystems . Bioeconomy: Private role in b io-businesses and forest conservation   
25. Because of the Amazon’s diverse biological , land and water  resources, t he bioeconomy37 provides the 
ideal framework for the development of sustainable, productive models and practices in AFOLU in the 
Amazon.  Shifting to production models , technologies  and practices that embrace a more sustainable use 
of the Amazon’s natural capital and forests  (from this point  forward defined as bio -businesses , see ¶ 35), 
can contribute to lower the impacts of climate change by reducing deforestation , restoring soil, and 
reducing GHG emissions. In parallel, being conscious of risks and vulnerabilities in the mainstreaming 
of more sustainable practices in AFOLU can help increase the region’s resilience to future climate- related 
impacts already unavoidable to this day (Table 4) .  
Table 4. - Overview of potential climate change impacts in the Amazon region, and adaptation and mitigation 
intervention s and benefits from selected bio -business value chains  
Sector  / 
sub-sector 
value chain Impacts  of climate change  Adaptation intervention s and 
benefits  Mitigation intervention s 
and benefits  
Sustainable 
agroforestry: 
Value chain: 
Coffee  Zones better suited for arabica coffee migrates 
upwards by about 500m in elevation, with negative 
ecosystem impacts ( Bunn et al, 2015;  Ovalle -Rivera 
et al., 2015 ). Reduction in 60% of area suitable for 
coffee production in Brazil ( Gomes et al, 2020 ).  Intervention s: Moving to agroforestry  
(shade tree management) , with organic 
fertilization, pest management and 
irrigation and water management  
(Gomes et al, 2020; Rahn et al 2018 ). 
Benefits : Agroforestry systems can 
maintain 75% of the area suitable for coffee production;  s
hade trees can 
decrease the mean daily temperature by up to 4 ° C (50% shade can decrease 
temperature by 
2−3 ° C) (Gomes et al, 
2020 ). Optimal tree cover , fertilization  
and irrigation adaptation practices 
could help prevent yield drops.  
Improved planting material, and 
management practices, would also 
reduce climatic stress.  Interventions : Agroforestry system 
involves arabica coffee, bananas and native tree species.  
Benefits : The converted and new 
coffee agroforestry areas should 
reach an additional 4.3 
tCO 2/ha/year sequestration 
relative to low productivity 
conditions and up to 15.2. 
tCO2/ha/year sequestration for 
plantations established on 
degraded land.  
Sustainable 
agroforestry: 
Value chain: 
Cacao  Higher temperatures and erratic rainfall changes 
cocoa farming suitability and causes yield reduction 
(Lahive et al., 2019; Bunn et al, 2019 ). There is a 
reduction in current suitable cacao production areas, and a migration of suitable areas for cocoa 
production with negative ecosystem impacts.  Interventions : Agroforestry  system 
combining food crops, fruit species, 
native tree species,  and timber trees; 
manual weeding, composting, mulch; irrigation and water management by rudimentary drip irrigation; integrated pest management  (IPM) , phytosanitary 
measures  (Bunn et al, 2019
).  
Benefits : Optimal tree cover and 
irrigation adaptation practices could 
help prevent yield drops.  30-40% 
canopy cover can increase yield by 22%. Better water management can increase yields (+73%) and trenches reduce soil erosion and flooding during 
intensive rainfa
ll. Improved planting 
material, and management practices, 
would also reduce climatic stress. 
Correct quantity and timing of fertilizer 
application to avoid soil depletion can Interventions : Agroforestry system  
combining food crops, fruit 
species, native tree species,  and 
timber trees ; manual weeding, 
composting, mulch . 
Benefits : The converted and new 
cacao agroforestry areas should 
increase carbon sequestration by 
an additional 4.3 tCO 2/ha/year 
sequestration relative to low 
productivity conditions and up to 
15.2 tCO2/ha/year sequestration 
for plantations established on 
degraded land.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 82 
 
 increase yields by 130% ; IPM can raise 
yields by 25%  (Bunn et al, 2019 ).  
Native palm -
perennial 
agricultural 
systems 
(Value chain  
Açaí) Interruptions to Açaí palm growth cycle from 
warmer temperatures and reaching of upper heat 
and water stress thresholds, new pest and disease 
outbreaks, and changes in crop yields and 
productivity.  Higher temperatures combined with 
drought conditions may increase fruit abortion. 
Evidence of a decline in Açaí  production during hot 
years that is largely attribute to regional 
temperature increases of around 1.5 °C in recent 
decades. Açaí producers estimate production 
losses of one to 40%  of normal production 
(Tregidgo et al. 2020 ) Interventions : Intensification of 
production, through optimal fertilization and micro- aspersion irrigation, as well 
as support to best practices including 
new cultivars, scheduling production to 
coincide with periods of low natural 
forest acai production, among others. 
(Oliveira et al. 2016, EMBRAPA, 2019) . 
Benefits : Native palms, as a perennial 
woody crop, can increase canopy cover and limit soil degradation, erosion and 
sedimentation, improve soil health, 
while also supporting biodiversity 
conservation, and maintaining 
ecological integrity at the landscape 
level. Irrigation more than doubles 
productivity of  Açaí cultivation 
(EMBRAPA, 2019) . Interventions : Use of deeper -
rooted species and non- crop trees 
with crops  
Benefits : Increased productivity is 
accompanied by above and below ground carbon stocks increases, 
reaching an additional 6.1  
tCO
2/ha/year sequestration/  
avoided.  
Non-timber 
natural forest 
products 
(NTFP ) (Value 
chain Brazil 
nut) Studies indicate that a warming, drying climate will 
reduce the mean net primary productivity (NPP) by approximately 52% by 2050 under a medium– high 
GHG emissions scenario. When the direct effects of CO
2 on plant physiology are included, NPP still 
reduces but to a lesser extent of 33% due to the enhancement of photosynthesis by CO
2 fertilization  
(Esquivel -Muelbert et al. 2018 ). Decrease in quality 
and availability due to inadequate growing 
conditions and pest and disease outbreaks (Oxfam, 2020);  Interventions : Enrichment and active 
management  (climate information 
management to anticipate management responses
), as well as landscape level 
conservation approaches , and favour  
crossed pollination by maintaining 
natural forest cover . Research and 
monitoring of forest conditions and 
composition are als o an important part 
of the strategy to adequately adapt to the change processes at hand, considering the many uncertainties . 
Benefits : Enrichment and active 
management would increase 
productivity of Brazil nut forests and 
other NTFPs as it responds to external 
ecosystem stressors from climate 
change.  Interventions : Protection of forest 
through intensification of forest -
based NTFP value c hain utilizing 
Brazil nut enrichment and other  
non-timber forest product best 
management practices 
(optimization of collection paths, in situ drying racks, among others)
. 
Benefits : Reduced emissions from 
reduced agricultural encroachment and other illegal deforestation.  
Enrichment in Brazil nut 
concessions, especially those that 
have been subjected to logging or 
agricultural induced degradation, 
could lead to increased carbon 
stocks equivalent to 1.4  
tCO 2/ha/year.  
Native species  
aquaculture 
(Value chain 
Colossoma 
sp.) Changes in the ecological balance that provides 
sustenance for fish; decreased availability of 
nutrients in the water; alteration of the reproductive behaviour of the species; degradation of areas that offer shelter to fish; migration of fish to other regions; 
decrease in river flows (
Herrera et al, 2015).  Loss of 
1 km2 of floodplain forest induces up to 9% 
decreasing in fish catches ( de França Barros et al 
2020 ). The size of fish species in the Amazon is 
negatively correlated to drought intensity ( Fabré et 
al, 2017 ) Interventions : Improvement of 
infrastructure, management practices 
and feed quality in aquaculture growing 
of in-demand local fish species 
(Colossoma sp. and other ´round fish´) 
in small -scale operations  (fish from 
aquaculture management and 
managed sustainable fisheries) .  
Benefits : Colossoma sp . and other 
´round fish´ are a resilient fish species, 
used to high temperatures and still 
waters often encountered in 
aquaculture operations. Growing in -
demand local fish species in small -scale 
operations reduces pressure on native wild fish populations, hence improving aquatic biodiversity, while waste stream 
water can be reused as fertilized 
irrigation water.  Diet and income 
diversification for local communities  
(McGrath et al, 2020).   Interventions : Growing in -demand 
local fish species ( Colossoma sp. 
and other ´round fish´) in small -
scale operations to substitute beef protein. Other measures as part of 
aquaculture and managed fisheries 
such as efficient energy (fuel) and 
raw material use, use of waste 
products for biodiesel, efficient 
post-harvest and distribution 
systems.  
Benef its: At the 
jurisdictional/landscape level the 
sector can convert to net emissions sink by substituting consumption of 
more emissions intensive protein 
sources, like beef


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 82 
 
 Forest ry (value 
chain of native 
species plantations)  Loss of carbon stocks, and reduced 
evapotranspiration and rainfall recycling; Slow shift 
to a more dry ‐affiliated forest genera in the 
Amazon ( Esquivel -Muelbert et al, 2018 ); With more 
extended or intense periods of soil water defici t, 
large trees and those with low wood density may be 
at greatest risk of hydraulic failure due to cavitation 
(McDowell & Allen, 2015; Rowland et al., 2015 ). 
Large trees have been shown to be particularly 
affected by artificially ‐imposed drought ( McDowell 
& Allen, 2015 ; Nepstad et al., 2007; Rowland et al., 
2015 ) and drought events ( Bennett  et al. , 2015 ; 
Phillips et al., 2010 ). This will result in a decline in 
forest productivity, tree growth and reforestation 
viability.  Activities : Reforestation with n ative 
species forestry plantations ( e.g., 
Shizolobium sp., Guazuma sp., 
Ochroma sp.)  
Benefits : Native species forestry 
plantations can increase ecosystem 
resilience and help avert the Amazon 
tipping point by being structurally similar 
to natural forests, as far as hydrological 
and climatic functions ; decrease in 
costs of restoration and reforestation; 
for every hectare of native forests 
planted and maintained 0.4 new local jobs are created (
Rolim et al., 2019 ). Activities : Reforestation with native 
species forestry plantations  (e.g., 
Shizolobium sp., Guazuma sp., 
Ochroma sp.) . 
Benefits : Decrease in deforestation 
and degradation ( Rolim et al., 
2019 ), higher carbon stocks in 
biomass and soil  above and below 
ground carbon stocks increases , 
which should reach an expected 6.5 tCO
2/ha/year sequestration.  
Wilderness 
and traditional use (value 
chain 
community -led 
nature 
tourism)  Damage to key tourism hotspots and tourism 
infrastructure creating higher operational costs 
(insurance, evacuation, back -up systems) and trip 
cancellations; Damage to forest resources (tourism 
hotspots) due to wildfires; Risk of reduced 
attractiveness of tourism in areas with increasing disease incidence (zika, malaria, dengue); Risk of decreased attractiveness of key tourism features (waterfalls) due to precipitation variability; Reduced attractiveness of eco-
tourism opportunities 
contingent on unique species ( giant otter ( pteronura 
brasiliensis ), macaws ( ara sp ), spider monkeys  
(ateles sp. ), etc.) that are highly vulnerable to climate 
change.  Activities : Community -led nature 
tourism 
Benefits : Well-organized community -
led nature tourism can lead to cultural revival and economic diversification of 
local and indigenous communities  
(
Izurieta et al, 2021) . It can lead to jobs, 
income and social inclusion ( Hoefle, 
2016 ). It is inherently aligned with 
keeping natural forests and all their 
biodiversity in place and promotes 
ecosystem -based adaptation and 
resilience. Though na ture tourism is 
vulnerable to outside shocks (e.g., 
COVID) it is also one of the key areas 
that can have a quick recovery in high forest landscapes once the economic recovery is underway.  Activities : Community -led nature 
tourism 
Benefits : The establishment of 
nature tourism operations and the ensuing protection of forests and 
wildlife species for observation by 
visitors leads to habitat 
conservation and avoided 
deforestation (Butts and Sukhdeo-
Singh, 2010 ; Lorencini and Gomes, 
2018 ). This avoided deforestation 
´halo´ effect is estimated to lead to 
increased carbon stocks equivalent to 1.87 tCO
2/ha/year.  
Source: IDB’s elaboration.  
26. However, bio-businesses and the nature of investments related to them pose various challenges in 
raising capital.  Since 2015, the environmental investment sector has been growing rapidly. This 
expansion includes investment blueprints for sectors  in the bioeconomy , expanded capital in private 
investment funds and investments by various value chain actors, signifying that the pool of available 
capital is becoming larger. Yet, bio-businesses in general are s till not ready to absorb the minimum levels 
of investment or the terms and conditions of funding that existing platforms are able to offer. Investment s 
needed to implement the se businesses  are often associated to small and medium -sized enterprises and 
to payback models that may well increase transaction costs and risks.  
Reinforcing the regulatory setting  for bio -business development  
27. Amazon countries do not have dedicated legal frameworks governing the bioeconomy, although there 
are countries that have recently embraced the concept under different instruments. All target countries 
have sectoral or general policy frameworks that cover some areas of relevance to bio-businesses , such 
as payments  for ecosystem services, forest concessions, environmental incentives, supply chain 
legislation, organic agriculture, sustainable fisheries, ecotourism, access to biological resources or 
scientific  research. In countries like Brazil and Peru, sub -national governments have also embedded 
bioeconomy  promotion in their regional strategies. Yet , the approach towards the promotion of bio-
businesses is still at its infancy, is based on programmatic objectives and lacks sufficient legal anchorage.  
28. In addition, while there have been recent adoptions of guidelines in countries like Brazil and Peru to 
integrate economic valuation of natural assets, none of the  Amazon countries have  comprehensive  
regulatory tools when it comes to mechanisms to adequately v alue natural  and forest assets  involved in 
bio-businesses . Thus, the latter  remain relatively unattractive to large - or small-scale investors and


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 82 
 
  
38 IDB, “ Impact Investment for Biodiversity Conservation: Cases from Latin America and the Caribbean ”, 2021.  
39 FAO (2016) Forest concessions: past, present and future, Forestry Policy and Institutions Working Paper 36.  
40 The United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) agenda highlights the role of promoting effective public, public - private and 
civil society partnerships.  financiers, which inevitably favour  other more profitable  and accessible ventures . Addressing these 
challenges requires innovati ve financing schemes  and channels, such as blended finance, high- risk 
capital investment, bond issuance and shared- risk models38. 
29. A sector -specific  scheme to promote bio-businesses  that deserves  consideration is forest concessions.  
The sector is dynamic throug hout the region,  with consolidated legal frameworks and countries 
increasing or decreasing concession areas rapidly in response to public policy and stakeholder 
engagement (Table 5 )39. Concessionaires can incorporate sustainable practices in forest with proper 
management and monitoring if they are able to generate sufficient revenue from sustainably harvested 
forest products, helping governments bring in private resources to forest conservati on40. In addition, 
increasing financial gains from sustainable products, activities or services will benefit not only private 
concessions but also community -based concessions, contributing to link sustainable forest practices with 
poverty eradication and r ecognition of community forest management.  
Table 5. Overview of forest concessions in Latin Am erica (thousands of hectares), by country  
Country  Total 
forest 
area Public 
forests 
area Public forests 
for production 
area Forest in 
public 
lands (%)  Public 
lands for 
production 
(%) Industrial 
concessions 
area Public lands 
under 
concessions 
(%) 
Brazil  516,000  313,000  4,300  61 1.37 840 0.27 
Peru  67,992  18,821  5,513  28 29 7,110  38 
Guyana  15,200  12,200  6,580  80 56 6,500  53 
Suriname  14,758  11,300  4,482  77 40 1,090  10 
Latin America  718,820  425,368  43,582  59 10 18,597  4 
Source: FAO (2016) Latin American Experiences in Natural Forest Management Concessions, Forestry Policy and Institutions . 
30. By definition, the concession of a particular area of forest to a private company promotes long- term 
investment by the concessionaire,  who has guaranteed access to the benefits of capital improvements 
over an extended period of time. This is crucial for building an economic constituency for standing forests. 
But given the multivariate nature of forestry, concession systems must be improved and implemented at 
scale  incorporating social and environmental factors  into the traditional  technical and financial analysis 
of projects on equal s tanding.   
31. The activities in this proposal seek to address  the above- described challenges  and increase the flow of 
private funds to bio-businesses  that can reduce the impact of climate change, safeguard local livelihoods 
and promote more inclusive development.  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Problem Statement  
32. In the Amazon basin , its various ecosystems –which include forests (lowlands and montane), peatlands, 
freshwater ecosystems and others – are experiencing changes in their dynamics as a result of climate 
change- induced increase in temperature, changes in precipitation and its variability, and extreme hydro 
meteorological events . These climate change- induced changes are  expected to cause a r ise in 
evapotranspiration, which is a key component of the surface water and energy balance of the target 
ecosystems in the basin. These impacts are compounded by changes and other dynamics associated to 
land use change, including deforestation (small and large -scale) , land degradation,  and wildfires , with 
CO 2 being emitted into the atmosphere as trees die and vegetation burns.  These changes in the Amazon 
ecosystems and the climate change- induced changes in temperature, precipitation and extreme hydro-
meteo rological events affect the productive systems and the people and businesses (micro, small, 
medium and large) that interact and depend on them.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 82 
 
  
41 IDB, “ Impact Investment for Biodiversity Conservation: Cases from Latin America and the Caribbean ”, 2021.  
42 This estimate should be considered a minimum, as the portfolio of value chains evaluated is indicative and not exhaustive.  
43 The sectors identified in the feasibility study have been the basis for the economic model and the estimations on target values for 
Programme indicators. However, provided that they fulfil eligibility criteria described under the activities of the Programme, other sectors or 
activities could be considered for receiving funds from the Programme.  33. As described in Section B.1, these climate -change induced warming of the Amazon , with more severe 
and sustained droughts, will make the forest ecosystems more vulnerable to degradation and loss of its 
ecological functions . Recent observations show that during the dry season, degraded forests in the 
Amazon are 6.5°C warmer, pump one -third less water , absorb one- third less carbon,  and show a 
considerably higher fire risk than intact forests ( Longo et al, 2020 ). In the last decades, the Amazon 
region has suffered with great er intensity a series of pressures that have caused the loss of at least 10% 
of its vegetation cover. It is predicted that i f more than 20- 25% of the Amazon's original forest cover is 
lost, the “tipping point” , the current dense forest could be permanently  transformed into a savannah 
(Lovejoy and Nobre, 2018) , resulting in the dieback of Amazon forest , and rapidly accelerate climatic 
changes  worldwide , as the Amazon would becom e a net source of carbon emissions instead of a sink . 
As shown in Figure 3, deforestation causes climate feedback loops that reduce precipitation and increase 
temperatures through changes in the albedo and surface roughness, and that reduce evapotranspiration 
and rainfall recycling.  
Shift in the development pathway . 
34. Cognizant of the social, environmental and economic challenges associated with the loss of natural 
capital, Amazon countries are increasingly looking for effective ways to promote a low emission/high 
carbon stock, climate resilient, more sustainable and inclusive development. Substantial efforts are 
needed to ensure a systematic and structural change,  as this transition faces barriers that are diverse 
and somewhat intertwined. Although the investor community at large has already started to contribute to 
sustainably leveraging natural capital, well -designed incentives can encourage them to invest more and 
to further innovate in low emission, climate resilient sustainability solutions. International commitments 
under the Paris Agreement and the Convention on Biological Diversity promote more engagement of the 
financial sector in sustainability overall, trigg ering awareness on the relevance of forest protection, 
reforestation, and soil management. But standard compensation mechanisms have not yet been 
deployed at scale, and finance for conservation still represents only a small portion of the broader 
sustainable investment market41.  
35. The region’s endowment of natural capital and its economic relevance offer considerable opportunities 
to mobilize private investments for bio -businesses. Throughout this proposal, bio -businesses are 
defined as business models, prac tices and technologies that sustainably use natural capital and forest 
assets  that lead to reduced emissions, higher carbon stocks, net gains in natural capital and increased 
climate resilience , in the context of the bioeconomy. More specifically, this inv olves practices such as 
conservation and preservation of ecosystems, recyclability and/or use of recycled materials, accreditation or certifications, efficient use of renewable resources (linked to climate change mitigation) and/or location 
considerations based on country level ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) hotspots, local communities’ 
poverty levels, proportion of natural -vegetation cover, and exposure to climate change (linked to climate 
change adaptation) (see ¶ 25
). For the purpose of this proposal, bio -businesses are broadly categorized 
as sustainable intensification and/or extensive ecosystem conservation that leads to reduced emissions, 
higher carbon stocks and increased resilience in any of seven sectors: perennial agriculture, agroforestry, 
aquaculture, forestry plantations, non -timber natural forest products (NTFP), nature tourism and 
ecosystem services. The feasibility study for this proposal ( see Annex 2) estimates current finance 
demand (debt and equity ) for bio- businesses in target countries in the order of  US$1.9 billion42. The study 
is based on sectoral Gross Domestic Product (GDP) analysis and a thorough revision of key value chains 
in each of the aforementioned sectors, considering the various groups of productive actors (small 
producers, indigenous and riverine populations, and large producers) and business models (independent 
smallholder model, associativ e model, aggregation and trading model, and integrated corporate 
model)43.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 82 
 
  
44 For instance, local infrastructure and connectivity gaps, or deficiencies in land tenure and rights across the region.  
45 European Investment Bank (EIB), Access -to-finance conditions for Investments in Bio- Based Industries and the Blue Economy , 2017.  
46 Economic Comission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), ALC  2018.  Programme Goal  
36. The overall goal of the Programme is to reduce GHG -emissions and increase the resilience of targeted 
value chains  and ecosystems  in the Amazon region by enabling the conditions to increase the flow of 
funds to bio- businesses in the bioeconomy of the Amazon. The Programme focuses on addressing some 
of the most critical barriers specifically faced by bio- businesses ( including those r elated to the valuing of 
natural capital within financial and business models) to encourage private investment. While this 
approach may not respond to other technical and governance barriers and risks  that are also relevant 
for the sustainable and inclusiv e development of the Amazon44, the Programme proposes that IF tailored 
financial and policy mechanisms to value natural capital are deployed through the operationalization of 
the Amazon Bioeconomy Fund, THEN bio-businesses that contribute to climate mitigation, resilience and 
adaptability to climatic threats of local people in the value chains  and ecosystems  will become financially 
viable, expand , and provide a new model for low -emission resilient business development , BECAUSE 
entrepreneurs  will be able to build capacity, start -ups will be  incubated and accelerated, private support 
will be  pooled through thematic bonds and incentivizing policies, and knowledge on climate -resilient and 
low-emissio n practices  will be  generated and disseminated.   
37. Fostering private investment in bio- businesses and their value chains can be determinant of the ability 
of economies to achieve maximum use of the potential of the bioeconomy. The financial sector can play 
a significant role, as project developers point to the need for debt financing, specifically long- term, with 
longer grace periods, flexible conditions and preferential interest rates. Both developers and financial 
institutions also long for equity instruments – especially those that absorb risks – and hedgi ng schemes 
that help attract private capital45. Promoting the bioeconomy also requires boosting processes such as 
incubation and accelerating businesses that enable their access to markets under competitive conditions. Access to financing, especially in the early stages and expansion is particularly relevant
46. This will allow 
to shift the current paradigm , where Amazon forests and ecosystems do not have significant economic 
and social value,  project  high emissions and increased climate vulnerability , to a new paradigm where 
the bioeconomy increases the economic and social value of the Amazon forests and ecosystems in a 
sustainable, low emissions/high carbon stock and climate resilient way (Figure 4).  
Figure 4. Paradigm shift of bioeconomy  interventions in the Amazon region


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 82 
 
  
Source: IDB’s elaboration.  
 
Barriers and Risks  
38. As showcased in Figure 4, this paradigm shift will help address both climate risks and drivers of land use 
change (forest conversion). Climate induced risks, affect the amazon ecosystems, productive systems 
(small, medium and larger producers) and other economic activities in the Amazon biome (including 
tourism, business and financial sectors) in various ways. In the case of the selected value chains (see 
Table 4), the climate induced risks due to changes in temperature and precipitation include the reduction 
in suitable crop production areas (coffee, cocoa) and interruptions to crop growth cycle of native palms; 
a decrease in the quality and availability of NTFPs (particularly traditional medicines, essential oils, açai 
berries, Brazil nuts, etc.) due to inadequate growing conditions; risk of biodiversity loss; changes in 
ecosystem functions, including regulatory and cultural services; risk of reduced ecosystem capacity to 
regulate key hazards (flood, drought); loss of carbon stocks, and reduced evapotranspiration and rainfall 
recycling; slow shift to a more dry ‐affiliated forest genera in the Amazon due to increase in temperat ure 
and decreased rainfall; damage to key tourism hotspots and tourism infrastructure creating higher 
operational costs and trip cancellations due to changes in precipitation and temperature.  
39. Partly due to the relative novelty of bio- business products, tec hnologies and markets, important barriers 
exist that prevent  funds to flow to private investments  with strong climate change adaptation and 
mitigation impacts  at scale . Many of these barriers  are linked to the prevailing incapacity to assign a 
proper value to natural capital used sustainably in business. This is relevant  as these investments are 
expected to combine financial goals with others related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
nature conservation, sustainable production practices and livel ihoods in local communities. In line with 
this, the main identified barriers  to investment in bio- businesses for climate resilience and mitigation are:  
(i) Weak institutional environment for low -emissi on, climate resilient bio -business development : The 
lack of national systems, platforms and tools for the valuation of assets that produce carbon 
sequestration and GHG -emission reduction or reduce vulnerability to climate risks, diminishes the 
capacity to attract private investment to activities that protect natural capital. In all target countries,  
existing legal frameworks and governance tend to distort the true costs of unsustainable activities in 
forest and land- use, without assigning a tangible value to conservation, climate mitigation, or 
increase d climate resilience. Changes are needed to address the absence of policies that support


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 82 
 
  
47 Rodríguez A. et al., Towards a sustainable bioeconomy in Latín America and the Caribbean: elements for a regional vision , 2019; Rodriguez 
A., La bioeconomía: oportunidades; y desafíos para el desarrollo rural, agrícola y agroindustrial en América Latina y el Caribe , 2017.  
48 IPCC (2019), Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and 
Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Summary for Policy Makers.  
49 Financial Times, ESG investors wake up to biodiversity risk, 2020.  
50 IFC, MSME finance gap: assessment i n the shortfalls and opportunities in financing MSME  in emerging markets , 2017.  the shift to more resilient and low -emissi on production practices and technologies, including long -
term strategies to access markets that offer premium prices for sust ainable products. In addition, 
better articulation among actors in the business ecosystem – investors, financial institutions, risk 
capital, businesses, research and development (R&D) centres, incubators, and accelerators – is 
needed to create scale and to l ink actors to value chains. Targeted mechanisms and incentives can 
be developed so that the private sector will invest more in low -emissi on and resilient activities, either 
directly or indirectly through capital markets or via well -structured partnerships .  
(ii) Risks of lending to bio-business es that help improve climate resilience and/or reduce GHG 
emissions , including those in areas exposed to climate  and environmental risks:  Despite their 
adaptation and mitigation benefits  (as outlined in Table 4  and Figure 5) , bio-business es are riskier 
and more costly compared to other land- uses, especially at the  early stages of development  and in 
low-income, vulnerable areas . Adopting resilient and low -emissi on production practices impose 
incremental costs on businesses and producers, requiring capital that is generally unavailable or only 
available at significantly higher  costs. Bio-business es in general lack the scale needed to attract 
conventional investors , as they are mostly not big enough for large investors and many times  not 
small enough for microfinancing.  In addition, they lack traditional types of collateral as required by 
financial institutions. Anchor firms are  dependent on small enterprises or producers  along their value 
chain with limited or no funding of their own and  must also work together with dispersed communities. 
Bio-business es generally require longer payback periods, too, since their financial returns cannot 
normally be expected in the short run. Many bio-business es operate in markets with high volatility in 
the volumes and prices of the inputs and products they offer, which negatively impacts their ability to 
be competitive, especially  since the climate benefits and environmental value of their product is not 
usually reflected in a price premium. Bio-business es also have limited or no track record that would 
inform potential investors about profitability , biodiversity impacts , and contributing factors to exposure 
to climate and environmental risks . In general, f inanciers and investors avoid riskier projects , and 
their lack of familiarity with lending to bio- businesses exacerbates their perception of risks . Thus, bio -
businesses  risk profile causes funds to flow towards other directions, leading  to an overall lack of 
resources to invest , which in turn limits their possibilities for development and expansion47.  
(iii) Lack of  standardized frameworks to monitor biodiversity and climate vulnerability i mpacts48: Lack of 
data, measurement systems, taxonomies, and natural capital and forest asset value accounting 
systems lead to insufficient awareness on the value associated to bio -businesses for climate 
mitigation and adaptation.  As a result, the costs of destruction relative to the benefits of sustainable 
use that supports GHG -emission reduction and climate resilience is not properly understood, nor is 
it considered in decision- making49 by either public or private actors. Reliable data is also ess ential to 
build credibility. Investors require transparency on the biodiversity and climate risks of the ventures 
they support. Measuring and reporting systems, metrics and indicators are key to build credibility.  
(iv) Immature capital and financial markets , which limits supply of funding for bio- businesses : In LAC, the 
problem goes beyond the characteristics inherent to bio -business es. Although initial capital needs 
may not be very high, bio -business es in the region do not have access to sources of venture capital, 
angel investors or other financing mechanisms, mostly due to their difficulty to bring their businesses 
to scale . The region’s banking sector lacks depth, with around  88% of total financing demand unmet . 
About half of formal s mall and medium firms  do not have access to formal credit and the gap is much 
larger when micro and informal enterprises are considered50. Capital markets are quite 
underdeveloped in most of the Amazon countries, leading to a marginal number of large companies using it as a financing source, with no mechanisms available for smaller firms  to access them. Other 
traditional sources of finance (
e.g., bank credit) are often not available to these ventures, partly 
because of lack of information that results in high collateral requirements and interest rates, and 
lending policies that favour short -term loans with low risks. The COVID -19 crisis has e xacerbated


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 82 
 
  
51 OECD, COVID- 19 in Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional socio- economic implications and policy priorities, 2020.  
52 Although there are some initiatives in the region (e.g. , Santander in Brazil ), there are potential complementarities. The Programme can 
benefit other entities (smaller scale) that have a presence in the region, as Santander ’s financ ing goes to consumption and larger entities, 
and does  not have major presence ( branches ) in the region.  these constraints, as lending strategies have been readjusted to address weaker operating conditions 
and increased risks. The crisis has also affected the financial health of firms , which are at higher risk 
and facing liquidity constraints51. These trends affect bio -business es, as Micro and S mall Enterprises 
(MSE)  represent the majority of these businesses and their  value chains . In the Amazon, this is 
compounded by a general absence of financial institutions in the region.  
(v) Knowledge and capacity  gaps  for qualitative and quantitative assessment of contributing factors to 
and benefits of sustainable intensification and expansion practices in targeted value chains : 
Insufficient awareness on the bio -business  market opportunity is compounded by other capacity 
issues, such as a general lack of specialized knowledge (about  climate change risks and resilience 
building investments in bio- businesses,  biochemical, molecular and genetic properties of natural 
sources,  production and marketing of innovative products or potential business models) , low levels 
of social organization, insufficient  alignment with international standards and norms, inadequate 
access to markets, insufficient logistic capacity, and limited use of certifications.  These factors 
combined critically limit the capacity of firms, MSE  in particular, to formulate successful growth 
strategies and to translate ideas for conservation , reducing emissions, and strengthening resilience 
into bankable/investable projects. Local availability of professionals that combine technical 
conservation, climate change adaptation and mitigation and financial skills is limited in target 
countries.  Financial institutions are generally not familiar with traditional agriculture models, let alone  
climate change and sustainable bio-businesses  that mitigate climate change and strengthen 
resilience of local producers and ecosystems . 
Programme structure: Components and Activities  
40. Enabling businesses to incorporate low-emissi on and climate resilient practices w hile maintaining 
minimum desired profit s requires novel strategies and financial structures. The identified climate induced 
risks will be addressed through the intensification and/or expansion of financially viable bio- businesses, 
which will allow the implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities that will reduce the negative 
impacts of climate change in those value chains. These activities include agroforestry, irrigation best 
practices, investments that reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while also maintaining or 
improving ec osystem services, sustainable forest management and conservation, plantations of native 
species, community -led tourism for the conservation of natural habitats and ecosystems, etc. (see Table 
4 and Annex 2).  
41. The adoption and expansion of adaptation and mit igation activities described above will address the 
impacts of climate change for improved management of land in agriculture and forest areas, increased 
resilience and enhanced livelihoods of Amazonian communities, and improved resilience  of Amazon 
ecosyst ems and ecosystem services. With a holistic view, this proposal identifies two main areas of 
action in which risk -tolerant financial instruments, improved institutional environments and capacities to 
properly value natural capital can help offset the incremental costs and risks of bio- businesses for low 
emissions  and climate resilient development.  
42. First, commercial bank s in target countries do not offer credit products tailored to bio -businesses  or to 
the type of investments needed to enhance sustainability, mitigation and adaptation benefits of these businesses .
52 Loans are mainly short -term,  and financing is concentrated in larger companies. Where 
formal credit exists for MSEs , financial and non- financial terms and conditions are highly unfavourable, 
which  is mainly the  result of: (i) high operating costs to lend at smaller scales; (ii) high transaction costs 
due to the remoteness of the territory; (iii) limited collateral; and (iv) increased perceived risks. Perception 
of risk by f inancial institutions  might not be unjustified as bio -businesses  in many cases face legitimate 
bankability challenges ( see description of incremental risks above ) and capacity  gaps  (see description 
of knowledge and capacity gaps above ). Sufficient data on the performance of bio-businesses or the 
financial value of natural capital is not available.  Innovative financing is key to address these issues, 
including a range of financial models and approaches to face market failures of traditional financing.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 82 
 
  
53 GIIN, Financing the SDGs: Impact Investing in Action”, 2018; PGGM et al., “ Institutional investment into the Sustainable Development 
Goals ”, 2018.  
54 IDB, “ Impact Investment for Biodiversity Conservation: Cases from Latin America and the Caribbean ”, 2021.  Innovative financing may use a combination of already established instruments , such as guarantees, 
loans, microfinance and factoring, or introduce new products, such as equity, quasi -equity, or convertible 
notes to expand existing products to new markets  and value chains or  involve new sources of funding,  
such as crowdfunding or investor/business matching platforms that can verify results . In any case, these 
financial mechanisms can help manage risks and adjust incentives to encourage private actors to invest 
in bio-business es, as well as attract other par ticipants to co- finance them.  
43. Second, governments are taking increased interest in the issuance of bonds to raise money for 
sustainable projects and attract new pools of socially responsible investors. On the opposite front, a 
growing number of institutional investors is increasing their concern for environmental and social 
standards into their investment decisions53. Capital markets indeed provide an adequate platform for new 
mechanisms  to channel private funds more efficientl y to projects that  address social, economic, climate, 
and environmental challenges  altogether . For instance, with transactions ranging between US$300 
million and US$1 billion, green bonds have become popular instruments for sustainable investments, 
particularly from large mainstream investors54. Green bonds in LAC are still largely focused on energy 
and infrastructure, but these instruments could be expanded to bio -businesses . While a sufficiently large 
portfolio would need to be supplied to support the minimum size of a bond issuance, the potent ial for bio -
business  that can transparently demonstrate climate impact (either mitigation or adaptation) in the 
context of the bioeconomy is large. In turn, improvement in capital markets for the bioeconomy would 
lower the cost of financing for bio- busines ses. To be successful  in this endeavour , potential issuers need 
to understand the key elements pertaining a bond issuance, improve their creditworthiness and offset 
incremental costs of issuance (particularly for first -time issuers). They also need to understand bio-
business  investment criteria and apply  minimum standards to effectively attract investors  and increase 
transparency on the alignment of the bond with investor goals.  
44. Activities under the Programme  are expected to help effectively overcome the challenges  described 
above,  ensur ing financing becomes available and projects  are suitable for financing, and enabling the 
use of thematic bonds to further support the development of these businesses . The deployment of 
financial instruments that enable investments that protect and recognize the value of natural capital in 
business is expected to  help offset the incremental risks and costs of these ventures  for the priva te 
sector , addressing the ‘r isks of lending to bio- businesses ’ barrier and making them more competitive vis -
à-vis other less sustainable alternatives. Targeted instruments designed to meet bio- business needs  can 
make financiers more willing to serve the sector and developers more willing to invest without risking 
profitability , addressing the ‘immature capital and financial markets ’ barrier . Knowledge and institutional 
mechanisms that address  barriers on ‘ weak institutional environment ’, ‘knowledge and capacity gaps ’, 
and ‘lack of standardized frameworks ’ can help ensure a continued flow of quality projects that can be 
financed successfully, including innovative ways to structure partnerships between public and private 
actors through conces sions . Well-structured bond issuances  to address  the ‘immature capital and 
financial markets ’ barrier , along with standardization of methodologies  to address  the barrier on the ‘lack 
of standardized frameworks to monitor biodiversity and climate vulnerability impacts ’, can increase the 
flow of funds to sustainable portfolios and persuade other  issuers –public and private–  to undertake this 
type of instrument  to finance their portfolios  as well.  
45. Overall, the Programme  can help create the foundation for markets that value the fundamental role of 
natural capital  in business , enabl ing the development of profitable, scalable, resilient  and climate -friendly 
production models in which private entities will be more willing to participate. Jumpstarting private 
participation  –enterprises , producers , financiers  or investors – in bio-business es should produce 
demonstration effects, highlighting biodiversity and resilience as an intrinsic element of economic 
success. In turn,  this may well entice more private actors to enter these  markets  in the future and in the 
longer term, shift ing the productive  structure of the Amazon  towards one more reliant on activities  that 
support  GHG -emission reduction and lead to reducing vulnerabilities to climate change.


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 82 
 
 46. While it is argued that climate change currently has a stronger role than deforestation in causing negative 
effects in the amazon biome (Staal et al. 2020), the feedback loop described in S ection B.2 needs to be 
addressed, as deforestation remains a major challenge in many parts of the region.  The investments 
proposed under the Program me will contribute to this by providing alternatives to unsustainable forest 
and land use. In addition to the impact on GHG -emission reduction, a secure, more diversified  flow of 
goods and services from bio-businesses  has the potential to significantly aid societal adaptation to 
climate change, providing safety nets to local communities when clima te variability causes crop failures, 
and helping reduce vulnerability of participants in the value chains at the local and sectoral levels . The 
enhanced productivity and profitability, job creation and income diversification that investments in bio-
businesses supported by the Programme (see Annex 2) are capable of delivering can reduce the 
economic vulnerability of Amazon communities, enhancing their livelihoods and resilience to climate 
change impacts. Conversely, degraded forests and insecure flows of forest ecosystem services can 
make communities and sectors more vulnerable to climate variability and change,  and lead to increased 
adaptation costs.  
47. The Programme and its actions described before are aligned with the priority for each of the participating  
countries . Table 7 in Section D.5 "Country Ownership"  provides  more detail on how the Programme is 
aligned with the NDC, Climate Polices, Strategies and Actions Plans, as well as sectoral plans.  The 
section provides a country -level description of the sectoral or general policy frameworks that show how 
the Programme i s a priority and covers the areas of relevance for each country, such as payments for 
ecosystem services, environmental incentives, supply chain legislation, organic agriculture, sustainable 
fisheries, ecotourism, and  technological research.  
48. As described i n the Operations Manual (Annex 21) and in section B .3, there will be a set of clear eligibility 
conditions for investments , beneficiaries and intermediation channels under each value chain. All 
investments  must be carried out in the Pan Amazon in any of the target countries. Eligible investments 
will follow an “ Indicative Positive List of Activities, Investments and Use of Resources ” (see Annex 21 for 
further details for each value chain)  and were initially determined based on bioeconomy definitions and 
their relevance in terms of contribution of mitigation and/or adaptation benefits . This list is not restrictive; 
it is dynamic and may evolve as new business opportunities arise that may be considered eligible in each 
target country. Incorporation of other ac tivities and uses will be evaluated on the basis of compliance 
with the definition of bio-business , their potential to deliver mitigation and/or adaptation impact, and their 
compliance with any other Programme requirements. Eligibility will be further determined by the policies and procedures of the EE in each country and with national regulations.  Section B .3 further describes 
the eligibility criteria under Component s I and II. 
Figure 5. - Theory of change diagram


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 82


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 82


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 82 
 
  
Note: Since not all components might be relevant or applicable in all target  countries, it should be emphasized that the theory of change is based on 
a general framework that aims to provide a list of eligible  uses for the funds. The applicability of speci fic components will be defined on a country -
by-country basis during Programme execution.  Country -specific needs, priorities and timeframes for implementation vary widely. Country -specific 
IDB programs in the context of this proposal will provide thorough j ustification for the selection of specific components and will be approved and 
implemented following IDB's project cycle, as detailed in Section B.4.  
B.3. Project/ Programme  description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages )


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 82 
 
  
55 Approved in March, 2021, the IDB’s Amazon Initiative  is designed to foster sustainable and inclusive development models in the Amazon, 
as well as to facilitate governance, alliances and collaboration within the region that are required i n this endeavour. The initiative will focus on 
four focus areas: i) bioeconomy, ii) sustainable agriculture, livestock and forest management, iii) human capital (health, education and 
employment), and iv) sustainable infrastructure and sustainable cities.  The proposed Programme will focus on a sub- set of the aforementioned 
activities, namely i and ii (with the exception of livestock, which it will not finance). In particular, the proposed Program me will support perennial 
agriculture, agroforestry, aquaculture, forestry plantations, NTFP s, nature tourism and ecosystem services by supporting various groups of 
productive actors (small producers, indigenous and riverine populations, and large producers) and business models (independent sma llholder 
model, associative model, and integrated corporate model) .  
56 The use of each component in IDB operations using Programme funds will be defined on a country -by-country basis during Programme 
execution.  This definition process will be closely coordinated with NDAs and the respective countries’ public authorities to ensure alignment 
with their existing and upcoming program s and initiatives in the Amazon.  
57 A sovereign investment loan is a sovereign guaranteed loan provided to an IDB eligible borrower  that benefits from the sovereign guarantee 
of the country.  Depending on the nature and/or mandate of the eligible borrower, the Subsidiary Agreements for a sovereign loan may include, 
in addition to the sovereign loan, a sovereign guarantee agreement to be entered into between the IDB and the country.   49. With a regional, multi- stakeholder approach (including investors, banks , project developers, producers , 
specialized advisory institutions , and R&D institutions ) the Programme  focuses on enabling the 
conditions to increase  the flow of funds to bio- businesses  in the bioeconomy of the Amazon . The 
Programme will be part of the overall IDB internal financing strategy to assist Amazon countries with 
promoting the sustainable development of the region, the Amazon Initiative, which goes beyond the 
Programme scope to  include topics such as health, infrastructure and education55. 
50. In order to achieve Programme  goals and in line with the theory of change, a multi- component structure 
is proposed.  Since not all components and activities might be relevant or applicable in all participating 
countries, it is noted that this is a general framework that aims to provide a list of possible – not 
mandatory – uses for the funds  at the country level56. 
Programme Components 
51. Component I: Financing solutions for bio -businesses:  Support to private bio-business es and their 
supply chains through dedicated financing solutions designed to help overcome the prevailing financing 
challenges for the sector in each country . To deploy Component I,  a holistic approach propose s activities 
in both the supply  and demand sides of the financing, using a set of tailored instruments to finance 
projects  in various stages of development.  Concessionality is particularly relevant for companies 
introducing sustainable practices, to cover incremental costs and strengthen their operational capacity 
and skills . Reducing the cost of finance and increasing its tenor enables amortization profiles that better 
suit bio -business investments.  GCF  resources  under  Component I will be executed  as follows:  
I.1. Sovereign  investment loans57 (US$ 135M ) and investment grants (US$16M ) will be provided by 
IDB to EEs  to finance private projects via on balance earmarked dedicated financing lines  and de-
risking financial solutions,  and/or through dedicated trusts or Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV) . Using 
sovereign loans (funded with GCF and/or IDB resources) and investment grant s (funded with  GCF 
reimbursable grants ), EEs will be able to  offer various financial instruments  that can provide terms 
(tenor, price, amortization profiles, collateral  requirements ) more adequate  to bio-businesses  
financial and risk profiles . Funds will be channelled by the IDB to EEs via:  
a) Loans  (US$ 135M ): to enable EEs to provide lending in various modalities  to beneficiaries directly 
or via local financial institutions (LFI) that would extend them  to beneficiaries.  
b) Targeted i nvestment grants  (US$ 16M): to enable EEs to structure de -risking financial solutions 
tailored to the needs of LFIs in each country -specific context to help them properly manage 
incremental risks when they go beyond their business -as-usual financing terms, market segments 
and type of businesses they finance –with the objective of enhancing and expanding their credit 
offer for investments eligible under this Programme. The management of incremental risk might 
materialize in the form of: i) longer tenors / duration of loans; ii) more flexible repayment terms / 
amort ization schemes; iii) longer grace periods (more attuned to the revenue profile of some bio-
businesses with longer  growth pace ); iv) alternative or reduced collateral requirements . 
Companies with a higher risk profile include earlier stage , less mature com panies, those with less 
robust off -take conditions – for value chains still developing or in  less consolidated markets –, those 
more vulnerable to climate/agricultural risks, etc . Investment grants will allow  the provision of  risk-


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 82 
 
  
58 There are many reasons and instances where a first loss coverage could be required. Some segments (micro/small businesses) , for 
example, face significant limitations in terms of collateral available. This restricts the extent to which LFIs might finance them, and/or 
significantly increases required interest rates to reflect (and thus offset) the higher loss provisions / expected losses ass ociated with lending 
to them. A first loss coverage has the potential  to partially offset this collateral deficit , expanding and enhanc ing the financing offer to such 
segments. In addition, some bio- business investments have long payback periods  –for example,  from the long time to grow/mature certain 
plants – and thus require longer tenors . A way to help LFIs provide such tenors is through first loss coverage that spans all the way throughout 
the maturity of a fully amortizing loan, thus significantly reducing the net exposure in the last few years, where a smaller proportion of the 
original loan is outstanding but the full guarantee/risk coverage could still be in place. Another justified use of a first l oss coverage are  
investments with remaining off -take risk  (e.g., price risk and/or off -take contracts not covering the full period required for loan repayment), 
where the first loss coverage could help overcome outstanding gaps / risks and result in a positive credit decision.  
59 The channelling structure will be determined on a country -by-country basis depending on the characteristics of the local financial system 
and regulation, and the capacity assessment of the local EE . The two mechanisms (SPV or dedicated lines)  could be combined – for instance,  
guarantees could be in a SPV while  financ ing remains  on balance . sharing products that enable financing of projects that would otherwise fall beyond the risk/return 
tolerance of LFIs , which are also subject to risk -taking and economic restrictions . 
In turn, products  offered by EEs to beneficiaries  with the abovementioned funding comprise:   
a) Credit instruments funded by the loans , including: i) medium and long- term individual loans for bio-
businesses in relevant value chains ; ii) associative loans for anchor companies;  and iii)  factoring  
products ; 
b) De-risking instruments structured with the investment grants , including: i ) first58 or second loss 
portfolio guarantees to mitigate the higher risk LFIs assume when financing bio- businesses; and 
ii) pari-passu  guarantees that support credits so that potential losses are distributed proportionally 
between the EE and the LFI, when applicable.  In all cases , de-risking instruments will not cover 
more than 80% of the LFI’s loan or portfolio of loans, to ensure risks are effectively shared with 
the LFI, promoting  adequate due diligence, structuring and supervision of investments  by them.  
Due to the programmatic nature of this proposal, the specifics of each ins trument and fine- tuning will 
depend on the activities to be supported in each country under country -specific IDB programs , and 
will follow IDB project -cycle policies for approval and implementation (see Section B.4).  For instance, 
the use of investment gra nts will be considered when LFIs are not capable of offering financing terms 
in line with eligible investments profiles in a specific country, sector and eligible value chain,  provid ing 
the required extent and depth of risk coverage fully by itself, or off ering such solution at a cost that 
does not hinder the economic viability of the investment.  
The structures  under which r esources from Component I.1 may be channelled are59:  
i. Trusts or SPVs  executed by EEs , which allow for the pooling of different capital sources and 
offer high levels of flexibility and efficiency.  An SPV structure facilitates the deployment of an 
ample range of financial products to support projects of all sizes, either directly or indirectly (via various  types of LFIs ). Aggregati on is also key to mitigat e the overall risk . 
ii. On-balance dedicated financing lines and de -risking financial solutions of EEs  that 
earmark funds for certain types of projects.  This structure allows for capitalizing  on pre-
existing operating structures within EEs , which in many cases already have products tailored 
to sectors that may be associated with bio -business es (such as agriculture ) in different stages 
of development.  
In either structure, EEs may deploy resources to final beneficiaries directly or via participating 
LFIs. LFIs will have to comply with a pre -established accreditation process, which EEs 
normally  have in place as part of their own operational policies. To be accredited, L FIs 
generally need to be supervised by the corresponding national super visory agency or qualify 
through exhaustive risk screening by the EE.  
Financing to final beneficiaries will be granted upon demand, subject to strict eligibility criteria. This includes a three- step verification system by which potential 
beneficiaries: i) shall not carry out 
activities or be subjects or entities involved in activities in a pre- defined exclusion list; ii) fulfil pre -
defined environmental, social and economic criteria to be categorized as bio- business (see ¶ 25 and 
¶35); and iii) comply with the eligibility of the sector of activity, type of investment and use of funds. 
While b io-business investment can emerge across multiple sectors (agriculture, forestry, aquaculture,


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 82 
 
  
60 IDB Lab  is the innovation laboratory of the IDB Group, responsible for promot ing development through the private sector by identifying, 
supporting, testing and piloting new solutions to development challenges and seeking to create opportunities for the poor and vulnerable 
populations in LAC. IDB  Lab uses flexible tools to test scalabl e innovations that drive economic and social inclusion . IDB Lab activities  are 
funded with funds under administration by the IDB, principally resources from the Multilateral Investment Fund III .  
61 CRIG’s repayment is usually triggered by a revenue- generating or liquidity event . 
62 For example,  combining solar power and water purification, generation of drinkable water and energy by whirlpool systems, biotech 
companies that produce microcapsules, colorants or pharmaceutical from nature- based inputs, such as plants/fruits etc.  agroforestry, NTFP , etc.) and the intended use of funds may be varied , Annex 21  provides  a 
framework on  eligibility criteria for investments to account for climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Specific sectors eligib le for financ ing will be decided on a country -by-country  basis in 
response to  country -specific circumstances and will be pre -established in the context of the 
Operations Regulations (OR) of each IDB  operation using GCF funds (see Sections B.4 and G.3) .  
I.2. Equity investments  (US$ 6.5M ) and innovation grant s (US$4M)  will be used to  enable risk-capital 
investment  flows to  early -stage bio-business es in the Amazon region in the form of direct equity, 
investment fund interests and other first loss  and risk sharing schemes  to complement equity from  
other funds administered by the IDB (such as IDB  Lab)60 and other co financers.  These schemes are 
considered effective tools to maximize the potential impact of financing operations in early stage/ high-
tech businesses and attract equity from private investors , because of their capacity to de -risk 
investments while offering more value for innovate companies.  Equity will be used for more 
mature/less risky  businesses  (only formal businesses)  that have passed the pilot phase (minimum 
viable product phase),  have positive revenues and are looking f or gaining market traction. Grants , in 
the form of Contingent Recovery Investment Grants (CRIG)61 will be needed for riskier/ more incipient 
businesses  or NGOs  (i.e., those that are leaving the pilot phase to start selling a determined product 
or service  or those still working on a minimum viable product and still without a steady flow of 
revenue) . Activities under Component I.2 will support ongoing IDB  Lab initiatives , including:  
a) Regenerate Accelerator (US$2 M equity and US$4M  grant ): a pilot fund that invest s in high-
potential regenerative bioeconomy enterprises operating in the countries of the Leticia Pact for the 
Amazon. The EE will be Kaete Investimentos , a local and reputable fund management company 
with vast experience in identifying sustainable early -stage bio-businesses, conducting detailed due 
diligences and deploying the best financial products for companies and investors . 
b) Direct funding for  climate -tech and biotech  companies (US$4.5 M equity ): IDB Lab has 
identified a series of potential direct investees , characterized as growth tech- based start-ups that 
develop innovative products and services that result in better climate change resilience for local 
households and small -holder farmers62. IDB Lab will be responsible for identifying and selecting 
these investees based on over  20 years of experience in financing impactful start -ups in LAC . 
Eligibility criteria for beneficiary bio- businesses under Component I .2 shall resemble  the eligibility 
criteria for financing under Component I .1. However, equity and investment grants considered under 
Component I.2 may  not only be used to  directly support projects meeting such  eligibility criteria, but 
also companies that indirectly enable the development of such projects, by offering solutions that 
help overcome critical barriers for their development (for example, to enhance market access and product off -take)  (see Annex 21) .
 
I.3. Technical cooperation (US$5 3.6M) will finance  activities under the following categories : 
a) Bio-business pipeline development and supervision  (US$ 23.5M): Advisory directed to  guiding 
the development and adequate implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities in bio -
businesses that will reduce the negative impacts of climate change.  
i. Support ing capacity of potential beneficiaries (US$ 13M): (i) advisory and extension 
services in good business practices , marketing and logistics , (ii) socioenvironmental impact 
measurement and monitoring systems  (including participatory monitoring systems with local 
indigenous  and afro-descendant  populations or peasant communities) , (iii) alignment with 
international standards and norms (including the adoption of certifications), (iv) access to 
local and international markets , and (v) technology upgrading in priority value chains.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 82 
 
  
63 The Amazon Biodiversity Knowledge Hub will support R&D centres and universities  in beneficiary countries whose mission is 
bioprospection, R&D, as well as conservation of the Amazon biodiversity . Discoveries from bioprospection are the primary source of new 
ideas, products and services that can be developed by existing firms and also by new start -ups, contributing to the development of the bio-
businesses pipeline.  
64 Existing information platforms mostly contribute to the purposes of science, conservation and project management. There is no platform 
designed with a connection approach specialized in driving efficient and additional finance in the Amazon.  
65 Resources used for the development of technologies to link investors and projects will complement effort s being developed by IDB  Lab and 
WWF in Colombia, in collaboration with the Paulson Institute and other conservation organizations, and expand these to the re st of the 
Amazon (see Section C.1.d).  ii. Support ing capacity of LFIs (public or private) (US$ 8.5M): (i) governance, management 
and fundraising of different financial structures, including SPV, where applicable,  (ii) 
monitoring and assessment tools associated to bio -business  performance , including data 
collection systems and indicators , (iii) coordination systems seeking to articulate actions 
among NDB , financial intermediaries and other relevant  institutions, and (iv) optimization of 
resource allocation and risk assessment of  bio-business  investments . 
iii. Supporting bioprospection, knowledge dissemination and R&D (US$2M ): (i) creation 
and management of the Amazon Biodiversity Knowledge Hub63, a virtual space for 
advancing open science, collaboration, and knowledge exchange for selected accredited 
R&D institutions, (ii) development of bioprospecting strategies and dissemination of results 
(local communities, private sector, academia, and local institutions), and (iii) a competitive 
fund to support R&D  and innovation projects by bio- businesses and R&D institutions jointly.  
b) Tools  for connecting bio-businesses  to stakeholders  and markets (US$ 11M):  assist  firms  in 
the prototype phase or already operating with a minimum viable product  to (i) better connect with 
stakeholders  and match their projects with investor s64, (ii) provide greater access to markets 
opportunities by connecting buyers and seller s, (iii) access incubators/accelerators that support 
their transform ation into scalable businesses , capable of attracting and absorbing funding offered 
by the Programme , as well as additional private capital , and ( iv) strengthen the presence of 
women, indigenous, afro- descendant and peasant communities among producers and companies 
with possibility of investment, and promote the hiring of women and indigenous people in bi o-
business65. This activity will support the following ongoing IDB  Lab initiatives:  
i. Amazonia 4.0 (US$1M) : Support to local communities ’ (including indigenous) start -ups 
focused on supplying resources to bio- tech companies. The EE will be Conexus, a local 
NGO that has a long track record in developing solutions to create  economic opportunities 
through sustainable production. Specifically, this initiative  will support business generation 
and reduction of deforestation in four Brazilian Amazon communities that depend on the 
cocoa and cupuaçu value chains, in which an estimated 3,000 people work . 
ii. Leticia Platform (US$3 M): Executed by the World wide Fund for Nature (WWF), which 
finances the creation of a local multistakeholder platform enabled with Geographic 
Information System ( GIS) and Client Relationship Manager ( CRM ) systems that  will identify, 
promote and link targeted bio- business es to potential investors . 
iii. Amazon Bioeconomy marketplace (US$7 M): Develop the bio- business ecosystem in the 
Amazon so that early -stage entrepreneurs and more mature small and medium -sized 
businesses can increase exports and connect with investors. This project will run in two 
complementing tracks. Track 1 will use a bottom -up approach focused on strengthening 
emerging bio- businesses and connecting them with investors. To do so, it wil l: (i) identify 
and help verify quality and/or certify bio- businesses and products; (ii) curate and help 
connect bio- businesses with global investors through mechanisms such as the “Leticia 
Platform;” (iii) help develop different aspects of the value chains and prepare bio- businesses 
to participate in a transactional marketplace. Track 2 will develop the transactional 
marketplace for bio- business products and services to be sold globally. To do so track 2 will 
entail: (i) market analysis (local, regional and global) to identify bioeconomy  products being 
exported or with export potential , as well as  regional and local organizations that can partner 
with this track to strengthen the skills and competitiveness of the producers; (ii) local partner 
engagement and capacity building to help strengthen the skills of local producers of selected


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 82 
 
  
66 The “Global Assessment of Environmental -Economic Accounting and Supporting Statistics 2020” states that Colombia, Peru, Ecuador and 
Brazil are implementing SEEA. However, deep gaps exist concerning the scope and thoroughness of SEEA implementation.  
67 OECM are geographically delimited areas – not Protected Areas – managed by multiple actors that conserve biodiversity, ecosystem 
services and functions, and its cultural, social, and economic values associated (IUCN, 2019). For instance, biosphere reserves, territories 
and areas conserved by indigenous peoples and loc al communities, responsible fishing areas, natural reserves of civil society, among others.  Amazon bioeco nomy products , and increase their international competitiveness; (iii) 
business matchmaking roundtables to generate export deals for new or existing Amazon 
bioeconomy products, gather lessons and generate knowledge that will inform the design 
of the future  online Marketplace and; (iv) design and implementation of a dedicated, 
transactional marketplace for cross -border transactions, that includes an application that 
allows potential investors to register; learn about bio businesses and finance them (such as 
a crowd equity/financing platform). The marketplace will be designed, developed, 
implemented and managed by the IDB, co -created and designed with the Rainforest 
Alliance, The Nature Conservancy, IDB  Lab, the Natural Capital Lab and could collaborate 
with g lobal marketplace platforms such as Mercado Libre. It will also complement the other 
two initiatives herein proposed by IDB Lab: Amazonia 4.0 and Leticia Platform. Amazonia 4.0 will support early -stage/communities -driven bio businesses that may benefit for  the 
marketplace in the future. The Leticia Platform can also benefit from the Marketplace given 
that 
it will support the engagement of investors to conservation and restoration projects 
undertaken by NGOs that may be featured in the bio-business marketpla ce in the future . 
c) Institutional and regulatory environment  (US$ 19.1M): While policy frameworks are in place in 
all targeted countries for conservation and sustainable management of forests and biodiversity, a 
regulatory approach to natural capital valuation, access to genetic and biological resources,  and 
incentives to attract priv ate actors to bioeconomy  investments are not universally  in place. Grants  
will finance advisory for and/or training of government entities in the following areas : 
i. Strengthening of national systems in valuing natural capital/forest assets (US$ 7.6M): 
(i) assessment and drafting of regulation in bioeconomy areas , (ii) bio-business  definition  
and taxonomy , integration of natural capital accounting practices in decision- making both at 
the national and sub- national level , design and implementation of payment for 
environmental services mechanisms, landscape- level monitoring and  management 
systems  (including climate -informed land- use planning, natural infrastructure and disaster 
risk management planning) , (iii) integrating land -use change and forestry management in 
public budgets , (iv) developing country’s System for Environmental  Economic Accounting 
(SEEA)66, (v) promoting regional agreements and concerted action among Amazon states 
or neighbouring sub -national entities to tackle specific issues, and (v i) articulating regional 
and national strategies with conservation practices within local communities  (indigenous, 
afro-descendant, fishing and peasant communities ) and their territories , in order to promote 
the sustainability of their local economies, their cultural meanings and practices, and 
specific actions carried out by women . 
ii. Developing  and implementing  innovati ve schemes for private participation in the 
sustainable management of forest s and other conservation areas (US$1 1.5M): 
appropriately fram e forest concessions and Public -Private Partnerships (PPP) as efficient 
policy instruments to deliver sustainable forest management  and forest governance plans 
with local communities.  Forest concessionaires – both private and community -based–  have 
shown their commitment to protecting their source of revenue by keeping illegal loggers and land speculators out. They 
can also contribute to the instauration of sustainable forest 
management and practices that can endure in the long- term. These apply to different 
conservation areas , including  legally protected areas but also other effective area- based 
conservation measures (OECM) , where local communities and private actors can play an 
active rol e67. Contractual structures  designed will seek to promote economic efficiency, 
value- for-money, fiscal sustainability and improved conservation outputs and results.  These 
mechanisms  will also  consider  land tenure and access to ecosystem services, especially 
when local communities and indigenous territories are involved, including areas where they 
live or that they use for their own livelihoods. This activity will  support: (i ) improvement of


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 82 
 
  
68 Expanding the objectives of private participation from an exclusive sustainable resource management approach to a broader int ervention 
where key conservation obje ctives are translated into the concession obligations, demand that contracts be designed with compensation 
mechanisms for the incremental investment cost of sustainable practices, especially since many benefits of sustainable forest  management 
do not gener ate revenue – and thus no incentive–  for forest owners and managers. This may require the use of financial resources as revenue 
streams, connected to the achievement of pre- determined environmental and social objectives.  
69 In February 2020, Mexican developm ent bank FIRA, issued a US$130 million green bond with support from the IDB. The bond is the first 
to receive an international Climate Bonds Initiative certification in the forestry sector  and is expected to support more than 500 sustainable 
projects in agriculture, with expected outcomes on productivity, GHG -emission reduction, reduced use of agrochemicals, efficient use of 
water, and soil conservation.  
70 Reporting by issuers is a fundamental element of best practices in thematic bond issuance. Originally focused on a requirement to account 
for the allocation of proceeds (either on a project -by-project or an aggregated portfolio basis), it is gradually emphasizing more on disclosing 
key underly ing methodologies and/or assumptions used to determine quantitative impact indicators to help inform investors.  
71 Supported by a private stakeholder consortium, the platform provides standardized and transparent disclosure. Standards for c learer 
visibility  about which bonds support nature- based projects could be developed.  
72 Component II.2 is initially targeted at Brazil , Colombia and Ecuador only.  Nonetheless, final allocations will be done in accordance with the 
IDB programming process and project -cycle described in Annex 21 and Section B.4, so country targeting in this case is only indicative.  
73 Leveraging the IDB’s AAA credit rating via the use of partial credit guarantees can make these bonds a better fit with the ri sk profile of 
institutional investors  otherwise unwilling to opt for a high- risk bond. The guarantee support would allow new investors to become familiar 
with the opportunities in LAC, efficiently boosting local bond markets.  regulatory and institutional regimes governing private sector participation  to emphasize  
better risk allocation that will lead to sustainable forest management and agriculture 
practices , and extend the scope of concessions to other nature -positive economy activities  
(e.g., eco-tourism),  and (ii) design of partnership structures and contractual models that 
incorporate effective incentive schemes to ensure sustainable practices are put in place , by 
adjusting compensation mechanisms to the incremental cost associated with conservation 
goals  while simultaneously promoting fiscal sustainability68. 
52. Component II: Bond structuring and issuance : Support to public entities ( including national  or sub -
national  governments and NDB s) to leverage capital market financing through the issuance of thematic 
bonds (those earmarked for specific use of funds, such as green or sustainable bonds) that include bio -
business es. Bond issuance can help governments gain access to new sources of private funding for their 
social and environmental financing programs , with better  financial conditions  relative to other sources69. 
Nonetheless, interest rates depend on various factors such as credit risk, the strategy of the issuer, and 
concrete perform ance conditions  required by investors.  More transparency is key to make governments 
accountable for the results of their policies, with regards to determining the real impact of a bond and its 
proceeds (including at the underlying project  level) and strate gic alignment of the issuer with broader 
sustainability goals70. Bond issuance offers  a platform to effectively attract local and international capital 
market investors , and fulfil  reporting requirements, with the aim of trigger ing increased financing for bio-
business es. Component II will use GCF grant funding in two distinct ways:  
II.1. Technical cooperation (US$5M)  will finance  advisory  services  on how to effectively include bio-
business es in the use -of-proceeds commitments of thematic bond issuance. A ctivities may include: 
(i) support for the legal and financial structuring of the bond , including the assessment of credit 
enhancement options , covered bond structures, co- finance/anchor investment with emer ging market 
bond funds and other guarantee alternatives , (ii) development of the bond framework, including 
eligibility criteria, (iii) bond certification and methodology, and (iv) harmonization and standardization 
of bond reporting following international standards , particularl y through the IDB Green Bond 
Transparency Platform  (GBTP)71. The IDB will be the EE for this activity.  
II.2 Grants for guarantees (US$30M)  will be used to deploy credit enhancement instruments for green 
bonds issued by public entities72. Many potential issuers in the region, particularly small or first -time 
issuers, face incremental costs associated to bond issuance and ex -post reporting. In addition, 
creditworthiness and limited capacity and/or diversification of issuers, as well as political risk, remain 
obstacles to capital market investments in LAC. Credit enhancement instruments, such as 
guarantees, can partly offset these issues, helping reduce the cost of debt for t he issuer without 
risking attractiveness to investors, increasing the chances and volume of resource uptake in public 
issuances to finance investments in bio -businesses73. Nonetheless, guarantee s represent an


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 82 
 
  
74 The level of y ield reductions that are obtained will depend on various factors, including - most notably - the country and entity issuing the 
bond, the tenor/maturity of the bond and the level of coverage provided by the IDB guarantee. These aspects will be determined during sub-
project preparation stage, at which point this could be assessed more precisely. This said, making conservative assumptions consistent with 
those made in the rest of the proposal, and based on observations on outstanding sovereigns bonds (conservatively adjusted t o reflect the 
usual higher risk associated to the sub-sovereign nature of public issuers to be supported by the Programme) and the ex -ante modelling of 
credit enhancement impacts, estimated improvements in yield required in the countries with the expected largest uptake of the Programme's 
credit enhancement solutions range between at least 170 and 280 bps. These reductions will help enhance funding cost (and thu s economic 
viability) of bio- businesses to which proceeds from these issuances will be on- lent. B ut besides the direct, issuance- specific impact on yields 
and funding costs, this intervention has the broader, more transformational objective and expected, lasting impact of helping develop thematic 
bonds as an instrument to facilitate access to capital markets, with their huge potential for unlocking this vast source of local currency, long 
term financing that can deliver a sustainable path of access to adequately -termed finance for bio- businesses.  
75 The guarantee will be issued by IDB  in its own capacit y. The guarantee is triggered in the event that the issuer fails to service the debt 
under the bond. The share of the bond (principal and/or interest)  to be covered by the guarantee and/or the structure of the guarantee will be 
determined on a case- by-case  basis.  The amount will vary depending on the underlying risk/rating of the issuer and the level of coverage 
needed to achieve a certain placement and/or price reduction objective.  additional cost to the issuance, which can often be a deterrent on uptake despite  the benefits it can 
offer in terms of helping secure successful placement of the bond and/or reducing the required yield74. 
To address the abovementioned cost barrier , IDB will use GCF grants for guarantees to reduce  the 
cost of financial charges of IDB- funded guarantees.  Guaranteed debtors  will pay IDB guarantee 
fees in accordance with IDB policy and as per documentation of the guarantee funded with IDB 
resources75. To the extent that IDB receives GCF grant resources for this use, IDB will transfer those 
resources to assist the guaranteed debtor in reducing the financial charges it has  to pay  to IDB during 
the life of the guarantee,  up to the amount of the grant . This will further improve the resulting all -in 
financing cost offered by the bonds, critical to bring funding to bio-businesses at viable terms . 
The assessment of potential beneficiaries for Component II.2 will require ensuring that there is: (i) 
sufficient volume of bio- business projects in the issuer’s pipeline; (ii) adequate legal and regulatory 
environments of local capital markets; and (iii) appetite and capacity of local investors to invest in 
these types of instruments.  An ex -ante analys is of the expected net financial benefit of the credit 
enhancement associated to the guarantee will be conducted by the IDB in order to determine the 
appropriateness of providing grant support  for Component II.2 . 
Proceeds from supported bonds (which are ex pected to provide long- term finance of at least 10 
years) will be well positioned to provide funding (through public entities, such as NDBs) to bio-
businesses and value chains, analogous to those expected to be financed under Component I. In 
other words, these  projects may benefit from direct financing from sovereign loans/grants  and equity  
(Component I.1 and I.2),  or financing funded via capital markets through bonds (Component II.2). In 
this sense, t he eligibility criteria for funding  obtained via bonds i n Component II shall be the same as 
the eligibility criteria for financing under Component I  (see Annex 21 ). The size of the demand is big 
enough to justify both mechanisms.  
53. Component III: Transversal  Technical Cooperation  (US$ 28M): Additional  activities will accompany 
the two components  described above , specifically via technical cooperation to support : 
III.1. Inclusion mechanisms for women and diversity in bio -business (US$5M ): Development of 
strategies, explicit measures and/or services to promote equitable access to the benefits of 
investments supported : (i) technical training or financial services tailored to women (taking into 
account collective land ownership) , (ii) better and equitable access to information and technologies , 
(iii) equit able ownership over productive factors such as land, animals and capital , (iv) including 
specific criteria  for the use of proceeds obtained from the issuance of sustainable bonds in favour of 
activities led by minorities, indigenous people and women, (v)  access to formal economies , (vi) better 
promotion and marketing strategies for bio- products in local, national, and international markets , (vii)  
good production practices , (viii)  gender -segregated data collection, and analysis of country -level 
gaps and opportunities. These mechanisms will be applied to strengthen women’s  own businesses 
and other alternatives  where they are included in fair schemes of employment. These actions will 
be carried out in accordance with national gender strategies.  
III.2. Integrated support  and strengthening of the ecosystem for Amazonian Small and Medium 
Enterprises ( SME ) and their communities (US$ 5M): Create  and consolidate a network of projects, 
technical assistance providers and market connectors that are synergetic with the Amazonia 4.0


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 82 
 
  
76 The Amazon ia 4.0 concept  is a technology driven methodology with the aim to develop a green circular economy that takes full advantage 
of the value of a “standing and permanent productive forest” so that it can reduce deforestation and capitalize on the Amazon biodiversity, 
with the s upport of new digital and innovative technologies , providing a viable economic alternative to deforestation- intense models . 
77 Among traditional peoples and communities are indigenous peoples, quilombolas, traditional communities of African origin, ext ractivists, 
riverside dwellers, caboclos, and artisanal fishermen.  concept76 and that will strengthen the role of Amazonian SME  and their communities77 as forest 
maintainers and bio- businesses ecosystem generators. Through a regional entity, local partners 
together with local communities will implement business development support  projects to improve 
SME and their communities’ access to market  opportunit ies leveraged by other initiatives carried out  
by the IDB Lab, such as Amazonia 4.0,  Leticia Platform, Regenerate Accelerat or and Bioeconomy 
Marketplace (see Component I) . To prepare for the implementation of the regional project, a regional 
mapping exercise will be performed  to create a database consisting of potential providers and 
recipients of the innovative solutions and connections . The database will gather information about 
(i) programs and institutions providing traditional peoples and communities and their bio- businesses 
with business development support , (ii) Amazonian SME  and their communities, their structure and 
social characteristics, as well as their main areas of economic activity; (iii) other local partners (public 
and private) that can be part of the implementation providing innovative technological solutions  and 
digitalization , and (iv) local market opportunities that can stimulate bio- business growth  and 
resilience . From this database, a methodology will be developed to select the local partners that will 
implement the Programme  together with the SME and their communities . IDB Lab is planning for  
Conexus  to be the regional  coordinator of this subcomponent , considering its expertise in business 
development and sustainable productive practices for community organizations , as well as its  
background as a  stakeholder connector .  
III.3. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) (US$2M ): Improv ing the design and execution of the whole 
Programme by including a meaningful and organic stakeholder engagement with quantifiable results 
to make it possible to measure both its effectiveness and the value added of this effort on the 
Amazon region. It also aims to revitalize and activate the Amazon’s key stakeholders' inclusion by 
mapping a wider range of stakeholder profiles, perspectives and perceptions, contributing to improve 
meaningful and diverse bio- businesses, fostering innovative approaches among gov ernments, the 
private sector, civil society, and other development actors, with quantifiable results. The SEP will be 
implemented on five levels of engagement:  information, dialogue, public consultations, collaboration, 
and partnerships.  
III.4. Small Grants Progr am (SGP) (US$ 10M) : This activity seeks to empower and enable local 
stakeholders – especially women, indigenous people, afro -descendants and campesinos –  to take 
on initiatives and enable bio- businesses to enhance and influence development outcomes with a 
bioeconomy perspective. To manage expectations of local groups, strategic plans for outreach, 
including clarification of funding priorities will be designed together with a SGP steering committee 
of IDB and community organization representatives. Specific c riteria will be fine -tuned as part of 
SGP activities to make the selection process more effective.  Activities under the SGP, composed of 
both Technical Cooperation activities and Investment Grants, will include the following TC activities: (i) programme ma
nagement activities (administration, knowledge and project lifecycle 
management); (ii) technical cooperation support and capacity building to facilitate community 
participation in the program --including institutional capacity strengthening for community 
organizations involved in programme co- management and for community participants in project 
development; and (iii) facilitating knowledge sharing among communities at the regional level 
through the strengthening of networks and alliances.  Investment Grant activities will include 
financing of (a) participatory grants for productive and participatory family/community proposals 
(“Productive Projects”), and (b) catalytic grants for projects that involve several communities focused 
on enabling tools and conditions to facilitate community participation in bioeconomy value chains 
(“Enabling Projects”).


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 82 
 
  
78 The Programme is aligned with the Pact overall, but specially contributes to its objectives 1, 10, 13 and 15, related to coor dinating national 
policies and regulatory frameworks, promoting sus tainable use of forests and production systems, including value chains, foster technological 
transfer to encourage sustainable business development, and strengthen financial programs and mechanisms, including with support from 
multilateral banks.  III.5. General advisory services (US$ 5M): (i) facilitation of Leticia Pact regional dialogue among 
signatories78, (ii) high- quality knowledge generation and regional/international dissemination in 
collaboration with the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO) , (iii) development and 
implementation of data collection systems,  (iv) analysis of limitations and opportunities of business 
informality in targeted sectors , and ways in which it can be avoided or reduced.  It is expected that 
these activities will help creat e awareness that will encourage additional private participation and 
financial flows . The IDB will be the EE for this activity.  
III.6. Programme monitoring and evaluation ( US$1 M): Monitoring activities, analyses and preparation 
of interim and final evaluations to be submitted to the GCF by the IDB. These include data collection, 
verification and assessment of fund- level impact and outcome indicators, as well as Programme 
performance indicators. Two self -assessment evaluations are foreseen: a mid- term outcome 
evaluation (2024) and a final ex -post evaluation (2028) (see Annex 11).  
54. Project Management Costs (US$0.9M ): Direct administrative costs to cover day to day execution-
related activities of the Programme . These include staffing/consultants, travel, project management 
systems and office supplies.  
55. In line with the proposed theory of change in Section B.2, successful implementation of activities  under 
the components described above is  expected to contribute to (i) reducing GHG -emissions from forest 
and land- use, enhanc ing carbon stocks of forests under improved management , (ii) leveraging privat e 
and public resources for bio-business es, and (iii) increas ing resilience and adaptation of regional 
ecosystems , facilitating adaptation of populations and economic sectors . 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500  words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams ) 
56. As provided in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), signed between the IDB  and the GCF, the 
Funding Activity Agreement (FAA) will establish the requirements for the transfer , administration and use 
of GCF funds for the financing of the Programme . The IDB will ensure all necessary management  and 
supervisory  mechanisms to provide and maintain a transparent and effective administration of the 
Programme  and will be solely responsible for the management and administration of GCF resources in 
accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, and following the provisions set forth in the AMA  
and the FAA . 
57. The Subsidiary Agreements  for the activities described in this proposal will establish the framework and 
conditions for all specific IDB  operations to be considered for funding from this Programme . Consistent 
with its regional and multi -component structure, detailed arrangements  –including between the IDB and 
corresponding EEs at the country level , when applicable–  will be tailored to the specifics of component 
activities and third parties  involved (see Table 6) , as well as intended final beneficiaries . 
58. During the implementation period, following the entry into effect  of the FAA for this Programme, GCF 
resources will be allocated by IDB in the context of country specific  IDB operations  (Sub -projects). The 
assessment of the institutional capacity and eligibility of EEs will be individually undertaken as part of the 
preparation process of each Sub- project conducted by IDB (unless otherwise noted), and will follow IDB 
policies, procedures, and due diligence standards. Only after a Sub- project has been approved by the 
IDB, the IDB may enter into a Subsidiary Agreement with the corresponding EE.   
59. Following a request from a specific  country to the IDB, a Sub-project will be prepared, assessed and 
approved as an individual IDB operation financed with GCF resources under this Programme.  If 
applicable, IDB resources or other res ources administered by the IDB  will co finance . Each Sub -project 
shall be consistent with the objective, scope and activities established in Section B.3 of this proposal and aligned with one or more of the expected results, as presented in the Programme pe rformance indicators 
in Section E.5 of this proposal. All IDB operations shall also be included in IDB programming and strategic


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 82 
 
  
79 IDB wil l not enter into any Subsidiary Agreements with LFIs or final beneficiaries, which for that reason are not considered EEs. 
Nevertheless, the Subsidiary Agreement and the OR will establish Programme and Sub- project requirements that the EE will pass -on to L FIs. dialogue with each target country, in the context of local government priorities and existing collaboration 
with the IDB.  
Contractual and Institutional Arrangements  
Component I.1  
60. Eligible EEs will be identified jointly with national governments based on the relevance of their public 
mandate to the Programme activities, experience in finance structuring and fiduciary managemen t, and 
track record, including with the IDB.  As per IDB policy, prior to the approval of each Sub- project , IDB’s 
fiduciary team will perform and/or update an institutional capacity assessment on the corresponding EE. 
This assessment includes overall techni cal capacity, adequacy of information systems, internal and 
external controls, and recommendations on any fiduciary risks identified. Institutional capacity 
assessment requirements for EE are detailed in Annex 20b.  
61. EEs will be responsible for channelling resources provided by the IDB via sovereign investment loans  
(funded with GCF and/or IDB resources)  and investment grants (funded with GCF reimbursable grants ) 
to private projects through  on balance earmarked dedicat ed financing lines and de- risking financial 
solutions and/or  dedicated trusts or  SPVs . Funds will be passed on to final beneficiaries in the form of 
various financial instruments that can provide terms (e.g., tenor, price, amortization profiles, collateral  
requirements ) more adequate to bio- businesses financial and risk profiles  (see ¶ I.1). To this effect, EE s 
will enter into funding agreements with eligible LFIs and/ or final beneficiaries of private projects. When 
channelling funds through LFIs, those institutions will provide financing to final beneficiaries of private 
projects.  
62. EEs will be responsible for the full execution of sovereign investment loans and investment grants in 
accordance with the Subsidiary Agreements. Such agreements typically require that prior to the first 
disbursement the EE approves the OR, in terms previou sly agreed with IDB. OR will detail specific 
eligibility and other requirements needed to ensure alignment with Sub- project and Programme 
requirements79 (see ¶ I.1). 
63. Without prejudice to the regional and programmatic nature of the Funded Activity, and to the 
assessments to be conducted by IDB at the Sub- project level, the following EEs have been identified for 
Component I.1: Banco da Amazonia ( Brazil ), FINAGRO (Colombia), CONAFIPS (Ecuador), COFIDE 
(Peru), and Suriname National Development Bank Ltd. (Suriname) . Additional information for each EE 
has been included in attachment 1 in  Annex 20b . 
Component I.2  
64. Fund managers and/or direct investees will be chosen by the IDB Lab through a formal due diligence 
process, including an integrity due diligence (conducted by the Office of Institutional Integrity of IDB) and 
an Environmental Social and Governance ( ESG ) consideration (using IDB’s ESG policy). In addition, the 
AE must provide counterpart financing at a minimum of 1:1.  
65. The following EE has already been selected (see Attachment 2 in  Annex 20b) for activity (a) under 
Component I.2 and is already executing initiatives to be scaled up with Programme resources: Kaete  
Investimentos, a local and reputable fund management company with vast experience in identifying 
sustainable early -stage bioeconomy businesses  (see ¶ I.2, a). 
66. Institutional capacity assessment and integrity requirements for EE s responsible for equity management 
under IDB Lab initiatives are detailed in Annex 20b.  
Figure 6.- Component I: Financial flows and prototype  structure of a Sub -project


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 82 
 
  
Component II.2  
67. In its capacity as AE, the IDB will administer resources received from GCF for Component II.2.  The 
implementation of the green bond issuance will be the responsibility of the public entity issuer in 
accordance with the bond documentation. As part of its project preparation cycle, and prior to the 
approval of the relevant guarantee operation (i.e., Sub- project), the ID B will conduct an institutional 
capacity assessment of such public entity, as further detailed in Annex 20b . Once the individual 
guarantee operation is approved by the IDB, the Subsidiary Agreements to be entered into between the 
IDB, as AE, and the bond i ssuer, as EE, would include all the  necessary guarantee documentation.  The 
guarantee documentation will establish the financial charges in accordance with IDB policy.  
68. GCF guarantee grant resources will be allocated for reducing the cost of the financial charges of IDB -
funded guarantees (¶II.2). For this purpose, the GCF will  disburse such resources to IDB into the GCF 
Account prior to the effectiveness of the guarantee.  GCF grant  resources  will be disbursed by the IDB  as 
a grant to the guaranteed debtor. The guaranteed debtor then makes the payments of those charges in 
full to the IDB but has received a grant to defray  its cost. In this way, the guaranteed debtor benefits from 
the grant by  lower ing its costs of issuing an  IDB-funded guarantee. If there is a cancellation and/or a call 
of the guarantee,  and the charges paid by t he guaranteed debtor up to that moment are less than the 
amount of the grant, a partial refund of the grant must be made.  
Figure 7.- Component II: Financial flows and prototype  structure of a Sub -project


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 82 
 
  
Technical cooperation (Components I.3, II.1, and III )  
69. The execution of technical cooperation resources under this Programme will be done under the IDB 
Technical Cooperation Policy  (OP 400) and related operational guidel ines. According to this  Policy, IDB 
may be the EE for technical assistance resources and/or it may enter into technical cooperation 
agreements with another EE. The definition of whether the EE is the  IDB, or a third party will depend on 
the specific country context and beneficiaries’ preferences and capacity. IDB will  plan along with 
government and potential beneficiaries the detailed deployment of specific technical cooperation 
components and define based on the best execution option.  The EE will be determined and assessed 
as part of the preparation of each technical cooperation Sub -project to be designed for every technical 
cooperation component of the Funding Proposal.  
Third -party EEs 
70. EEs must be legally established entities. This includes (i) national and subnational institutions from 
borrowing member countries of the IDB with legal capacity to enter into agreements with the IDB; (ii) 
regional and subregional agencies established by the same countries; (iii)  private companies eligible to 
receive loans from the IDB; and (iv) not -for-profit institutions, including civil society associations.  
71. When the IDB is not the EE, IDB will enter into technical cooperation agreements with eligible EE s. 
Eligible EE s will be required to use applicable IDB’s procurement policies for their use of GCF funds.   
72. According to IDB procedures, a formal diagnosis of the EE is required to assess institutional capacity, 
fiduciary management, eventual execution risks and identify and implement mitigation measures. Four 
basic areas are evaluated: (i) Management of Contracting of Services and Procurement of Goods; (ii) 
Administrative, Financial and Accounting Management; (iii) Technical and Monitoring Capacity; and (iv) 
Knowledge Management and Strategic Communication Capacity. It should be noted that this analysis is 
comprehensive as it also identifies institutional characteristics and capacities associated with the 
management of resources from national and international donors, good practices, experience, and use 
of systems to strengthen these, with a view to an efficient and transparent project execution.  
IDB Execution  
73. In specific local circumstances and for some of the components of the Funding Proposal  (in particular for 
components such as II.1,  III.5 and III. 6), because of the scope of activities and/or highly complex technical 
inputs, which would feed into specific P rogram me preparation and reporting requirements from both the 
IDB and the GCF, it is appropriate for the IDB to directly execute in order to provide a centralized 
coordination of the various product s. The execution by the IDB will enhance the quality control of th e


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 82 
 
  
80 When EEs other than the IDB  are involved, they will produce and maintain information on the activities  they are executing, and report it to 
the IDB.  
81 The resources for the sovereign- guarantee loan will be provided through the IDB.  studies and methodologies to be developed and will improve the efficiency and velocity in the  design and  
execution at the Sub -project level .  
74. When acting as EE, IDB will apply its own policies and procedures for hiring of individual consultants 
and/or pr ocurement of consulting and other services, supervision, monitoring and reporting of activities , 
and will ensur e the fulfilment  of applicable AMA and FAA requirements. On a case- by-case basis, the 
IDB will determine if Subsidiary Agreements are needed for technical cooperation activities executed by 
the IDB, for example, if the beneficiary has committed in- kind contributions . 
Common provisions for all Components  
75. The administration of any of the above- mentioned operations, including reporting requirements, will follow 
IDB policies and procedures, and applicable AMA and FAA requirements, which will be reflected as 
needed in any Subsidiary Agreements . The Subsidiary Agreement  will require that GCF proceeds are 
used for eligible activities under the applicable components of the Programme, would establish the 
disbursement period and will establish other implementation requirements, including regarding the 
execution structure for GCF -funded activities  within the EE . 
76. Due to the programmatic nature of this proposal, institutional capacity assessments will be carried out in 
the context of country  specific  IDB Sub-projects  as part of the preparation and approval of each individual 
investment loan,  guarantee,  technical cooperation, or equity investment operation, and will follow IDB 
policies and due diligence standards.  In all cases, EEs will follow AE’s guidelines and princi ples (see 
Annex 20b) . 
77. Monitoring and evaluation of each IDB Sub-project  approved with funding from the Programme  will also 
follow standard procedures established by  IDB policy. This includes a requirement to define monitoring 
indicators at the product  and results  level, which shall be consistent with one or more of the activities and 
expected results  included in Sections E.6 and E.5, respectively . Investment l oan operations also require 
an economic evaluation, which assesses the value of net benefits associated to IDB support. Whenever 
possible, the methodology used to calculate net benefits  and costs of IDB loan operations using funds 
from the Programme  shall be consistent with t he model used to estimat e the economic rate of return of 
the Programme  (see the Economic Model in Annex 3 and Section D.6) . 
78. On account of the Programme  design, which includes  various countries, components, EEs and 
disbursement schemes, the IDB  will monitor, compile and register information on all IDB operations 
approved and fi nanced –totally or partially – with resource s from this Programme, and  will be solely 
responsible for aggregating and updating information on  the Programme  for periodical reporting to the 
GCF80. The procurement plan shall also be revised periodically according to progress of  the various IDB 
Sub-projects  in target countries.  
Table 6.- Summary of implementation arrangements by components, activities  and outputs  
Component  Subcomponent  Type of IDB 
implementation 
arrangement  Activity  Output  EE 
Component I.  
Financing 
solutions for 
bio-businesses  I.1 Sovereign 
investment  
loans81 and 
investment grants  Sovereign- guaranteed 
loan and investment 
grant (global credit 
operation), under a 
Subsidiary agreement 
in the framework of the 
FAA Debt financing 
supply to bio-
businesses  Credit disbursed or guaranteed to 
bio-businesses  NDBs (as listed in Section A.20 
and Annex 
20b) 
I.2 Equity 
investment s and Subsidiary Agreement , 
under  the framework of 
the FAA  Risk capital supply 
for early -stage bio-Risk-capital 
investment  
disbursed to Kaete Investimentos , 
IDB, and other  
direct


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 82 
 
  
82 Peru will not participate in the sub -component II.2.  innovation  
grant s businesses  (post 
MVP phase)  
Contingent 
recovery 
investment grants 
for earlier stage bio-
businesses (MVP 
phase)  early -stage bio -
businesses  investees 
defined and 
assessed by IDB Lab  
I.3 Technical 
cooperation  Technical cooperation agreement s between 
IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA ; 
or FAA where the IDB 
is EE  Bio-business 
pipeline 
development and 
supervision  Service contracts 
for capacity 
building , digital 
tools  and 
technical support  
Technology 
applied and 
quality standards 
achieved  IDB and 
various  EEs as 
detailed in 
Annex 20b  
Technical cooperation agreements between IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA ;
 
or FAA where the IDB 
is EE.  Tools for 
connecting bio-
business es to 
stakeholders and 
markets  Connecting tools and coordination systems  IDB, Conexus, 
WWF , The 
Nature 
Conservancy  
and Rainforest 
Alliance   
Technical cooperation 
agreements between 
IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA ; 
or FAA where the IDB 
is EE  Institutional and 
regulatory 
environment  Service contracts 
for regulation and 
institutional 
support  Various EEs 
as detailed in 
Annex 20b  
Component II: 
Bond 
structuring and 
issuance  II.1 Technical cooperation  FAA Technical support 
for thematic bond 
framework 
development and 
issuance  Specialized 
advisory services 
for bond 
issuance  IDB 
II.2 Grants for 
guarantees  Investment grant 
agreement between 
IDB and EE under the 
FAA82 Implementation of 
credit enhancement 
for public thematic bond issuances  
with reduced costs 
for the issuer  Guarantees structured for 
bonds that include bio-
businesses  Various EEs to 
be identified as  
potential green 
bond issuer s 
and IDB, as 
detailed in 
Annex 20b  
III. Transversal 
Technical Cooperation  III.1 Inclusion 
mechanisms for 
women and 
diversity in bio-
businesses  Technical cooperation 
agreements between 
IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA  Development of 
strategies, explicit 
measures and/or 
services to promote equitable access to the benefits of 
investments 
supported  Amazonian 
platform to 
promote women’s access to bio-business 
financial 
services.  
Gender -lens in 
LFIs portfolio  
Selection criteria  
to access credit 
that rewards a Various EEs as detailed in 
Annex 20b


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 82 
 
 gender -lens in 
bio-business  
III.2 Integrated 
support and the 
strengthening of 
the ecosystem 
for Amazonian 
SME and their 
communities  Technical cooperation 
agreement  between 
IDB and Conexus , 
under the framework of 
the FAA  Strengthen the role of SME and their 
communities  as 
forest maintainers and bio-businesses 
ecosystem 
generators  Strategic 
connections plan developed  
E-knowledge 
products 
developed  
Regional  network 
of SME and their 
communities  
and public and 
private partners  Conexus  
III.3 
Stakeholders Engagement 
Plan (SEP)  Technical cooperation 
agreements between 
IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA ; 
or FAA where the IDB 
is EE  Improve the design and execution of the Programme by 
including a 
meaningful and 
organic stakeholder 
engagement with 
quantifiable results  Information tools 
published and 
disseminated.  
Dialogue meetings and 
consultation 
processes 
implemented.  
Collaboration 
products, partnerships  and 
sub grants 
implemented  IDB 
Amazonian 
Universities, 
local 
stakeholders, 
regional 
indigenous 
organizations  
III.4 Small 
Grants Program  
(SGP) Technical Cooperation 
and Investment grant  
agreements between 
IDB and EE, under the 
framework of the FAA ; 
or FAA where the IDB 
is EE for certain TC 
activities  Program 
management, 
building institutional 
capacity, financing Productive and 
Enabling Projects, 
and knowledge 
management co-
designed in 
cooperation with 
community 
organizations  Community 
organization 
institutional capacity to manage program processes and 
projects.  
Portfolio of 
grants 
implemented.  
Knowledge and 
networking strategy 
implemented.  IDB and one or 
more 
community 
organizations   
III.5 General 
advisory services  FAA Facilitation of 
regional dialogue, 
knowledge 
generation, 
implementation of data collection 
systems, relevant 
regional analysis  Knowledge 
products  
published or 
disseminated  IDB 
III.6 Programme 
monitoring and evaluation  FAA Monitoring and 
evaluation as per 
Annex 11  Periodical reports 
on fund-level 
impacts and 
outcomes  
Mid-term and 
final evaluations  IDB


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 82 
 
 Experience and t rack record of the AE and EEs  
79. The IDB is the main source of multilateral financing for LAC. Since 1961, the IDB  has provided almost 
US$246 billion for projects to reduce poverty, raise standards of living, spur economic growth, protect 
natural resources, and foster integration and trade.  The IDB is well- positioned to support Amazon 
countries in advancing towards their climate mitigation and adaptation goals, building on extensive 
experience gained during design and implementation of several operations related to the promotion of 
private sector investment. For more than a decade now, t he IDB has been particularly active on climate  
finance,  mobilizing private capital  in partnership with a vast array of publi c and private institutions . Only 
within  the last five years, t he IDB has approved credit lines for over US$1.5 billion, supporting some 
US$3.3 billion in green investment s in 19 countries. Additional support for thematic bond issuances with 
NDB s and ministries of finance amount to more than US$3 billion.  
80. All this experience entails long- term relationships with governments and partner institutions , including 
over 40  NDB s through out the region  and in target countries , as well as thorough understanding of the 
financial markets.  Beyond traditional loans and technical assistance , the IDB  has decades of experience 
supporting innovati on in various sectors across  the region and developing innovative financing 
mechanisms  to leverage private investments  both at a macro (governments) and micro level (MSMEs).  
81. Appropriate coordination between public and private parties, as well as among the different financing 
mechanisms, is essential to ensure success when implementing the structure proposed for the 
Programme . As part of  the ongoing IDB strategic  dialogue with target countries , includ ing all sector 
ministries and public agencies involved in the bioeconomy , the Programme  will be guided by IDB focal 
points in each country, as well as relevant technical experts within both public and private sector windows 
at the IDB. Led by the Connectivity, Markets and Finance (CMF)  division , in close coordination with the 
Environment and Rural Development (RND), Climate Change and Sustainability (CCS) , Gender and 
Diversity (GDI), Competitiveness, Technology and Innovation (CTI), Integration and Trade (INT), and 
Fiscal Management (FMM) divisi ons, and the innovation lens provided by IDB Lab, the Programme  will 
benefit from  synergies in the development  of sector -dedicated projects, combining extensive knowhow 
on the design and implementation of innovative financial and policy instruments  for access to finance, 
business acceleration, bond issuance, public -private contractual  structures, and vast technical expertise 
on AFOLU and value chains in the rural sector. Under this collaborative scheme, the IDB  has already 
some initiatives underway to channel national and international funding to bio-businesses  in Brazil, 
Colombia and Peru  (see Section C.1.d) , which offers the opportunity to replicat e good experiences  and 
learn from experience.  
82. Due to its internal structure, the IDB is able  to sustain this multidisciplinary approach throughout the 
implementation of the Programme , adding value and offering knowledge based on regional and 
international best practices.  IDB’s internal procedures  will ensur e a solid definition of the logic and scope 
of the intervention in each participant country, including technical feasibility of the proposed customi zed 
solution on a country -by-country basis, key aspects of risk allocation, availability of and coordination with 
other  sources of funding, and engagement of corresponding counterparts at a country and regional level.  
83. NDBs  acting as EE for Component I .1 have a public  mandate to promote inclusive and sustainable 
productive activity, have ample experience in finance structuring and fiduciary management, and are 
generally an important financing agent for development in their respective countries. As such, they play a fundamental role in stimulating the expansion of access to finance and mobilizing  resources in sectors 
underserved by local markets, offering several financial support mechanisms to companies of all sizes to enable investments.  EEs for other components, especially those working with the IDB  Lab, have 
proven capacity in their corresponding fields and experience with local markets. Overall, EEs have been 
or will be selected and identified using IDB internal operations approval systems and due diligence.  In 
most cases, these entities will be those  with which the IDB  has a relevant track record, based on prior 
investment loan or technical cooperat ion operations  (see Section B.4  and Annex 20b).  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 82 
 
 84. Attracting the private sector to participate in bio -business investments is essential to support Amazon 
government strategies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation of forest ecosystems . By 
nature, private capital flows are necessarily reliant  on return expectations (the existence of and possibility 
to determine a minimum level of economic return) and the level of risk involved. Most likely, if expected 
returns adjusted for risk are not attractive in comparison to other investment opportunities , private funding 
will be insufficient in sectors that are crucial to transition to a low -emissi on development path and build 
resilience in the long- term. If the value of natural capital and forest assets is not properly accounted for , 
these investments will remain unattractive or plainly overlooked.  Ultimately, the goal is to induce the 
involvement of private actors that fundamentally are willing to make efforts to support sustainability in their business but  have yet to see them as financial ly attractive.  
85. Incentives are needed to promote the valuing of these assets across markets if private sector 
participation is to be encouraged. The system needs to be comprehensive enough so that the dynamics 
of these markets are changed to make these inve stments more profitable. The public sector can play an 
important role in allocating resources directly to the development of the  bioeconomy, especially since it 
is so relevant to the government’s development goals. But overall fiscal restrictions in target ed countries 
are substantial, and public funds are insufficient to cope with the many social and economic issues that 
governments need to address. Particularly amid  the recent COVID -19 crisis, restrictions have become 
larger,  and uncertainties remain on how the crisis is going to evolve. In this scenario, governments can 
leverage limited own and international resources to provide incentives so that private funds flow more 
easily to bio-business es, supporting their development at scale. GCF funding can aid governments in 
this respect, enabl ing this transformation to happen at a faster pace.  
86. Concessional financing and grants are an integral part of the set of mechanisms used by development 
finance institutions to support private sector development . Its use must be guided by the understanding 
that they should bring additional value, without displacing other financing sources . Extending incentives 
with public funds to a private business is  fully justified when the development of such business produces 
positive externalities that  would  not be properly accounted for  otherwise . When the concessionality  is 
effectively employed to fix market failures, concessional  resources help achieve development impacts 
by leveraging private sector participation that would not happen without support . 
87. As a general premise , the justification of the use of  GCF concessional  funds  in this Programme is based  
on the inability of bio- businesses to access financing in the local market on adequate  terms, and to L FIs 
not being able to raise funding for credit and  risk mitigation instruments  that allow them to match lending 
conditions required by these businesses , which in turn lead to limited investment for the development, 
expansion and diversification of the bioeconomy. GCF’s participation and concessional finance will allow 
for the provision of financing instruments and incentives suitable for these investments, helping offset 
incremental costs and risks undertaken by private developers/sponsors, banks and investors to make 
their involvement in bio- businesses viable.  Initial capital flows from first movers  are expected to leverage 
resources from other developers, lenders and investors.  
88. Concessional loans, equity and grants under Component I , aim at delivering more adequate financial 
instruments for bio- businesses. Reducing the cost of finance and increasing its tenor makes the 
amortization profile more suitable to bio- business investments.  De-risking support can catalyse positive 
lending decisions  by means of enhancing the collateral profile of operations and/or reducing expected 
losses for financiers (in turn reducing loss provisions and improving profitability). First loss, risk sharing, 
and guarantee schemes are also considered effective tools i n early stage/riskier businesses to maximize 
the potential impact of leveraging equity from private investors, helping address the “valley of death” for innovate companies. GCF participation is critical to:  
- supplement IDB resources, significantly enhancing reach and impact of the Programme (more than 
twice, as per IDB estimations ); this includes an estimated private sector leverage potential of over  
US$160 million  only in activities under  Component I . 
- achieve the required level of concessionality  and other critical financing terms (e.g., tenors, risk -
tolerance).


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 82 
 
 - address the bankability challenges faced by innovative early -stage bio -business es that hinder their 
access to traditional debt financing, giving them the required capital and time to build their business 
(capacities/track record, pipeline, off -take and supply agreements).  
89. For instance, for investments modelled for SMEs in the native palm, cacao, coffee, aquaculture, native 
timber and NTFP sector s, a reduction of 300 bps  in interest rates and a tenor of 10 years (matching the 
economic payback period of these investments) would result in an average improvement of equity IRR 
of 2.3% (from 8.6% in the base case to almost 11%  with GCF -enabled improved financing terms ). This 
would achieve not only a meaningful improvement in IRR, but also an alignment between payback 
periods and loan tenors, which would  reduce the need for further (generally scarcely available) equity 
injections to pay back debt before projects start paying off.  
90. Grants for technical cooperation  in Component  I.3 will provide critical support to build capacities,  
innovation,  business resources and regulation, among others, to help overcome bankability issues  and 
ensure adequate implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities in bio- businesses that will reduce 
the negative impacts of climate change .  
91. Grants under  Compon ent II will support the deployment of thematic bonds, particularly tailored for 
financing of bio- businesses in various ways: i) filling capacity gaps needed to develop a pipeline and 
portfolio of suitable bio- business projects (e.g., compliance with relevant bond standards, financial profile 
suitable for aggregation/inclusion for bond financing, etc.), ii) supporting the design of sovereign-
guaranteed  instrument s to credit enhance issuance s to achieve interest rate reductions , particularly in 
certain countr ies that are not investment grade,  where rates  can be higher than needed to enable the 
financing of bio- businesses under suitable terms, iii) ensuring proper  structuring of these bonds (given 
higher requirements for certification,  monitoring, reporting and verification), when needed. In particular, 
grants for guarantees  in Component II.2  are needed in cases where the economics –without valuing 
relevant externalities - result unattractive.  GCF support becomes critical, to  reduce pricing for IDB-funded 
bond guarantees (i.e. , buying down their cost by using GCF grants) when the costs of the instrument 
might significantly offset the interest rate reductions achieved through the credit enhancement, turning 
them unattractive.  Such support in turn incentivize s development of bond solutions to help pave the way 
for access of bio -businesses  to the vast availability of capital markets financing.  
92. Overall, GCF grant resources are key to cover availability gaps of the described instruments, as well as 
limitations in public budgets available to fund these activities, particularly as they are stressed with and 
prioritized for COVID -19 pandemic -related investment needs.   
93. Throughout its project cycle, the IDB assesses development outcomes of each operation it approves. 
Such an assessment is geared towards ensuring that interventions are indeed aligned with its mandate, 
including social, environmental and economic development aspects and the justification of the need for 
support. At the country and component level, the use of funds from the Programme will be justified on 
development outcomes, clearly stated in the results framework required for approval of all IDB operations 
(see Section B.4). Justification at the country level will also be based on the concept of additionality and 
minimum concessionality . 
94. With regards to ensuring the use of minimum concessionality  (in order to avoid market distortions and 
crowding out private investment), the following principles will be applied in all cases  for interventions 
funded by this Programme:  
i. Financial analysis will be conducted for each lending/guarantee facility to be deployed, for instance 
by comparing financial performance metrics of the relevant sector or prospect investment with 
appropriate benchmarks. This will be used to assess the need for pric ing and other specific terms 
(tenor, grace, seniority, etc.) enabled by  GCF  funding concessionality . Country -level analysis will 
also support  confirmation of the additionality of the proposed financing/guarantee solution.  
ii. EEs and LFIs on -lending to final beneficiaries will have to abide by the rules established by the IDB 
in the respective Subsidiary  Agreements ( see Section B.4). These rules include oversight 
mechanisms (e.g., indicators, mandatory reporting and supervision visits) intended to ensure an 
adequate use of the grant element to transfer or reduce risk, to maintain appr opriate levels of quality 
of the portfolio and fulfil conditions on the use of funds. This will also help ensure that the grant


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 82 
 
  
83 Following the example of previous GCF/IDB funded programmes, the methodology for ensuring GCF  concessionality  is pas sed down to 
final beneficiaries includes: i) for final beneficiaries, financial products within this activity are designed so that they i nherently offer interest 
rates more attractive than comparable products on the market, and ii) LFIs will be required to  declare the average interest rate applied to 
similar borrowers, and a comparison with GCF -funded products, which shall demonstrate lower interest rates than the declared average.  See 
Annex 21.  element reaches final beneficiaries and does not distort the market or encourage excessively risky 
lending, and that it leverages the desired behaviour among stakeholders83.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
95. Successful implementation of Programme  activities should translate into increased confidence on and 
experience with the bioeconomy  among government s, investors, financiers and firms, leading to them 
further  investing in structur ing and implement ing bio-businesses  without donor support in the future.  
Moreover, by supporting bio- businesses through a value chain approach, the Programme will be building 
robust connections to demand and markets. These relationships and mutual beneficial transactions, 
strengthened by anchor companies in these value chains, are self -replicating. The activities  proposed by 
the Programme  have been designed to induce investment and crowd in private actors , with a view to 
ensuring that such activities  produce results that are sustainable over  time. These mechanisms are 
intended to function in a way that does not distort existing markets , but instead by offering venues where 
market conditions can be improved to match  the risks and costs of bio- businesses.  
96. First, f or businesses directly supported via  debt or equity -like financing instruments , concessionality  is 
essentially used to incentivize a systematic and effective financing system for formal bio- businesses, 
whatever the stage of their development. By tackl ing first-movers’ risks , the Programme  will help build a 
strong portfolio of bankable projects and demonstrate the profitability of the sector to financers and 
businesses  alike, encouraging other actors to participate in these markets later in time. The Program me 
will monitor the extent to which LFIs have  built capacity to be able to on- lend to these businesses , small 
and large alike,  without requiring further  subsidies , as well as  to expand their lending practices and 
portfolio to respond to bio- business  needs.  The Programme  will also oversee the level of engagement of 
local public and private institutions , the use of certifications and sustainable principles,  and the 
development of technology to support the creation of pipeline in the future.  
97. Second,  regarding the work with thematic bonds, besides securing sufficient investment in bonds 
earmarked for bio- businesses and their direct contribution to scaling up financing for these ventures, the 
proposed Programme  will make some additional contributions w ith longer -lasting effect: i) asset 
demonstration , since supported bonds will offer another platform to demonstrate the viability of these 
assets to yet another group of investors, especially at the international level , and ii) capacities and 
standards  on the issuer side (for issuance, monitoring and reporting)  that at the local level will remain in 
place, opening the door for replicating successful  issuances in the future by either the same or other 
potential issue rs. Within the context of the global drive  toward green and sustainable bonds, the 
aggregation and monetization of bio -business finance through bond issuances is an innovation not 
previously applied by major international financial institutions. Above and beyond the introduction of the 
instrument in developing markets, resource  mobilization will expose institutional and impact investors in 
developing economies to opportunities from new capital market instruments. This supports the 
development of domestic capital markets, which will eventually also facilitate the participation of 
international sources of finance. Altogether, supporting functional capital markets for the bioeconomy will 
create financial structures that will provide large amounts of financing well beyond the life of the 
Programme . 
98. Institutional and specialized knowledge barriers are addressed by technical  cooperation activities under 
each component in the proposed structure. T hese have been crafted to incorporate capacity transfer and 
training, which will help institutions better understand the actors, products , business models , technologies 
and networks  involved in the bioeconomy, better gauge the risks involved and overcome the information 
asymmetry problem. S uch capacity building is intended to improve institutional ability to sus tain or 
replicate the activities financed by the Programme , as well as strengthen the delivery of associated 
development outcomes. By adopting a training- of-trainer’s model and engaging relevant “aggregators” 
(e.g., extension organizations or incubators), know -how should be inherited by others that are also


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 82 
 
 relevant to these markets. Where regulation and institutions will have been reinforced, such improved 
frameworks are expected to remain in place beyond the Programme  and continue to encourage private 
investments in the long run , for example with national natural capital accounting systems and SEEA in 
participating countries . The generation and dissemination of knowledge and improved coordinating 
systems among public and private actors should also contribute to sustaining results in the long- term.


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 82 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
279 million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  135 20 years  5 years  0.75 % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  ---    
(iii) Equity  6.5    
(iv) Guarantees  ---    
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  20    
(vi) Grants  117.5     
(vii) Result s-base d 
payments  ---    
(b) Co -financing 
information84 Total amount  Currency  
319.1  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
IDB and/or other c o-
financiers85 Senior 
Loans86 155 million USD ($)  25 years  
5 years  LIBOR+
0.80% pari passu  
 
IDB Guarantees87 145 million USD ($)   25 years  0.80%  
IDB Lab, Fundo Vale  Equity  4  million USD ($)   10 years    
IDB Lab, Kaete, Conexus, 
RA, TNC, WWF  Grant  14 million USD ($)      
IDB In-kind 1.1 Million USD ($)     
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
598.1  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 
250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page)  99. For the reimbursable portion of the resources  requested, participant countries 
will provide a sovereign guarantee, which covers the EE financial obligations 
under the loan (including repayment of principal, payment of interest and other 
financial charges).  
100. As listed in Section C.1.b,  besides IDB co-financ e EEs are expected to 
contribute with additional resources to complement the financing of a larger 
portfolio of bio- businesses. Resources from intermediary LFIs will be leveraged 
especially in the case of guarantee products offered by NDBs and funded by 
the Pr ogramme, as these would only cover the credits partially, leading to L FIs 
assuming risks with their own resources.  In addition, the Program me estimates 
to mobilize some US$18 1 million  in debt financing from bond investors and 
some  US$175 million  equity and debt from other sources at investment /firm 
level. Also, the Programme will benefit from in -kind contributions (US$1.1 
 
84 The estimated total amounts of AE and other co- financiers are subject to the approval of allocation of such funds for each individual Sub-
project on a case- by-case basis and is contingent on such approvals being obtained (see Section B.4) . 
85 Loans from the AE and/or funding provided by EEs, LFIs and/or other resources administered by AE in excess of that funded with GCF 
resources, and/or a combination thereof . 
86 IDB loan terms are flexible. Expected averages for tenor and grace are used and rates applicable for the 4th quarter 2020 under the Flexible 
Financing Facility (FFF) . 3-month  LIBOR based rates reset four times a year in January, April, July and October. S ee IDB Finance Current 
Interest Rates and Loan Charges -  All financial products . 
87 See IDB Finance Flexible Guarantee Instrument (FGI) for Sovereign Guaranteed Operations .


---
*Page 51*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 82 
   
 million) for the overall implementation, administration and supervision of 
activities. More concretely, these are related to I DB’s and EE’s operational and 
administrative working hours of staff involved in IDB sub- projects  using funds 
from the Programme, which will be determined on a case -by-case basis, 
depending on various factors such as the type of intervention (i.e., the spec ific 
structure of components), the size of the loan or non- reimbursable allocation 
and the timeframe for implementation of each operation88. 
101. The Programme will complement existing initiatives, platforms and actions by 
the IDB focused on the Amazon region a nd the support for the bioeconomy. 
These include activities at the regional, national and subnational levels, 
involving public and private actors, all of which are engaged in efforts that 
contribute to the sustainable development of the region. For instanc e, the 
proposal links directly with initiatives being designed in different countries by 
IDB with support from the Natural Capital Lab, such as the Programa para el 
Desarrollo de la Bioeconomía en la Amazonia Peruana  with Peruvian 
development bank, COFIDE,  and the Amazonia Regenerate Accelerator 
implemented by Kaete Investimentos  across Leticia Pact signatories.  
102. In the context of its internal Amazon Initiative financing strategy, and in line with 
its broader engagement in partnerships and mobilization, the IDB will map 
collaboration and partnership opportunities with government, private and civil 
society actors, w orking in the same or complementary areas of actions 
proposed, both at the country and regional levels. For instance, WWF, 
Conservation International ( CI) and IDB have a very good track record of 
collaboration in the execution and co -financing of operations in Latin America. 
For this proposal and to ensure that all investments maximize opportunities to 
achieve synergy at the national level and contribute to regional climate 
mitigation and resiliency goals, an ad hoc working group for the Amazon  region 
–which will include all three organizations and is part of the Stakeholder 
Engagement Strategy described in Annex 7–  will be established.  
103. Complementarities between proposals of these organizations have been 
identified and will be more deeply developed during execution. Following the 
model applied in the Bhutan for Life Project  (FP 050), in the projects Natural 
Legacy of Peru  (CN 21330) and Colombian Heritage  (CN 22830) WWF will 
collectively support 22 million hectares of natural ecosystems in the Amazon -
and the mitigation and adaptation benefits they provide-  through improving 
protected areas management capacity and practices while establishing 
sustainable financing mechanisms for national networks of protected areas. 
Grant -funded investments by WWF initiatives  will complement those of the 
Programme by securing sustainability of public land, while increasing 
availability of natural resources that support businesses ranging from eco-
tourism to forest products (such as Brazil nuts) as well as valuable ecosystem 
services like regulation of water and micro- climates.  Similarly, in their project 
Scaling up regional action to reduce deforestation and increase resilience to 
climate change under the framework of the Leticia Pact for the Amazon - Brazil, 
Colombia, Ecuador and Peru , CI will also be supporting the creation, 
strengthening and scaling up of enterprises and value chains which reduce 
emissions, augment carbon sequestration and storage, and/or reduce 
vulnerability to climate change. In addition to its focus on ins titutional support 
for local participation, monitoring and governance of ecosystems to improve 
management of at least 35 million hectares of forest in the region, CI’s initiative  
 
88 While specific costs related to GCF requirements are expected to be covered with AE fee (e.g., admin & supervision costs), ID B full -time 
staff hours dedicated to the IDB project cycle of operations to be approved and implemented using GCF funding also involve partial use of 
IDB's own administrative and operational budget .


---
*Page 52*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 82 
   
 is being designed to become a potential pipeline for national partners on the  
execution of the Programme and is also aligned to the vision of securing 
regeneration of ecosystem services with private actors and on private land.  
104. Both proposals mentioned above are complemented by IDB ’s broad approach 
to the Amazon biome, which in supp ort to the Leticia Pact aligns public and 
private funding for ecosystem regeneration in public and private land. The 
Programme  is being set up to act as a lighthouse for conservation finance 
innovation with a facility so support green bonds design, a facil ity to fund and 
train LFIs on Bioe conomy, and a facility to engage with impact investors.  
Finally, IDB will also explore co -financing or parallel financing mechanisms 
including public private partnerships during implementation to ensure 
complementarities and synergistic approaches at the country level; an example 
of this  is the Leticia Platform89 with WWF from the Technology and Innovation 
to Close the Green Finance Gap in the Amazon Basin Program . 
105. Annex 23 provides an overview of ongoing related initiatives in the Amazon in 
target  countries. The proposed Program me builds on and goes beyond existing 
efforts, as it strengthens private sector actors’ participation in forest 
conservation.  
C.2. Financing by component90  
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing91 
Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component I: Financing solutions for bio -businesses  
I.1 Sovereign 
investment loans and investment 
grants  Credit disbursed or 
guaranteed to bio-
businesses  290 135 Senior 
loans  155 
 Senior loans  IDB 
 
16 16 Grants   
I.2 Equity 
investments and 
innovation grants  Risk-capital investment  
disbursed to early -
stage bio-businesses  10.5 6.5 Equity  4 Equity  IDB, Fundo Vale 
9.2 4 Grants  5.2 Grants  IDB, Kaete  
I.3 Technical cooperation  Service contracts for 
capacity building , 
digital tools (including monitoring systems)  
and technical support  23.5 23.5 Grants     
 Connecting tools and 
coordination systems  18.8 11 Grants  7.8 Grants  IDB, Conexus, 
RA, TNC, 
WWF  
 Service contracts for 
regulation and 
institutional support  19.1 19.1 Grants     
Component II: Bond structuring and issuance  
II.1 Technical 
cooperation  Specialized advisory 
services for bond 
issuance  5 5 Grants     
 
89 The Leticia Platform is a digital platform that uses advanced technologies and algorithms to provide information on who is doing what and 
where. It is the product of a partnership of key players in conservation, technology, data science and finance. The platform combines 
location intelligence with the power of connections and collaboration integrating the industry -leading GIS and CRM platforms in one 
place (see ¶I.3, b) .  
90 A conservative assumption is that the revolving feature could increase outputs  in a range of  1.5-2.5 times.  
91 The estimated total amounts of AE and other co- financiers are subject to the approval of allocation of such funds for each individual Sub-
project on a case- by-case basis and is contingent on such approvals being obtained (see Section B.4).


---
*Page 53*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 82 
   
 II.2 Grants for 
guarantees  Guarantees structured 
for bonds that include 
bio-businesses  175 30 Grants  145 Guarantees  IDB 
Component III: Transversal technical cooperation  
III.1 Inclusion 
mechanisms for 
women and diversity in bio-
businesses  Amazonian platform to 
promote women’s 
access to bio-business 
financial services  
Gender -lens in LFIs 
portfolio  
Selection criteria to 
access credit that rewards a gender -lens 
in bio-business  5 5 Grants     
III.2 Integrated 
support and the strengthening of the ecosystem 
for Amazonian 
SME and their 
communities  Strategic connections 
plan developed  
E-knowledge products 
developed  
Regional network of 
SME and their 
communities and public 
and private partners  6 5 Grants  1 Grants  IDB 
III.3 Stakeholders 
Engagement 
Plan (SEP)  Information tools 
published and 
disseminated  
Dialogue meetings and 
consultation processes 
implemented  
Collaboration products, 
partnerships  and sub 
grants implemented  2 2 Grants     
III.4 Small Grants 
Program  (SGP ) Community 
organization 
institutional capacity to 
manage program processes and projects.  
Portfolio of grants 
implemented.  
Knowledge and 
networking strategy 
implemented.  10 10 Grants     
III.5 General 
advisory services  Knowledge products 
published or 
disseminated  5 5 Grants     
III.6 Programme 
monitoring and 
evaluation  Periodical reports on 
fund-level impacts and outcomes  
Mid-term and final 
evaluations  1 1 Grants     
Project 
Management 
Costs (PMC)  Staffing and 
consultants  2 0.9 Grants  1.1 In-kind IDB, IDB Lab, 
Fundo Vale, Kaete,


---
*Page 54*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 82 
   
 Office equipment, 
mission -related travel 
costs, project 
management systems 
and office supplies  Conexus, RA, 
TNC, WWF  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  598.1  279 319.1  
Note: Specific allocations by country are generally expected to be proportional to the size of participant economies, as this should be indicative of 
the size of the local market and the corresponding financing needs.  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 
page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒  No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒  No ☐ 
106. The proposed innovative financing mechanisms and incentives embedded in newly developed  schemes, 
the relatively incipient stage of advance of these business models and markets, and the complexities 
involved in coordinating the various actors efficiently, calls for specialized technical cooperation support 
for capacity building. Capacity building and knowledge generation will be developed in a range of areas 
such as extension services and coordination mechanisms for bio- businesses, investors and producers, 
as well as identification, evaluation and supervision of projects by L FIs, regulatory measures to enable 
natural capital valuation, innovation in public -private contractual schemes in forestry, standardization and 
harmonization of bio -business criteria, bioprospection, certification of thematic bonds and bio- business 
pipeline, monitoring and verifying environmental impacts of bio- business (see Section B.3)  
107. Awareness raising and dialogue will be an important transversal element of the Programme to maximize 
the potential for dissemination and replication, targeting key audiences including the bio- business 
community, domestic and international institutional investors and government relevant agencies.  The 
transfer of knowledge is considered essential to ensure tha t results are achieved, sustained and can be 
built-on over time (see ¶ 98). As a standard practice, the IDB is also committed to making knowledge and 
lessons learned from the Programme available to the international community, including financial and 
development institutions, to enable further replication and upscaling of the approach.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 82 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
108. Due to the diverse nature of bio -businesses  that may ultimately benefit from the improved business 
environment  and financing enabled by the Programme , and the characteristics of the proposed scheme 
–in which specific investments to be financed are not known ex -ante and driven by demand from local 
private actors – estimations of potential impacts were made based on an indicative portfolio of value 
chains  (See Annex 2 and Annex 3 ). 
109. After a characterization of the potential sectors and value chains in the bioeconomy, analysis was 
undertaken to understand the  size and definition of actors in each chain. A more detailed review was 
conducted of  primary producer s and other actors in each chain, to understand key production variables 
and limitations of the existing business model s. By applying to each value chain an indicative allocation 
of Programme resources (i.e., GCF resources plus additional resources mobilize d) used for CAPEX 
investment (US$707 million  overall) , the study modelled specific productive interventions. Where 
possible, these interventions were normalized to a per hectare basis  and translated into mitigation and 
adaptation benefits  (see Section E and Annex 3 ). 
110. Based on the methodology and assumptions  used  in the model described above, the expected annual 
and lifetime tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) to be reduced or avoided by the Programme 
are 6.2 million and 123.4  million , respectively  (see Annex 22) . The expected volume of resources  to be 
leveraged by the Programme, including public and private sources, is US$719.1 million  (US$ 319.1  
million  co-finance as per Section C.1.b plus US$ 400 million  from other sources). T he total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries are estimated to reach about 191,952  and 485,375, respectively92. 
111. It should be noted that  in order to maintain a conservative approach on the potential for mitigation, 
calculations for this section consider only the impact expected to be produced by  the direct use of the 
US$598.1 million of GCF  financing plus co- financing. However,  the impact is expected to become larger 
inasmuch as the funds are expected to be used in a revolving manner  throughout the maturity period of 
the GCF loan93. In addition,  the Programme  is indeed designed to allow for the development of a self -
sustaining support framework that will keep funds flowing to bio- businesses that lead to GHG emission 
reduction in the long- term, even after the GCF loan is fully reimbursed.  This indirect impact o f the 
Programme , mainly the result of the demonstration effect, is quite difficult to estimate  but is considered 
to be additional to the values presented . Hence, the potential impact assessment and quantification 
presented herein is considered to be in the  lower bound of the range of possible actual impacts 
attributable to Programme  activities . 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
112. Overall, the Programme  is structured so that it reinforces the activities of private sponsors and leverages 
private finance for bio- businesses in order to sustain and increase private participation in the future, 
regardless of the existence of further Programme  support. To this  end, several elements have been 
considered for the proposed Programme  design:  
- It leverages private finance and supports regulatory reform  
- It supports ventures that are commercially viable or expected to become so in the short - to medium -
term 
 
92 The direct beneficiaries  of the Programme are bio-business owners and their families whose adaptive capacity has improved . This is  
estimated based on the total size of the investment resulting from the P rogramme (some US$707 million of CAPEX  including both GCF  and 
additional funding) and the number of bio- businesses that the P rogramme can finance. Using the values from the financial model, the average 
investment for each value chain, market segment (micro, small , and medium  enterprise), and the country are used to estimate the average 
size of a loan. Using the total size (value) of the Programme, the total number of loans that can be financed by the Programme is estimated 
for each value chain, market segment and country  to estimate the total number of bio- businesses financed. The total direct beneficiaries are 
then estimated by multiplying the total number of bio- businesses in each value chain and country by the average size of household. The 
estimation for indirect beneficiaries  assumes that for each bio-busines s, there are a number of new jobs per bio- business that are created, 
and that the benefits will be passed to the people within the household of each bio -business employee. Thus, the total number of indirect 
beneficiaries is estimated by multiplying the tot al number of bio- businesses by the number of new jobs per bio- business  and the average 
number of people in each household per country. See Annex 3 for the data and assumptions used to calculate this . 
93 A conservative assumption is that the revolving featur e could increase the impact values  in a range of 1.5-2.5 times.


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 82 
   
 - It incorporates different platforms to attract private actors, targeting both the supply and demand 
sides of the investment  
- It combines innovative financial and institutional mechanisms with technical cooperation  
- It is aligned with local market practices and policy objectives  
- It is targeted specifically at the underlying problem – the inadequate valuing of natural capital in 
business – and as such, it is focused on addressing market failures specific to private investment  
- Its costs and benefits have been asse ssed (Annex 3), suggesting that the size of the support is 
adequate to attain its development objectives with a positive economic rate of return  
113. In sum, this holistic approach is aimed at enabling the creation and support of a sufficiently qualified 
portfolio of bio -business ventures that offer tangible gains to both sides of the financing, shifting risk 
perceptions of developers, financiers and investors, as well as public entities in charge of promoting the 
bioeconomy.  
114. The Programme  is indeed conceived as  an important contribution to kick -start a change of entrenched 
behaviours (i.e., unsustainable high emission practices in business  in the Amazon  that increase climate 
vulnerability and risks ) by promoting the valuing of natural capital via a set of incent ives, financial 
solutions and technical support  –to borrowers and lenders alike–  to help first-movers establish and 
demonstrate commercial viability of bio -business models. Once they have seen it can be profitable (i.e., 
adequate risk -adjusted returns and risk management possibilities) , private investors will choose to invest 
more in bio -businesses  to reduce sustainability risk and boost portfolio resilience. In this sense, the 
Programme will contribute with settin g the track for the adoption of sustainable practices and 
technologies in private -led businesses to reduce GHG -emissions , enhance carbon stocks  and/or 
increase resilience beyond GCF support.  
115. All Programme  activities have been  designed in a way that they can be integrated in to national systems 
so that changes are ingrained and continue to evolve  after Programme  completion. NDBs  and other  
actors acting as EEs have extensive knowledge of the local markets and can also help catalyse  the 
Programme’s impact using their various delivery channels, also increas ing the pool of potential supply 
of co-financing.  As the Programme  enables different platforms through which market conditions are 
improved to compensate for the incremental risks and costs and allow the private to obtain real value 
for their money used sustainably, the intrinsic value of natural capital is expected to e merge and  
ultimately  become  internalized by these  actors in their decision- making processes. New capacities and  
awareness will be built  among the many relevant stakeholders involved, which will also contribute to a 
more enabling environment to further expand and scale- up these investments.  
116. All in all, Programme  activities are thought of as  a “bridge”  that will enable a  transition from grant -funded 
models to self-sustaining structures that support markets in the long- term. 
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Social and economic co- benefits  
117. At a macro level, investing in bio- businesses in the Amazon is necessary to protect the regional 
economy, as the economic losses from the destruction of the Amazon in a business -as-usual scenario 
are projected to be significant (Section B.1). This does not only involve  environmental challenges, but 
also the ability to creat e jobs and growth, and making economies more competitive. The mainstreaming 
of new production models supported by the Programme  will generate more consolidated and dynamic 
markets, which leads to positive effects on several  aspects, including:  
- economic benefits related to improved trade, consumption and investment at the macro level  
- enhanced competitiveness, productivity and value creation of firms related to these ventures  
- diversification  of current crop production systems and improvements in the provision of agro -
ecosystem and forest ecosystem goods and services  
- reduced government expenditures on subsidies (where applicable) or increased tax revenues 
through greater investment and economi c activity  
118. Increased private investment overall can also trigger ripple effects throughout the economy, which in 
turn reflects in human well -being and welfare consistent with assessed targets of the  Sustainable


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 82 
   
 Development Goals  (SDG ), specifically those related to poverty, hunger, health, work, innovation, 
responsible consumption and production, water, cities, climate, oceans, land, and  partnerships (IPBES, 
2019). Thus, loss of biodiversity is not only an environmental issue but also a social issue. In this sense, 
Programme  activities are expected to bring co- benefits related to : 
- increased sources of income for agricultural and non- agricultural communities in rural areas  
- direct and indirect employment creation  
- technology development  
- financial inclusion  
119. It is worth noting that forest ecosystems provide human societies with a wide range of ecosystem 
services that reduce at the local and sectoral levels the vulnerability to impacts of climate change 
(particularly changes in the frequency , duration, and intensity of temperature, rainfall, coastal flooding, 
and hurricanes).  However, these climate change variables will also have significant impacts on forest 
growth, species diversity, and ecosystem function. Therefore, for human society to continue to benefit 
from forest ecosystem services, adaptation strategies must also reduce the negative climate change 
impacts on forests themselves.  
Gender sensitive development impact  
120. The Programme  will strive to support gender equality  by incorporating mechanisms and a strategy that 
targets and monitors the participation of women as beneficiaries . For instance, technical training or 
financial services tailored to women and women- led enterprises can help address the significant 
financing gap for this group, especially among MSE .94 In addition, investments in projects that support 
the use of locally available  sources can also provide opportunities for women’s entrepreneurship, such 
as in local enterprises that can deliver services or becom e part of the supply chain. Programme  
implementation activities (Section B.3) will include the identification at the country level of gender gaps 
and the potential to incorporate specific measures to ensure gender equality in alignment with IDB ’s 
Operational Policy on Gender Equality and Gender Action Plan , and explicit services to promote 
equitable access to the benefits of investments supported by different social groups, including women 
and indigenous communities. Whenever possible, t he potential to promote equitable access to benefits 
from supported activities will be included in the criteria for prioritization of beneficiary  sectors and 
activities . In addition, another crucial outcome is the improved articulation of indigenous, afro-
descendant and peasant bio- businesses to the market. Hence, this project also engages with the 
Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP -765), the Strategy for Indigenous Development (GN -
2387- 5) and the Diversity Action Plan (DAP ) 2019- 2021 that promote  development with identity 
respecting collective rights and traditional forms of land management. By fostering the development of 
local bio -business es, this Programme promotes a more inclusive agenda to the bioeconomy , while 
respecting and promoting cultur al forms of conservation and territorial management. That is why the 
activities included are culturally sensitive  in the ways they engage with strategies of training, feasibility 
analysis, financial strategies, legal and other challenges. The Programme  also promotes intercultural 
communication and engagement plans to strengthen such local economies  in the national and/or 
international markets and with different governmental  institutions and economic sectors. Finally, this 
Programme includes the lessons of previous ID B interventions  that attempted  to strengthen indigenous, 
afro-descendant and peasant local economies including socio- cultural protocols and close follow -up 
strategies that guarantee the social, environmental and cultural viability , as well as the sustainability of 
the Programme .  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
121. As described in Section B.1, the AFOLU sector is a major contributor to GHG emissions in all Amaz on 
countries  and a key driver of rising deforestation rates . It is also highly vulnerable to climate changes 
that are  increasing temperatures and frequency and intensity of fires , further impacting agricultural 
productivity. Despite governments’ willingness to find wa ys to reduce deforestation and land 
 
94 Throughout LAC, this gap is estimated at US $86 billion (IDB Invest, 2020).  This has become more critical in the face of the COVID -19 
crisis, as women are expected to have been disproportionately affected given their lower levels of income and higher poverty rates, compared 
to men (CEPAL, 2020).


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 82 
   
 degradation, efforts so far have been insufficient to revert the trends. A shift in local productive 
structures and practices can contribute to address ing this issue , but this cannot be achieved on public 
efforts alone. Private participation is key to produce a fundamental and long -lasting change , specifically 
via investing in the adoption of business models , activities  and technologies that use the natural 
resource more sustainably. In all targeted countries, natural capital is substantial,  and the development 
of bio-businesses  poses an important opportunity to address AFOLU -related GHG emissions  and 
increase resilienc e to climate change . Yet, capital flows to these activities are not granted . Measures 
need to be taken to better connect relevant actors within  these markets  and for them to realize the 
value of natural capital in  these activities at scale.  
122. None of these countries has either a proper regulatory environment, or specific mechanisms to  
adequately value natural/forest assets.  Advances made in regulatory and institutional frameworks vary 
among the targeted countries  and the development of bioeconomy strategies is still incipient . Overall, 
legal and policy frameworks are in place for the c onservation and sustainable management of forests 
and biodiversity, but incentives for streamlining the participation of private actors in related business es 
are generally not in place. A ll target  countries  have also demonstrated their commitment to consol idate 
a support system for safeguarding their natural capital and have been implementing initiatives in this 
very complex sector  (see Section B.2). 
123. On the other hand, all targeted countries have financial systems that show low levels of depth, are 
inherently risk -averse and offer very limited financing alternatives for these ventures. A dequate financial 
instruments that can crowd in the private sector to support more rapid development of these business 
models  are still lacking. In general, the risks  associated to these projects, especially in the absence of 
proper natural capital valuation, hinders credit and investment by private actors. In addition, support is 
needed across the region to overcome barriers related to the limited expertise and advanc ement in 
technology development  associated to the innovative nature of these business es (see Section B.2). 
124. GCF resources are necessary for deploying mechanisms that can attract private capital, particularly 
from local financial systems and impact -driven investors  to bio-businesses that can deliver climate 
benefits  with the maximum leverage possible. They are also needed to  build knowledge and capacity 
within local governments, and along the finance and production value chains . 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
125. Country -level ownership is crucial to ensure results over the longer -term. This involves meaningful 
participation beyond the Programme  proposal and implementation, including governance support and 
alignment with nationally devised climate change strategies , and forest and bioeconomy related legal 
frameworks . During the implementation phase, strategic decisions will be coordinated with ND As and 
the respective countries’ public authorities to ensure alignment with their existing and upcoming 
program initiatives in the Amazon and to ensure complementarity, scalability of approaches, and 
knowledge sharing. A strategic steering committee will be organized at the country level with the 
respective NDA, the EE s (where applicable), and Ministry of Finance to provide periodical strategic 
input, while the day -to-day execution is conducted by the designated EEs.  
126. All targeted countries have well -establ ished climate commitments and plans – both at national and sub-
national level – related to reducing GHG emissions and increasing climate resilience and adaptation,  
including Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and National Adaptation Plans (NAP) (see Table 
7). Many of these require external financing, technology and knowledge transfer. They also widely 
recognise the private sector’s role in deploying investments to support their goals, and its potential to 
contribute to the paradigm shift to a low -emis sion and climate resilient development path.  
127. Amazon countries  also have  forest and biodiversity policies in which the Programme can contribute to 
addressing chronic financing and implementation gaps. A pproaches to REDD+ and forestry policies 
differ among countries, but many of the m include bioeconomy -related considerations as part of their 
strategies. Moreover, while most  Amazon countries do not have dedicated legal frameworks governing 
the bioeconomy, several countries have recently embraced the concept under different instruments :


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 82 
   
 - Brazil has incorporated bioeconomy strategies in national documents such as the National Plan for 
the Promotion of Socio- Biodiversity Value Chains 2009, National Strategy of Science, Technology, 
and Innovation 2016- 2022 and the National Programme for Biobased Agricultural Inputs 
(implemented by Decree No. 10,375/2020).  
- In Ecuador, the government has st ated its vision to pursue the bioeconomy as a strategy for 
recovering from the socio- economic impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic, preserving its threatened 
ecosystems, and diversifying the country’s production matrix to become more independent from 
fossil fu els (MAE 2020). The National Development Plan (2017- 2021) includes bioeconomy as a 
tool for sustainable growth. Ecuador has also adopted a National Pact for Sustainable Bioeconomy 
and a Law for Agro Biodiversity, Seeds and Promotion of Sustainable Agricult ure. 
- The bioeconomy concept is integrated in several Colombian national development documents such 
as the Colombian Low Carbon Development Strategy, the Green Growth Strategy, the Circular 
Economy Strategy and most recently the Bioeconomy Policy (2020). The country has also adopted 
in 2018 Guidelines to authorities regarding the application of available economic valuation 
methodologies, to promote the generation of information as a technical criterion to support the 
decision- making process in the management  and conservation of the nation's natural heritage.  
- Bioeconomy concepts are embedded in multiple pieces of Peruvian legislation and development 
strategies, mainly Vision of Peru to 2050, the National Competitiveness and Productivity Plan and 
the Law Promot ing Investment and Development of the Amazon region. Concerning the accounting 
for biodiversity and ecosystems in national economic planning and policy decision- making, the 
Ministry of Environment has approved the Guide for the Economic Valuation of Natural Heritage, 
which aims to provide guidance on the matter  so that decision makers can use this concept in the 
face of the conservation and sustainable use of natural heritage. Equally, Peru has adopted in 2019 
guidelines  for the formulation of investment projects in the typologies of ecosystems, species, and 
support for the sustainable use of biodiversity.  
- The Guyana’s Low Carbon Development Strategy (LCDS) establishes the country’s intention to 
transition to a low -carbon  economy, focusing on reduced deforestation and degradation and 
investment in high priority low -carbon sectors such as aquaculture and ecotourism.  
- Suriname’s Policy Development Plan objectives give a strong indication of the country’s priorities 
related to  developing the bioeconomy in the medium -term. The country has several policies in place 
that contribute to a sustainable bioeconomy by strengthening environmental components in 
bioeconomy fields, with the primary aim to increase climate resilience. New pr oduction clusters that 
are prioritized in this regard include processing and/or use of residual wood and waste, non- timber 
forest products, and environmentally related use of the forests , including compensation for forest 
preservation and recovery of rain forests.  
128. In general terms, all Amazon countries have sectoral or general policy frameworks that cover some 
areas of relevance, such as payments for ecosystem services, environmental incentives, supply chain 
legislation, organic agriculture, sustainable fis heries, ecotourism, or technological research.  
Table 7.- Climate change mitigation and adaptation commitments, by country95 
Brazil  Brazil’s NDC establishes that the country will enhance its national capacity in the conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity, focusing efforts in reducing GHG emissions by applying “large-scale 
measures relating to land -use change and forests”. The National  Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan has 
the overall objective of “contributing to the mitigation of climate change through the eradication of illegal 
suppression of native vegetation, the conservation and recuperation of forest ecosystems and the 
development of a low -carbon sustainable forest -based economy, generating economic, social and 
environmental benefits”.  The National Law on Climate Change establishes sectorial action plans for 
mitigation and adaptation that aim among others to prevent and control deforestation in the Amazon, prevent 
and control fires and transition towards a low carbon agriculture. The National Climate Change Plan aims 
 
95 A comprehensive revision of poli cy and legislation at the country level related to forest management and climate change, including REDD+ 
is included in Annex 24a Country Assessments Climate, REDD+, Bioeconomy and in Annex 24b on Biodiversity Commitments and 
Legislation.  These annexes provide additional background on local commitments to improve country's natural resource governance. 
Programme activities will not address all policies surveyed related to conservation and REDD+. Rather, it focuses on legislation for the 
valuation of natural capital assets as a way to provide economic value to biodiversity and forests .


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 82 
   
 to reduce deforestation and reverse the net loss of forested areas. Most states have also enacted laws at 
the sub -national level with a few of them including specific GHG emission reduction targets.  Brazil’s NAP 
recognizes the role of biodiversity and ecosystems in reducing socio-economic vulnerabilities through 
provision of ecosystem services. The NAP also recogniz es that benefits of EbA strategies include reduction 
of the vulnerability to gradual and extreme events maintenance of the ecological integrity of ecosystems, 
carbon sequestration, greater food security, sustainable water -resources management, and an integrated 
approach to territorial management, all of which generate multiple economic, social, environmental, and 
cultural benefits for society  
Ecuador  Ecuador’s updated NDC places strong emphasis on climate targets for the AFOLU sector . The NDC 
embraces a gender -sensitive approach and aims at promoting sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and low -
carbon development . The revised NDC is fully aligned with its National Development Plan, the National 
Climate Change Strategy , and individual integrated projects to address desertification and land adaptation , 
such as the “Integrated Management for the fight against desertification, land degradation and adaptation 
to climate change” project, led by the Ministry of Environment since 2014. The National Climat e Change 
Strategy 2012-2025 targets priority sectors for tackling AFOLU -related GHG emissions, i.e., agriculture, 
land-use , land-use change, and forestry , as well for adaptation. It has identified adaptation actions, including 
conservation of protected are as, management of carbon stocks and establishment of water recollection 
systems; strengthening the resiliency of vulnerable communities with a focus on food security; and the 
identification of vulnerable areas to drought and land degradation to promote sus tainable land management 
practices and water catchment systems, among others . 
Colombia  Colombia’s NDC  sets emission reduction targets for 2030 and a carbon budget for its National Development 
Plan, which aims to ensure the country is on its path to achiev ing its 2030 goals. The government has 
chosen to focus its efforts on three goals in the AFOLU sector: i) halting the accelerated growth of 
deforestation by 2022; ii) a commitment to enhanc ing GHG removal by expanding agroforestry, sustainable 
management of natural forests, silvopastoral systems, and other forms of productive land restoration by 
over 700,000 ha; and iii) implementing best practices in agricultural lands by applying less fertili zer (NDC 
Partnership, 2019). The country passed a Climate Change Law in 2018 and is promoting the use of market 
economic instruments including a carbon tax and an emission trading scheme. They  also have a National 
Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Defor estation and Forest Degradation (ENREDD+) and the Amazon 
Vision Program . Colombia’s National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (PNACC) seeks to reduce the 
vulnerability of the country and increase its capacity to response to the threats and impacts of climate 
change. The PNACC seeks to influence the environmental, territorial and sectorial planning processes in 
such way that key stakeholders can make informed decisions, considering climate determinants and 
projections, to reduc e vulnerability in populat ions, ecosystems and productive sectors.  
Peru  Peru’s NDC includes mitigation and adaptation commitments in the thematic area of forests, as well as in 
mitigation in the land- use, land-use change and silvopasture sectors. Under current polic y, land-use, land -
use change, and forestry -related emissions from Peruvian deforestation are projected to increase by 82 –
84% between 2012 and 2030. Peru is committed to reducing this source of GHG emissi ons, has declared 
its objective of reaching carbon neutrality in 2050, and has expressed support for using market mechanisms. 
The country has also adopted a Framework Law on Climate Change and a Gender and Climate Change 
Action Plan . At the subnational lev el, regional climate change strategies have been drafted by many 
Peruvian Amazon regional governments, which are becoming more relevant given the role assumed by 
regional governments under the ongoing decentralization processes and the new climate change l aw. The 
NAP, currently under  elaboration,  includes forestry as one of the sectors to be tackled. The Programme is 
aligned with the main objective in this sector which is increase the resilience of forests and unsustainable 
anthropic activities to maintain the provision of ecosystem -based services. In addition, it will strengthen the 
adaptive capacity of society to manage forests in a participatory way at different government levels.  
Guyana  Guyana’ NDC and Low Carbon Development Strategy enshrine the country’s commitment to forest 
conservation and sustainable forest management , includ ing the extension of 2 million ha of national 
protected areas and other area -based conservation measures, redu ced impact logging and improved forest 
governance.  The NDC is aligned with the National Climate Change Policy and Action Plan 2020- 2030 as 
the main instrument for unifying and coordinating national climate policy in Guyana.  As part of Guyana’s 
Low Carbon D evelopment Strategy, the country has envisaged a variety of adaptation measures in the 
forestry sector: 1. Promotion and encouragement of local communities and indigenous people’s participation 
in forest use, protection, conservation and management, and the utilization of non-timber forest products; 
2. Implementation of efficient Management Plans for primary and secondary forest, and degraded forest 
lands; 3. Collaboration with R&D  institutions to promote species enrichment of degraded forests and forests 
lands with economically valuable species which are resilient to the impacts of climate change, where 
possible, among others. Adaptation actions in the country are based in different pillars, innovation of 
financing instruments is one of them. The pillar see ks to introduce financing instruments for the 
implementation of adaptation measures, and to expand/adjust mechanisms and platforms, including 
international cooperation and funding, and investments from the private sector and public budget.  
Suriname  Suriname has  commitment  to maintaining the integrity of its 93% forest cover as a carbon sink, increasing 
efforts on sustainable forest and ecosystem management, developing climate -smart farming and minimizing


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 82 
   
 deforestation and forest degradation.  This commitment is aligned with the 2017 -2021 Policy Development 
Plan, which aims for the forest sector to increase its contribution to the economy and the welfare of this and 
future generations, including through biodiversity preservation  and with the National Climate Change Policy, 
Strategy and Action Plan. Suriname has also adopted a NAP in 2019, contributing to an integrated approach 
to climate resilience and sustainable economic development. The NAP indicates six strategic priorities, 
including integrating and mainstreaming climate change adaptation in broader economic development. 
Priority sectors include forestry, energy, agriculture, and tourism.  Suriname formally adopted the Joint 
Declaration of "High Forest, Low Deforestation count ries" that seeks to overcome barriers of accessing 
climate finance needed for the continued progress toward sustainable development goals, with concurrent 
care and protection for their essential intact forest ecosystems.  
129. Regional cooperation is also key. As previously described, the Leticia Pact signed by  representatives 
from all target countries  (Section B.1)  lists various points on which they  intend to collaborate, including 
combating deforestation, promot ing forest restoration and sustainable use of resources, actions to 
strengthen women and indigenous peoples and the creation of educational campaigns on the 
importance of the Amazon conservat ion. Although the Leticia Pact is a good starting point for an overall 
vision of countries with regards to forest and natural resource sustainable management, it does not 
specify how goals will be achieved. The IDB will work closely with governments and ac company their 
efforts to consider, evaluate and implement concrete actions , sectoral agreements  and establish 
targets in their agendas as a priority.  As described in Section B.4 , the IDB  will also capitalize on its 
strong and well -established relationships  with partners throughout the region, based on a long history 
of collaboration with an extensive network of NDB and government agencies in LAC.  
130. Perspectives of various local stakeholders have been considered for the development of this proposal, 
including NDB s, government ministries, bio- business developers, L FIs and investors. C ountry -specific 
implementation will ensure close consultations with local indigenous people and communities, as well 
as civil society organizations, in all cases. Also, the IDB will engage with universities, scientific 
organizations and cross -national netw orks, such as Parceiros pela Amazonia, Amazon 4.0 , Fundação  
Amazonia Sustentavel , all of which are working to support entrepreneurship in bioeconomy.  
131. All operations carried out within the framework of the Programme  will contribute to target countries’ 
national priorities related to climate change and land degradation, and their commitments under the 
Convention on Biological Diversity  and their National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plans (NBSAP), 
the Paris Climate Agreement and their NDC s, NAPs , the Sendai Framework and the SDG . They will 
also be coherent with actions undertaken by these countries under the amended Amazon Cooperation 
Treaty and the Leticia Pact.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
132. Section B.5 describes how GCF resources are needed to structure  financing instruments  that can help 
overcome barriers identified, including its approach to ensure minimum concessionality.  
133. Besides the provisions thereby described,  the risk of crowding out other private and public investment 
will be mitigated by some additional factors:  
i. As described throughout this  proposal, bio- businesses (particularly MSEs) are by and large financially 
underserved, both in terms of availability of risk capital for start -up and of adequately  termed  debt 
from LFIs. Thus, activities from the Program me aim to fill a financing gap through financial and non -
financial support . In doing so , the Programme strives to help develop a market that is currently far 
from tapping its full potential. As this  market develops , opportunities  will be created  –rather than 
diminish ed– for other investors and financiers.  
ii. The Program me implementation model  will extend solutions to L FIs and other relevant actors  already  
acting in the target region, who  will become partners instead of competitors. Leveraging Program me 
resources, these entities  are best positioned to reach,  properly assess and support  beneficiaries . 
Partnerships with LFIs and EEs will be promoted through the provision of funding and de- risking 
solutions, as well as various types of technical cooperation (see S ection  B.3) that will enhance their 
capacities to properly identify, assess and structure financing solutions that can effectively manage 
the risks inherent to these businesses  and attract more investment .


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 82 
   
 134. Based on the economic model and with a conservative approach (see Annex 3) the Programme is 
estimated to deliver an average GCF cost of US$ 2.26 per ton of CO 2e abated. This expected GCF cost 
efficiency compares favourably relative to other forest -related GCF programs in the region, including 
various projects in the Amazon (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador) from the Pilot Program for REDD -plus 
results -based payments (ranging between 4 and 5 US$/ton of CO 2e) as well as other GCF forest 
projects in Latin America (FP 19, 128, 146) with costs ranging between 1 and 3 US$/ton of CO 2e. From 
an effectiveness point of view, the Programme is projected to achieve a leverage ratio of 1:2. 6 (i.e., 
US$2. 6 additional public and private funding leveraged per US$1 of GCF investment); thus, a GCF 
US$279 million investment is expected to leverage about US$719.1  million in additional public and 
private contributions (including co- finance as per Section C.1.b).  
135. The Program’s Economic Rate of Return (ERR) has been estimated at 49%. The estimation is based 
on financial flows stemming from an ass umed portfolio of supported investments and the value of 
abated GHG emissions. For the latter, a social cost of carbon of 40 US$/ton of CO 2e has been used. 
Internalizing carbon value increases the basic financial rate of return of the investments at the as set 
level (i.e., pre -tax and independent of the financing structure) from 14% to the resulting 49% ERR, 
reflecting the significant additional value of natural capital externalities when properly considered (in 
this case by incorporating GHG emission abatement benefits). From that perspective, this ERR 
calculation is also conservative, as it does not incorporate other expected environmental and social 
benefits (including those stemming from enhanced climate change adaptation/resilience) into t he 
model.  
136. Availability period for the structuring and deployment of some of the financial solutions is proposed at 
5 years from the effectiveness date of each  corresponding subsidiary agreement (within the larger 7-
year implementation period for the Progra mme). This is required given the complexity of structuring 
some of these financial structures  with EEs, as well as the need to  allow a reasonable origination 
period, considering that : i) multiple LFIs will need to be involved to reach target bio- businesses , with 
each of whom a design, approval and deployment process will need to be followed;  and ii) in some 
cases, enhanced origination capacities will only be in place after some technical assistance activities 
are completed.


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 82 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /Programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s 
Performance Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the 
project/ Programme  contributes  as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
☒ Shift to low- emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  
 
96 The impact of main activities on GHG emissions were estimated by using the EX -ACT (EX -Ante C -balance Tool) tool, developed by FAO. 
In addition to soil type, climate information, conversion modes of land, the model used i) the duration of the investment  (implementation-  and 
capitalization phase), ii) the initial land- use and iii) the final land- use. The soil type and climate information inputs were obtained by using the 
IPCC cli mate and soil classification that is embedded in the tool.  
97 Main assumptions for these values include: i) for bank loans, debt -to-equity ratio (at corporate level) of 75/25; ( ii) for bank guarantees, 50% 
guarantee coverage and 70/30 debt -to-equity ratio; iii) for equity investments, matching equity considered from AE (at 1:1 ratio); iv) for bonds, 
4.5x ratio of IDB guarantee relative to GCF grant, 80 % guarantee coverage, 75/25  debt-to-equity ratio.  
98 For the purpose of this percentages , total population is assumed to be  the total population of the Amazon, estimated at  some 30 million 
people (WWF  and Rainforest Foundation Norway ). E.2. Core indicator targets  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or 
avoided ( mitigation  and cross -
cutting  only)96 Annual  6,170,048  tCO 2eq 
Lifetime  123,400,955  tCO 2eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t 
CO 2 eq, defined as total 
investment cost / expected 
lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation  and cross -cutting 
only)  (a) Total project financing 998,100,000  USDUSD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  279,000,000  USDUSD 3   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  123,400,955  tCO 2eq 3   
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  8.08 USDUSD / tCO 2eq 3    
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2eq 
removed (e = b / c)  2.26 USDUSD / tCO 2eq 0    
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/ Programme  
as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by 
public and private sources 
(mitigation  and cross -cutting 
only)97 (f) Total finance leveraged  719,100,000  USDUSD 72   
(g) Public source co- financed 314,100,000  USDUSD 3   
(h) Private source finance leveraged  405,000,000  USDUSD  4   
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b)  2.6  2  
(j) Public source co- financing ratio (j = g / b)  1.1 1  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k =  h / b)  1.5  1  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number 
of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, (disaggregated 
by sex)  Direct  Click here to enter text. 191,952  
50% of female  
Indirect  Click here to enter text. 485,375  
50%% of female  
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population98 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  0.64% (Expressed as %) relative to population of the 
Amazon  
Indirect  1.62% (Expressed as %) relative to  population of  the 
Amazon


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 82 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected 
Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)99 Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final   
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
land use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, 
and through sustainable forest 
management 
and 
conservation 
and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks  M4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) - forest 
and land use  Monitoring platform, field 
surveys, data collection.  0 0.6
100 
million  
(annual)  6.2 
million101 
(annual)  
 The indicator 
measures  annual 
tCO 2eq. 
The lifespan  of 
investments is estimated to be  20 
years, on average.  
Total expected 
abatement over the 
lifetime of investments (20 years) is 123.4  
million tCO2e.  
There are sufficient 
local public actors 
(NDBs and 
government 
entities) willing to and capable of engaging in the valorisation of 
capital natural assets . 
Private sector agents are willing 
to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets . 
Specialized service 
providers are available at competitive costs . 
Bio-businesses in 
each of the 7 sectors adopt best adaptation and mitigation practices  
and technologies . 
 
A1.0 Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most A1.2 Number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate 
Monitoring platform, field surveys, data collection of bio -
businesses 
supported  0 19,195 
Male: 
9,598 191,952102 
Male: 
95,976 Private sector agents are willing to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets . 
 
99 The monitoring for impac ts, outcomes and programme specific indicators will be conducted according to the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Plan specified in Annex 11.   
100 Mid-term values are generally estimated at between 10- 20% of final values, as the preparation and approval process of all country sub-
projects under the Programme is expected to take a good part of the of the first half of the Programme implementation per iod.  
101 Methodology applied is the EX -ACT (EX -Ante C -balance Tool), developed by FAO. In addition to soil type, climate information, and 
conversion modes of land, the model used i) the duration of the investment  (implementation-  and capitalization phase), ii) the initial land- use 
and iii) the final land- use. Model is based on a typical value chain in each of the sectors assumed to be financed,  as per feasibility study. For 
detailed assumptions please refer to Annex 3  and Annex 22 . 
102 Model is based on a typical value chain in each of the sectors assumed to be financed, as per feasibility study. For detailed assumptions 
please refer to Annex 3.


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 82 
   
 vulnerable 
people, 
communities and regions  resilient livelihood 
options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.)  Female: 9,598 Female: 95,976 Bio-businesses 
have access to 
credit and 
implement the 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
activities foreseen.  
Support structures / services for the implementation of best adaptation and mitigation practices are available.  
 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  A4.1 
Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems 
protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to climate variability and change  Monitoring platform, field surveys, forest 
statistics, data 
collection based 
on supervision of individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 0.8 million  
hectares  3.9 million  
hectares
103 Financing from the 
Programme is 
effectively disbursed,  and 
investment targets are met.  
There are sufficient local public actors (NDBs and government entities) willing to and capable of 
engaging in the 
valorisation of 
capital natural assets . 
Private sector agents are willing to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets  
 New bio-business / 
green jobs 
created  Monitoring platform, field 
surveys, data 
collection  0 9,847  
Male: 
4,924  
Female: 
4,924  49,236  
Male: 
24,618  
Female: 24,618  There are sufficient local public actors (NDBs and government entities) willing to and capable of engaging in the valorisation of 
capital natural assets . 
Private sector agents are willing 
to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets  
 
103 Methodology applied uses area (hectares) of land or forests where businesses develop more resilient practices, based on modelling on i) 
the initial land- use and ii) the final land- use. Model is based on a typical value chain in each of the sectors assumed to be financed, as per 
feasibility study. For detailed assumptions please refer to Annex 3.  E.4. Fund -level  outcomes 
Indicator  Baseline  Target  Assumptions


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 82 
   
  
104 Methodology appli ed uses area (hectares) of land or forests where businesses develop more resilient practices, based on modelling on i) 
the initial land- use and ii) the final land- use. Model is based on a typical value chain in each of the sectors assumed to be financed, as per 
feasibility study . For detailed assumptions please refer to Annex 3.  
105 Based on the analysis of country -specific circumstances and progress, the indicator measures the institutional and regulatory systems 
that improve incentives for the bioeconomy development in the context of their low -emission planning policies, based on evidence of their 
effective implementation . Expected 
Outcomes  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Mid-term  Final   
M9.0 Improved 
management 
of land or 
forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions  M9.1 Hectares of 
land or forests 
under improved 
and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission 
reductions   Monitoring 
platform, field 
surveys, data 
collection based 
on supervision 
of individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 0.7 million  3.5 
million104 There are sufficient 
local public actors 
(NDBs and 
government 
entities) willing to 
and capable of 
engaging in the 
valorisation of 
capital natural 
assets . 
Private sector 
agents are willing 
to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets . 
Specialized service 
providers are 
available at 
competitive costs .  
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and regulatory 
systems  M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low-emission 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation   Monitoring 
platform, data 
collection from  
reports on 
Programme 
activities  
Publications 
from competent 
national 
authorities  No/Weak  
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for 
low-emission 
planning and 
development 
are in place  Introduction 
of efficient 
institutional  
and 
regulatory 
systems for 
low-
emission 
planning and 
development  
in at least 
two target 
countries  Implementati
on of 
financing 
systems  
tailored for 
bio-
businesses 
in at least 1 
NDB per 
target 
country, and 
increase in 
financing 
portfolio of 
low-carbon 
investment 
as a result of 
systematizat
ion of bio-
business 
identification
, evaluation 
and network 
creatio n105 Political will to 
foster bioeconomy 
strategies  is 
confirmed and 
remains in place 
throughout 
Programme 
implementation . 
 
A5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and regulatory 
systems for 
climate -
responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for climate 
resilience and their 
effective 
implementation   Monitoring 
platform, data 
collection from  
reports on 
Programme 
activities  
Publications 
from competent 
national 
authorities  No/Weak 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for 
climate 
resilience 
are in place  Introduction 
of efficient 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems for 
climate 
resilience in 
at least two 
target 
countries  Implementati
on of 
financing 
systems 
tailored for 
bio-
businesses 
by at least 1 
NDB per 
target 
country, and 
increase in Political will to 
foster bioeconomy 
strategies is 
confirmed and 
remains in place 
throughout 
Programme 
implementation.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 82 
   
  
106 Based on the analysis of country -specific circumstances and progress, the indicator measures the institutional and regulatory systems 
that improve incentives for the bioeconomy development in the context of their low -emission planning policies, based on evidence of their 
effective implementation . 
107 Average value among Amazon countries of percentage of f irms with female majority ownership (World Economic Forum, Global Gender 
Gap report 2021 ). financing 
portfolio of 
climate 
resilient 
investment 
as a result of 
systematizat
ion of bio-
business 
identification
, evaluation 
and network 
creation106 
A7.0 
Strengthened 
adaptive 
capacity and 
reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of Fund -
supported tools 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to climate 
change and 
variability   Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys 0 bio-
businesses 
under the 
programme 
that have 
adopted at 
least 1 
measure 
under the 
eligibility 
criteria  
 
58% of those 
bio-
businesses 
with female 
majority 
ownership107 11,460 bio-
businesses , 
of whom: 
8,859 bio 
businesses 
in the 
sustainable 
agroforestry 
value chain, 
560 bio-
businesses 
in the Native 
palm -
perennial 
agricultural 
systems 
value chain, 
883 bio-
businesses 
in the non-
timber 
natural 
forest 
products 
(NTFP), 788 
bio-
businesses 
in the native 
species 
timber value 
chain, 314 
bio-
businesses 
in the 
aquaculture,  
and 55 bio-
businesses 
in the 
community -
led nature 
tourism 
value chain 
have 
adopted at 
least 1 
measure 
under the 
eligibility 
criteria  
 57,299 bio-
businesses , 
of whom: 
44,295 bio 
businesses 
in the 
sustainable 
agroforestry 
value chain, 
2,799 bio-
businesses 
in the Native 
palm -
perennial 
agricultural 
systems 
value chain, 
4,416 bio-
businesses 
in the non-
timber 
natural 
forest 
products 
(NTFP),  
3,940 bio-
businesses 
in the native 
species 
timber value 
chain, 1,571 
bio-
businesses 
in the 
aquaculture,  
and 277 bio-
businesses 
in the 
community -
led nature 
tourism 
value chain 
have 
adopted at 
least 1 
measure 
under the 
eligibility 
criteria  
 Private sector 
agents are willing 
to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets.  
Bio-businesses 
have access to 
credit and 
implement the 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
activities foreseen.


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 82 
   
  58% of 
those bio-
businesses 
with female 
majority 
ownership  58% of 
those bio-
businesses 
with female 
majority 
ownership  
A8.0 
Strengthened 
awareness of 
climate threats 
and risk -
reduction 
processes  A8.1 Number of 
males and females 
made aware of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses   Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys 0 1,000  
Male: 500 
Female: 
500 10,000  
Male: 
5,000 
Female: 
5,000 Support structures 
/ services for the 
implementation of 
best adaptation 
and mitigation 
practices are 
available.  
 Number of 
technologies and 
innovative 
solutions 
transferred or 
licensed to support 
low-emission and 
climate resilient 
development as a 
result of GCF 
support  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys 0 3 new 
measures  
and 0 
technology  
Measures: 
agroforestry, 
sustainable 
forest 
managemen
t and 
conservation
, native 
species 
plantations  7 new 
measures 
and 2 
technologies  
Measures: 
Same as 
midterm, 
plus pest 
managemen
t, 
community -
led nature 
tourism, use 
of resilient 
fish species 
and small -
scale 
operations  
Technologie
s: Irrigation, 
aquaculture 
technologies  Private sector 
agents are willing 
to participate if  they 
can make  a profit 
with natural capital 
assets.  
Support structures 
/ services for the 
implementation of 
best adaptation 
and mitigation 
practices are 
available.  
E.5. P roject/ Programme  performance indicators 
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term Final  
Component I : Financing solutions for bio-businesses  
Increasing 
climate 
resilience of 
bio-
businesses 
and their 
value chains 
in areas 
exposed to 
climate and 
environmenta
l risks  Increase in revenue 
per job (percentage)  Surveys of bio-
businesses  0 5% 17% Private sector agents 
are willing to participate 
if they can make a profit 
with natural capital 
assets.  
Support structures / 
services for the 
implementation of best 
adaptation and 
mitigation practices are 
available.  
Percentage of 
beneficiaries who 
perceived that their 
knowledge 
improved as a result 
of the information 
received in the 
training 
sessions/workshops Monitoring 
Platform or 
training 
sessions/works
hops surveys  0 20% 70% Beneficiaries  remain 
interested and actively 
participate in the 
programme activities.  
Trainings are 
effective/sufficient to 
enable and speed up the 
adoption of low carbon


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 82 
   
 differentiated by 
gender  climate -resilient 
practices.  
Percentage of bio-
businesses that 
report alignment 
with international 
standards and 
norms  (including the 
adoption of 
certifications)  Monitoring 
Platform or bio-
businesses 
surveys 0 15% 40% Beneficiaries remain 
interested and actively 
participate in the 
programme activities.  
Trainings on 
international standards 
and certification are 
effective/sufficient for 
bio-businesses . 
Percentage of bio-
businesses  in 
priority value chains  
that report 
technology 
upgrading  Monitoring 
Platform or bio-
businesses 
surveys 0 15% 40% Beneficiaries remain 
interested and actively 
participate in the 
programme activities.  
Technology is available 
to bio -businesses  
Improving 
access to 
finance by 
bio-
businesses 
and their 
value chains 
in areas 
exposed to 
climate and 
environmenta
l risks  Number of climate 
resilient and/or low -
emission bio -
businesses 
financed  Reports from 
financial 
institutions that 
participate in 
the Programme  0 7,640  38,200  Private sector agents 
are willing to participate 
if they can make a profit 
with natural capital 
assets.  
 Total bio- business 
financing portfolio 
(US$ million) in LFIs 
participating in the 
program . 
 
Indicator includes 
financing disbursed 
or guaranteed by 
Component I.1, 
including 
Programme 
financing and L FIs 
own resources 
mobilized.  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys,  reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
report s 0 32 324 LFIs can  access various 
sources of funding and 
increase their 
willingness to enter the 
bio-business financing 
market.  
Increasing 
the volume of 
total 
investment 
flows to bio-
businesses 
and their 
value chains  Total investment in 
bio-businesses 
(US$ million) 
leveraged through 
the financial 
system, including 
co-financing from 
other sources (debt 
and equity ). 
 
Indicator includes 
investments Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 45 450 Private sector actors 
confirm their willingness 
to invest if  they can 
make  a profit with 
natural capital assets.


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 82 
   
 enabled by 
Components I.1 and 
I.2, including 
financing and co-
financing from the 
Programme and 
leverage from third 
parties.  
Employment in bio-
business and value 
chains supported 
(number), that 
contributes to improv ing resilience 
adaptability to climate threats . 
Indicator includes 
investments 
enabled by 
Components I.1 and 
I.2, including 
financing and co-
financing from the 
Programme and leverage from third 
parties.  Monitoring platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of individual operations approved and EE monitoring 
reports  0 14,500  144,888  Private sector actors 
confirm their willingness 
to invest if  they can 
make  a profit with 
natural capital assets.  
 
Enhancing 
capacities 
and 
coordination 
of bio-
business 
market 
stakeholders  Entities participating 
(number) in bio-
business 
operational and 
technical tools and 
trainings, 
disaggregated by 
type. 
Indicator 
aggregates entities 
supported under 
activities (a) and (b) 
under Component 
I.3. 
Entities can be 
classified by type 
as: LFI (public or 
private), investor, 
business , producer  
or business support 
organizations (may 
include trade 
promotion 
organizations, 
chambers of 
commerce, sector 
associations and 
others) . 
Where applicable, 
an indicator on the 
share of entities that 
are women or 
women- led wil l be 
included.  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 60 150 Bio-business market 
stakeholders  participate 
in training and take 
appropriate actions as 
advised.  
Specialized training and 
extension service 
providers are available 
at competitive costs.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 82 
   
 Enhancing 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
environments 
for bio-
businesses  Public entities 
(number) 
participating in 
trainings for 
regulation and 
national systems 
bio-businesses and 
forestry concession 
schemes  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 7 20 Governm ents in target 
countries maintain their 
bioeconomy -related 
priorities. Public actors 
confirm their willingness 
to engage in training and 
reform of their national 
systems for valuing of 
capital natural assets to 
support bio-business 
value chains.  
Specialized service 
providers are available 
at competitive costs.  Regulation 
(number) for valuing 
natural capital or 
forest concessions 
regimes 
published/enforced  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 7 20 
Innovative 
concession 
schemes (number) 
designed and 
subjected to market 
consultation  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
EE monitoring 
reports  0 3 8 
Component II: Bond structuring and issuance  
Improving 
readiness of 
bond issuers 
to access 
funding for 
bio-
businesses in 
capital 
markets  Bond issuers 
(number) with 
improved 
knowledge on 
portfolio 
identification, bond 
structuring and 
certification . 
Where applicable, 
an indicator on the 
share of bonds that 
incorporate gender -
related eligibility 
criteria will be 
included.  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys,  reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
bond 
certificati on  0 1 4 Sufficient pipeline of bio-
business projects is 
developed in order to 
support a minimum -
sized bond issuance.  
Specialized service 
providers are available 
at competitive costs.  
 
Increased 
volume of 
funding 
raised for bio-
businesses 
through bond 
issuance  Number of climate 
resilient and/or low -
emission bio -
businesses 
financed  Reports from 
financial 
institutions that 
participate in 
the Programme  0 3,820 19,099 Private sector agents 
are willing to participate 
if they can make a profit 
with natural capital 
assets.  
 Volume of financing 
raised (US$ million) 
through bond 
issuances 
supported that 
include bio-
businesses  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys, reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 0 18 181 Private sector agents 
confirm their willingness 
to participate if  they can 
make  a profit with 
natural capital assets.  
Relative political and 
economic stability is


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 82 
   
 approved and 
bond issuances  maintained in target 
countries.  
It is confirmed that bond 
market in target 
countries overall has 
enough legal guarantees 
to incorporate a new 
type of thematic bonds 
(i.e., where green or 
sustainable bonds are 
already being explored).  
Share (%) of total 
value of financing 
raised through bond 
issuances enabled 
by credit 
enhancement  Monitoring 
platform, 
surveys,  reports 
based on own 
supervision of 
individual 
operations 
approved and 
bond issuances  0 100%  100%  Credit enhancement 
effectively offsets 
incremental cost of the 
debt for the issuer and 
increases attractiveness 
to investors.  
IDB confirms its triple 
AAA category as a 
guarantor of the bond.  
E.6. Activities  
Component/ Act
ivity Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Component I: Financing solutions for bio -businesses  
I.1 Sovereign 
investment loans 
and investment 
grants  Funding to NDBs (or SPVs 
administered by them) that 
offer financial and guarantee 
instruments to bio-
businesses, directly or via local FIs that would extend it 
to bio -businesses  • Debt financing  through 
NDBs dedicated product  
lines or SPVs  
• Risk coverage/ incentives 
to LFIs or final borrowers  • Debt and guarantee financial 
instruments tailored to the scal e 
and risks of bio-businesses . 
• Total volume of financing disbursed 
I.2 Equity 
investments and innovation grants  Funding directly or to 
investment facilities that offer high-risk tolerant capital (equity) for incubation of new business models and early -
stage bio -businesses  • Regenerate Accelerator  
• Direct investments  • Equity -like financial instruments 
for early -stage bio-businesses  
• Total volume of financing disbursed 
I.3.a Bio-
business pipeline development and supervision  Capacity building for bio -
business operation, 
management and evaluation from the demand a supply side of the financing  • Technical support for 
potential beneficiaries  
• Technical support for FIs 
(public or private)  
• Technology upgrading  
• Support for certifications  
• Positioning strategy  
• Bioprospection and R&D  • Training and extension services 
for bio-businesses and members of their value chains  
• Training and advisory for FIs  
• Records/Lists of participation of entities in eligible trainings/initiatives  
• Quality certifications  
• Positioning strategy defined  
• Amazon Biodiversity Knowledge Hub 
• Bioprospection strategies  
• Dissemination of bioprospection 
results  
I.3.b Tools for 
connecting bio-businesses  to 
stakeholders and 
markets  Financing for ongoing IDB 
Lab initiatives for connecting 
bio-businesses to 
stakeholders and markets  • Leticia Platform  
• Amazon Bioeconomy 
Marketplace  
• Amazonia 4.0  • Coordination mechanisms  
• Records/List of participation of entities in eligible 
trainings/initiatives  
• Market related studies and 
relevant data.  
• Knowledge material, 
publications, and reports.


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 82 
   
 • Trained local partners supporting 
local producers.  
• Matchmaking events organized.  
• Marketplace design and 
implementation roadmap  
I.3.c Institutional 
and regulatory 
environment  Advisory services and 
training of government entities for streamlining private participation in investments.  • Strengthening national 
systems in terms of valuing natural capital/forest assets  
• Innovative schemes for 
private participation in sustainable management of forests and 
conservation areas  • Regulation drafts or assessment 
studies  
• National systems 
developed/implemented  
• Trainings for bioeconomy -related 
government entities  
• Records of participation of 
entities in el igible trainings  
• Drafts contracts and supporting 
documentation for public -private 
partnerships  
Component II:  Bond structuring and issuance  
II.1Technical 
cooperation for 
thematic bond 
issuance  Advising on mechanisms to 
include bio- businesses in the 
use-of -proceeds 
commitments of thematic 
bonds  --- • Bond issuance document 
package  
• Bond certification  
• Frameworks or reporting 
systems studies  
II.2 Grants for 
guarantees  Structuring credit 
enhancement instruments for 
specific issuances  --- • Guarantee instruments to cover 
risks of sovereign bond issuances  
• Bond guarantee contracts signed  
Component III: Transversal technical cooperation  
III.1 Inclusion 
mechanisms for women and diversity in bio-business  Developing strategies, 
measures and/or services to 
promote equitable access to the benefits of investments supported  --- • Diagnosis and studies  
• Strategies/plans developed/implemented  
• Records of female participants in 
specific eligible activities  
III.2 Integrated 
support and the strengthening  of 
the ecosystem 
for Amazonian SME and their 
communities  Build economic and social 
environmental resilience as well as prosperity and well -
being of the SME and the 
Amazonian communities in 
which they reside  --- • Regional mapping  
• Database of potential providers 
and recipients of the innovative 
solutions and connections  
• Strategi c connection plans 
developed/implemented  
• Records of S ME and their 
communities and partners  
participants in specific eligible 
activities  
III.3 
Stakeholders 
Engagement 
Plan Improve the design and 
execution of the Programme 
by including a meaningful 
and organic stakeholder 
engagement.   
Revitalize an activate the 
Amazon’s key stakeholders' inclusion by mapping a wider range of stakeholders’ profiles, perspectives and perceptions (governments, the private sector, civil society, and other development actors).  
  • Information level: 
Stakehold er mapping, AI 
Amazon citizen’s pulse  
• Dialogue level: Regular 
dialogue tables set  
• Consultation level: Due 
diligence on consultation 
improvement.  
• Collaboration level:  
Assessment on 
stakeholders’ local 
capacities and trainings.  
• Partnership level: 
External resources 
mobilized; Small Grants 
Program designed   • Knowledge materials, including  
publications , assessment  
reports , and systems for data 
collection and monitoring 
(developed or updated)


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 82 
   
 III.4 Small 
Grants Program  Empower and enable local 
stakeholders, especially 
women, indigenous people, afro-descendants, 
campesinos, to take 
initiatives to enhance and 
influence development outcomes with bio economy perspective.   • Prioritize the Amazon 
economic and social development with identity.   
• Leverage local economic 
activities led by local communities related to the invention, development, production, and use of biological 
products and processes  • Small investment grants per 
country awarded to leverage and develop local bio business led by local stakehol ders: indigenous, 
afro-descendants, women, youth 
and elderly  
III.5 General 
advisory services  Increase  awareness on the 
contributing factors to and benefits of bio-business intensification and expansion  --- • Knowledge materials, including 
publications, assessment reports, and systems for data collection and monitoring 
(developed or updated)  
III.6 Programme  
monitoring and evaluation  Monitoring activities, 
including analyses and preparation of interim and final evaluations to be submitted to the GCF by the 
IDB --- • Periodical reports on fund -level 
impacts and outcomes  
• Mid-term and final evaluations  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 
page)  
137. On account of the Programme design, which includes various countries, components, EEs and 
disbursement schemes, the IDB will monitor, compile and register information on all IDB Sub -
projects  approved and financed –totally or partially – with resources from this Programme, and 
will be solely responsible for aggregating and updating information on the Programme for 
periodical reporting to the GCF  (see Annex 11) . 
138. Monitoring and evaluation of each IDB operation approved with funding from the Programme 
will follo w standard IDB policy. This includes a requirement to define monitoring indicators at the 
product and results level, which shall be consistent with one or more of the activities and 
expected results included in Sections E. 5 and E. 6. All indicators will hav e targets established 
ex ante, based on existing knowledge at the time of preparation and approval of the Sub -project  
by the IDB Board of Directors. Throughout implementation of the Programme , values for 
monitoring indicators will be integrated annually by  the IDB in its internal monitoring systems.  
139. Following IDB standard practice, agreements between the IDB and EEs will establish monitoring 
and periodical reporting obligations during execution. In coordination with the IDB, EEs will 
compile and maintain al l information necessary. In some cases, additional projections, 
estimations, or technical calculations will be required, which could be carried out by the IDB 
based on the information provided by the EEs in the periodical reports or with specialized suppor t 
provided in the context of technical cooperation activities under component I (see ¶51, I.3 .a).  
140. EEs are required to inform the IDB on the performance of activities  under their execution at least 
on an annual basis. Annual reports generally include an in- depth examination on the  
performance of activities relating to  (i) disbursements (amounts, dates, co- financing including 
local counterpart and other sources, when applicable), eligible expenses financed, and the 
remaining amount of funds; (ii) compliance on the eligibility and concessionality requirements; 
and (iii) evolution of indicators on the results framework, including at the investment  level.  
141. In addition to the annual reports, IDB-led mid -term and final evaluations of all approved IDB sub -
projects will be carried out to: (i ) determine the extent to which products and outcomes defined 
in the results framework have been met; (ii) identify lessons learned and provide 
recommendations for improving implementation; and (iii) assess the performance of the EEs. 
These evaluations wil l be used as inputs to develop a final assessment.


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 82 
   
 142. A final assessment of each Sub-project  funded by the Programme will be carried out by the IDB 
once the funds are fully justified. This report shall contain all relevant information to evaluate the 
fulfilment  of objectives as per targets established ex ante and is normally submitted to the IDB 
within six months after the last disbursement to the EE. Due to the times required to collect and 
analyse information, reporting commitments by EEs are expected to continue until after the end 
of the execution period, within the time limits established for  the submission of the final report .


---
*Page 76*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 82 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
143. As per IDB’s Project Risk Management Framework, all IDB  Sub-projects  using funds from the 
Programme  will require a description of the overall risk assessment  and respective mitigation measures  
under either of the following categories:  
- Executing environment: political, economic and financial, institutional, legal, natural, social  
- EE: organizationa l structure, internal processes, human resources, systems, goods and services, 
integrity  
- Project: technical design, planning, sustainability, governance system, environmental and social 
safeguards.  
144. Scales for qualifying probability and impact of each risk are defined as:  
- For probability: high, medium -high, medium -low, low  
- For impact: high, medium -high, medium -low, low 
145. All IDB Sub -projects  to be prepared under the Programme will undergo a thorough environmental and 
social safeguards screening, including the timely disclosure of environmental and social safeguards 
documentation, in coordination with the IDB Environmental and Social Safeguards Unit (VPS/ESG) and 
in compliance with IDB’s new Environmental and Social Policy Framework. Each operation is classified 
under a specific c ategory and level of risk, based on the assessment of the associated environmental 
and social risks and impacts; the actions required to address these are described in the corresponding 
management instrument.  
146. If an EE is involved, the IDB also has a formal approach to risks of a fiduciary nature. Prior to approval, 
the IDB is required to carry out or document analysis of fiduciary risks associated with the EE under any 
of the specified typologies, in line with the IDB  Project Risk Management Framework.  
147. Risks identified for the overall Programme  are listed below.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  Insufficient transformation of identified demand into fundable projects 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
148. Business owners and developers must  face several needs at the same time and resources are limited. 
While the existence of a viable model is necessary for  the process of investment decision- making, it is 
not always sufficient.  Information may not be accessible to all potential beneficiaries and a history of 
recurrent cris es, including the most recent COVID -19, may have made private actors less inclined to 
invest. The risk is considered medium  because the potential demand has been quantified as significantly 
higher than the existing  funding.  While the probability of not reaching at least 37% of the total potential 
demand (US$707 million  in CAPEX estimated to be supported by equity and debt instruments enabled 
by the Program me108 versus a demand of beyond US$1.9 billion overall) is considered low, limitations 
on approval and implementation periods in each country increase the probability to medium . Impact is 
considered medium, as even if this risk materializes, under no circumstance should it affect the totality 
of Programme  funding.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
149. Technical cooperation activities under each component include activities to support the demand side of 
each component. Bio -business pipeline development and supervision activities under Component  I are 
 
108 The US$707 figure differs from the total amount of funding leveraged, as the former only considers the net investment that will end up 
being used as CAPEX investment/financing (including equity and debt) and hence it does not include the guarantee or TC moneys.


---
*Page 77*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 82 
   
 aimed at supporting firms to develop high -quality proj ects that are bankable. The institutional capacities 
of the EE  for the loan component to respond to this demand in a timely and effective manner have been 
analysed by the IDB and  should be reviewed in the context of each pre -approval Sub-project . Advisory 
services under C omponent  II will result in bond structuring using best international practice, increasing 
the quality of the issuance and enabling access to more investors.  As th is support is delivered within the 
framework of the Programme  itself, helping consolidate fundable projects at a faster pace, it is 
considered that the probability of this risk occurring is low. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  Impossibility to deliver monitoring data on all supported projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Low 
Description  
150. Because the bioeconomy  is a relative ly new concept that involve s various specific technical skills, 
monitoring the results could become challenging. In most cases, monitoring will depend on secondary 
sources, which may not be fully deployed of well -functioning in all target countries . In the case of EEs 
for Component  I, these  institutions may have good monitoring systems in place for their overall credit 
operation but  are not necessarily suited to deliver geographic  data or technical aspects of specific 
practices.  The probability of this risk is considered high based on the scope of the Programme , which 
involves several types of businesses, channels and sectors. Also due to the existing lack of coordination 
among relevant institutions, as identified in some target countries, which leads to numerous databases 
and sources of information. Impact is considered low, because while data at the investment  level may 
not be available in all cases, conditions will be in place to guarantee all investment  follow strict eligibility 
criteria to be considered part  of the bioeconomy.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
151. As part of the implementation activities for each IDB operation using funds from the Programme , specific 
monitoring and reporting arrangements will be established, including templates and indicators, means 
of verification and periodicity of data collection. Where an EE different from the IDB  is involved, these 
arrangements will be agreed with the IDB prior to the disbursement of funds as per IDB policy. In addition, 
transversal technical cooperation  activities include support for overall supervision and coordination at 
the country level, which includes assistance to carry out monitoring activities and the deployment of 
monitoring systems that are adequate to incorporate the majority of beneficiary projects to the overall 
impacts and results measurement . 
Selected Risk Factor 3  Unexpected changes in political will  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description  
152. Given that future developments around the COVID -19 pandemic are sti ll uncertain, a risk has been 
identified in potential delays on implementation at the country level, as a result of governments in target countries prioritizing new emergency measures that may arise in the coming years. So far, governments 
throughout the region have s hown a strong commitment to incentivising the development of bio -
business es with the participation of the private sector as they consider it key to promote the sustainable 
development of the Amazon. Even if the impacts of the crisis are higher than expecte
d, it is well 
recognized that the sector can play a significant role in the post -COVID recovery phase. Hence, this  risk 
is considered low.  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 78*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 82 
   
 153. The IDB team will follow closely the development of the crisis and its effect on government  priorit ies in 
all target countries and will provide analyses about the potential of bio -business  investment to effectively 
contribute to sustainable development in each co untry in alignment with various national policies and 
plans. Strong relationships with representatives  in each country (including NDAs but also other relevant 
stakeholders) will support close monitoring of government plans  to ensure that engagement with the 
Programme  is sustained and justified to respond to their  economic recovery needs.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  Cumulative or unanticipated socio- environmental negative impacts  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational  Low High 
Description  
154. Eligibility of investments to be financed under the Programme  is based on the sustainable nature of 
these businesses regarding the use and conservation of biodiversity. This considers  environmental, 
social and economic sustainability criteria and, therefor e, no direct negative socio- environmental impacts 
are anticipated. Despite this condition, given the number and geographical dispersion of the potential 
projects to be financed by the Programme , as well as the potential for indirect and cumulative impacts,  
associated with financial intermediation, it has been classified as I-2 per the GCF Environmental and 
Social Policy . Business development based on the use of biodiversity in an inherently complex region 
such as the Amazon, in some cases may involve sensit ive issues that would need to be carefully 
addressed. Timely information and oversight of these issues are  key to avoid reputational risks.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
155. Besides the overall ESG framework presented with this proposal, each IDB financing operation to be 
approved  with funds  from the Programme  will include a more specific assessment of socioenvironmental 
impacts and risks and management measures, including cumulative effects and indirect impacts. The framework at the IDB  Sub-project  level incorporates an exclusion list of high- risk socioenviron mental 
activities/sectors and Category A projects which will not be eligible for financing (such as those involving 
involuntary resettlement, negative impact on indigenous peoples or critical natural habitats, damage to 
cultural sites, or the use of invasi ve species).  The assessment of  EEs’ capacity for socioenvironmental 
risk management is part of the institutional analysis that is carried out or updated before the approval of each IDB Sub-project  (see Sections B.4 and G.1). In addition, the Programme  includes technical 
cooperation activities to support overall supervision at the country level, which includes the adequate 
implementation (and design, if required) of a socio environmental risk management system, as well as 
continuous impact monitoring.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  Unidentified financing of money laundering, terrorist financing, and 
prohibited practices  
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low High 
Description  
156. National financial systems are subject to country compliance with the international standards of the Anti ‐
Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism policy, embedded in national policymaking of all target countries. As lending operations being considered in the context of this Programme will be 
part of financial intermediation schemes in local and international markets, a very low risk is foreseen on 
having unidentified financing of these practices.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
157. Because all financial operations under Programme activities are carried out in the context of the financial 
and capital markets, subject to national regulation, this risk is considered low . Nonetheless, the IDB will


---
*Page 79*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 82 
   
 not only establish specific rules and eligibility criteria for all financial transactions in each target country 
(as pa rt of IDB project -cycle), but all portfolios financed will be subject to IDB’s non- objection.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  Misuse of materials or technology procured for unauthorized, improper or 
illicit purposes  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
158. Due to the diverse nature of the bio- business sectors, models, practices and technologies, use of funds 
for purposes that are aligned with the Programme criteria can be difficult to standardize. Hence, a risk is 
identified in a possible misuse of some elements procured with loans or grants from the Programme. 
The risk is classified as low, as IDB policies and procedures are deemed sufficient to guarantee checks 
and balances to prevent this.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
159. EEs eligibility and disburse of funds to them will be contingent on their compliance with institutional 
capacity assessment and formal agreement with IDB, which include specific guidelines for use of 
proceeds, whether it is reimbursable or non -reimbursable money. The IDB supervises compliance of all 
requirements established in these agreements, including the OR, where applicable (see Section B.4 and 
G.3) and carries out supervision of all beneficiary entities and projects.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 Exposure to foreign exchange risk of beneficiaries or LFIs as result of 
financing  under Component I.1  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  High Low 
Description  
160. Foreign exchange (FX) risk (or currency risk ) exists in financial transaction s under Component I.1, as 
IDB loans are denominated in USD and loans to final borrowers are likely to be disbursed in a currency 
other than USD (i.e., the local currency in each country), especially in the case of smaller firms  for which 
transac tions occur mainly in local currency . Thus, FX risk arises from the possibility of unfavourable 
fluctuations  between the local  currency and the USD before the loan repayment  is completed , as the 
associated value may decrease due to changes in the relative value of the involved currencies.  Target 
countries are generally prone to undergo sporadic unstable economic conditions, but NDBs acting as 
EEs generally have the capacity to hedge this risk (i.e., place USD in the market and manage profits to 
increase their capacity to offer concessional terms in local currency). Bio-businesses exporting or 
importing goods and services are also subject to FX risk but can take measures to manage it as well. All 
in all, while the probability of facing FX risk in the target countries is high, its impact is considered low  
based on the mitigation measures below . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
161. If the analysis at the country -level identifies that a substantial portion of the loans will be  required in local 
currency, the IDB will ensure that the corresponding EE is informed about the FX risks and sufficiently 
connected to financial institutions interested and willing to hold USD positions locally, and that the size 
of the  market  is large enough in relation to the amount of Programme resources allocated to that 
particular country. As for bio- businesses exposed to FX risk,  hedging strategies to mitigate it  usually 
involve mechanisms such as forward contracts, options and others, which can protect them  from 
exchange rate fluctuations.  Capacity building and proper implementation of such mechanisms will be 
part of the TC activities under Component I.3.


---
*Page 80*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 76 OF 82 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 8 Possibility  of loss es resulting from borrower s’ failure to repay the loans or 
meet contractual obligations  under the bonds  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Low Medium  
Description  
162. In any credit transaction, a risk exists that the borrower may default . Potential defaults of bio- businesses 
financed by the Programme may negatively impact the repayment of the lender LFI to the EE, and that 
of the EE to the IDB. As described in Section B.4, loans provided to EEs with GCF funding under 
Component I.1 will be backed by a sovereign guarantee ; this is, in the event of default , the GCF would 
be protected (i.e., reimbursed) by the national government. Investment grants will contribute to reduce the net exposure of the public sector to the extent and depth of the de- risking instruments enabled by 
these funds , which would allow for potential recoveries from defaulting borrowers through LFIs . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
163. While it is not possible to foresee who will default on obligations, properly assessing and managing credit 
risk can lessen the severity of a loss. The intermediation scheme proposed for Component I.1 uses LFIs 
expertise in collecting and processing inform ation to accurately assess the risk (i.e., capacity to repay, 
associated collateral, credit history and capital) of various investments. As the bulk of LFIs are private, 
origination of credit follows commercial banking practice under market conditions, and the inclusion of 
sub-loans in their lending portfolio is indicative that the expected value of these investments will produce 
net profits. If a lender participating in the Programme faces heightened credit risk, instruments enabled 
by the Programme have been designed precisely to mitigate it, while at the same time avoiding an 
increase in financial costs for the borrower or issuer of a debt obligation. Also, with regards to Component 
II investors are expected to look at the credit rating of the bond they are buying, as an indication of the 
risk of default of the issuer. The AAA rating provided by the IDB guarantee supported by Component II.2 
significantly diminishes the risk. Hence, the probability  of this risk is considered low .


---
*Page 81*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 77 OF 82 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately  1.5 pages )  
164. Because higher Environmental and Social (E&S) risk activities will be excluded from the Programme, 
the potential E&S risks and impacts are likely to be low to moderate, which are largely manageable by 
standard mitigation measures . Therefore , this transaction was categorized as Category B.  
165. Although the Programme is expected to have positive contributions on natural resources, if a beneficiary 
project fails to meet good practices implementation, negative impacts can occur. However, based on the 
proposed E&S management approach these risks and impacts can be readily addressed through well -
established mitigation measures  and fulfilment of IDB’s applicable Environmental and Social 
Performance Standards . 
Table  8.- Assessment of E&S risks and impacts, and mitigation measures  
 E&S Risks and Impacts  Mitigation Measures  
ESPS1  The targeted portfolio includes MSMEs and 
Cooperatives, where structured ESMS are 
uncommon.  
E&S management practices and governance is 
usually limited to meet national law and permits requirements.  Where applicable, investments  will seek good 
practices independent third-party certifications (e.g.: organic, eco-friendly , ISO, fair trade, FSC, VCS ) 
consistent with IDB’s  
Environmental and Social 
Performance Standard  6. 
EEs will screen beneficiary investments ’ performance 
against the a pplicable requirements . 
ESPS2  Targeted sectors have physical, biological and 
chemical hazards risks. OHS culture maturity 
level is limited in the region and in MSMEs.  
Child and forced labour  practices occur in the 
region (including supply chain related practices).  IDB will support the development of sectoral labour  
practices and working conditions checklist and guidance assessment  consistent with IDB ’s 
Environmental and Social Performance Standard 2.  
Supply chain auditing protocols will be foster through anchor investments.  
ESPS3  Limited logistics to final disposal for waste and 
hazardous materials.  
Wastewater pollution.  EEs will review applicable required environmental 
permits based on sector and country requirements, as well as against selected EHS guidelines.  
IDB will support the development of sectoral 
environmental checklist and guidance assessment.  
ESPS 4 Affected communities EHS related may include:  
- Access to resources and benefit sharing 
issues (including e nvironmental services  
related to provision)  
- Exposure to hazards (physical and chemical)  IDB will support the development of sectoral affected 
communities EHS checklists and guidance 
assessments  consistent with IDB ’s Environmental and 
Social Performance Standard 4.  
ESPS5  Investments  involving involuntary resettlement 
will not be eligible  Exclusion of investments  requiring involuntary 
resettlement as defined by IDB’s Environmental and 
Social Performance Standard 5.  
ESPS6  Land conversion and deforestation risks 
(including supply chain)  
Impact on critical habitats  Exclusion of investments  requiring deforestation , or 
which present significant risk of induced deforestation, including supply chain.  
Supervision will include monitoring of land -use and 
land cover change.  
Exclusion of investments  that involve land clearing 
activities  in critical habitats as defined by IDB’s 
Environmental and Social Performance Standard 6.  
ESPS7  Adverse impacts to communities and persons 
belonging to indigenous peoples and afro-
descendant  Exclusion of investments  with potential adverse 
impacts on Indigenous people as defined by IDB ’s 
Environmental and Social Performance Standard 7 .


---
*Page 82*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 78 OF 82 
   
 IDB and EEs will develop and rollout consultation and 
stakeholder engagement strategies with indigenous 
peoples  and communities  consistent with IDB’s  
Environmental and Social Performance Standard 7 . 
ESPS8  Projects involving adverse impacts on cultural 
heritage.  Investments  will protect cultural heritage from the 
adverse impacts of project activities and support it s 
preservation. and will promote the equitable sharing of 
benefits from the use of cultural heritage  consistent 
with IDB’s Environmental and Social Performance 
Standard 8.  
ESPS 9  Gender equality  Sub-Projects  must be designed to achieve inclusion 
from Sub-Project -derived benefits of people of all 
genders, sexual orientations, and gender identities  
consistent with IDB ’s Environmental and Social 
Performance Standard 9.  
Investments  must be designed to minimize ris k of 
sexual and gender -based violence in affected 
communities and workers  consistent with IDB ’s 
Environmental and Social Performance Standard 9 . 
ESPS 10  Stakeholder engagement and information 
disclosure  Borrowers will comply with IDB requirements for 
stakeholder engagement and information disclosure  
consistent with IDB ’s Environmental and Social 
Performance Standards 1 and 10.  
166. For financial intermediation activity I.1, each participating NDB and LFI will manage the supported 
portfolio by applying a specific E&S Management Framework (ESMF) to be approved by the IDB during 
Sub-project preparation. The ESMF will include the Program me’s applicable requirements, as follows:  
- National applicable E&S laws and regulations;  
- IDB Exclusion List;  
- Category A high risk projects screening;  
- No deforestation policy; and 
- IDB’s September 2020 Environmental and Social Policy Framework (ESPF) , as applicable.  
167. In order to do so, IDB review will focus on improving EEs’  capacity and commitment t o assure adequate 
level of safeguards implementation. IDB will review any existing E&S Management System (ESMS) for 
every selected L FI that will provide funding to projects under the Program me. As part of the ESMS 
review, IDB will follow the IDB E&S proced ure and apply its Platform for the Analysis of Institutional 
Capacity (PACI) tool to identify needs to capacity building and institutional strengthening in ESG aspects.   
168. For a complete description of the components of the E&S risk and impacts assessment and management 
approach applied by the IDB in both the preparation and execution of the Program me, see Annex 6. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
169. Women play a fundamental rol e in the Amazon. As users of forest products and guardians of traditional 
knowledge, women have always been involved in the region. Nevertheless, their access to forest 
resources and the economic benefits generated by the biodiversity is lim ited compared to men’s. The 
countries included in the Programme present significant gender gaps for women due to cultural and 
structural barriers, which are exacerbated in rural areas and among indigenous and afro- descendant 
women. Just recently, some of t hose gender gaps have been widened due to the COVID -19 crisis. 
ECLAC estimates that female participation in the workforce in 2020 in LAC will be 46%, a decrease of 6 
percentage points compared to 2019. This means that about 12 million women left the regional workforce 
due to job destruction.


---
*Page 83*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 79 OF 82 
   
 170. Women also face barriers to access the financial sector, the lack of access to capital being the main 
reason women- led businesses fail. Currently, the supply of gender -lens financial products in LAC is 
limited since onl y a few fund managers consider gender in their investment analysis. Despite this, a 
gender -lens investing for women- led business is emerging in various types of assets in LAC through 
bonds, microfinance and specific lines of credit and technical assistance  to SMEs run by women.  
171. The participation of Amazon women in the bioeconomy presents multiple gaps related to pre -existing 
inequality conditions of women's livelihoods and economies in the region. Some of the gaps that women 
face in the bio- business value c hains are related to ownership of productive assets (land, animals, 
capital); distribution of the use of time in productive and household tasks; access to formal economies; 
equitable distribution of investments and profits; access to information and technology, little leadership 
in economic projects and difficulties to access working spaces traditionally assigned to men.  
172. The Gender Action Plan has been designed to contribute to reducing the existing gender gaps and 
overcome many of the barriers women face i n the bio- business value chains and the financial sector. 
The Programme  will design a platform to promote women’s access to bio- business financial services 
through training, a community of women entrepreneurs, studies of pre- feasibility of value chains, su pport 
to expand their business and to transition from the informal to the formal sector, among other activities. On the other hand, the Programme  will work with LFIs to incorporate a gender -lens in their portfolio 
through gender awareness trainings, the identification of bottlenecks to integrate gender in their services 
and products, and the creation of credit programs specific for women, among others.  
173. The gender assessment and action plan have been developed with IDB staff and several gender and 
diversity specialists working in Colombia, Perú and Washington D .C. A gender study on bio -business  
value chains that is been carried out in Peru will further inform the implementation of the gender 
assessment and  gender action plan (see Annex 8). 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
174. Disbursement of Programme resources to the IDB under the FAA would be subject to the IDB having 
approved the allocation of Programme resources to reimbursable (sovereign guaranteed loans) or non-
reimbursable (technical cooperation  and investment grants) Su b-projects  and following the effectiveness 
of the corresponding Subsidiary Agreements  for such operations  –if such agreements are needed.  
175. In credit operations financed under Component I.1, financial management considerations included in the 
OR to be approved prior to disbursements shall be consistent with policies and operational standards of 
the IDB and the corresponding EE, and abide by the laws and financial regulation of the country in which 
funds are being used.  Loan resources will be disbursed to the corresponding EE as an advance of funds 
or as reimbursement of expenses at any time within the established loan disbursement period, in 
accordance with IDB policies. In all cases, the portfolio of sub- loans to be recognized by the P rogram me 
will be subject to revision by the IDB in order to proceed with each disbursement. Investment grant 
resources could be disbursed upfront, provided that conditions established in the financial agreement 
between the IDB and the corresponding EE have been fulfilled. These conditions may include a 
requirement to create a specific account to which funds will be transferred exclusively for the execution 
of the Program me or limits to the volume of GCF resources to be disbursed in advance. Conditions will 
be determined on a case- by-case basis for each participant country.  EEs will be required to submit 
audited financial statements within 120 days after the closing of each fiscal year throughout the execution 
period,  as per standard IDB practice. Financial statements shall be duly audited by an independent firm 
acceptable to the IDB and in compliance with local regulation. EEs are also required to prepare and 
submit periodical reports (at least annually) including financial information and compliance with eligibility 
criteria for sub -loans, as well as progress with regards to the development objectives based on a set of 
predefi ned results indicators.  Non-reimbursable resources may be deployed by IDB either through 
technical cooperation or investment grants.  
176. The financial management and oversight  of any of the above- mentioned operations, including reporting 
requirements, will follow IDB policies and procedures, and applicable AMA and FAA requirements, which 
would be reflected as needed in any Subsidiary A greements. The Subsidiary A greements will require 
that use of GCF proceeds be for eligible activities under the applicable comp onents of the Programme,


---
*Page 84*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 80 OF 82 
   
 will establish the disbursement period and will establish other implementation requirements, including 
regarding the executing structure of GCF funded activities  within the EE . 
177. When acting as EE , IDB will apply its own policies for hiring of individual consultants and/or procurement 
of consulting and other services and  will require other EEs  to use applicable IDB’s procurement policies 
for their use of GCF funds  (see Section B.4).  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential  information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretari at the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
☒ full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
☐ redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.


---
*Page 85*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 81 OF 82 
   
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  Letters from Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana , Peru, and 
Suriname.  
☒ Annex 2a Feasibility study  
☒ Annex 2b  Feasibility study (Excel)  
☒ Annex 3 a Economic analyses (Excel)  
☒ Annex 3b  Description and Summary Results of Economic Analysis  
☒ Annex 3 c Regional Regenerate Assumptions Model  (Excel)  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/Programme milestones  
☒ Annex 6a  Environmental and Social Analysis and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework  
☒ Annex 6b  ESS disclosure form Draft (Published in English, Spanish, Portuguese and Dutch by IDB 
by September 3rd, 2021 )  
☒ Annex 7  Citizen Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Socialization Phase  I 
☒ Annex 8a  Gender assessment  
☒ Annex 8b  Gender and Diversity action plan  
☒ Annex 9  Legal Due Diligence   
☒ Annex 10a  Procurement policies to be applied  
☒ Annex 10b  18-month tentative Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☐ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, [IDB Board approvals for national or regional sub-
projects occur after GCF Board approval . A FAA clause to be included]   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)   
☒ Annex 16  Map 
☒ Annex 17  Multi- country Programme information  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal - Not applicable  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties - Not applicable


---
*Page 86*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 82 OF 82 
   
  ☒ Annex 20a  Financial Capacity Management Assessments - First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment   
☒ Annex 20b  Institutional Assessment and Definition of Executing Entities   
☒ Annex 21  Operation s Manual  
☒ Annex 22a Carbon Methodologies and Assumptions  
☒ Annex 22b  GHG calculations  
☒ Annex 23  Overview Projects and Program Initiatives in the Amazon  
☒ Annex 24a  Country Commitment Assessments Climate, REDD+, Bioeconomy  
☒ Annex 24b  Country Commitment Assessments Bioeconomy   
☒ Annex 24c  Country National Determined Contributions Alignment  
☒ Annex 25a  Financial instruments and justification of utilization of investment grants  
☒ Annex 25b  Comparative Leverage Grant vs Guarantee  
☒ Annex 26  List of References  
☒ Annex 27  Comments and questions by the independent Technical Advisory Panel and responses 
by the accredited entity


---
*Page 87*
---

/1 /2 /3 /4 /2 /5 /3 /5 /1 /6 /7 /2 /7 □ /11 /1 /4 /12 /3 /3 /5 □ /11 □ /14 /15 /16 /14
/17 /16 /16 /18 /19 /20 /2 /2 /19 /21 /22 /23 /21 /24 /25 /26 /25 /27 /22 /14 /23 /28 /25 /29 /23 /30 /15 /2 /19 /21 /22 /2 /24 /25 /26 /16 /15 /25 /31 /14 /25 /15 /23 /18 /17 /18 /33 /14 /24 /14 /25 /34 /32 /25 /24 /35 /27 /21 /26 /16 /25 /36 /22 /27 /18 /15 /22 /27 /22 /15 /36 /37 /21 /30 /38 /14 /24 /14 /25 /36 /25 /15 /22 /28 /21 /27 /34 /14 /15 /29 /25 /15 /21 /36 /29 /22 /19 /35 /14 /31 /22 /39 /14 /15 /38 /22 /32 /36 /32 /25 /24 /35 /27 /21 /26 /16 /25 /34 /1 /12 /40 /5 /41 /40 /0 /38 /22 /26 /42 /15 /43 /1 /2 /5
/44 /45 /46 /45 /47 /48 /49 /50 □ /52 /53 □ /53 /45 /46 /54 /46 /55 /56
/47 /57 /58 /59 /57 /60 /61 /59 /62 /61 /60 □ /63 /64 /59 □ /45 /65 /60 /57 /59 /65 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66 □ /54 /63 /63 /61 /62 /59 /67 □
/46 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66 □ /68 /57 /67 /62 /69 /65 /61 /60 /57 /70 □ /54 /71 /60 /72 /64 /59 /62 /60 /73 □ /63 /64 /59 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /74 /59 /57 /57 /65 □ /55 /66 /62 /75 /61 /60 /57 □ /53 /71 /65 /70
/56 /67 /76 /66 /61 /65 /61 /70 /61 □ /70 /64 /67 □ /44 /62 /65 /62 /67 /60 /77 /59 /62 /64 /67 /78 □ /79 /66 /64 /58 /64 □ /80 /78 □ /81 /82 □ /61 /65 /70 /61 /59 /78 □ /67 /61 /66 /61 □ /81 /83 /84 /85 /79
/55 /56 /80 □ /86 /87 /87 /88 /89 /85 /84 /87 /87 □ /85 □ /79 /59 /61 /67 /90 /66 /62 /61 /91 /68 /53 □ /85 □ /92 /93 /83 /94 □ /95 /88 /83 /81 /85 /81 /81 /84 /93 □ /85 □ /57 /85 /75 /61 /62 /66 □ /61 /65 /70 /96 /69 /58 /63 /97 /63 /61 /98 /57 /65 /70 /61 /96 /69 /64 /99 /96 /100 /59
□ □ □
□
/55
/61 /59 /60 /61 □ /47 /56 /45 □ /65 /82 □ /83 /87 /93 /101 /91 /81 /87 /81 /83 /91 /44 /56
□ □
□
/44 /59 /96 □ /50 /61 /65 /65 /62 /58 /102 □ /74 /66 /57 /75 /61 /59 /57 /58
/68 /57 /76 /71 /60 /73 □ /56 /103 /57 /58 /71 /60 /62 /99 /57 □ /68 /62 /59 /57 /58 /60 /64 /59 □
/74 /59 /57 /57 /65 □ /55 /66 /62 /75 /61 /60 /57 □ /53 /71 /65 /70 □
/74 /85 /48 /64 /104 /57 /59 /78 □ /81 /88 /85 /88 □ /47 /64 /65 /69 /70 /64 /85 /70 /64 /65 /69 /78 □ /50 /57 /64 /65 /67 /71 /85 /69 /71 □
/45 /65 /58 /72 /57 /64 /65 □ /55 /62 /60 /73 /78 □ /49 /57 /76 /71 /100 /66 /62 /58 □ /64 /63 □ /105 /64 /59 /57 /61
□
/49 /57 /106 □ /107 /108 /109 /110 /111 /109 /112 □ /114 /115 /116 /114 /116 /117 /118 /119 □ /120 /116 /115 □ /121 /122 /123 □ /124 /125 /107 □ /126 /127 □ /128 /129 /130 □ /115 /123 /112 /118 /115 /110 /111 /109 /112 □ /121 /122 /123 □ /114 /115 /116 /112 /115 /118 /131 □ /132 /133 /122 /123 □ /134 /131 /118 /135 /116 /109 □ /130 /111 /116 /123 /136 /116 /109 /116 /131 /127 □ /107 /108 /109 /110 /132
/137 /138 /139 /138 /140 /141 /142 /143 /144 /145 /146 □ /45 /63 □ /73 /64 /71 □ /61 /65 /67 /104 /57 /59 □ /60 /72 /62 /67 □ /66 /57 /60 /60 /57 /59 /78 □ /76 /66 /57 /61 /67 /57 □ /62 /65 /70 /62 /58 /61 /60 /57 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /80 /59 /64 /58 /57 /67 /67 □ /65 /96 /82 □ /83 /81 /83 /81 /87 /96 /83 /87 /87 /81 /83 /87 /91 /81 /87 /81 /83 /85 /101 /81 □ /96
□
/68 /57 /61 /59 □ /44 /59 /96 □ /74 /66 /57 /75 /61 /59 /57 /58 /78
□
/83 /96 /147 /57 □ /59 /57 /63 /57 /59 □ /60 /64 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 □ /57 /65 /60 /62 /60 /66 /57 /70 □ /148 /48 /72 /57 □ /54 /75 /61 /98 /64 /65 □ /79 /62 /64 /57 /58 /64 /65 /64 /75 /73 □ /53 /71 /65 /70 /148 □ /61 /67 □ /62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57
/63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69 □ /76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 □ /67 /71 /100 /75 /62 /60 /60 /57 /70 □ /100 /73 □ /45 /68 /79 □ /60 /64 □ /71 /67 □ /64 /65 □ /44 /61 /73 □ /101/60 /72/78 □ /81 /87 /81 /83 /96
/81
/96 /48 /72 /57 □ /71 /65 /70 /57 /59 /67 /62 /69 /65 /57 /70 □ /62 /67 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /70 /71 /66 /73 □ /61 /71 /60 /72 /64 /59 /62 /98 /57 /70 □ /59 /57 /76 /59 /57 /67 /57 /65 /60 /61 /60 /62 /99 /57 □ /64 /63 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /47 /57 /58 /59 /57 /60 /61 /59 /62 /61 /60 □ /63 /64 /59 □ /45 /65 /60 /57 /59 /65 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66
/56 /58 /64 /65 /64 /75 /62 /58 □ /54 /63 /63 /61 /62 /59 /67 /78 □ /44 /62 /65 /62 /67 /60 /59 /73 □ /64 /63 □ /56 /58 /64 /65 /64 /75 /73 /78 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /46 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66 □ /68 /57 /67 /62 /69 /65 /61 /60 /57 /70 □ /54 /71 /60 /72 /64 /59 /62 /60 /73 □ /63 /64 /59 □ /79 /59 /61 /98 /62 /66 /96
/95 /96 /80 /71 /59 /67 /71 /61 /65 /60 □ /60 /64 □ /74 /55 /53 □ /70 /57 /58 /62 /67 /62 /64 /65 □ /79 /96 /87 /89 /91 /83 /87 /78 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /58 /64 /65 /60 /57 /65 /60 □ /64 /63 □ /104 /72 /62 /58 /72 □ /104 /57 □ /61 /58 /102 /65 /64 /104 /66 /57 /70 /69 /57 □ /60 /64 □ /72 /61 /99 /57 □ /59 /57 /99 /62 /57 /104 /57 /70 /78
/104 /57 □ /72 /57 /59 /57 /100 /73 □ /58 /64 /75 /75 /71 /65 /62 /58 /61 /60 /57 □ /64 /71 /59 □ /65 /64 /85 /64 /100 /149 /57 /58 /60 /62 /64 /65 □ /60 /64 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 □ /61 /67 □ /62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69 □ /76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 /96
/88 /96 /79 /73 □ /58 /64 /75 /75 /71 /65 /62 /58 /61 /60 /62 /65 /69 □ /64 /71 /59 □ /65 /64 /85 /64 /100 /149 /57 /58 /60 /62 /64 /65 /78 □ /62 /60 □ /62 /67 □ /62 /75 /76 /66 /62 /57 /70 □ /60 /72 /61 /60 /106
/61 /94 /48 /72 /57 □ /69 /64 /99 /57 /59 /65 /75 /57 /65 /60 □ /64 /63 □ /79 /59 /61 /98 /62 /66 □ /72 /61 /67 □ /65 /64 /85 /64 /100 /149 /57 /58 /60 /62 /64 /65 □ /60 /64 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 □ /61 /67 □ /62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69
/76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 /150
/100 /94 /48 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 □ /61 /67 □ /62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69 □ /76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 □ /62 /67 □ /62 /65 □ /58 /64 /65 /63 /64 /59 /75 /62 /60 /73 □ /104 /62 /60 /72 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /65 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66
/76 /59 /62 /64 /59 /62 /60 /62 /57 /67 /78 □ /67 /60 /59 /61 /60 /57 /69 /62 /57 /67 □ /61 /65 /70 □ /76 /66 /61 /65 /67 □ /64 /63 □ /79 /59 /61 /98 /62 /66 /150 □ /61 /65 /70
/58 /94 /45 /65 □ /61 /58 /58 /64 /59 /70 /61 /65 /58 /57 □ /104 /62 /60 /72 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /74 /55 /53 /151 /67 □ /57 /65 /99 /62 /59 /64 /65 /75 /57 /65 /60 /61 /66 □ /61 /65 /70 □ /67 /64 /58 /62 /61 /66 □ /67 /61 /63 /57 /69 /71 /61 /59 /70 /67 /78 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 □ /61 /67
/62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69 □ /76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 □ /62 /67 □ /62 /65 □ /58 /64 /65 /63 /64 /59 /75 /62 /60 /73 □ /104 /62 /60 /72 □ /59 /57 /66 /57 /99 /61 /65 /60 □ /65 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66 □ /66 /61 /104 /67 □ /61 /65 /70 □ /59 /57 /69 /71 /66 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /67 /96
/101 /96 /147 /57 □ /61 /66 /67 /64 □ /58 /64 /65 /63 /62 /59 /75 □ /60 /72 /61 /60 □ /64 /71 /59 □ /65 /61 /60 /62 /64 /65 /61 /66 □ /76 /59 /64 /58 /57 /67 /67 □ /63 /64 /59 □ /61 /67 /58 /57 /59 /60 /61 /62 /65 /62 /65 /69 □ /65 /64 /85 /64 /100 /149 /57 /58 /60 /62 /64 /65 □ /60 /64 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 /78 □ /61 /67
/62 /65 /58 /66 /71 /70 /57 /70 □ /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /63 /71 /65 /70 /62 /65 /69 □ /76 /59 /64 /76 /64 /67 /61 /66 /78 □ /72 /61 /67 □ /100 /57 /57 /65 □ /70 /71 /66 /73 □ /63 /64 /66 /66 /64 /104 /57 /70 /96 □
/93 /96 /147 /57 □ /61 /66 /67 /64 □ /58 /64 /65 /63 /62 /59 /75 □ /60 /72 /61 /60 □ /64 /71 /59 □ /65 /64 /85 /64 /100 /149 /57 /58 /60 /62 /64 /65 □ /61 /76 /76 /66 /62 /57 /67 □ /60 /64 □ /61 /66 /66 □ /76 /59 /64 /149 /57 /58 /60 /67 □ /64 /59 □ /61 /58 /60 /62 /99 /62 /60 /62 /57 /67 □ /60 /64 □ /100 /57 □ /62 /75 /76 /66 /57 /75 /57 /65 /60 /57 /70
/104 /62 /60 /72 /62 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /67 /58 /64 /76 /57 □ /64 /63 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /76 /59 /64 /69 /59 /61 /75 /75 /57 /96
/86 /96 /147 /57 □ /61 /58 /102 /65 /64 /104 /66 /57 /70 /69 /57 □ /60 /72 /61 /60 □ /60 /72 /62 /67 □ /66 /57 /60 /60 /57 /59 □ /104 /62 /66 /66 □ /100 /57 □ /75 /61 /70 /57 □ /76 /71 /100 /66 /62 /58 /66 /73 □ /61 /99 /61 /62 /66 /61 /100 /66 /57 □ /64 /65 □ /60 /72 /57 □ /74 /55 /53 □ /104 /57 /100 /67 /62 /60 /57 /96
□
/105 /62 /65 /70 □ /59 /57 /69 /61 /59 /70 /67 /78
□No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 88*
---

/0 /1 /2 /3 /4 /2 /5 /3 /5 /1 /6 /7 /8 /2 /9 /7 □ /11 □ /1 /4 /12 /12 /12 /3 /3 /5 □ /11 □ /13 /14 /15 /16 /14
/17 /16 /16 /18 /19 /20 /2 /2 /19 /21 /22 /23 /21 /24 /25 /26 /25 /27 /22 /14 /23 /28 /25 /29 /23 /30 /15 /2 /19 /21 /22 /2 /24 /25 /26 /16 /15 /25 /31 /14 /32 /25 /15 /23 /18 /17 /18 /33 /14 /24 /14 /25 /34 /32 /25 /24 /35 /27 /21 /26 /16 /25 /36 /22 /27 /18 /15 /22 /27 /22 /15 /36 /37 /21 /30 /38 /14 /24 /14 /25 /36 /25 /15 /22 /28 /21 /27 /34 /14 /15 /29 /25 /15 /21 /36 /29 /22 /19 /35 /14 /31 /22 /39 /14 /15 /38 /22 /32 /36 /32 /25 /24 /35 /27 /21 /26 /16 /25 /34 /1 /12 /40 /5 /41 /40 /0 /0 /38 /22 /26 /42 /15 /43 /5 /2 /5/44 /45 /46 /47 /48 /49 /50 /51 /45 □ /53 /54 /54 /55 /50 /53 /56 /45 □ /49 /57 /49 /51 /58 /45 /50 /55 /46 /53 /48 /49 /50 /51 /49
/59 /60 /61 /62 /63 /64 /44 /65 □ /63 /64 /66 /60 /59 /44 /65 □ /67 /65 /68 /59 /69
/69 /49 /46 /58 /49 /51 /53 /58 /70 □ /71 /45 /58 □ /61 /50 /51 /49 /58 /50 /53 /51 /55 /45 /50 /53 /57 □ /59 /46 /45 /50 /45 /48 /55 /46 □ /63 /71 /71 /53 /55 /58 /54
/68 /55 /50 /55 /54 /51 /58 /70 □ /45 /71 □ /59 /46 /45 /50 /45 /48 /70 □ /45 /71 □ /72 /58 /53 /73 /55 /57
□
/74 /75 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /75 □ /83 /84 /84 /85 /80 /83 /86 /75 □ /79 /87 /79 /81 /88 /75 /80 /85 /76 /83 /78 /79 /80 /81 /79 □ /89 /75 /88 □ /90 /91 /92 /93 /94 /95 /96 /97 □ /99 /95 /100 /91 /101 /96 /97 □ /102 /97 /103 /101 /104 /105 □ /106 /101 /107 /91 /101 /108 /109 /91 /92 /97 /110 /94 /111 □ /96 /101 □ /99 /104 /104 /112 /113 /108 /97 /104
/90 /107 /97 /113 /114 /103 /92 /107 /97 /104 □ /115 /113 /108 /101 /91 /113 /94 /107 /92 /97 /113 /94 /92 /104 /105 □ /79 /78 □ /116 /117 /118 /119 /120 /118 /121 /119 /121 /117 /105 □ /122 /84 □ /117 /123 /124 /120 /125 /105 □ /76 /75 /80 /126 /75 /88 /78 /79 □ /127 /75 /88 /128 /88 /85 /75 □ /75 /129 /76 /85 /83 /87 □ /86 /79 □ /130 /88 /83 /84 /131 /87 /85 /83 /105 □ /76 /75 /78
/126 /77 /80 /86 /83 /78 /79 /80 /81 /75 □ /80 /75 □ /83 /88 /81 /132 □ /133 /134 /105 □ /135 □ /117 /134 /105 □ /86 /75 □ /74 /79 /76 /88 /79 /81 /75 □ /80 /134 □ /123 /132 /120 /116 /125 /105 □ /86 /79 □ /123 □ /86 /79 □ /75 /77 /81 /77 /136 /88 /75 □ /86 /79 □ /121 /119 /117 /120 /132
/137 □ /83 /77 /81 /79 /80 /138 /76 /85 /86 /83 /86 /79 □ /86 /79 /84 /81 /79 □ /86 /75 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /75 □ /89 /75 /86 /79 □ /84 /79 /88 □ /76 /75 /80 /126 /79 /88 /85 /86 /83 □ /80 /75 □ /84 /85 /81 /79
/127 /139 /89 /84 /124 /118 /118 /84 /79 /85 /132 /79 /76 /75 /80 /75 /78 /85 /83 /132 /140 /75 /141 /132 /136 /88 /118 /84 /79 /85 /118 /76 /75 /80 /81 /88 /75 /87 /83 /86 /75 /88 /142 /79 /143 /81 /79 /88 /80 /75 /132 /89 /127 /89 /144
/83 /76 /83 /75 /145 /86 /75 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /75 /142 /76 /75 /80 /126 /79 /88 /85 /88 /146 /85 /86 /142 /75 /88 /140 /83 /75 /142 /83 /76 /79 /84 /84 /75 /142 /79 /143 /81 /79 /88 /80 /75 /145 /119 /105 □ /85 /80 /126 /75 /88 /78 /83 /80 /86 /75 □ /75 □ /76 /147 /86 /85 /140 /75 □ /141 /79 /88 /85 /129 /76 /83 /86 /75 /88 □ /148 /149 /150 /150 /150 /151 /151 /152
/79 □ /75 □ /76 /147 /86 /85 /140 /75 □ /153 /154 /153 □ /150 /155 /148 /90 /150 /156 /151 /152 /132
/157 /58 /45 /46 /49 /54 /54 /45 □ /50 /158 □ /159 /160 /159 /160 /161 /162 /159 /161 /161 /160 /159 /161 /163 /160 /161 /160 /159 /164 /165 /160 /162 /69 /59 /61 □ /50 /158 □ /159 /165 /166 /166 /166 /161 /161 /160


---
*Page 89*
---

 
1 
Calle 26  13 -19 Código Postal 110311 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia     PBX 381 5000   www.dnp.gov.co  
 
Bogotá D.C., viernes, 18 de junio de 2021    *20214540638891*  
    Al responder cite este Nro.  
SGRDCC     20214540638891  
 
 
 
 
The Green Climate Fund – GCF  
Att. executive -office@gcfund.org  
 
 
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by Inter-American Development Bank  – regarding 
The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private  capital  by valuing bioeconomy 
products and services with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon.  
 
 
Dear  Madam, Sir , 
 
We refer to the programme  titled  The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital 
by valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate mitigation and adaptation results 
in the Amazon , in Colombia as included in the funding proposal submitted by  the Inter-
American Development Bank to us on May the 18th 2021 . 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Planning Department 
of Colombia.  
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no -objection to the programme  as included in the funding 
proposal.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
 
(a) The government of Colombia has no -objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal;  
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national 
priorities, strategies and plans of Colombia;  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.  
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the programme 
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
 
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme.  
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be  made publicly available on the GCF website.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
2 
Calle 26  13 -19 Código Postal 110311 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia     PBX 381 5000   www.dnp.gov.co  
  
 
Best Regards,  
 
 
 
CAROLINA DIAZ  GIRALDO  
Director  (in charge ) of Environment and Sustainable Development  
National Planning Department  
CC cpolycarp@gcfund.org ; jjacob@gcfund.org ; ccasallas@dnp.gov.co ; jmanuelsa@iadb.org ; 
ignacioco@iadb.org ; mnetto@iadb.org ; danielhi@iadb.org ; omarv@iadb.org ; alexanderv@iadb.org  
Prepared : Carlos Eduardo Casallas  
Revised : Juan Sebastián Rivera


---
*Page 91*
---

|
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y AndalucíaCódigo Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0150-0
Quito, D.M., 02 de junio de 2021
Asunto: Funding Proposal for the GCF by Inter-American Development Bank regarding
the initiative "The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by valuing
bioeconomy products and services with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the 
Amazon
 
 
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
 
 
The following is in reference to the initiative titled “The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:
Unlocking private capital by valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate
mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon” in Ecuador, as included in the funding
proposal submitted by Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) to us on May 2021. 
  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment and
Water of Ecuador, which acts as National Designated Authority. 
  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our No-Objection to the initiative as included in the
funding proposal. 
  
By communicating our No-Objection, it is implied that: 
1. The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the initiative as included in the 
funding 
proposal; 
2. The initiative as included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with Ecuador’s 
national 
priorities, strategies and plans; 
3. In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the initiative, as
included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with relevant domestic legislation. 
  
As National Designated Authority, we underline that our national process for 
ascertaining 
No-objection to the initiative, as included in the funding proposal, has been duly
followed, thereby being applicable to all projects or activities that will be implemented
within the scope of the initiative. 
  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
  
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux


---
*Page 92*
---

|
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y AndalucíaCódigo Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0150-0
Quito, D.M., 02 de junio de 2021
Sincerely, 
 
 
Atentamente, 
 
 
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO   
Anexos: 
- 
2021.05.26_informe_fondo_de_bioeconomia_para_la_amazonia_clean_(2)-signed-signed-signed.pdf
Copia:  
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
 
Señora Magíster
Inés Patricia Arias Machado
Directora de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
 
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
 
Señorita
Andrea Paulina Bedón Pineda
Asistente en Áreas Protegidas
ab/gv/ia
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux


---
*Page 95*
---

 
MINISTERIO DE ECONOMÍA Y FINAN ZAS 
DIRECCIÓN GENERAL DE ASUNTOS DE ECONOMÍA  
INTERNACIONAL, COMPETENCIA Y PRODUCTIVIDAD  
                 
"DECENIO DE LA IGUALDAD DE OPORTUNIDADES PARA MUJERES Y HOMBRE S" 
“AÑO  DEL BICENTENARIO DEL PERÚ : 200 AÑO S DE INDEPENDENCIA”  
 
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)  
 
       Lima, July 16th, 2021  
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the Inter -American Development Bank  (IDB) regarding 
“The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by valuing bioeconomy products 
and services w ith climate mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon ” 
 
Dear Madam, Sir,  
We refe r to the programme titled “The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by 
valuing bioeconomy products and service s with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the 
Amazon”  in Peru as included in the funding proposal submitted by IDB to us on July 6th, 2021 .  
The undersigned is the duly a uthorized representat ive of the Ministry of Economy and Fin ance, the 
National Designated Authority of Peru.  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no -objection to the pro gramme  as in cluded in the funding  proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The government of Peru has no-objection to the pro gramme  as included in the funding 
proposal;  
(b) The pro gramme  as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Peru ’s national 
priorities, strategies and plans;  
(c) In accordan ce wi th the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the  programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.  
We also confirm that our national pro cess for ascertaining  no-objection to the programme  as includ ed 
in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme . 
We acknowledge that this letter  will be made publicl y available on the GCF website.  
Kind r egards,   
 
  
 
 
 
[DIGITAL SIGNATUR E] 
JOSÉ LA ROSA BA SURCO  
General Director  
General Directorate of International 
Economic Affairs, Competition and 
Productivity  
Ministry of Econom y and Finance of Peru


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
MINISTR Y of SPATIAL PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT  
S.M. Jamaludinstraat no. 26  
 Paramaribo, Suriname  
Tel.No: +597 -451192 /Email: secretariaat.minrom@gov.sr ; pa.minrom@gmail.com  
 
To: 
The Green Climate Fund (GCF)  
 
 
 
Our ref.: ROM 219 /2021                   Paramaribo, September 01, 2021  
 
      
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the Inter -American Development Bank  regarding The Amazon 
Bio-Economy Fund: Unlocking Private Capital by Valuing Bioeconomy Products and Services with 
Climate Mitigation and Adaptation Results in the Amazon  
 
 
Dear Madam, Sir,  
 
We refer to the programme titled The Amazon Bio -Economy Fund: Unlocking Private Capital by Valuing 
Bioeconomy Products and Services with Climate Mitigation and Adaptation Results in the Amazon as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by the Inter -American Development Bank  to us o n 16 March 
2021 . 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Designated Authority  of Republic 
of Suriname . 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
 
(a) The government of Republic of Suriname  has no -objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal;  
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, 
strategies and plans of Republic of Suriname ; 
(c) In ac cordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included 
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.  
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the pro gramme  as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
 
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme  
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly avail able on the GCF website.  
 
Kind regards,   
 
 
 
 
____________________________  
Silvano Tjong -Ahin  
National Designated Authority  
Republic of Suriname


---
*Page 97*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital 
by valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate 
mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon  
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Inter -American Development Bank  (IDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project  or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme  The following Amazon countries: Brazil, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, and Suriname   
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A 
Explanation on language  N/A 
Link to disclosure  N/A 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A 
Explanation on language  N/A 
Link to disclosure  N/A 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, September 1, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Dutch, Portuguese , and Spanish . 
Explanation on language  English,  Dutch,  Portuguese, and Spanish are the official 
languages of the Amazon countries eligible under this 
Program.  
Link to disclosure  English : 
http://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE -
1304725458 -24 
 
Dutch :   
http://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHAR E-
1304725458 -21 
 
Portuguese : 
http://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE -
1304725458 -22


---
*Page 98*
---

Spanish : 
http://www .iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE -
1304725458 -23  
Other link(s)  https://www.iadb.org/en/projects   
Remarks  An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the “Annex 6a Environmental 
and Social Analysis and Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”.  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A 
Explanation on language  N/A 
Link to disclosure  N/A 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 3, 2021  
Place  Physical copies will be available at the  following IDB country 
offices : 
 
Brazil:  
Setor de Embaixadas Norte Quadra 802 Conjunto F Lote 39 
- Asa Norte  
Brasilia -DF 
Brasil  
 
Colombia:  
Carrera 7 N 71 -21, Torre B Piso 19. Edificio Avenida Chile  
Bogotá  
Colombia  
 
Ecuador:  
Avda. 12 de Octubre N24 -528 y Cordero Edificio World 
Trade Center - Torre II, Piso 9  
Quito  
Ecuador  
 
Guyana:  
47-High Street, Kingston  
Georgetown  
Guyana  
 
Perú : 
Dean Valdivia 148 -Piso 10 Centro Empresarial Platinum 
Plaza San Isidro  
Lima  
Perú


---
*Page 99*
---

Suriname : 
Peter Bruneslaan 2 -4 
Paramaribo  
Suriname  
The ESA and ESMF is shared in its full form and translated in 
four languages on the IDB website (links above).  
Nevertheless, Environmental and Social aspects were 
included in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that was 
designed to assure a wide and diverse array of stakeholders 
wer e reached to allow for information  and experience 
exchange , dialogue, consultations, collaboration, and 
partnerships to ensure an inclusive and meaningful 
stakeholders’ participation .   
The virtual dialogues held (see below) did support to tailor 
the design of the Programme. For those virtual dialogues , 
1,658 people were invited and ultimately 548 participated 
from 7 countries and 47 jurisdictions in the Amazon basin.  
Ancestral Knowl edge: June 29 (Spanish), July 6 (Portuguese)  
Capacity building for women groups: July 20 (Spanish), 
August 3 (Portuguese)  
Capacity building for IP: August 10 (Spanish), August 17 
(Portuguese)  
Various perspectives and strong ideas August 20 (English)  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting   Wednesday, December 15, 2021  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 4, 2021  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 100 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 173 
Proposal name:  The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by 
valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate 
mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon  
Accredited entity:  Inter -American Development Bank  (IDB)  
Country/(ies):  Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
This  regional, multi -stakeholder  program me 
seeks to catalyse the flow of private funds to 
bio-businesses to reduce the impacts of 
climate change in the Amazon biome, while 
addressing critical barriers for private 
investment in bio -businesses that have a high -
risk  profile . The programme aims to shift 
current development and financial models 
through investing in nature -based businesses 
to conserve the Amazon  to significantly 
contribute to reduc ing greenhouse gas 
emissions and increas ing the region’s climate 
resilience.  The programme’s impacts need  to be closely  
measured, monitored and reported using 
evidence -based monitoring  and evaluation  
(M&E) frameworks , in terms of both 
reduced emission s and increased resilience 
resulting from  the programme ’s 
investments. The M&E system  and related 
instruments will need to adequately  monitor  
the effectivenes s of the p rogramme using an 
adaptive management approach.  
This programme emphasizes the intrinsic 
value of the Amazon biome by using modern practices and technolog ies to encourage 
innovative bio-business es to build a local and 
global bioeconomy.  Market demand data demonstrates the 
potential demand  of the loan, equity and 
bond instruments  for bio- business  finance . 
The adoption capacity at the country and 
regional levels will need to be closely 
monitored.  
This programme is designed so that all 
activities can be integrated  into national 
systems. Improvements are expected to 
continue  to evolve  after  programme  
completion. It aims to enable a transition  from 
grant -funded models to self -sustaining 
structures  supporting bio-business  markets.   
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of  proposed  conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively .


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 101 
 
 
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Programme background  
3. This programme will focus on the Amazon region, especially on six countries of South 
America : Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname.  Covering over 6,000,000 km2, 
the Amazon is the world’s largest river system, housing the greatest concentration of 
biodiversity on Earth, with more than 10 per cent of the world’s described species. The Amazon 
biome hosts over 40 per cent of global  dense moist tropical forest and 10 –15 per cent of 
terrestrial biodiversity. It is fundamental for carbon balance and resilience to global climate 
change. While it contains many different ecosystems, the Ama zon forms a single bio -geophysical 
entity, and its many parts depend on the integrity of the whole. As a social -ecological system, it 
is home to 34 million people, including more than 350 indigenous groups.  
4. Since 1980, temperatures in the region have incr eased by 0.5 ° C on average , and the 
observed impact is particularly acute in the central Amazon area . The Amazon region is highly 
vulnerable to climate change because of its direct exposure, high sensitivity and low adaptive 
capacity to climate risks. As e xtensively described in the f easibility study ( annex 2) and 
supported by recently published research literature, the climate change context for this programme shows robust signals of dryness over some portions of the Amazon. Observed and 
projected increase d regional temperatures may induce a higher frequency of extreme climate 
events, directly impacting forests and agricultural productivity leading to increased inciden ce of 
floods, droughts and wild fires. 
5. Evapotranspiration is essential for maintaining the Amazon climate, ensuring water 
vapour is replenished during transport across the basin by recycling precipitation back to the 
atmosphere. However, factors controlling the Amazon region’s evapotranspiration are changing, 
reducing climate stability and leavi ng the region vulnerable to further uncertain change. 
Understanding climate change -induced changes to the Amazon’s water cycle is crucial for 
predicting how the biome’s ecosystems may respond  to the changing climate and preparing 
appropriate risk mitigatio n measures.  
6. Human activities interact with the Amazon “natural” system, leading to deforestation 
and forest degradation, anthropogenic fires (in many cases exacerbated by drought events), 
biodiversity loss, and ecosystem fragmentation, among other factors, all of which perpetuate 
adverse climate feedback loops. This  means that Amazon forests are more vulnerable to 
degradation and to loss of ecological functions such as sequester ing carbon, retain ing carbon 
reserves and biodiversity, and control ling hydrological and biogeochemical cycles .1 The 
inclusion of extractive human activities, the loss of ecosystem health and natural stocks 
reinforce each other’s decline. These additional complications to the  climate feedback loop lead 
to increasingly warmer and drier conditions , which  will further drive the Amazon rainforest to 
reach its tipping point, resulting in the dieback of Amazon f orest and the conversion of forested 
ecosystems into a savannah -like lan dscape. Reaching this tipping point would result in the 
Amazon becoming a net source of carbon emissions instead of a sink. Recent research2 (e.g. the 
Science Panel for the Amazon3) has shown that this trend is now evident, and that the 
intensification o f the dry season and an increase in deforestation seem to increase ecosystem 
stress, the occurrence  of wild fires, and carbon emissions in the eastern part of the Amazon.  
7. To restore ecosystem functionality and related benefits , it is essential that concert ed 
efforts be made across the Amazon basin to reduce deforestation, increase forest cover, restore 
degraded ecosystems to strengthen climate change mitigation, improve the resilience of local 
 
1 Marengo and Souza, 2018.  
2 See < https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586 -021 -03629- 6>. 
3 See < https://www.unsdsn.org/science -panel -for-the-amazon -presentation -of-initial -findings >.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 102 
 
 
populations, livelihoods and ecosystems, support species recovery and enhance biodiversity. O n 
6 September 2019, the Heads of State and Heads of Delegation of Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname signed the Leticia Pact for the Amazon Region. On 11 
August 2020, at the Second Presidential  Summit of the Leticia Pact, the signatory countries 
gathered virtually to discuss the urgent need for a financing initiative for the region’s sustainable development and bioeconomy
4 – an aim that  is supported by the International 
Science Panel for the Amazon. The panel noted that the business -as-usual scenario causes more 
environmental degradation and increases society’s vulnerability to climate change , whereas the 
alternative scenario of social d evelopment based on a bioeconomy will allow a more sustainable 
use of resources.  
8. Because of the Amazon’s diverse biological, land and water resources, the bioeconomy 
approach provides a robust framework for promoting sustainability in the agriculture, for estry 
and other land use ( AFOLU ) sector. Shifting to business models and technologies that 
sustainably use natural capital and forest assets (i.e. bio -businesses) which can contribute to 
reduc ing the impacts of climate change and greenhouse gas ( GHG)  emiss ions, and to increas ing 
the region’s resilience.  
9. There is significant potential for p rivate investment under the bio-business  approach  
showing the ability of national and local economies sustainably leverage natural capital. In 
addition to  governments and local populations, the financial sector can play a significant role in 
protecting the Amazon, along with boosting processes such as incubating  and accelerating 
businesses and promoting comprehensive regulatory tools to adequately value nat ural and 
forest assets involved in bio -business es.  
10. For this programme, an initial six key bioeconomy value chain interventions that 
prioritiz e natural capital and deliver climate benefits  were chosen : sustainable agroforestry, 
native palm  cultivation , non -timber natural forest products, growing native species timber, 
aquaculture, and community -led nature tourism. The programme will generate socio economic 
benefits through its support of 57,299 bio -businesses , 58 per cent of which  have female 
majority owners hip. The aim is that all pre -selected value chains should be able to access 
financing suited to their intrinsic characteristics and risk –return profiles, as well as benefit from 
a conducive policy environment, technical assistance, and incentives to value natural capital.   
11. A total investment portfolio of USD 465 million in bio -business will support employment 
of 144,888 people in these in bio -business es and generate 49,236 new green jobs 
(approximately 50 per cent female) that contribute to improving resil ience to climate threats 
and generating an increase in around 17 per cent per job.  
12. The overall climate change contribution over the 20 years of the programme is 
estimated at  123 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( MtCO 2eq) mitigated through 
improved forest and land use that avoids deforestation and enhances  forest carbon stocks. In 
addition, climate resilience will create some 191,952 direct and 485,375 indirect beneficiaries 
(of which, around 50 per cent are female) through improved adaptation capacities from the 
adoption of diversified, climate -resilient livelihood options.  
13. The programme aims to deliver direct environmental benefit s amounting to  3.9 million 
hectare s of Amazon ecosystems protected and under strengthened management in response to 
climate variability and change.  
 
4 The concept of “b ioeconomy”  refers to any economic activity based on the use of natural renewable biological 
resources, from both land and ocean, to obtain food, materials and energy in a sustainable way without 
compromising their availability for future generations. It comprises ac tivities related to the invention, development, 
production and use of biological products and processes. For the purposes of this p rogramme, the bioeconomy is 
understood to be nature -positive, leading to net gains in natural capital, resulting in positive impacts on 
biodiversity, and encouraging sustainable land -use practices.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 103 
 
 
14. The programme consists of three components with eleven subcomponents.  They will be 
implemented by the Inter -American Development Bank ( IDB) in collaboration with the 
Governments of Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname.  The programme is 
categori zed as medium level of Intermediation (I2) based on the  Environmental and S ocial 
Policy  of the GCF . 
Component I . Financing 
solutions for bio- businesses 
Subcomponent s 
I.1 Sovereign investment 
loans and investment grants  
I.2 Equity investments and 
innovation grants  
I.2.a Regenerate a ccelerator  
I.2.b Direct funding for climate -tech 
and bio -tech companies  
I.3 Technical cooperati on 
I.3.a Bio -businesses pipeline 
development and supervision  
I.3.b Tools for connecting bio-
businesses to stakeholders and markets  
I.3.c Institutional and regulatory 
environment
 Component II . Bond 
structuring and issuance  
Subcomponent s 
II.1 Technical coope ration for 
thematic bond issuance  
II.2 Grants for guarantees  
 Component III . Transversal 
technical cooperation  
Subcomponent s 
III.1 Inclusion mechanisms 
for women and diversity in 
bio-businesses  
III.2 Integrated support and 
the strengthening of the 
ecosystem for Amazonian 
small and medium -sized 
enterprises and their 
communities  
III.3 Stakeholder e ngagement 
plan 
III.4 Small grants programme  
III.5 General advisory 
services  
III.6 Programme monitorin g 
and evaluation  
15. The financial instruments and mechanisms for this programme include grants ( USD 
137.5  million ), loans ( USD 135  million ) and equity ( USD 6.5 million ) amounting to a total GCF 
contribution of USD 279  million . A total of USD 598.1 million  is committed, mostly from IDB and 
grants from other organizations, including private entities.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component I: Financing solutions for bio -businesses (total cost: USD 387.1 million; GCF  cost:  USD 
215.1 million , co-financing: 172 million ) 
16. Subcomponent I.1  (GCF: USD 151  million ) Sovereign investment loans and investment 
grants will provide funding to n ational development banks (NDBs ) or special purpose vehicles 
(SPVs ), administered by the NDBs , that offer financial services  to bio-business es. This will be 
conducted  directly or via l ocal finance institutions (LFIs) wh ich will deliver  debt and guarantee 
financial instruments tailored to the scale and risks of bio -businesses.   
17. Structuring the SPVs will require an in -depth analysis and enhancement of the financial, 
legal and operational capacities of the relevant entities . For this component, the entities must 
have already been  assessed by the a ccredited  entity (AE) . Entity strengthening and capacity 
development are key to enable the development and operation of increasingly sophisticated 
fiduciary structures, over an extended period, allowing for cross -country learning and exchange.  
18. The mechanism s set out in compon ent I allow for the pooling and blending of capital 
from different sources with varying risk appetites and tolerances. This component  offer s an 
ample range of financial products to support projects of all sizes, either directly or indirectly,


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 104 
 
 
with high lev els of flexibility and efficiency. For each country, this means that different financing 
structures can be offered to meet  the needs of different market segments. The AE aims to 
support and leverage the capacities of NDBs so that they can also provide seco nd-tier financing 
to create a multiplier effect. For sub component s I.1 and I.2 , only NDBs are executing entities 
(EEs). Following the examples of GCF -funded program mes FP009, FP063 and FP064, L FIs are 
not EE s because they have no contractual relationship with IDB.  
19. For the s overeign investment  loans (GCF: USD 135  million ), the  lender to sub -project s 
under component I could be  any of the following : (1) the NDB, in first -tier operations structured 
via dedicated credit lines;  (2) the SPV, in first -tier operations structured via SPVs ; and (3) the 
intermediary financial institution, in second -tier operations , structured via either dedicated 
financing lines or SPVs , as follows:   
(a) NDBs will have limited  discretion to a llocate fundin g. They  can on-lend to beneficiaries 
directly or through L FIs, as per their official mandate  and subject to the requirements in 
the Subsidiary A greements . If their mandate allows them to do both, they will have 
discretion on the operation type. In each case, the Subsidiary Agreement will require 
that an Operations Regulation  (OM)  be approved in terms acceptable to IDB as the  AE. 
The operational regulation detai ls the appropriate sector , use of proceeds , eligibility 
criteria and accreditation process for LFIs (when applicable) ;  
(b) When second -tier operations are applicable and  when  first -tier LFIs are involved, it is 
the executing NDB that is contractually responsible for deciding which projects in the 
credit portfolio of each LFI are presented to I DB for funding, based on the eligibility 
criteria fulfilment . As per the Subsidiary A greement and OM , NDBs will also be required  
to be responsible for supervising the use of proceeds ex  post ; 
(c) The tenors of subloans and other terms and conditions will depend on four  elements: 
(1) the characteristics of each project , (2) the entity financed,  (3) the ultimate use of 
proceeds , and (4) prevailing financial market practices ; and  
(d) Overall, GCF funding is expected to help offset incremental costs so that financing 
remains viable and projects profitable, but markets are not distorted. The mismatch 
between subloan tenors and GCF funding could be reflected in the revolving use of funds 
if the programme  monitoring shows positive results.  
20. The rationale for the t argeted investment grants  (GCF: USD 16 million ) is to overcome 
the higher risk barriers faced by bioeconomy investments , especially those innovating in terms 
of business models and/or introduction of more sustainable practices . The respective NDBs will 
implement the  investment grant s.  
21. Use of an investment grant  will need to comply wit h (1) the eligibility criteria ; (2) the 
methodology for concessionality  pass -through ; (3) the maximiz ation of impacts, mobili zation ; 
and (4) replicability . Whether an  investment grant  will be effective for a particular investment is  
highly depend ent on circumstances,  as codified in the  programme’s Operations manual (annex 
21).  
22. Three de -risking instruments can be structured and offered by the EEs  with the support 
of an investment grant , with  aim of reduc ing risk/exposure and/or enhanc ing the collateral 
profile of certain investments . The three instruments are:   
(a) Pari -passu credit guarantees, where potential losses are distributed proportionally 
between the guarantor and the creditor financial intermediary, wh o is the beneficiary of 
the guarantee;   
(b) Portfolio guarantee instruments (or risk -sharing facilities) , especially useful for some 
segments (micro/small businesses) that face significant limitations in terms of collateral 
available;  and


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 105 
 
 
(c) Risk transfer schemes  operating as guarantees for integrators that provide liquidity , 
supplies or other resources to companies in their supply chains.  
23. The AE provided (in annex 25(a)) d iffere nt alternatives to the investment grant s for 
achieving the required level of de -risking. During the review process, IDB explained that a GCF 
guarantee, in the context of an operation with a public EE , would need to be backed by a 
sovereign counter -guarantee. The sovereign counter -guarantee would not effectively share the 
risk and reduce the net exposure of the public sector (i.e. in the event of a call on the GCF 
guarantee the GCF would be reimbursed by the national government) , thus substantiating the 
need  for the grants.   
24. Subcomponent I.2 Equity  investments (GCF: USD 6.5 million ) and innovation grants  
(GCF: USD 4 million ) has two subcomponents: I .2.a Regenerate accelerator  (GCF: USD 2 million  
in equity and USD 4 million  in grant) , and I.2.b Direct funding for climate -tech and bio -tech 
companies ( GCF: USD 16 million in grants ). Subcomponent I.2 aims to target disruptive 
solutions , via new and sustainable business models and opportunities,  through 
entrepreneurship . It will be key to develop ing market sectors where climate -tech skills are 
crucial and better- informed consumer s. A focus on the  consumer side will need to be 
considered , not only for  product validation , but also for ensuring market traction , while 
acknowledging  the heterogeneity of th e entrepreneurship –ecosystem s dynamics among the 
Amazon countries.  
25. Subcomponent I.3 Technical cooperation  (GCF: USD 53.6 million ) intends to  enhance 
readiness for bankable projects under subcomponent I.1. Supervision costs are excluded 
because those costs are part of the  AE fee budget. Activities under the bio -business pipeline 
development and supervision subcomponent (I.3.1) comprise (1) support to potential 
beneficiaries , including LFIs , and (2) bio-prospection and knowledge management 
incorporating research and development  and innovation.  
26. The E Es for this subcomponent , IDB’s innovation laboratory ( IDB Lab ) and Conexus , will 
take the lead to support the following ongoing initiatives: ( 1) Amazonia 4.0  (e.g. Bio-fabrica  for 
cocoa and  cupuaçu  value chains ); (2) the Leticia Platform ,5 currently being piloted for Colombia 
with the support of WW F, the Paulson Institute and the Basque Institute for Climate Change 
based on the Herencia  Colombia Project ; and (3) the Amazon Bioeconomy marketplace , co-
created and designed by Rainforest Alliance, The Nature Conservancy, the Natural Capital Lab , 
and potentially collaborating  with global marketplace platforms such as Mercado Libre .  
27. These initiatives are underpinned by the  development of tools for connecting bio-
businesses to markets and different stakeholders including potential investors (I.3.b) and the 
develop ment  and strengthen ing of  the institutional and regulatory environment  (I.3.c) , 
including activities to support countries in their efforts to calculate the value the natural capital 
and forest assets  and mainstream the valuation processes into national economic accounting 
systems,  as well as the development of schemes (e.g. public –private partnerships) to foster 
private sector participation in forest and conservation concessions management schemes . 
Component II: Bond structuring and issuance  (total cost: USD 180  million; GCF  cost:  USD 35 
million ; co-financing: USD 145 million ) 
28. Component II  aims to support public entities to leverage finance from capital markets  
through the issuance of green and sustainable bonds. IDB has recent ly demonstrated experience 
supporting other public entities in Latin America and the Caribbean  (e.g. Mexican D evelopment 
Bank FIR) in the issuance of green bonds  related to activities leading to emission reductions and 
natural resources management . Some countries in the r egion are currently developing and 
strengthening their regulatory frameworks for sustainable bonds such as the Peru Sustainable 
 
5 See < https://hecoleticia -panda.hub.arcgis.com/ >.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 106 
 
 
Bond Framework ,6 which has been developed to follow the International Capital Market 
Association  principles .  
29. The programme’s bond component comprises two subcomponents: ( II.1) Technical 
cooperation for thematic bond issuance ( GCF: USD 5 million ) to provide specialized advisory 
services for bond issuance, including  support ing governmental entities on the development of 
the legal and financial structuring  of the bonds  and certification ; and ( II.2) Grants for guarantees  
(GCF: USD 30 million ), used to o vercome cost barriers for credit enhancement. IDB will co -
finance this second component through IDB g uarantees structured for bonds that include bio -
business es (Cofinancing: USD 145  million ).  
30. As stated in the funding proposal and its annex 25(a), the proposed use  of reimbursable 
investment  grants under  component  II.2 is to enhance viability and expand the reach of IDB 
guarantees for credit enhancement . This should result in a broader deployment of green  and 
thematic  bonds  aimed at funding bio -businesses and  is expected to improve the resulting all -in 
financing cost offered by the bonds, which is critical to the aim of providing bio -business es with 
viable terms.  
31. In respon se to a request from the GCF Secretariat, a  comparativ e modelling exercise was 
performed by IDB to demonstrate the increased leverage potential when using  GCF grants for 
guarantees instead of GCF  guarantees  (annex 25(b)) . Leverage factors under various scenarios 
of bond and guarantee coverage terms were modelled ( funding proposal, a nnex 25(b)) and 
found to range from 7.7 to 31. For the programme proposal,  the AE has assumed terms that 
result in a conservative 7.7 x leverage, in the lower end of the above -mentioned  range . This 
suggests that  USD 30 million of GCF grants are expected to mobilize approximately USD 231  
million  in bond investment. This is also reflected in the estimations of leverage potential in 
section E.2.3  of the funding proposal . 
32. The bonds will be  issued by  public entities (includi ng national governments and NDB s). 
It is expected that,  as a result of the programme, proceeds from the bonds (which are expected 
to provide long -term finance of at least 10 years) will be well positioned to provide funding 
(through NDBs) to value chains requiring longer tenor (e.g. most of the bio -business value 
chains prioritized ) analogous to those expected to be financed under component I. These 
require financing with funds raised directly via GCF  or IDB loans/grants supported by the 
programme or via capital markets, through bonds supported by the programme. The feasibility 
study  demonstrates that the size of the demand is large enough to justify both mechanisms. As 
the funding raised via bond issuance  will, in practice , complement the funding provided directly 
via loans/grants in component I, eligibility criteria for the use of  component II funds shall be the 
same as the eligibility criteria for financing under component I. 
Component III: Transversal technical cooperation ( total cost:  USD 29 million; GCF  cost:  USD 28 
million ; co-financing: USD 1  million ) 
33. Subcomponent III.1  Inclusion mechanisms for women and diversity in bio -businesses 
(GCF: USD 5 million ) aims to strengthen the capacities of women, and communities of 
indigenous people and those of African descen t. This will include the development of an 
Amazonian platform to promote women’s access to bio -busines s financial services while  
ensur ing a gender -lens  in the LFIs portfoli o. Dedicated t raining is defined in the  gender and 
diversity action plan ( annex 8 (b)).  
34. The goal s of subcomponent III.2 Integrated support and the strengthening of the 
ecosystem for Amazonian small and medium -sized enterprises (SME s) and their communities 
(GCF: USD 6 million ) and III.3  Stakeholder engagement plan (GCF: USD 2 million ) are to build 
cons ultation -based economic and social environmental resilience as well as prosperity and 
well -being of the SMEs and the Amazonian communities in which they operate.  IDB Lab will 
 
6 See <https://www.gob.pe/th/institucion/mef/informes -publicaciones/20493 89-bonos -sostenibles>.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 107 
 
 
facilitate and support the strengthening and promotion of SMEs owned and run by A mazonian 
traditional communities through innovative technological solutions, digitalization and 
connections between the SMEs, their supply chains, and local and international markets. This 
will strengthen the SME ecosystem by providing access to finance, s upport systems and 
business networks , as well as knowledge products and stakeholder meetings and processes. 
Both components are designed to complement each other during the execution  of the 
programme.    
35. Subcomponent III. 4 (GCF: USD 10 million ), the dedicated small grants programme (SGP)  
to local stakeholde rs, will be designed to strengthen mechanisms for inclusive business, 
accountability and participation, as well as partnerships with the public and private sector s, and 
civil society organizations . An SGP s ecretariat is expected to be set up for managing priorities 
and implementing decision -making processes. As indicated by the AE, the SGP responds to the 
stakeholder consultation process conducted as part  of the design of the programme.   
36. Subcomponent III.5 General advisory services  (GCF: USD 5 million ) includes knowledge  
(i.e. data) and business  management services for relevant regional cooperation  including the 
Leticia Pact and the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization.  
37. Subcomponent III.6 Programme monitoring and evaluation  (GCF: USD 1 million ) 
includes the relevant monitoring and evaluation activities as noted i n annex 11.  
38. Project management (total cost: USD 2 million; GCF cost: USD 0. 9 million , co-financing: 1. 1 
million ) 
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                          Scale: Medium  to high  
39. This is a cross -cutting programme with 50 per cent of the impact potential allocated for 
the forest and l and use result s area (mitigation), 25 per cent for e cosystems and e cosystem 
services (adaptation) and 25 per cent for the most vulnerable people, communities and regions 
(adaptation). The program me’s direct beneficiaries are estimated at 191,952  people (around 50 
per cent women) who are owners of bio- businesses and their family mem bers in the prioritized 
value chains that will be supported by the p rogramme. An additional 485 ,375  people  (around  
50 per cent women) in the region are expected to benefit indirectly from the p rogramme, from 
the new jobs that will be created through the bi o-businesses. Specific criteria for each identified 
value chain are to be used to realize programme benefits. These criteria are detailed in the 
program me’s theory of c hange , which is  provided in the funding proposal  and in the Operations 
manual  (annex 21) . The criteria for programme benefits are deemed to be appropriate and are 
in line with the GCF investment criteria indicators.  
40. The number of the beneficiaries (direct and indirect) is estimated as follows :  
(a) Direct beneficiaries are estimated based on  the total size of the programme (both GCF 
and co -financing) and the number of bio -business es that the programme can finance. 
Using the values from the economic and financial model,  (annex 3), the average 
investmen t for each value chain, market segment (micro, SMEs, medium, large) and 
country is used to estimate the average size of a loan. Using the total size (value) of the 
programme, the total number of loans that can be financed by the p rogramme is 
estimated for each value chain, market segment and country. The total direct 
beneficiaries are then estimated using the number of bio -businesses multiplied by 
average number of people per home of the beneficiary owner of the business. In this case, it is assumed that the direct beneficiaries correspond to the owner of the bio -


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 108 
 
 
business and the respective family members in the household supported by the income 
from the bio -business ; and 
(b) Indirect beneficiaries are assume d to be  employees working in the bio -businesses 
(excluding the owner) and their respective famil y member s who benefit from the 
income of the employee. This estimate is calculated using the number of bio -businesses 
multiplied by employees (excluding the owner) multiplied by the average number of 
family members of the respective employees (average family size minus 1, the actual 
employee) . 
41. The economic and f inancial analysis ( annex 3 ) provides details of the data and 
assumptions used for these es timations. The AE will follow  the criteria described in the 
Operations manual (annex 21 ) for all value chains . Thus, at a minimum, the direct beneficiaries 
are the family owners and their dependants  whose adaptive capacity has improved through the 
adoption of practices and technologies that improve their climat e resilience. This follows the 
agreed adaptation logic for each value chain. For indirect beneficiaries, the AE considers  the 
new employees  and their dependents  that benefit from the improved financial performance of 
the bio-business es. The a daptation impa cts, in terms of direct beneficiaries, are conservative 
and objectively verifiable.  
42. The feasibility study (annex 2)  contains the climate problem statement, which includes a 
well -documented and adequately referenced description of the implications of Amazo n dieback , 
and regional and national implications, as well as the dynamic  nature of changes  behind these 
implications. In addition, the theory of change  include s a detailed description of the climate 
risks for each prioritized value chain targeted by the programme; and the feasibility study 
includes a characterization of the climate risks overview at the Amazon basin level and presents 
country -specific profiles.  
43. The expected mitigation impact of the programme  is within a reasonable range in terms 
of cost -effectiveness, and the assumptions underpinning the estimates for each value chain are 
appropriate and conservative. The expected  mitigation impact of the programm e has been 
estimated in 123  MtCO 2eq reduced or avoided (including increased removals) in the forest and 
land use result s area. The methodology and assumptions  used  in the  mitigation impact 
calculations and related model s are described  in the GHG calculations (annex 22 (a)) and are 
based on the assumptions used in the feasibility study ( annex 2 ) and the economic and financial 
analysis  (annex 3 ).  
44. The programme  applies the Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (Ex -Act) developed by the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), which uses the appropriate 
default values in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) guidelines.7 Default 
factors were applied appropriately to the modelled land -use systems,  and assumptions were 
documented  (annex 22(b)) . For the timber value chain, the values have been adjusted in the 
model, changing the estimate of wood density on  the basis of data in the  forest reference 
emission level  (FREL)  and n ational GHG i nventor y of each participating country ; and the carbon 
fraction, being consistent with the IPCC default value for tropical regions as well as with most of 
the FRELs of the countries in the Amazon  basin . The total mitigation estimate for the 
programme  is conservative  because it does not include removals from the dead organic carbon 
pool (litter and deadwood).   
45. In terms of the baseline s, all countries considered for the programme  have submitted 
their FRELs to the UNFCCC : most addressed only  the activity  “reducing emissions from 
deforestation ” and some also  from “forest degradation ”. None have included “enhancement of 
forest carbon stocks ” (e.g. through restoration or reforestation).  Moreover, the information 
 
7 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and 2019 Refinement of the 2006 Guidelines for 
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 109 
 
 
contained in the national communications of the countries do es not commonly present the 
specific emission factors used for estimat ing land converted to f orest land and f orest land 
remaining forest land ( i.e. conservation). While s ome emission factors can be found in the 
countries’ biennial update reports  and national inventory reports , not all the countries have 
updated their respective reports . These sources , together with IPCC values, have been consulted 
by the AE to assess and validate relevant assu mptions and methodologies (e.g. those provided 
for through Ex -Act) which has made it possible to model broader coverage of the different  value 
chains included in the economic model  of the program me.  
46. The programme’s proposed value chains ( except for a quaculture ) each  contribute to the 
mitigation impact potential of the programme. During programme implementation, the AE will 
monitor developments around international validation of possible methodologies that could be 
used for measuring the mitigation benefits of aquaculture projects.   
47. Considering the complexities  of the proposed programme  – its regional nature , scope , 
the need for standardized definitions,  and the classification schemes for depicting and analysing 
the land cover across the  vast Amazon  region  – the feasibility study makes use of the  regional 
recognized information sources covering the Pan Amazon region (i.e. RAISG8). Using this 
information sources, the land use and land -cover change and dynamics across the Pan Amazon 
in the last 100 years , identifying deforestation patterns and drivers  across frontier landscapes 
(e.g. fig. 9 in the feasibility study ) were better unders tood . The land use categories (e.g. F orest) 
were defined based on country- specific (Governmental -led) sources  (e.g. Vegetation Cover Map 
of Peru, Ecosystems Map of Ecuador ), and therefore, the definitions used to determine each land 
use category are based on official country definitions and can therefore be compared and 
contrasted with other classification systems.     
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                               Scale: Medium  to high 
48. The programme is strengthening regional integration among Amazon countries, by 
supporting the regionalization of bioeconomy value chains and integration initiatives. This 
holistic and systematic approach will not only increase productivity and green employ ment in 
the Amazon r egion, but also promot e inclusion and sustainable business models that increase 
climate resilience and reduce GHG emissions.  
49. There are several elements showing that this programme is more than a sum of 
interventions at the country level and has a clear and demonstrated innovation and impact at 
programme level.  
(a) The proposed programme considers a set of interlinked individual pro jects, unified by 
the overarching vision of reducing GHG emissions and increasing the resilience of 
targeted value chains and ecosystems in the Amazon region by enabling the conditions 
to increase the funding flow  to bio-business es in the Amazon ’s bioecono my. Interlinked 
individual projects also contribute to common objectives and strategic goals, which will 
deliver sustainable climate results and impact in the GCF mitigation and adaptation 
result areas efficiency, effectively and at scale. Therefore, the p rogramme’s activities are 
coherent, creating synergies between components and sub -project s and reinforcing the 
intended outcomes. The planned activities add value by combining their components. It 
creates greater impact, increased sustainability, higher co st-effectiveness , and deeper 
integration rather than when combined individually . 
(b) The programme stimulates two key shifts: ( 1) moving away from an economy based on 
forest and natural resource -exploitation, cattle raising and annual agriculture, to a 
nature -based economy consisting of diverse and sustainable bio -business es, and (2) 
 
8 Red Amazónica de Información Socio Ambiental Georreferenciada.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 110 
 
 
chang ing values that see the Amazon region as an infinite source of natural resources 
and agriculture land for capitalist consumption, to a diverse environ ment , of global 
importance, made from standing forests and related ecosystems and its local 
communities.  It builds an inclusive wealth paradigm based on the Amazon biome 
natural capital . 
(c) The programme’s biobusiness  approach is a financial innovation. The focus on micro 
businesses and SMEs is welcome as these enterprises usually lack the scale to attract 
conventional investment , despite having viable business model s and a clear climate 
adaptation and/or mitigation pathway. By focusing on specific value chains relevant to 
the Amazon region, it, as sub -categories provide an innovative approach to 
programmatic structure and clearly demonstrates added value compared to s tand -alone 
projects. 
50. The proposal is technically sound. Specific theories of change are provided for each of 
the value chains addressed by the program me, linking the technical interventions directly to the 
program me’s climate rationale and result areas. Th e interventions proposed for each value 
chain are described in sufficient detail and references are provided to relevant research and 
practical experience , and when available, referencing recent research published in peer -
reviewed articles . The feasibility  study (annex 2) provides detailed analysis of the national 
contexts and justification for the proposed technical approaches. The funding proposal also 
includes details of the eligibility criteria to be used for assessing  the proposals of bio- businesses 
in each value chain before investments are approved  in the operations manual (annex 21) . The 
programme has potential for demonstrating the economic viability of climate -resilient practices 
in the targeted value chains at a scale sufficient to leverage matching investments through co -
finance and additional private and public sources. Leveraged investments will benefit both the 
value chains supported by the programme , and the additional value chains and interventions 
which may  contribute towards the overall programme goal as described in annex 3 . 
51. IDB will work with the programme’s NDBs as its main partners . The existing networks 
and beneficiary clusters can be  leveraged and  will be complementary to the work that 
mainstream or commercial banks are initiating in the region. Most of these commercial banks 
do not have direct access branches in the intervention sites of the region.  The programme 
expects to reach different bioeconomy value chains through the established  microfinance, rural 
finance and cooperative finance institutions and networks working in each of the target 
countries, thus strengthening existing financial institutional  fabric  in the region.  
52. While countries have made great efforts to estimate and monit or their national income 
accounts to evaluate economic performance and assess the effectiveness of their policies, 
traditional indicators based on national income accounts, such as gross domestic product (GDP), 
are limited because they do not consider the use and consequent depletion of the natural capital (e.g. ecosystems integrity, biodiversity) of a country. If countries start incorporating their 
natural capital into their national accounts to, they may be able to make better economic 
decisions. Thus,  incorporati ng natural capital accounting through the use of the System of 
Environmental -Economic Accounting
9 is particularly  relevan t for Amazon countries. The system 
follows a similar accounting structure to that used for the System of National Accounts.  IDB, the 
AE for this programme , has demonstra ble experience (e.g. through  the Integrated Economic -
Environmental Modelling  platform) of incorporating in its natural capital -related  projects its 
accounting in the national accounts of the countries and evaluating the expanded impact of the projects , and would be a strategic choice for this programme.  
53. Thematic bonds are financial tools earmarked for specific use of funds, such as green or 
sustainable bonds.  Recently, the IDB launched the Green Bond Transparency Platform, which 
captures all the issuer -reported and external reviewer data in a free- of-charge one -stop -shop 
 
9 See < https://seea.un.org/ >.


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 111 
 
 
allow ing for harmoni zation, comparability  and learning. The platform is also a discussion hub 
for taxonomy, methodology and green frameworks. Any thematic bonds with green proceeds 
will be informed by the data, evidence and best practice on the use of proceeds and impacts. The 
IDB team has built a network of several key market actors such as  issuers, external reviewers, 
underwriting banks, investors  and stock exchanges, as well as standard setters.  
54. The challenge for the b onds component of the proposal will be the methodological 
structuring and knowledge transfer required for bioeconomy -relevant  bonds. The frameworks 
will need to be informed by existing experience and built in to the programme . Moreover, many 
potential issuers in the region, particularly small or first -time issuers, face incremental costs 
associated with bond issuance and ex -post reporting. According to the AE, in four of the 
targeted countries (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru), between 2014  and 2021 there were 52 
individual green bond issuances totalling USD 9 b illion ( covering about 37  per cent of the La tin 
America and Caribbean region). The largest share was  for Brazil (85 per cent ), with Colombia 
and Peru account ing for about 7  per cent, and Ecuador makes up 1  per cent. NDBs make up 10  
per cent of the total, with financial corporates at 14  per cent and non- financial corporates 
making up  the bulk , at 76 per cent .  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                               Scale: High  
55. The programme creates  economic, environment, social and gender co -benefits beyond 
the typical climate mitigation and adaptation benefits. The programme directly contributes to 
targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 and 13 .A of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 13 ( climate action) and 
contr ibutes to multiple other SDGs , as follows :10 SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) 
targets 8.2, 8.3, 8.5, 8.9 and 8.10; SDG 15 (life on land ) targets 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.5, 15.6, 15.9, 
15.A and 15 .B; SDG 2 (zero hunger, achieve food security and promote sustainable agriculture)  
targets 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2 .A; and SDG 5 (gender equality ) targets 5.5, 5 .A and 5 .B. Indirectly, the 
programme contributes to SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 3 (health and well- being), SDG12 
(responsible consumption and production) and SD G17 (partnerships for the goals).  
56. In terms of environmental benefits, the programme will promote the conservation, 
restoration and sustainable management of 3.9  million  hectares of natural forest ecosystems. 
This is achieved through the promotion of bio -business es based on natural ecosystem use : 
namely  non- timber forest products ( 2.9 million hectares ) and nature -based tourism ( 1 million 
hectares). In addition, the project will improve environmental conditions in forests through 
sustainable timber harvesti ng (105,000 hectares), and land uses such as agroforestry and native 
palm cultivation (219,000 hectares). All these improved land uses contribute to mitigation co -
benefits through the sequestration and emission reductions of 123 MtCO 2eq over 20 years.  
57. Beyond the climate mitigation co -benefits, environmental protection and biodiversity 
conservation is also supported by the programme. The Amazon is the most species -rich biome 
on the planet. The extreme species -richness and local knowledge wealth amounts to a n 
enormous potential to sustain bio -business . This highlights biodiversity as an intrinsic element 
of economic success , in two main ways : 
(a) The paradigm shift to a more biodiversity -based economy not only promotes the local 
economy but also has major potenti al to benefit other cultural and social aspects of 
biodiversity management. These benefits include fair access and benefit sharing, protection and positive use of traditional and local knowledge and increased research 
on sustainable use of biodiversity. Th rough this, the programme contributes to s trategic 
goals B, D and E of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets ;
11 and 
 
10 See < https://www.un.org/sustainabl edevelopment/sustainable -development- goals/ >. 
11 See < https://www.cbd.int/sp/targets/ >.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 112 
 
 
(b) The preservation and enhanced management of the biodiversity, soils and ecological 
processes of the natural forests deliver significant benefits related to the enhancement 
and maintenance of key ecosystem services such as water provision, pollination, 
recreational opportunities, raw materials (wood, fibres)  provision , food and natural 
medicines. These services are of significant economic, social, health and cultural 
importance, while not yet adequately included in traditional economic accounting and 
policy decisions.  
58. The programme’s social co -benefits are measured in terms of the direct ( 191,952 ) and 
indirect ( 485,375 ) beneficiaries of the supported and developed bio -business es (i.e. business 
owners and their families, including existing and newly generated jobs). This includes climate 
adaptation benefits because livelihoods based on improved biobusiness are more resilient to 
the effect s of climate change (heat, droughts, flooding) compared with the business -as-usual 
economic sectors (extensive cattle raising, annual agriculture and so on ). Other social benefits 
include the generation of almost 50,000 new jobs and of around 17 per cent increa sed income  
per job overall.  
59. Other socioeconomic co -benefits are generated by programme activities such as the 
training of and communication with the target population , which will strengthen their financ ial 
administration and business management skills (70  per cent of all business owners) with the 
use of technology and certifications (40 per cent of all supported biobusiness) and overall 
awareness of climate threats and related appropriate responses  (10,000 people).  
60. In relation to gender issues, the status quo based on destructive forest use, cattle 
ranching, and agriculture is male dominated. The power imbalance characteri zes a situation in 
which other members of the communities, usually women and youth, area able participate only 
marginally in decision -making and benefit sharing, and have to partake in more risky forms of 
labour (i.e. menial labour in  unfit or unhealthy working conditions ). Diversification of the local 
economy with different (economically and environmentally sustainable) bio -business es 
increase s the options for different members of the community to have jobs (or household tasks) 
that match their interests, skills and capacity, reducing the risks of inequity or unhealthy labour 
conditions.  
61. An entire subcomponent (III .1) is devoted  to mechanisms to increase diversity and the 
participation of women in the bio-business  approach , with a dedicated budget of USD 5 million . 
In accordance with national gender strategies, the programme will encourage women’s 
participation especially by stre ngthening women- owned businesses and inclusion into fairer 
employment schemes. This will be done through the development of strategies, explicit 
measures and/or services to promote equitable access to the benefits of investments supported, 
such as:  
(a) Technic al training or financial services tailored to women (taking into account collective 
land ownership) ;  
(b) Better and equitable access to information and technologies;   
(c) Equitable ownership over productive factors such as land, animals and capital;   
(d) Including sp ecific criteria for the use of proceeds obtained from the issuance of 
sustainable bonds in favour of activities led by minorities, indigenous people and women ;  
(e) Access to formal economies;  and 
(f) Better promotion and marketing strategies for bio -products in local, national and 
international markets, coupled with good production practices.  
62. The programme will apply gender -segregated data collection, and analysis of country -
level gaps and opportunitie s: it targets a minimum of 50 per cent female participation in all


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 113 
 
 
activities and benefits (58 per cent of supported bio -businesses will have female majority 
ownership). Programme implementation activities will include the identification at the country 
level of gender gaps and the potential to incorporate specific measures to ensure gender 
equality.  
3.4 Needs of the recipien ts                                                                    Scale: High  
63. The AFOLU sector is a major contributor to GHG emissions in countries in the Amazon 
and a key driver of rising deforestation rates. Despite willingness to find ways to reduce 
deforestation and land degradation, efforts so far have been insufficient to rever se trends. A 
shift in local productive structures and practices cannot be achieved on public efforts alone . 
Good public policies on private participation are key to produce a fundamental and long -lasting 
change, specifically via encouraging an increase in  the level of investment and investing in 
business models, activities and technologies with sustainability at their core. 
64. In the programme’s targeted countries, natural capital is substantial, and the 
development of bio -business es pose an important opportu nity to address AFOLU -related GHG 
emissions and increase resilience to climate change. The programme aims to incentiv ize 
measures to  better connect relevant actors within these markets and for them to realize the 
value of natural capital in these activities at scale, unblocking the constricted capital flows 
prevalent under the status quo by focusing on two main areas:  
(a) Strengthening and/or stabili zing a proper regulatory environment, or specific 
mechanisms to adequately value natural/forest assets ; and 
(b) Attracting  private capital, particularly from local financial systems and impact -driven 
investors to bio -businesses that can deliver climate benefits with the maximum 
leverage.  
65. GCF resources are necessary for these actions for two primary reasons:  
(a) Advances made in regulatory and institutional frameworks vary among the six targeted 
countries and the development of bioeconomy strategies is still in a nascent stage. Overall, legal and policy frameworks are in place for the conservation and sustainable 
managemen t of forests and biodiversity, but incentives for streamlining the 
participation of private actors in related businesses need to be developed . The 
programme builds on the demonstrated commitment to consolidate a support system 
with corresponding actions for safeguarding their natural capital in this complex sector . 
(b) All six targeted countries have financial systems that show low levels of depth, are 
inherently risk -averse and offer limited financing alternatives for innovative nature-
based ventures. There re mains a lack of a dequate financial instruments that can crowd 
in the private sector to support more rapid development of these business models. In 
general, the risks associated with these projects, especially in the absence of proper 
natural capital valuation, hinders credit and investment by private actors. In addition, support is needed across the region to overcome barriers related to the limited 
expertise and advancement in techno logy development associated with the innovative 
nature of these businesses.  
66. The environmental and social management framework ( ESMF ) (annex 6 (a)) and 
stakeholder engagement plan (annex 7) set out the approach for achieving continuous inclusion 
and engagem ent of indigenous people and local communities through, for example,  the SGP  for 
indigenous and traditional communities and a public consultation series . When applicable, the 
eligibility criteria for investments also include criteria sensitive to gender and i ndigenous 
people s’ considerations,  such as participation and consent requirements. The pro gramme will


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 114 
 
 
not include high -risk projects such as involuntar y resettlement or adverse impacts on critical 
habitats or indigenous peoples.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                                           Scale: High  
67. Each of the countries targeted by the p rogramme have climate, forestry and biodiversity 
policies. All six targeted countries have well- established climate commitments and action plans 
– at both the national and subnational level  – related to reducing GHG emissions and increasing 
climate resilience and adaptation, including n ationally determined contributions and n ational 
adaptation plans. The countries also widely recognize  the private sector’s role in deploying 
investments to sup port their goals, and the potential of the private sector to contribute to the 
paradigm shift to a low -emission and climate -resilient development path.  
68. In terms of forestry and biodiversity policies, approaches to forestry policies differ 
among countries, but many of them include bioeconomy -related considerations as part of their 
strategies to address chronic financing and implementation gaps. The funding proposal 
document presents a detailed overview of all countries’ sectoral and general policy framework s 
that cover some areas of relevance, such as payments for ecosystem services, environmental incentives, supply chain legislation, organic agriculture, sustainable fisheries, ecotourism, or 
technological research. Specific country examples are as follows:  
(a) Brazil has incorporated bioeconomy strategies in several strategies, including the 
National Plan for the Promotion of Socio -Biodiversity Value Chains and the National 
Programme for Biobased Agricultural Inputs ;  
(b) Ecuador has stated its vision to pursue the bioeconomy as a strategy for recovering from 
the socioeconomic impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic, preserving its threatened 
ecosystems, and diversifying the country’s production matrix to become more independent from fossil fuels ; 
(c) Peru has recently approved  its Law on Societies of Collective Benefit and Interest ;12  
(d) The bioeconomy concept is integrated in several Colombian national development 
documents such as the Green Growth Strategy, the Circular Economy Strategy, and the 
Bioeconomy Policy ; and 
(e) Guyana an d Suriname also have several policies in place that contribute to a sustainable 
bioeconomy.  
69. The proposed Amazon Bioeconomy Fund is a key tool to promote regional collaborative 
implementation of the Leticia Pact, signed in 2019 by the p rogramme’s participa ting countries. 
The text of the Pact lists various points on which signatory countries intend to collaborate, 
including (1) combating deforestation, (2) promoting forest restoration and sustainable use of 
resources, (3) mainstreaming actions to strengthen the rights of women and indigenous people, 
and (4) creating educational campaigns on the importance of conservation of the Amazon.  
70. Guided by the spirit of the amended Amazon Cooperation Treaty and the Leticia P act, all 
operations carried out within the framework of the programme will contribute to the target 
countries’ national priorities relat ing to climate change and land degradatio n (i.e. nationally 
determined contributions  and national adaptation plans);  commitments under the Convention 
on Biological Diversity and their n ational biodiversity strategy and a ction plans ; and  
international treaties such as the Paris Agreement, the Send ai Framework, and the SDG s.  
71. During the development of the p rogramme proposal, relevant national government 
agencies were closely engaged to ensure governance support and strategy alignment with 
 
12 See < https://busquedas.elperuano.pe/normaslegales/ley -de-la-sociedad -de-beneficio- e-interes -colectivo -socieda -
ley-n-310 72-1905747 -1/>.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 115 
 
 
climate, forest and bioeconomy -related legal frameworks. In addition, p erspectives of various 
local stakeholders have been considered, including NDBs, government ministries, bio -business 
developers, LFIs and investors. Focusing on the finance sector, n ational financial institutions 
and private sector organizations ( innovation labs, incubators, and accelerators) are considered 
to be a key part of the programme’s delivery model as EE s of many of the programme’s financial 
instruments. Country -specific implementation will ensure close consultations with local 
indigenous people and communities, as well as civil society organizations, in all cases. Also, the 
AE will engage with universitie s, scientific organizations and cross -national networks, all of 
which are working to support entrepreneurship in the bioeconomy.  
72. During the implementation phase, strategic decisions will be coordinated with national 
designated authorities and the relevant country authorities to ensure coherence and 
complementarity with their existing and upcoming initiatives in the Amazon with a focus on the 
scalability of approaches, and the promotion of knowledge sharing. A strategic steering 
committee will be set up at the country level with the respective national designated authority , 
the EEs (where applicable), and the respective Ministry of Finance to provide periodic strategic 
input, while the day -to-day execution is conducted by the designated EE( s). The AE will wor k 
closely with governments and accompany their efforts to consider, evaluate and implement concrete actions, sectoral agreements and establish targets in their agendas as a priority.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                        Scale:  Medium  to high 
73. From the perspective of both  mitigation and adaptation, the programme exhibits high 
efficiency per USD of GCF funding in comparison with the relevant benchmarks. The 
programme’s mitigation cost -effectiveness is USD 2.43 /tCO 2 (GCF financing) which is below 
GCF’s portfolio average in Latin America and the Caribbean region and international AEs. 
Similarly, the cost per beneficiary is also below the GCF portfolio average as well as the averages 
for Latin America and the Caribbean , direct access entities and international AEs . The 
programme’s average e conomic internal r ate of r eturn is 49 per cent including mitigation 
benefits, for a carbon price of USD 40/tCO 2, and 14 per cent without carbon benefits. This is well 
above the social cost of capital of 8  per cent  used in the analysis and is robust to sensitivity 
analysis. It provides analytical comfort in the overall programme intended impacts.  
74. The funding amount requested by the AE is thoroughly justified. One of the main 
strengths of the programme design is a granular analysis of both financing gaps and economic 
and financial consideration of the value chains prioritized. The selection of these value chains is 
well defined and justified. The feasibility study data annex  (annex 2 (b)) describes in detail (1) 
the number of businesses by sector and size targeted ; (2) the average financing ticket size for 
each business size and sector ; and (3) the total financial demand of business es by size and 
sector. It also describes all these element s not only in aggregate fashion at programme level, but 
also for each country.  
75. The demand analysis shows that the financial gap for bioeconomy businesses in the 
programme countries amounts to more than USD 2 billion. This gap is split into USD 834 million 
for micro businesses, USD 693 billion for small and medium size businesses, and USD 571 billion for large businesses.  
76. From a sectoral perspective, the AE’s analy sis estimated funding needs in the agriculture 
sector to be the largest at USD 1.1 billion, followed by the forestry sector at USD 899 million, and 
wilderness at USD 43.7 million.  
77. The country allocation of the financial demand adequately reflects the extension and 
spatial coverage of the Amazon ecosystems. The financial allocation responds to the 
negotiations between the AE and each of the countries during programme formulation and  
provides a reflection of the heterogeneity of the economic and political si tuations in the region.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 116 
 
 
78. The choice of financial instruments by the AE directly stems from the financing gap 
analysis. The funding proposal adopts a programmatic approach that targets the de -risking of 
bioeconomy business es at all the relevant levels :  
(a) Com bining concessional loans with the innovative use of reimbursable grants for credit 
enhancement, early -stage equity investment allows the programme to target companies 
of all the relevant sizes ranging from micro businesses to SMEs with potential access to  
bank lending, innovative companies needing  equity financing, and large businesses 
seeking capital market funding through loans ;  
(b) The AE proposes to use the GCF concessional loan to de -risk LFI investment in bio -
business es, potentially leading to additional private sector finance through 
demonstration effects. The AE is requesting a low -concessional senior loan (0.75  per 
cent pricing ; 20-year tenor ; 5-year gra ce period) with terms and size as per the senior 
loan provided by the AE ( LIBOR  + 0.08  per cent  pricing ; 25-year tenor ; 5-year grace 
period). This request is backed by the results of a thorough and detailed “with and 
without GCF” financial analysis that de monstrates that the GCF will contribute to 
enhanc ing the bankability of bioeconomy projects by increasing average interest rate of 
returns. However, and most critically, the financial analysis shows that the average 
payback period for the activities under consideration in the proposal is between 7 and 20 years ( economic model, annex 3 (a)). Local LFIs are commonly not able to provide 
financing with such long tenors because they are not familiar with the credit risk 
associated with both the beneficiaries and the sector. The GCF concessionality is 
therefore justified on the basis of  the financial analysis and the feasibility study results ;  
(c) In addition to directly providing concessional loans, the AE will use GCF reimbursable 
grants to structure risk -sharing in struments, such as portfolio guarantees targeting LFIs. 
The rationale behind this choice of instrument is described in a nnex 25 (a). These risk -
sharing instruments will directly enable the LFI loans necessary to complement the 
GCF’s USD 135 million senior l oan and IDB’s USD 155 million senior loans. The funding 
proposal projects a co -financing ratio of 1:1.1 considering the USD 318 million co -
financing and 1:2.4 considering additional USD 400 million. This includes USD 49 million 
from LFIs ’ own resources, US D 181 million in debt from bond investors, and USD 175 
million equity and debt from other sources ( funding proposal section C.1.b).  
79. The delivery model selected by the AE, through NDBs as EEs for c omponent I, also 
increases the likelihood for success for three reasons: (1) it increases the likelihood of 
successfully disbursing the programme resources by leveraging the NDBs’  network and existing 
distribution channels ; (2) it builds the capacity of NDBs and LFIs in assessing risks related to 
bioeconomy business, alleviating risk perception barriers;  and ( 3) it builds the capacity of NDBs 
in terms of innovative and strategic use of their ow n resources. Discussion on the choice of EEs 
is described in detail in a nnex 20 (b). The capacity -building components will cement the impact 
of the programme and increase the likelihood of improved access to finance for bioeconomy 
businesses by reducing the  risk perception of local banks towards businesses operating in the 
value chains under consideration.   
80. The AE also includes a component aiming at catalysing the use of capital markets to 
finance bioeconomy activities. This is targeted toward s the largest businesses under the 
program me. It is a realistic target because the programme includes  Brazil, which is both the 
most sophisticated capital market in the Latin America and Caribbean region and the country that has the largest share of the Amazon, as well as Colombia, another sophisticated  capital 
market. The AE makes innovative use of reimbursable grants to reduce transaction costs for the bond issuers, increase the coverage of IDBs ’ own guarantees, and ultimately create the 
additional credit enhancement t hat will lower the cost of capital, in addition to transaction 
costs, for the green bond issuers.


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 117 
 
 
81. The AE provided analysis in annex 25 (b) demonstrating the leverage effect of the GCF 
instruments for component II (bonds) with a potential 10x leverage in th e case of the use of GCF 
grants.  This means that the component ’s USD 30 million grants can unlock up to USD 231 
million in green bond issuance under its most conservative leverage scenario of 7.7x. This 
component will be delivered by IDB and will be accomp anied by USD 5 million technical 
assistance support to the IDB Green Bond Transparency Platform , which increases this GCF 
component’s paradigm shift potential in the capital market s of Latin American and the 
Caribbean  in a cost -effective way.  
82. With the use of GCF equity, the programme aims to address the financing needs of 
smaller start -ups and the s o-called “missing middle ”. The funding proposal adequately 
references those incubators and accelerators  that provide institutional strengthening of start -
ups rather than investment in the region, and explains that the investment available is usually 
focusi ng on start -ups able to absorb more than USD 1 m illion in investment, which is not the 
case of the bioeconomy start -ups in the Amazon biome. Here, the choice of delivery model is 
conducive to scalability. Indeed, the AE will invest through fund managers , which makes it 
possible to build capacity and alleviat e risk perception barriers among the ecosystem of local 
venture capital funds.  
83. The programme’s t erm sheet include s the relevant covenants requiring that the AE 
ensures that the GCF concessionality is pas sed on to the end beneficiaries. These considerations 
are further described in the Operations manual (annex 21).  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
84. Programme background . The programme aims to increase private investment in bio -
businesses that will contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation in the Amazon, through innovative financing solutions, strengthening  the business environment and providing 
capacity -building interventions. The intended environmental and social co -benefits  of the 
increased investment in bio -businesses include diversif ication of  current crop production 
systems,  improve ments to  the provision of agro -ecosystem and forest ecosystem goods and 
services;  an increase in income sources for communities in rural areas;  and enhance d forest 
growth, species diversity and ecosystem function.  
85. Environmental and s ocial (E&S) r isk category and safeguard instrument . The 
programme is classified as category I2 ( medium level of i ntermediation) because the potential 
E&S  risks and impacts are likely to be low to moderate, and are largely manageable by 
implementing standard mitigation measures. The Secretariat confirms the risk category and 
that this is within the AE’ s accreditation level. High E&S risk activities ( category A) will be 
excluded from being supported by the programme. The programme has developed an environmental and s ocial analysis and an ESMF. As part of the ESMF, the AE will follow its E&S 
risk procedures and apply its Platform for the Analysis of Institutional Capacity (PACI) tool to 
identify the needs of local financing institutions to manage the E&S risk s. 
86. Compliance with the GCF environmental and s ocial safeguards (ESS) s tandards . 
The discussions below summarize the programme’s compliance with the GCF ESS standards and requirements.  
87. ESS 1: Assessment and m anagement of E&S risks and i mpacts . The program me has 
prepared an  environmental and social analysis  and an ESMF  that provides a description of how 
the E&S risks and  impacts will be assessed, managed, mitigated, and supervised at both the 
framework and project operational level.


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 118 
 
 
88. The ESMF  has been established in accordance with the AE’s e nvironmental and s ocial 
policy framework wherein financial intermediaries will manage the E&S risks and impacts in 
accordance with the specific environmental and social management systems (ESMS) that will be 
developed by each financial intermediar y and approved by the AE. Specific su b-project s and 
investments to be implemented will be subject to environmental and social screening, 
assessment and implementation of management measures.  
89. The programme intends to support the following sectors in the region: agriculture 
(perennial and annu al crop s); agroforestry and non -timber forest products; aquaculture and 
fish farming; and ecotourism. Hence, E&S risks relating to soil, solid waste, pesticide and 
fertilizer use, and energy and water use are expected to be triggered. Concerns on risks 
regarding  occupational and community health and safety, as well as on biodiversity and 
ecosystems services are also expected. General mitigation strategies are in place in the ESMF 
and will be detailed for the sub -project s after  the environmental and social i mpact assessment  
and the environmental and social management plan have been finalized ; 
90. ESS 2: Labo ur and w orking conditions . The programme may have potential for child 
and forced labo ur practices that occur in the region (including supply chain -related practices) 
as well as potential for exposure to physical, biological and chemical hazards. To mitigate these 
concerns, the programme w ill support the development of sectoral labo ur practices and 
working conditions checklist s and guidance assessment s consistent with the AE’s 
environmental and s ocial performance standard. Supply chain auditing protocols will also be 
implemented as necessary ; 
91. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and p ollution prevention . The eligible activities under the 
programme may have poten tial to cause water pollution as a result of their implementation. 
There may also be issues regarding  final disposal of waste and hazardous materials. To mitigate 
these risks, the programme will ensure that implementors acquire the necessary environmental,  
health and safety permits required at the national level including use of applicable good 
international environment, health and safety (EHS) practices and guidelines. Nevertheless, the 
programme is expected to promote resource efficiency as one of its eli gible activities and will 
include those investments that demonstrate recyclability and/or use of recycled materials;  
92. ESS 4: Community h ealth, safety and s ecurity . The implementation of the programme 
may affect communities in terms of  EHS -related issues suc h as potential exposure to hazards 
(physical and chemical) including concerns on access to resources and benefit sharing. To 
mitigate these potential impacts and concerns the programme will support the development of 
EHS checklists for communities and guid ance assessments consistent with the AE’s 
environmental and s ocial performance standard 4;  
93. ESS 5: Land a cquisition and involuntary resettlement . The programme will not 
support activities that will involve involuntary resettlement and these investments will not be 
eligible under the programme. This will also be the case for  its excluded sub-project s and 
investments. Should land acquisition occur, th is will be conducted on a negotiated settlement 
and will be on a “willing -seller -willing -buyer” basis ; 
94. ESS 6: Biodiversity c onservation and s ustainable management of l iving natural 
resources . The programme may include  land conversion and deforestation risk s that could 
affect protected areas and key biodiversity areas. To mitigate these risks, the programme will exclude activities that will require deforestation, or which present significant risk of induced 
deforestation, including those in the supply chain.  Monitoring of land use and land -cover change 
will also be undertaken ; 
95. ESS 7: Indigenous p eoples and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy . The Pan Amazon 
region where the project will be implemented is home to 1.5 million people ( around 4 per cent 
of total population ). To ensure minimal risks to indigenous peoples and local communities, 
including Afro -descendant and peasant communities, the p rogramme will exclude sub -project s


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 119 
 
 
that could have potentially adverse impact s on communities and/or indigenous populations, 
including involuntary resettlement. The AE also notes that any potential risks to indigenous 
peoples will be managed in line with i ts latest new e nvironmental and s ocial policy framework , 
which includes standard 7 on indigenous peoples. This standard includes the provision for free, 
prior and informed consent of affected communities. It also excludes the possibility of projects 
that m ay have potential undesired contact with indigenous people who are uncontacted living 
in voluntary isolation or “in initial contact”. The AE has included an outline for the development 
of sociocultural analyses and indigenous peoples plans. When additional due diligence on 
indigenous peoples is required beyond the in -house capacity, a dedicated external expert will be 
engaged by the AE.  
96. The AE will also ensure consultation and stakeholder engagement with indigenous 
peoples and has conducted socialization activities through round -table  meeting s that include 
indigenous organizations. Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, dialogues have been conducted 
mainly online, with the methodology and lessons learned noted in the s takeholder engagement 
plan. The AE notes in the ESMS that, as a result of these dialogues, elements to strengthen 
engagement of indigenous peoples were included in the proposal. These include a s mall grants 
programme for indigenous and traditional communities, continuous stakeholder engagement, 
strengthe ning the inclusion mechanism for gender and diversity, and amplifying the dialogue 
process on topics such as indigenous knowledge, capacity -building of women and 
empowerment of indigenous peoples. The AE notes the role and engagement of indigenous 
women in  territorial management and local livelihoods. An action plan that targets inclusion of 
indigenous peoples and local communities to increase their bio -business capacities is part of the 
gender and diversity action plan; and  
97. ESS 8: Cultural h eritage . The implementation of the program me could have adverse 
impacts on cultural heritage. To mitigate these impacts, the activities will be ensured to protect cultural heritage from the adverse impacts due to project activities and instead support its 
preservation. The sub-project s will also promote the equitable sharing of benefits from the use 
of cultural heritage consistent with the AE’s e nvironmental and social performance standard 8.  
98. Implementation arrangements . The AE will monitor the environmental and social 
performance of the specific sub -project s financed by the programme through supervision by 
safeguards specialists.  Loan agreements will also include reporting requirements by the NDBs 
on compliance with environmental and social safeguards. Supervision missi ons will be 
conducted, and corrective action plans will be developed as necessary to address non -
compliance. Financial institutions will be supported in the development of each sub-project  
level ESMS through the capacity -building subcomponent of the progra mme. Reporting on 
progress towards achieving environmental and social objectives will be part of the legal and 
contractual obligations of the borrowers.  
99. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. During the development of the 
programme, consultatio ns and dialogues  have been conducted  with representatives of 
traditional communities,  as well as international civil organizations. Some of the concerns 
raised during these consultations that were considered by the programme include  issues on 
extractive industr ies as a threat to food sovereignty and ancestral knowledge;  inclusion of 
indigenous peoples ’ concerns;  potential for deforestation ; land tenurial issues ; and exclusion of 
small organiza tions in implementing activities. The programme has also developed a 
stakeholder engagement plan to ensure transparency and meaningful consultation with affected 
and interested parties. Stakeholder engagement and consultations will be conducted 
throughout the programme cycle.   
100. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The programme will have a GRM for 
communities and individuals who may be affected or potentially affected by the activities under 
the programme and will be able to access them at all three levels: t he sub -project GRM, the AE’s 
GRM, and the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism . This three -tiered approach will be


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 120 
 
 
established early in the stakeholder engagement process, in a culturally appropriate manner 
and its design will include inputs from locally affe cted stakeholders. In line with the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF indigenous peoples’ focal point will be available for 
assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.  
4.2 Gender policy  
101. The gender assessment provides the context of t he enabling environment in the six 
countries that are the focus of the project. It indicates that the six countries have ratified the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and its optional 
protocol and the Inter -America n Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of 
Violence against Women. The constitutions of the respective countries also indicate that there is respect for equality between women and men , and prohibition of discrimination based on sex. 
Each  of the countries have established women’s ministries with responsibilities for 
implementing, promoting and protecting the rights of women and other marginalized 
community members. The countries have set up dedicated gender or women ministries with 
women’s  policies (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador), gender action plan (Surinam e), gender and 
climate policy (Peru) and policy with a focus on domestic violence in the case of Guyana. Despite 
the institutional support, legal frameworks and policies, the ability for wom en to  access 
resources and opportunities remain s low and women are persistently in a disadvantaged 
position in societies compared with their male counterparts . 
102. The gender assessment was completed based on a desk review and it is expected that 
the pr ogramme will conduct country - and sector -specific gender assessment s through 
stakeholder consultations. This is to be done at the initial phase of pro gramme  implementation. 
As per the findings of the gender assessment , women across the Amazon region  are en gaged in 
reproductive and productive activities including in homestead and community gardens, such as 
the rearing of livestock, and engagement in agroforestry and non- timber forest products 
activities. Women oversee home and family care, which also often e ncompasses the care of the 
natural environment. In addition, women are also active in the productive activities of 
agriculture, livestock, forestry, and fisheries in which different forms of environmental care and 
sustainable use of natural resources are exercised. Men on the other hand play a large role in 
timber -based activities and businesses and in general men have more ownership of productive 
assets (land, animals, capital), access to formal markets and economies, information technologies and more deci sion -making power over financial and other resources , including 
natural resources and associated businesses.  
103. Cultural and societal norms continue to create barriers for women’s engagement in 
leadership and decision -making and have  resulted in very few women on boards of directors, 
few women in leadership roles in local and national governance and few women entrepreneurs in the formal economy. The main barriers that female entrepreneurs encounter to forming 
formal companies are difficulties in leaving the in formal sector due to domestic responsibilities 
preventing them from working longer hours outside the home not being informed about 
financial markets and existing opportunities;  difficulties in accessing financing without legal 
ownership or guarantee ; and a  general inequality in entrepreneurial opportunities, including 
access to resources, adequate training and business advice as reported by the women surveyed . 
Existing financial service providers and their products also generally ignore  the particular 
needs  of women and rarely conduct gender -based  assessment s when develop ing products. 
These barriers also limit opportunities for indigenous peoples and people of African descen t. 
104. Land and land tenure  are resource s distributed unequally among men and women, 
because it is usually Amazonian men who have ownership and administration over the land. 
This is exacerbated by women having less access to state identification or visibility processes that prevent them from part icipat ing in formalization processes. Although Amazonian women


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 121 
 
 
do not exercise ownership over land widely, they do play an essential role in territorial 
management and local forms of environmental conservation practices. Women are more 
vulnerable to the im pacts of climate change; because they have fewer economic resources to 
mitigate impacts, for example on productive systems of agriculture, livestock and tourism. 
Women’s family and environmental care activities create a strong dependence on natural 
resourc es so that any change in such resources has tremendous effects on their livelihoods as 
well as on their personal and social well -being. Women’s traditional roles lead them to be 
involved in value chains that harness, preserve and depend on natural resources such as trees, 
seeds, medicinal plants, insects and fruits, among others. However, there are still some gaps for 
women to be able to fully participate in and benefit from bio -business opportunities. Women 
still have little leadership in development proje cts, businesses and value chains that have 
traditionally been the domain of men. Many Amazonian women face a gap in income generation 
opportunities because they have less access to knowledge and technical tools. The uneven 
distribution of means of producti on and income also leads to the lower participation of 
Amazonian women in the bioeconomy.  
105. The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement s 
of the G ender Policy of the GCF . The gender action plan provides activities that  address the 
challenges faced by women and includes baseline, indicators, targets, timelines and budgets. As 
there are further studies to be conducted, the Secretariat expect s fine tuning in the targets and 
indicators.  
106. The main budget is directed to training program mes that promote social capital needed 
for environmental conservation, local governance and the bioeconomy. The gender and 
diversity plan include activities targeted at providing services to promote bio -business owned 
or led by women; while  also ensuring capacity and skill gaps are addressed that are faced by 
women and indigenous women, people of African descen t and other local communities. It also 
includes measures to ensure financial institutions are enabled to incorporate gender perspecti ves in their investments, with the aim of address ing the gaps in incorporating gender 
issues in financial services. The project also includes measures to improve the skills of women and their ability to access and participate in jobs up and down product va lue chains. It also 
includes measures to increase indigenous women’s participation in environmental governance, 
including women’s participation in the development of environmental plans, and seven country 
strategies to foster intercultural forms of governa nce and conservation. The AE plans to 
integrate conflict resolution and grievance mechanisms that will provide women with easy 
access to these mechanisms and the ability to report and address instances of gender -based 
violence. The pro gramme  will have a gender expert to integrate gender issues throughout the 
programme and to implement the gender action plan as well as ensuring that people with 
gender expertise become  part of the decision -making bodies.  
107. The gender action plan shows gender responsiveness by creating opportunities, 
building capacity and increasing access to communities of women, indigenous  people  and 
people of Afr ican  descen t in decision -making processes and supporting changes to (financial) 
systems to be gender responsive by design.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
108. The funding proposal requests USD 135 million in senior sovereign loans, USD 6.5 
million in equity and USD 137.5 million in grants (of which USD 20 million is reimbursable). The 
programme will target reducing GHG emissions and increas ing the resilience of value chains and 
ecosystems in the Amazon region by enabling the conditions t o increase the flow of funds to bio-
businesses in the bioeconomy of the Amazon. Countries included in the programme are Brazil,


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 122 
 
 
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname. The AE is providing co -financing of up to USD 
155 million in senior loans, up to U SD 145 million in guarantees and up to USD 4 million in 
equity. IDB together with other donors will also provide USD 14 million in grant funding.  
109. For component I GCF will provide USD 135 million o f senior loans to EEs for on -lending 
to eligible sub -project s. As per the agreed terms the loans will be either directly to the sovereign 
or guaranteed by the sovereign. Additionally, USD 16 million in reimbursable grants will be 
provided to enable EEs to structure de -risking financial solutions for LFIs. This reimbursable 
grant will be used as a guarantee benefiting the LFIs. The EE shall hold the funds from the 
reimbursable grant and will return the funds to GCF in case the guarantee is not called upon. To 
support (early stage) bio -business USD 4 million reimbursa ble grants and USD 6.5 million in 
equity will be provided. A total of USD 54.6 million is allocated for technical cooperation under 
component I.  
110. Component II will provide support to public entities to leverage capital market financing 
through the issuance  of thematic bonds. GCF will provide USD 5million in grants for technical 
cooperation and USD 30 million in grants to deploy credit enhancement instruments for green 
bonds issued by public entities. The USD 30 million in grants will be used to reimburse th e 
guarantee fee to be charged by the AE for guarantees it will provide on the thematic bonds to 
investors. The guarantees by the AE are to increase investor appetite for thematic bond 
issuances. For component III GCF will provide USD 28 million for transve rsal technical 
cooperation.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium -high risk)  
111. The AE, IDB, has an extensive track record in the region amounting to nearly USD 246 
billion for projects. The AE has experience in providing climate finance demonstrated by six 
approved projects with the GCF and approved green credit lines for over USD 1.5 billion in the 
past five years. The AE has supported thematic bond issuance (as envisioned under component 
II) for over USD 3 billion. IDB is rated AAA by Moody’s.  
112. The EEs for this programme are public sector entities, NDBs , private sector fund 
management companies, othe r private sector entities and the AE. The IDB will assess the 
capacity of each EE as per the O perations manual (Annex 21) prior to entering into any 
Subsidiary Agreement. For component I.1 EEs will be jointly selected with the participating  
governments  of the programme countries  and may include NDBs or government agencies. The 
EEs executing component I.2 will be direct investees and selected fund management companies,  
and for component II.2 the EEs will be public sector issuers. The EE s for technical assist ance can 
also include the IDB itself.  
113. GCF will rely on IDB to adequately assess the capacity of the EEs. Given the limited 
visibility on the EE s for GCF at this stage and the potential number of entities involved the 
AE/EE capability risk is assessed as m edium to high.  
114. IDB and the designated EEs (including N DBs ) clearly have the necessary institutional 
and financial capacity to manage the programme and to select, assess and monitor sub-project  
investments. Annex 20 (a, b)  of the funding proposal provides a detailed institutional 
assessment methodology and criteria, including for technical quality supervision, which gives 
sufficient confidence that EEs have, or will have access to, technical capacity, which is also 
backed up  by the level of technical detail provided in the feasibility study.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
115. Sovereign credit risk : IDB shall enter into sovereign loan agreements on behalf of GCF 
with the countries under the programme. The loans will be either a direct sovereign loan or a


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 123 
 
 
loan to an EE with a sovereign guarantee. Therefore, for USD 135 million in loans GCF will be 
exposed to credit risk of these countries. The level of credit risk differs between the countries in 
the programme: Pe ru has an investment grade rating BBB+ (Fitch), while Brazil and Columbia 
are respectively rated BB - and BB+ by Fitch and Suriname is rated RD by Fitch as of April 1 2021 
as result of an uncured default. The borrowing countries are member countries of the IDB, and 
the IDB has preferred credit status for these countries. The close relationship of IDB and the 
beneficiary countries is expected to reduce the sovereign credit risk. IDB co -financing as 
presented in the funding proposal is contingent on approval o f the IDB board and could be 
substituted with co -financing by the EE and/or other parties , potential reducing financial 
alignment of GCF with the AE. Allocation to a single country of sovereign loans is set at up to 60  
per cent which may result in signific ant losses in case of single default. It is advised that the AE 
shall commit to co -financing the loans by its own resources and on a pari -passu basis.  
116. Private sector investment risk : Reflows for the investments undertaken on behalf of 
GCF in early -stage  bio-businesses (up to USD 6.5 million in equity) are highly uncertain given 
the risks inherent in the financial instrument as well as the early stage at which GCF will provide 
funding to the investees. The repayment of reimbursable grants (up to USD 16 mi llion) provided 
by GCF under component I.1 is contingent on the repayment of private sector loans guaranteed by these funds. Repayment risk is expected to be high because the guarantee will cover risk for 
which there is no appetite in the market. GCF will have partial alignment with the lender of the guaranteed loans as guarantees are capped at 50  per cent of the underlying loan amount.  
117. Co-financing risk : IDB co -financing is contingent on approvals by the AE. Lack of co -
financing could delay the programme or reduce the size and therefor e impact achieved in a 
timely manner. The guarantees by the AE under component II are to increase investor appetite 
for thematic bond issuances but the issuances are not tied up at this stage. Some comfort can be 
derived from  the minimum co -financing ratios included for sovereign loans at 1:1.148 (which 
includes resources outside of the AE) and the minimum co -financing ratio of 1:4.8 for the grants 
under component II.2.  
118. Demand risk : The program me will focus on enabling condit ions to increase the flow of 
business in the bioeconomy. Lack of demand for such financing or lack of economic 
opportunities would reduce the impact of the programme. Mitigating factors for this risk are the favourable financing conditions, the  technical a ssistance component of the programme and the  
non- formal demand declarations received by the AEs.  
119. Foreign exchange risk : GCF lending will under component I  will be in USD. Currency 
risk will be absorbed by the EE or the intermediary LFI. Shocks in exchange rate s could impact 
the EEs ability to repay , potentially resulting in the need to invoke the sovereign guarantee.  
120. Use of funds : The impact of the programme depends on the continued use of GCF 
proceeds in accordance with the goals set out in the funding proposal and the initial eligibility criteria. Reflows from sub-project s should therefore be either reinvested by the EE and other 
inter mediaries in accordance with the investment criteria or repaid to the AE and GCF. The AE 
shall contractually require that EEs for the duration of the programme will invest proceeds of 
GCF in eligible sub -project s. Also, for the bond issuance , the part of the issuance that benefit s 
from GCF grant for guarantee fees shall remain invested in eligible sub -project s for the duration 
of the programme.   
121. Carbon credits : Although the sale of carbon credits is not an objective of the 
programme, the term  sheet includes no requirements to cancel or retire carbon credits 
generated by sub -project s financed by GCF. Sale of carbon credits by the sub-project s could 
reduce the impact attributable to GCF. It is advised that limitations on the generation and sale o f 
carbon credits at the activity level are included in the terms and conditions of the project.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 124 
 
 
122. The recipient countries – Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname – are 
not subject to the United Nations Security Council restrictive measures.  
123. The A E, who will also act as EE for some activities, will implement the programme 
jointly with the following EEs:  
(a) Banco da Amazônia (Brazil) ; 
(b) Fondo para el Financiamiento del Sector Agropecuario (FINAGRO) (Colombia) ; 
(c) Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares (CONAFIPS) (Ecuador) ; 
(d) Corporación Financiera de Desarrollo (Peru) ; 
(e) Suriname National Development Bank (Suriname) ; 
(f) Kaet é Investimentos ; 
(g) CONEXUS;   
(h) WWF ; 
(i) The Nature Conservancy ; and  
(j) Rainforest Alliance.  
124. The A E has pe rformed the capacity assessment on the  EEs (NDBs) and has determined a 
low exposure when it comes to their ability to manage money laundering, terrorist financing 
and prohibited practices. Taking into consideration the outlined challenges associated with t he 
Suriname National Development Bank, the Office of Risk Management and Compliance recommends enhanced due diligence on all activities pertinent to this EE. For EEs yet to be 
selected , the eligibility criteria and processes are detailed in annex 20 of the funding proposal 
package.  
125. In addition, the AE has performed a comprehensive institutional assessment on other 
EEs – which are predominantly tasked with technical cooperation and coordination – and there 
were no red flags associated with their profiles.  
126. As per the risk assessment performed by the AE, money laundering , terrorist financing 
and prohibited practices represent low probability and high impact for the programme. As mitigation measures, the AE intends to implement a set of eligibility criteria fo r all transactional 
activities, including  the no-objection requirement from the IDB for all portfolios within the 
programme found in a nnex 21.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low  risk)   
127. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains within 
the risk appetite.  
4.3.6.  Project viability and concessionality  
128. GCF will provide concessional loans, technical assistance, equity and grants. At this stage 
the AE could no t provide  the details of  financing terms for the sub-project s. Before first 
disbursement the AE shall provide the methodologies prepared by EE, with the no -objection by 
the Accredited Entity to apply the  concessionality  of GCF Reimbursable Funds to the final 
beneficiaries to ensure that final beneficiaries sufficiently benefit from the investment . 
129. GCF will provide a reimbursable grant under component I.1 to provide guarantees to the 
private sector. A GCF guarantee would be a more efficient instrument ; howev er, limitations at 
the AE did not allow for use of this instrument.


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 125 
 
 
130. GCF shall provide grants to partially reimburse the guarantee fee to be charged by the 
AE for guaranteeing the thematic bond issuance for bio -businesses. The level of concessionality 
will depend on marke t circumstances at the time of issuance and cannot be fully determined at 
this stage. GCF relies on the AE to set an appropriate level of concessionality . The AE shall 
determine the amount needed for each guarantee on a minimum concessionality basis taking 
into account an ex -ante analysis of the net financial benefit expected from the credit 
enhancement of the bond issuance to be provided by the IDB guaran tee and the funding costs 
(and other financial terms) that the public bond issuer needs to achieve in order to reach 
eligible bio -businesses (directly or indirectly) with adequate financing conditions.  
4.3.7.  Conclusion  
131. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  • The AE has an extensive track record in the 
region. Multiple EEs are involved. GCF will 
rely on the AE to adequately assess the 
capacity of the EEs ;  
• Currently there is limited  visibility on 
financial terms for the intended beneficiaries. The AE shall provide before 
first disbursement methodology on how 
concessionality shall benefit end 
beneficiaries and monitor in accordance with 
the AMA.  
• GCF is exposed to sovereign and private 
sector investment risk.  Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability  Medium -
High  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Medium  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
132. IDB will be the AE for the programme in six countries (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Guyana, Peru and Suriname). This programme has various EEs, some of which  will be decided at 
a later stage of the programme.  
133. For the execution of sovereign loans and investm ent grants referred to in 
component I.1 , each EE will be responsible for the full execution of the loan and/or investment 
grant in accordance with the Subsidiary Agreement and its Operational Regulations. EEs may 
include N DBs  or other government agencies, such as FINAGRO (Colombia), CONAFIPS 
(Ecuador), COFIDE (Peru), Suriname National Development Bank Ltd. (Suriname) and Banco da 
Amazô nia (Brazil).  
134. For the execution of equity investments referred to in component I.2, eligible EEs 
include: for the Regenerate Accelerator, Kaet é Investimentos , an entity already institutionally 
assessed by IDB, a local fund management company with vast experience in identifying 
sustainable early -stage bioeconomy businesses; and other direct invest ees (growth tech -based 
start- ups) to be defined and assessed by IDB Lab that will receive funding support for activities 
related to climate -tech and bio -tech investments.  
135. For the execution of investment grants referred to in c omponent II.2 , IDB will 
transf er GCF grant resources to a public entity issuer acting as EE, for it to defray the financial 
charges and costs associated with the portion of the guarantee funded with IDB resources. As


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 126 
 
 
part of its project preparation cycle, and prior to the approval of t he relevant guarantee 
operation, the IDB will conduct an institutional capacity assessment of such public entity. 
Sovereigns for bond issuers are also EEs for c omponent II. 
136. For all t echnical cooperation activities  (components I.3, II.1 and III) IDB may be the 
EE and/or it may enter into a Subsidiary Agreement with other EEs.  
137. IDB will ensure all necessary management and supervisory mechanisms are in place to 
provide and maintain transparent and effective administration of the p rogramme and will be 
solely responsible for the management and administration of GCF resources in accordance with 
its policies, procedures and practices, and following the provisions set forth in the  accreditation 
master agreement  (AMA)  and the  funded activity agreement  (FAA) . 
138. The financial management and oversight of any programme operations, including 
reporting requirements, will follow IDB policies and procedures, and applicable AMA and FAA 
requirements, which would be reflected as needed in any Subsidiary Agreements.  
139. As per  IDB policy, prior to the approval of each sub -project , IDB’s fiduciary team will 
perform and/or update an institutional capacity assessment on the corresponding EEs.  
140. EEs will be required to submit audited financial statements within 120 days after the 
closing of each fiscal year throughout the execution period.  
141. Financial statements shall be duly audited by an independent firm acceptable to the IDB.  
142. This programme still ha s unidentified EEs, thus  capacity assessment s will be a condition 
before disbursement (as in clause 15 and schedule 6). Furthermore, since co -financing cannot 
be confirmed at this stage, this will be a condition for disbursement(s) as noted  the term sheet .  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
143. The programme is a facility supporting bio -businesses in six countries in the Amazon 
biome, focusing on the improvement of adaptive capacity of various beneficiaries and increased 
resilience, as well as the reduction of GHG emissions or their removal in various bio -business 
value chains.  
144. The programme  is expected to reach a total of 191,952  direct beneficiaries and 485,375 
indirect beneficiaries (of which around 50 per cent are female)  in all six countries. The 
estimation of the beneficiaries follows a clear logic and is linked to the provision  of adaptation 
benefits by the programme. The distribution of beneficiaries per country is described in a nnex 
17.  
145. The pro gramme  is also expected to lead to approximately 123 MtCO 2eq over the 
programme lifetime of 27 years. The estimates are conducted usin g clear assumptions and peer -
reviewed methodologies and tools, such as the Ex-Act tool. The additionality of the emission 
reductions has been clearly established through barrier and financial analysis demonstrating 
that the activities supported by the programme would not take place without GCF funding.  
146. The theory of change clearly establishes the impact pathways of the programme, 
including the impact expected to be generated by the individual value chains.  
147. The impact and outcome indicators have been correctly selected and included in the 
logical framework in alignment with the GCF results management framework and performance 
measurement framework . Relevant result indicators have also been included , which will 
facilitate efficient monitoring of the programme results, outcomes  and impacts.  
148. Annex 5 has been completed in line with the GCF requirements , clearly describing the 
timelines of the individual activities and the concrete deliverables.


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/ B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 127 
 
 
149. Annex 11 includes a clear monitoring plan and a budget for monitoring individual 
indicators included in the log ical frame work . The budget for the interim and final evaluations is 
also included and is considered adequate.  
150. Annex 17 provides clear breakdown s of the impact s generated per country and the 
corresponding  budgets.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
151. The accreditation master agreement was  signed with the A E on 29 August 20 17 (the 
AMA), and it became effective on 30 March 2018.  
152. The A E has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement th e programme.  
153. The proposed p rogramme will be implemented in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, 
Peru and Suriname. The GCF has signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with 
Guyana.  
154. However, in the other countries in which the programme is to be implemented, GCF is 
not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The current state of communication with the countries where GCF does not have 
privileges and immunities is as follows: an agreement with Brazil is under negotiation with the 
latest communication on 11 June 2021; an agreement with Colombia is under negotiation with 
the latest communicat ion on 8 April 2019; an agreement with Ecuador is under negotiation with 
the latest communication on 7 September 2019; an agreement with Peru is under negotiation with the latest communication on 2 July 2019; and an agreement with Suriname is under 
negotia tion with the latest communication on 28 April 2021.  
155. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as app ropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation i n these countries or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities.  
156. No-objection letters for the p rogramme have been received from all countries: Brazil, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname .  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
157. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Submission by the A E to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Se cretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, confirming 
that the A E has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity 
and authority to implement the proposed p rogramme;  and 
(b) Signature of the FAA  in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within 
180 days from the date of Board approval .


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 128 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP173 
Proposal name:  The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by 
valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon  
Accredited entity:  Inter -American Development Bank (IDB)  
Country/(ies):  Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential               Scale: Medium  to high  
1. Concept . The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund is a large -size d programmatic funding 
proposal submitted by the Inter -American Development Bank  (IDB) . The programme covers six 
Amazon countries: Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname  and is based on the 
principles of the Leticia Pact for the Amazon Region signed by the governments of Bolivia, 
Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname in on 6 September 2019. A fundamental 
step towards implementation of the Pact was a doption  of the action plan .1 The Pact is seeking 
cooperation among Amazon countries for the conservation of the region to generate 
opportunities for the sustainable development and well- being of its population . Among the 
various conservation activities are combating  deforestation and forest degradation; 
strengthen ing the conservation, recovery and resilience of biodiversity and ecosystems; and 
establishment of sustainable productive systems.  There  is agreement  among the signatory 
countries  to promot e the  financial mechanisms , with the collaboration of the IDB , to implement 
the Pact  and increase private investment in bio -business.  Funding for the implementation of the 
mandates of the Leticia Pact and its a ction plan will be accessed  through presentation of 
regional or subregional projects to different international funding sources . The funding 
proposal is fully in compliance with the  agreements and will mostly contribute to strengthening 
private investment flow to bio -business.  
2. Low-emission and climate change resilience bio -business is the target for the Amazon 
Bioeconomy Fund programme.  According to the funding proposal  50 per  cent o f GCF proceeds 
is for mitigation activities in land -use changes and the forest result area and the remaining  50 
per cent for adaptation activities related to  most vulnerable people and ecosystems. Based on 
the sample projects provided in the funding propos al, the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel (TAP)  conclu des that  the adaptation element  of the programme  is relatively  weak and in 
most cases the adaptation measure s are not in fact direct response s to the well demonstrated 
climate change impact s but rather belong to the strengthening of mitigation component .  In 
some cases,  the reasons for low resilience of ecosystems are unsustainable anthropogenic 
activities such as  unsustainable land use  that causes  land degradation . However, the 
independent TAP recognizes that the adaptation measures planned and implemented in a 
sustainable way could strengthen the ecosystems’  resilience , increase farmers ’ income s and 
 
1 The a ction plan was adopted during the 25th Conference of the Parties (COP25) of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), held in December 2019 in Madrid, Spain. The plan further developed the 
Pact’s mandates into specific actions,


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 129 
 
 
reduce the losses  in case of climate hazards.  The e xpected adaptation impact , based on the 
sample cases,  is medium to low . 
3. GCF financial support . GCF provides three types of financial support: USD 137.5 million  
grant contribution including reimbursable grant , which is 49 per cent of the total GCF 
contribution ; a 48.5 per cent  senor loan ; and 2 .5 per cent equity ( USD 6.5 million ). Total cost of 
the funding proposal is USD 597 million including USD 279 million (47 per  cent) from GCF. The 
accredited entity (AE) will contribute USD 318  million ( 53 per cent of total cost) distributed as 
follow s: senior loan ( USD 154 .9 million,  48.7 per cent ); guarantee ( USD 145 million , 45.6 per  
cent ); grant (USD 14 million , 44 per  cent ,); and equity (USD 4 million , 1.3 per cent ).   
4. Implementation arrangements /financial modalities . Implementation of the funding 
proposal will operate through the executing entities (EEs).2 Prior to entering into any s ubsidiary 
agreement with an EE, the IDB will assess the managerial capacity of the entity  including 
technical capacity to implement and monitor climate change -related projects . The funding 
proposal will be implemented through four different financial schemes and relevant EE:  
sovereign loans and investment grants, equity investments, investment grants  and grants.  
(a) In the execu tion of sovereign loans and investment grants  (Component I.1) each EE 
will be responsible for the full execution of the loan and/or investment grant in 
accordance with the subsidiary agreement. Eligible EEs will be identified jointly with 
national governme nts based on the relevance of their public mandate to the p rogramme 
activities, experience in finance structuring and fiduciary management, track record, 
including with the IDB , and technical capacity to deal with climate change -related bio -
businesses. EEs  may include National Development Banks (NDBs) or other government 
agencies, such as FINAGRO3 (Colombia), CONAFIPS4 (Ecuador), COFIDE5 (Peru), 
Suriname National Development Bank Ltd. (Suriname) and Banco da Amazonia (Brazil) .  
Final beneficiaries of individual subprojects implemented through this component will 
be private bio -business entities, including natural and legal persons, classified as micro, 
small, medium and large enterprises operating in the region . Final beneficiaries may be 
individual structures, associative structures (cooperatives or similar structures), and 
'anchor ’6 companies belonging to bio -business value chains.  Fina l beneficiaries  
(farmers)  will be involved in m onitoring  the results of this  component  at the level of 
collecting field data , as well as the EEs which have the final responsib ility towards  IDB. 
Details are provided  in annex 11 to the funding proposal.  
(b) For the execution of equity investments ( Component I.2 ) eligible EEs include: an entity 
already institutionally assessed by IDB ; a local reputable fund management company 
with experience in identifying sustainable early -stage bioeconomy businesses  with low 
emission and climate resiliency potential ; and other direct investees (tech nology -based 
start- ups) to be defined and assessed b y IDB’s innovation laboratory (IDB Lab) that will 
receive funding support for activities related to climate - and biotech nology  investments .  
This component has the same  type of  final beneficiaries and structure for monitoring  of 
results as C omponent I.1.  
(c) For the execution of investment grants  (Component II.2) for management of the 
guarantee element of GCF funds , IDB will transfer GCF grant resources to a public entity 
 
2 EE refers to any entity that signs a Subsidiary Agreement with IDB to execute, carry out, or implement a part of the 
funded activity a s defined in the accredited Master Agreement (AMA) between IDB and GCF, dated 29 August, 2017.  
3 Fondo para el Financiamiento del Sector Agropecuario.  
4 Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares.  
5 Corporacion Financiera de Desarrollo.  
6 ‘Anchor company’ means a  qualified high -technology business  that is an integral part of a high -technology activity 
and that has the ability or potential ability to influence business decisions and site location of qualified suppliers and 
customers.


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 130 
 
 
issuer acting as EE . This will  defray the financial charges associated with the portion of 
the guarantee funded with IDB resources. As part of its project preparation cycle, and 
prior to approval of the relevant guarantee operation, IDB will conduct an institutional 
capacity assessment  of the public entity,  including assessment of technical capacity to 
develop and manage  climate change related projects .  
Direct beneficiaries will be public entities, including national or subnational 
governments and ND B, that require to leverage capital market financing through the 
issuance of thematic bonds aimed at supporting bio -companies, which will be the f inal 
beneficiaries of the issuances . The f inal beneficiaries  will provide  monitored/measured 
field data and those that do not have sufficient  capa city will be supported by  other 
responsible structures.  
(d) For all t echnical cooperation activities (Components  I.3, II.1 and III) implemented with  
grant , IDB may be the EE and/or it may enter into a s ubsidiary agreement with other 
EEs. Direct beneficiaries of these components will be bio -businesses and initiatives led 
by minorities such as indigenous people, women, Afro -descendants’ groups and local 
traditional communities to ensure them better and equitable access to information, 
techno logies, capacity -building, ownership over productive factors and empowerment, 
assuring meaningful participation and local development with identity.  IDB will monitor 
all activities implemented and results achieved.   
5. Programme components . The programme has three components and several sub -
components :  
(a) Component I  is financing solutions for bio -businesses:  support to private bio -
businesses and their supply chains through dedicated financing solutions designed to 
help overcome the prevailing financing challeng es for the sector in each country.  
(i) Sub-component I.1 is  the execution of sovereign loans ( total loan USD 290 
million with USD  135 million  from GCF  and USD 155 million from IDB ) and 
investment grants  (USD 16 million from GCF ) through  EEs selected by the IDB. 
Funds will be channelled by the IDB to EEs via: ( a) loans to enable EEs to provide 
lending in various modalities to beneficiaries directly or via local financial 
institutions (LFI s) that would extend them to beneficiaries ; and (b) targeted 
investment grants to enable EEs to structure de- risking financial solutions 
tailored to the needs of LFIs in each country -specific context to help them 
properly manage incremental risks . Products offered by EEs to beneficiaries that 
have received th e abovementioned funding comprise: ( a) credit instruments 
funded by the loans ; and (b) de-risking instruments structured with the 
investment grants (first/second loss, pari -passu  guarantees between EE and 
LFI) . The structure under which resources for Compo nent I.1 may be channelled 
are: trusts or special purpose vehicle s executed by EEs and on -balance dedicated 
financing lines and de -risking financial solutions.  
(ii) Sub-component I.2  is the execution of equity investments (US D 6.5 million  
from GCF and USD 4 million from IDB, Fundo Vale7) and innovation grants 
(USD 4 million  from GCF and USD 5.2 million from IDB, (Kaete Investimentos8). 
This sub -component will be used to enable risk -capital investment flows to 
early -stage bio -businesses in the Amazon region in the form of direct equity, 
investment fund interests and other first loss and risk sharing schemes. Sub -
component I.2 will support ongoing IDB Lab initiatives, such as: Regenerate 
Accelerator (a pilot fund that invests in high -potential regenerative bioeconomy 
 
7 Investment and development fund created to generate positive social and environmental impacts. Fundo Vale   
8 Management company with vast experience in identifying sustainable early -stage bioeconomy businesses. Kaeté 
Investimentos (kaeteinvestimentos.com.br)


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 131 
 
 
enterprises operating in the countries of the Leticia Pact) ; direct funding for 
climate - and biotech nology  companies (IDB Lab will be responsibl e for 
identifying and selecting these investees based on over 20 years of experience in 
financing impactful start -ups in L atin America and the C aribbean ); and   
(iii) Sub-component I.3 is technical  cooperation (USD 53.5  million , GCF and USD 7.8 
million, IDB, Conexus, RA9, TNC10, World Wildlife Fund ) contributing to : bio-
business pipeline development and supervision;  advisory services for  the 
development and adequate implementation of adaptation and mitigation 
activities in bio -businesses that will reduce the negative impacts of climate 
change ; and  supporting the capacity of potential beneficiaries (LFIs, bio -
businesses) and local partners ( knowledge dissemination  agencies,  research and 
development  organizations) . Of particular  importance are  tools for connecting 
bio-businesses to stakeholders and markets (USD 11 million) and support to 
ongoing IDB Lab initiatives such as: Amazonia 4.011, Leticia Platform, Amazon 
Bioeconomy marketplace . 
(b) Component II  is dedicated to  bond structuring and issuance. This activity is to 
support public entities (including national or subnational governments and NDBs) to 
leverage capital market financing through t he issuance of thematic bonds (those 
earmarked for specific use of funds, such as green or sustainable bonds) that include 
bio-businesses.   
(i) Sub-component II.1  Technical cooperation (USD 5 million , GCF grant ) will 
finance advisory services on how to effecti vely include bio -businesses in the use -
of-proceeds commitments of thematic bond issuance ; and 
(ii) Sub-component II .2 Grants for guarantees (USD 30 million , GCF  grant  and USD 
145 million , IDB guarantee ) will be used to deploy credit enhancement 
instruments for green bonds issued by public entities .12 Many potential issuers 
in the region, particularly small or first -time issuers, face incremental costs 
associated with  bond issuance and ex -post reporting .  
(c) Component III  relates to  transversal techn ical cooperation (USD 28 million , GCF  
grant  and USD 1 million , IDB in-kind ) which are activities accompanying C omponents I 
and II described above. The five sub-components are financed mainly with GCF grant 
and could significantly contribute to the action plan of the Leticia Pact and in particular 
to the activities planned under Mandates 11 and 12 of the Pact .13 The component has the 
following five sub -components:  
 
9 Amazon small business relief fund. Amazon Relief Fund . 
10 The Natural Conservancy (TNC) is an organization with a proven track record of using the best -available science 
for conservation –  to identify, design, and implement  natural climate solutions  initiatives. The Nature Conservancy 
and Amazon Partner . 
11 The Amazonia 4.0 concept is a technology -driven methodo logy with the aim to develop a green circular economy 
that takes full advantage of the value of a “standing and permanent productive forest” so that it can reduce 
deforestation and capitalize on the biodiversity of the Amazon region , with the support of ne w digital and 
innovative technologies, providing a viable economic alternative to deforestation- intense models.  
12 Component II.2 is initially targeted at Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador only. Nonetheless, final allocations will be made 
in accordance with the IDB programming process and project  cycle described in annex 21 and section B.4, thus  
country targeting in this case is only indicative.  
13 Promote joint action aimed at  the empowerment of women inhabiting the A mazon region to encour age their active 
participation in its  conservation and sustainable development ; and strengthen the capacities and participation of 
indigenous and tribal peoples, and local communities in the sustainable development of the Amazon region, 
acknowledging their  fundamental role in its  conservation .


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 132 
 
 
(i) Sub-component III.1 considers inclusion mechanisms for women  and 
diversity in bio -busin ess (USD  5 million , GCF ). These actions will be carried out 
in accordance with national gender strategies;  
(ii) Sub-component III.2 considers strengthening of the ecosystem for 
Amazonian small and m edium enterprises (SME s) and their communities  
(USD 5 million , GCF  and USD 1 million , IDB). This sub -component creates and 
consolidates a network of projects, technical assistance providers and market 
connectors that are synergetic with the Amazonia 4.0 concept and that will 
strengthen the role of Amazonian SME s and t heir communities14 as forest 
maintainers and generators of a bio -businesses ecosystem;  
(iii) Sub-component III.3 considers strengthening  the stakeholder engagement 
plan (S EP) (USD 2  million , GCF ). The SEP will be implemented on five levels of 
engagement:  information, dialogue, public consultations, collaboration  and 
partnerships;  
(iv) Sub-component III.4  is a small grants program ( SGP) (USD 10 million , GCF ). 
This activity seeks to empower and enable local stakeholders – especially 
women, indigenous people s, Afro-descendants and peasants ( campesinos)  – to 
take on initiatives and bio -businesses that will enhance and influence 
development outcomes with a bioeconomy perspective. Grants will be used to 
strengthen mechanisms for inclusive busine ss, accountability and participation ; 
and 
(v) Sub-component III.5  considers general advisory services (USD 5 million , GCF ) 
for facilitation of Leticia Pact regional dialogue among signatories ,15 high -quality 
knowledge generation and regional/international diss emination in collaboration 
with the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO)  among others.  The 
IDB will be the EE for this activity.  
6. Eligibility criteria . During the review process the AE provided additional clarification 
on bio -business and eligibility criteria for this funding proposal. It was clarified that  for the 
Leticia Pact and for this funding proposal a bio -business is understood to be a business that 
responsibly integrates biodiversity in its core processes, incorporates strategies a nd tools for 
climate mitigation and adaptation, strengthens the inclusion of local communities, indigenous 
peoples and traditional knowledge and internalizes costs for the sustainable use and 
conservation of natural resources . 
7. The eligibility criteria  for investment projects  as provided during the review process 
are:  
(a) Reduce emissions and increase ecosystem carbon stocks by expanding the forest -based 
economy : 
(b) Support ecosystem protection, regeneration and adaptation, increasing social, climatic and economic  resilience ; 
(c) Promote and diversify the productive matrix through more efficient and sustainable use 
of natural resources, channelling  private capital to the conservation, restoration and 
sustainable use of ecosystems, including soil ; and/or  
 
14 Among traditional peoples and communities are indigenous peoples, quilombolas, traditional communities of 
African origin, extractivists, riverside dwellers, caboclos, and artisanal fishermen.  
15 The programme is ali gned with the Pact overall, but specially contributes to its objectives 1, 10, 13 and 15, related to 
coordinating national policies and regulatory frameworks, promoting sustainable use of forests and production 
systems, including value chains, fostering te chnological transfer to encourage sustainable business development, 
and strengthening financial programmes and mechanisms, including with support from multilateral banks.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 133 
 
 
(d) Contribute to a  more sustainable and resilient p ost-COVID -19 recovery with socio -
economic co -benefits for the local population and indigenous peoples and seek the 
participation of women in all financial components.  
8. The independent TAP  considers that the criteria are in l ine with sustainable 
development and climate change but are quite general. Based on  these criteria sample projects 
are presented in the funding proposal. F or greater  transparency TAP recommends develop ing 
more specific eligibility criteria , in particular for adaptation cases. When discussing the 
investment eligibility criteria , the independent TAP  concluded that perhaps not all species 
considered in sample projects are viable in the Amazonian ecosystem and  during the  funding 
proposal  implementation more Amazon friendly species should be select ed which could 
significantly contribute to  sustainable bio -businesses . The independent TAP  also noticed that 
eligibility criteria  should not only account for the direc t hectares under sustainable 
management, but involve conservation elements to  double the effect of the programme , in terms 
of hectares rehabilitated and protected, that could contribute to maintain  conservation of the 
dry corridors  of Amazon . 
9. Impact . The A E estimates the impact of the programme to be  123,400,955 tCO 2eq. 
emission reduction for the 27 years of the project’s lifespan. Annual greenhouse gas ( GHG)  
emission reduction is estimated as 6,170,048 tCO 2eq.  Direct beneficiaries of the adaptation 
measures are 521,597 inhabitants and the indirect beneficiaries number a further 478,292 . The 
direct beneficiaries of the programme are those bio -business owners and their families whose 
adaptive capacity will be  impr oved. This is estimated based on the total size of the investment 
resulting from the p rogramme  (see annex 3a to the funding proposal)  and the number of bio -
businesses financed by the programme ,16 As already  mentioned , these estimat es could be 
doubled if the conservation component is added to the investment criteria .   
10. The independent TAP  asked the AE to provide its opinion on the added value of this 
programme as compared to  supporting single projects in the countries involved . The AE 
provided the following opinion s:  
(a) Demonstration of profitability of the bioeconomy  through creating a strong portfolio 
of bankable bio -businesses . This  is not always possible at the country level, 
particularly for countries with a small economy and limited markets . The 
programme will help build a strong portfolio of bankable bio -business investments and 
demonstrate the profitability of the sector to financers and businesses alike at the 
regional level, encouraging other regional actors to participate in these markets ov er 
time. The p rogramme will also oversee the level of engagement of local public and 
private institutions, the use of certifications and sustainable principles at the regional 
level, as well as  the development of technology to support the creation of a regional 
pipeline and market ; 
(b) Ensure necessary scale for thematic bonds . As regard s the thematic bonds, besides 
securing sufficient investment in bonds earmarked for bio -businesses and their direct 
contribution to scaling up financing for these ventures, the proposed p rogramme will 
make some additional contributions with longer -lasting e ffect: (i) asset demonstration , 
since supported bonds will offer another platform to demonstrate the viability of these 
assets to yet another group of investors, especially at the international level;  and (ii) 
capacities and standards  on the issuer side (for issuance, monitoring and reporting) 
that will remain in place  at the local level, opening the door for replicating successful 
issuances in the future by either the same or other potential issuers;  
 
16 The estimation for indirect beneficiaries assumes that for each bio -business, a nu mber of new jobs are created, and 
that the benefits will be passed to the people within the household of each bio -business employee. Thus, the total 
number of indirect beneficiaries is estimated by multiplying the total number of bio -businesses by the numb er of 
new jobs per bio -business and the average number of people in each household per country.


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 134 
 
 
(c) Development of green employment in the region. The programme is strengthening 
regional integration among Amazon countries , having common bio me, by supporting 
the regionalization of bioeconomy value chains and integration initiatives.  This holistic 
and syst ematic approach will increase productivity and green employment in the 
Amazon Region, promoting inclusion and sustainable business models;  
(d) The proposed p rogramme considers a set of interlinked individual projects , 
unified by the overarching vision of reduc ing GHG emissions and increasing the 
resilience of targeted value chains and ecosystems in the Amazon region by enabling the 
conditions to increase the flow of funds to bio- businesses in the bioeconomy of the 
Amazon. Interlinked individual projects also  contribute to common objectives and 
strategic goals, which will deliver sustainable climate results and impact in the GCF 
mitigation and adaptation result areas of efficiency  and effective ness and at scale;  
(e) Create and consolidate at scale  a network of projects, technical assistance providers and 
market connectors that are synergetic with the concept of Amazonia 4.0 and that will 
strengthen the role of traditional peoples and communities as forest maintainers and 
generators of a bio-business es ecosystem;  and 
(f) Provision of g eneral advisory services  related to: (i) facilitation of Leticia Pact 
regional dialogue among signatories ; (ii) knowledge and dissemination across the 
region and internationally;  (iii) development and implementation of data collection 
systems; and  (iv) analysis of limitations and opportunities of business informality in 
targeted sectors, and ways in which it can be avoided or reduced . 
11. The independent TAP  fully agrees with the AE’s vision o n the added value of this 
regional pr ogramme and would like to particularly highlight the benefits which could be gained 
by smaller and less developed countries with limited econom ies and market s.  
12. The independent TAP ’s opinion is that the funding proposal has high i mpact  potential 
but at the  same time recognizes the complex ity of this funding proposal for implementation . 
This implementation complexity  should be  compensated by well -developed subprojects, a 
proper management scheme,  effective  eligibility criteria, including a conservation agreement 
and results monitoring plan . Management and result monitoring systems are well developed 
and presented in the funding proposal though the independent TAP  still ha s reservations 
related to the eligib ility criteria  for subprojects  and in particular regarding the climate eligibility  
and in particular those for the adaptation projects.  The independent TAP  scores these criteria as 
medium to high and recommends the AE to  focus more on the feasibility of subprojects  and 
their climate change eligibility .   
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                     Scale: High  
13. As mentioned in paragraph 1 of this assessment , the programme considered in the 
funding proposal is constructed on the principles of the Leticia Pact signed by seven countries 
for the Amazon Region. This initiative recogniz es the significance of cooperation for the 
conservation of Amazon ian biodiversity in order to generate new business opportunities for the 
sustain able development and well- being of its population. Th e Pact , reaffirming the sovereign 
rights of the countries of the Amazon region over their territories and natural resources, 
including the development and sustainable use of those resources , declares the  willingness of 
signatory countries  to move  the region on to a sustainable development pathway , renouncing 
unsustainable  development that is  nature -aggressive . The Pact fully recognizes the synergies 
among all conventions and initiatives regulating the sust ainable management of biodiversity 
including the Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement to the UNFCC C and REDD- plus mechanism.  
14. Annex 24a to the funding proposal provid es the analysis of progress in implementation 
in the Amazon countries of three interdependent  processes regulated by the UNFCCC (climate


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 135 
 
 
change), REDD -plus (deforestation and forest degradation) , and the Leticia Pact  (sustainable 
development of the region’s bio -business capacity) . The analysis demonstrates that  climate 
change -related regulations, strategies and action plans are  well  advanced in all participant 
countries and therefore the contribution from this funding proposal could significantly 
strengthen the start -up of the climate change- related bio-business development process and 
related market.  
15. With this funding proposal GCF joins th is regional  initiative and will contribute to its 
successful realization. It is confirmed by the AE that despite the funding proposal title , “The 
Amazon Bioeconomy Fund ”, th e funding proposal is for a program me which intends to establish 
multiple financial and technical assistance mechanisms which holistically and coherently 
address the barriers identified to bio -business development and contribute to a paradigm shift  
at regional level . GCF ’s key contribut ion should be the leveraging of more private finance 
through its co ncessional investment for the climate resilient and low -emission bio -businesses 
than is currently available for activities promoted by the Leticia Pact.  
16.   The independent TAP  considers that the role of this funding proposal in accelerati ng 
the paradigm shift process initiated by the Leticia Pact can  be crucial. It plans to contribute to  
sustainable development of the region  through strengthening  or establishment  of local 
capacit ies where gaps are identified . The independent TAP  considers that not all bio -businesses 
might be climate -friendly from the perspective of low emission s and climate resiliency17 and 
therefore timely intervention from GCF is opportun e to assure climate sustainability in the bio-
business sector.   
1.3 Sustainable development potential            Scale:  High  
17. Sustainable development is the key principle of the Leticia Pact and the basis of the 
funding proposal. Responsibility to wards  the Pact was expressed by the signatory parties 
through adoption of the action plan,18  which further developed the mandates of the agreement 
into specific actions. The action p lan is considered by the countries as a fundamental step 
towards implementatio n of the Leticia Pact and a step to wards  regional cooperation for 
sustainable development in the Amazon  region . It provides a framework for action to combat 
the causes of deforestation and illegal activities that are taking place in the Amazon region, with  
52 key actions, organized in 5 thematic areas, promoting the conservation and sustainable 
development of the Amazon biome as well as the protection of indigenous and tribal peoples and local communities living in this strategic ecosystem, including their cultural heritage and 
traditional knowledge . 
18. The funding proposal contribute s to Sustainable Development Goal (SDG ) 15 committed  
to protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, to sustainably manage 
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation , and halt biodiversity loss . 
In particular, t he funding proposal contribute s to: target 15.9 considering the  integrat ion of  
ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, developme nt processes and 
poverty reduction strategies; and goals 15a and 15b  related to m obiliz ation  and increas ing 
financial resources from all sources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and 
ecosystems at all levels .  The sample subprojects considered in the funding proposal could  
contribute to SDG 15.2 which calls to  promote the implementation of sustainable management 
 
17 For example, the funding proposal actively considers the promotion of native species, among other activities. 
Considering that climatic parameters are being changed beyond their traditional variability, these native species 
and their adaptive capacities to the observed and forecast trends should be well investigated and only “climate 
resilient native species” should be supported and promoted.  
18 The action pla n was adopted during the 25th Conference of the Parties (COP25) of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), held in December 2019 in Madrid, Spain.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 136 
 
 
of all types of forest, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and substantially increase 
afforestation and reforestation globally .  
19. Under mandate number 919 the action plan considers the strengthening of cooperation 
which should contribute to regional sustainable developmen t. The funding proposal plans to 
make significant contribution to this process through technical cooperation components , 
planning knowledge and strengthening capacity  throughout the region .  For all components the 
funding proposal has intensive capacity -building or technical cooperation sub -components. In 
particular, all five sub -components of Compone nt III are dedicated to transversal technical 
cooperation :  
(a) Grants for technical cooperation in Component I.3 will provide critical support to build 
capacities, innovation, business resources and regulation, among others, to help 
overcome bankability issue s and ensure adequate implementation of adaptation and 
mitigation activities in bio -businesses that will reduce the negative impacts of climate 
change ; 
(b) Grant for specialized advisory services for bond issuance  will support the participant 
public entities a nd will be dedicated to development of the bond framework, including 
eligibility criteria, bond certification and methodology, and  harmonization and 
standardization of bond reporting following international standards, particularly 
through the IDB Green Bond Transparency Platform ; 
(c) USD 28 million grant allocated f or Component III should contribute to 
operationalization of  mechanisms  for women ’s inclusion  as well as to  create and 
consolidate a network of proj ects, technical assistance providers and market connectors 
that are synergetic with the Amazonia 4.0 concept and that should  strengthen the role of 
Amazonian SME s and their communities as forest maintainers and bio -business 
ecosystem generators . This activity seeks to improve the design and execution of the 
whole programme by including a meaningful and organic stakeholder engagement with 
quantifiable results to make it possible to measure both its effectiveness and the value 
added of this effort for  the Amazon region . The Small Grants Program me is intended to 
empower and enable local stakeholders – especially women, indigenous people s, Afro-
descendants and peasants ( campesinos) – to take on initiatives and bio -businesses to 
enhance and influence d evelopment outcomes with a bioeconomy perspective . 
20. Activities planned in the funding proposal contribut e to the SDG climate target 13.2 
committed to i ntegrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning . 
The funding proposal con tributes to integration of the climate change concept not only at the 
national but also at the regional level sustainable action  plan.   
21. Component III and sub -component I.3 contribute to SDG target  1.B (no poverty) through 
contribution to the c reat ion of  policy frameworks at the national and regional levels, based on 
pro-poor and gender -sensitive development strategies, to support accelerated investment in 
poverty eradication actions .  
22. Programme activities are expected to contribute to: increase sources o f income for 
agricultural and non -agricultural communities in rural areas; creat e direct and indirect 
employment; develop technology and financial inclusion . 
23. Based on th is assessment of the funding proposal’s contribution to the various SDG 
goals and targe ts and considering the objective of the pro gramme  to contribute to 
implementation of the Leticia Pact in a sustainable, low -emission and climate resilient way, the 
 
19 Exchange and implement experiences in the management of the systems of protecte d areas of the Amazon 
countries at regional, national and subnational levels for their effective management and for the benefit of the local 
populations, through the promotion of the development of conservation and sustainable use of programmes and 
project s.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 137 
 
 
independent TAP  is of the opinion  that the expected contribut ion of the project  to sustainab le 
development is  significant . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient        Scale:  High  
24. Country needs are relevantly analysed and provided by the AE i n annex 24a . Some key 
findings from t he comprehensive analysis of national circumstances and gaps  regarding the 
three interlinked and interinfluenc ing processes ongoing in Amazon countries such as:  
countries ’ commitments to the UNFCCC, voluntary involvement in REDD -plus  process and 
initiative  of seven Amazon countries concluded as  the Leticia P act are provided below .  
25. Gaps and n eeds  identified  by the AE during the survey:  
(a) None of the  funding proposal countr ies involved in REDD -plus  activity among  has a full 
system of REDD -plus  safeguards in place. Many of the countries lack the financial and 
technical resources to fully implement their REDD -plus  and sustainable forest 
management strategies, especially community forest management . The funding 
proposal plans to contribute to the REDD- plus  process with implementation of 
subprojects. The AE confirms that all REDD -plus  activities will be reported to the 
respective national governments ; 
(b) Limited technical and financial capacities were also identified as hindering 
implementation of REDD- plus  and related policies in Guyana , Peru and Suriname. 
Although countries have advanced in creating  policies and programmes promoting 
community forest management, this is an area in need of development that offers large opportunities for the development of bioeconomy projects;  
(c) Several countries have not yet aligned their sectoral legal and policy framew orks with 
their REDD -plus  and sustainable forestry goals . For example, Colombia’s National REDD -
plus  Strategy is also a trans -sectoral policy that targets sustainable agricultural 
development, though in practice unsustainable livestock expansion is a major  problem ; 
(d) No of participant country has a full system of REDD -plus  safeguards in place;  
(e) Unclear and insecure land tenure remains a major issue in all countries, in particular for 
indigenous peoples and other ethnic minorities . Overlaps between indigenous lands and 
commercial concessions are a major barrier to implementing activities to sustainably 
use and manage forests . Component III.4 (Small Grant Programme, USD 10 million)  
plans special programmes for strengthening indigenous population s, empower ing and 
enabl ing local stakeholders – especially women, indigenous peoples , Afro-descendants 
and peasants ( campesinos) – to take on initiatives and bio -businesses to enhance and 
influence development outcomes with a bioeconomy perspective;  
(f) Weak land -use planning l aws and lack of enforcement lead to overlapping of forest uses . 
For instance, p rotected areas often overlap with community lands, or even with 
production forests or concessions. This represents a challenge for the execution of 
bioeconomy projects executed in these areas ; 
(g) Despite the fact that legislation recognizes community concessions, forest communities continue to face challenges in exercising sustainable forest management. Forest 
communities need to develop management plans and obtain permits from the 
competent authorities, which often require technical and financial capacity that the 
communities do not have. Although the importance of community forestry concessions 
is increasingly being recognised, technical and financial support needs to be enhanced . 
Different sub -components of C omponent III will contribute to  different elements of this 
problem but the effective implementation of S EPs should be  the most important ;


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 138 
 
 
(h) Illegal logging and deforestation remain a major issue in all countries in the region ; 
(i) The majority of countries do not have dedicated legal frameworks governing the 
bioeconomy although some  countries have recently embraced the concept under 
different instruments.  For example, Colombia has adopted a specific strategy on 
bioeconomy, E cuador includes bioeconomy as a tool for sustainable growth in its 
national development plan and has a national pact for sustainable bioeconomy, Brazil 
approved a program me on bioeconomy socio -biodiversity  in 2019  and its National 
Strategy for Science, Tec hnology and Innovation 2016 –2022 aims to enhance innovation 
for the use of bioeconomy products that contribute to nutrition, energy and economic 
development ; 
(j) Despite the existence of forestry incentives and the countries' commitment to them, limited national financial budgets and frequently cumbersome administrative 
procedures for accessing forestry incentives means that fewer beneficiaries than 
expected have benefited from them ; 
(k) Most countries do not have comprehensive plans for sustainable agricultu re. Brazil is 
the exception, with its plan for low carbon agriculture ; 
(l) Policies in favour  of sustainable tourism are beginning to emerge and are a priority for 
all countries , although not all countries have specific legislation for the promotion of 
ecotour ism. Sustainable ecotourism is among the list of eligible projects for this funding 
proposal . 
26. The independent TAP  considers that the needs of the recipient country are very high 
and the GCF programme could significant ly contribut e to narrowing some of thes e gaps through 
the activities, such as: support ing the start - up cases, finalis ing legislations, and establish ing 
tools for assessment value chains of bio -businesses on sustainability including climate change 
resiliency and low emission.   
1.5 Country ownershi p       Scale:  High  
27. This funding proposal has very strong regional ownership based on the regional 
initiative to promote sustainable bio -businesses  in the Amazon region. The independent TAP  
believes  that demonstration of similar cooperative ownership around a  problem considered in 
programmatic funding proposals should be the basis  of a programmatic approach.  
28. Country ownership regarding  the programme could be estimated as high for each 
participant coun try based on the high degree of ownership of the Leticia Pact which is a 
foundation of the GCF programme . The UNFCCC commitments and REDD -plus  programme , in 
which these six countries voluntarily participate , are also an indication of ownership .  
29. Activities planned in the funding proposal are fully in compliance with  these countries’ 
commitments under the UNFCCC  and Paris Agreement , nationally determined contributions 
(NDCs ) and climate change action plans for implementation of national commitments to the 
REDD -plus  programme . 
30. Progress has already been achieved in implementation of the UNFCCC commitments and 
REDD -plus  programme reviewed by the AE as follows : 
(a) All six countries involved in the programme have ratified the Paris Agreement of  the 
UNFCCC an d submitted at least one NDC. E xcept for Guyana , all countries have already 
submitted an updated NDC. All the NDCs are built on national policies , long -term 
development plans, low -carbon strategies, climate change plans and sectoral policies . 
The forest an d land use sector is an important element in all NDCs of Amazon countries;


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 139 
 
 
(b) Brazil, Colombia and Peru have adopted specific legal frameworks governing climate 
change mitigation and adaptation . Brazil and Peru also have climate -related frameworks 
at sub -national level ;  
(c) Few countries have developed specific gender strategies related to climate change, 
although most countries have laws or policies mandating a gender -responsive approach 
to climate change and the environment . Peru is perhaps the most advanced o f the seven 
Letitia Pact20 countries in this regard, having enshrined in law a Gender and Climate 
Change Action Plan, w hich specifically addresses forests;  
(d) The majority of the p rogramme countries are participating in REDD -plus  programme and 
have adopted legal and policy frameworks governing the REDD- plus mechanism.  Brazil, 
Colombia , Ecuador and Guyana are among the most advanced countries globally in 
REDD -plus  implementation, with all four having received results -based payments from 
internati onal donors ; 
(e) All the countries have sectoral or general policy frameworks that cover some areas of 
relevance to the bioeconomy, such as payments for ecosystem services, environmental 
incentives, supply chain legislation, organic agriculture and sustainable livestock  
management , sustainable fisheries, ecotourism, or technological research. Among the 
countries analysed , Colombia has a very complete framework that covers areas related 
to the bioeconomy under its biofuels policy, the Colombian Low Ca rbon Development 
Strategy and policy on green growth and circular economy . In Guyana, bioeconomy-
related activities are included in the Carbon Development Strategy and Green State 
Development Strategy. In several countries, these activities are governed by  laws 
focusing on the development of the Amazon region – for instance, the Peruvian Law 
Promoting Investment and Development of the Amazon Region;  
(f) Subnational governments in Brazil and Peru have also embedded bioeconomy 
promotion in their regional strategies. In Brazil, Amazon states have also adopted 
different sectoral plans related to bioeconomy activities;  
(g) Almost all countries have national forest incentive schemes for both restoration and conservation, which is one of the target area s of the funding proposal;  
(h) While approaches to REDD- plus  differ, many of the countries include bioeconomy -
related approaches as part of their strategies;  
(i) Payment for ecosystem services legislation exist s both at the national and subnational 
level. Brazil, Colombia, and Peru have legislation on payments for environmental 
services while Ecuador has specific schemes that implement payment for ecosystem 
services (the Sociobosque Programme);  
(j) Legislation and su stainable supply chain policies are at an early stage of development 
and are often focused on specific products, with national laws coexisting with voluntary 
schemes.  Brazil, Colombia , Ecuador  and Peru  are the countries with the most 
supportive regulatory  frameworks in relation to sustainable supply chain policies;  
(k) Most countries have sustainable supply chain strategies focused on their main 
agricultural products. These products include coffee  (Colombia, Ecuador , Peru ) and 
cocoa (Colombia , Peru ). These products are in the focus area mainly described in the 
sample cases provided in the funding proposal and assessed for GHG emissions 
potential.  
31. The c oncept of the funding proposal as well as principles of the Leticia Pact are in 
compliance with REDD -plus initiatives in which all six countries are involved. Peru and 
 
20 Plurinational State of Bolivia is not involved in this programme.


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 140 
 
 
Suriname are also participating in international REDD- plus  programmes including the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility and the U nited Nations REDD programme, but have yet to enter into 
any a greements for results -based finance.  
32. Although  the funding proposal mainly targets the private sector through C omponent I, it 
covers all types of stakeholders through C omponent III, thus  ensuring broad national -level 
participation of stakeholders. These t wo components will be executed by the national entities.   
33. The independent TAP  considers that countr y ownership is high  for each participant 
country  but could be strengthened  at national and reg ional levels if the conservation element is 
more transparently demonstrated in this process .  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale:  High to medium  
34. The r atio of total GCF proceeds to the total co-financing is 1:1.14  and the loans are at the 
same ratio . The g rant component ratio is 8.4:1 . Having in mind that the funding proposal has  a 
large technical assistance component , financed by grant (49 per  cent of total), for participant 
countries’ cooperation  and integration through establish ment  of common understanding and 
standards, the independ ent TAP  opinion is that such distribution of GCF proceeds is acceptable 
and the expected effect should be high.  The Pact particularly highlights the role of cooperation 
in the region.  
35. Components I and II , responsible for achievement of climate change relat ed mitigation 
and adaptation results , are quite complicated  for implementation  because of different financial 
arrangements and variety of the subprojects . Working through various financial schemes and 
various type of mitigation and adaptation activities,  these two components should be supported 
by strong climate change expert teams and monitored under the comprehensive monitoring 
process. During the review the AE confirmed that each executing entity will be assess ed for 
climate change technical knowledge th rough IDB’s standard procedure. Annex 11 to the funding 
proposal provides a comprehensive monitoring process for mitigation and adaptation results 
monitoring. Managerial and technical skills of the AE are  also considered crucial  for the 
achievement of high  efficiency and effectiveness . During the review , the AE provided a long list 
of its climate change -related activities , including the GCF programmes,  and conf irmed having 
the in-house  staff with strong climate change technical background s. The independent TAP  
considers that the programme implementation  activitie s responsible for efficiency are 
transparent and could ensure high efficien cy and effectiveness of the results . 
36. The c ost of abatement per tCO 2eq for the total programme is calculated by t he AE as USD 
8.08 and for GCF USD 2.43 which is in the range of costs for land -use change and forestry 
projects. 
37. As is highlighted in the impact assessment section 50 per cent for the adaptation share 
seems too ambiguous and might be difficult to achieve , though much depends on the proper 
design and monitoring of measures. The independent TAP ’s expectation is that this distribution 
of 50:50 might be changed based on monitor ing of results. The independent TAP  takes into 
consideration that risk factor 2 (“Imp ossibility to deliver monitoring data on all supported 
projects”) related to the monitoring process is scored by the AE as high which also could  have 
an impact on the differentiation of results between mitigation and adaptation which is 
frequently a challenge for the land -use and forestry sector. The independent TAP  has take n this  
into consideration and score s the project efficiency as high to medium.  
38. Risk factor 1 “Insufficient transformation of identified demand into fundable projects” 
considered  by the AE  could have significant impact on the programme efficiency . The AE 
considers this risk to be medium,  based on the preliminary demand assessment demonstrating 
that only 37 per  cent of total demand could be satisfied by the programme. From the financ ial 
demand perspective,  the AE’s opinion could be accepted  but at this stage only the sample


---
*Page 141*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 05 
Page 141 
 
 
projects given in the proposal are available for the independent TAP  to make a precise 
judgement on the level of risk.   
39. For the consideration of Board 30 the inde pendent TAP  received a project that is more 
focused on technical support for operationalization of the REDD -plus  process in Peru. Similar 
sectors and subprojects are considered in the funding proposal from Peru and  the independent 
TAP considers overlapping  and double accounting of GHG reduction  as risk area. During the 
review call with the AEs, IDB confirm ed that particular measures will be applied to avoid any 
overlap of project territories and double accounting of emission reduction.   
40. The independent TAP  recognises all challenges of the programme and scores the 
effectiveness and efficiency potential of the funding proposal as high to medium.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
41. The independent TAP  recomm ends this funding proposal for approval by the  GCF Board  
with the following condition :  
42. Prior to the first disbursement under the Pr ogramme, the AE shall submit, in a form and 
substance satisfactory to the Secretariat , updated eligibility criteria for investments to be 
applied in Sub-Projects that:  
(a) Demonstrate the adaptation and/or mitigation potential based on the considerations 
included in the independent TAP assessment;  
(b) Include agreements between EE/LFIs and end beneficiaries aimed at ensuring results and impacts of investments with regards to conservation, restoration and sustainable 
management.


---
*Page 142*
---

G
CF/B.30/02/Add.05  
Page 142 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 173) 
Proposal name:  The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by 
valuing bioeconomy products and services with climate 
mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon  
Accredited entity:  Inter-A merican Development Bank (IDB)  
Country/(ies):  Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname  
Project/programme size:  Large  
Impact potential  
The AE notes and thanks iTAP’s assessment.   
The Programme’s Operational Manual (Sub -annexes 3 and 5) provides insight on the selection 
process flow and tools ( i.e., climate vulnerability heatmap)  for beneficiary investments.  This 
will be further enhanced in response to  iTAP’s recommendation.   
Based on the analysis in the feasibility study, the Programme is aimed at considering the 
climate impact on native species and promoting climate -resilient native species and their 
inclusion in agroforestry systems to conserve existing ecosystems. The selection process flow 
and the climate vulnerability heatmap aim to ensure focus on value chains in geographies that 
have low climate change variability , to avoid maladaptation.  
Paradigm shift po tential  
The AE t hanks  the iTAP  for the review. 
Sustainable development potential  
The AE thanks the iTAP for the review. 
Needs of the recipient  
The AE thanks the iTAP for the review. 
Country ownership  
The AE thanks and notes the iTAP’s assessment on country ownership.  The AE confirms that 
the Programme is consistent with current strategies and policies of Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Guyana, Peru and Suriname . As per iTAP ’s recommendation, the AE will ensure t hat the 
Programme supports strengthening of regional and national conservation elements.


---
*Page 143*
---

  
       GCF/B.30/02/Add. 05 
Page 143 
 
 
 Efficiency and effectiveness  
The AE thanks the iTAP for the review. The AE considers that the proposed structure of the  
Programme is designed to offer a high  level of  versatility to attend to the different types of 
stakeholders and Sub-projects  and final investments . This will help reduce risks to efficiency 
related to reduced demand of particular sectors or investment types. A s pres ented in the 
proposal , all initiatives will be carried out under a framework of strong coordination with other 
actors in the region and supported with technical backstopping , including  to EEs and final  
beneficiaries, for the  preparation, execution and moni toring of Sub -Projects a nd investments.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:   
 
The AE thanks ITAP for recommending the Programme and agrees with suggested conditions.   
With a view to ensure that the Programme can at the same time achieve its objectives and be 
executable, the eligibility criteria will be updated considering the ITAP’s recommendations,  
building on the Programme’s Operational Manual, in particular the selec tion process flow and 
tools (vulnerability heatmap) for eligibility, and the environmental and social safeguards.   
The AE will also include agreements between EE/LFIs and end beneficiaries aimed at ensuring proper monitoring of results and impacts of inve
stments with regards to conservation, 
restoration and sustainable management.


---
*Page 144*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: 
Annex 8 Gender Assessment  
GENDER ASSESS MENT  
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ........................................................................................................ 2  
2. GENDER CONTEXT  ................................ .................................................................................................. 2  
LEGAL , REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK . ........................................................................................ 2  
EDUCATION . ............................................................................................................................................................ 13 
EMPLOYMENT . ........................................................................................................................................................ 14 
POLITICAL REPRESENTATION  ................................................................................................................................. 14 
Table 1. Main gender indicators in the Amazonian countries (pre- COVID -19) ...................................... 15 
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN . .................................................................................................................................. 16 
Table 2. Prevalence of intimate partner violence, physical or sexual  ...................................................... 17 
3. AMAZON POPULATION  ................................ ......................................................................................... 17 
SOCIAL GROUPS AND DIVISION BY SEX  ................................................................................................................... 17 
GENDER RELATIONS IN THE AMAZONIA  .................................................................................................................. 18 
4. WOMEN IN FINANCE IN LAC ................................ ................................................................................ 19 
WOMEN -LED BUSINESSES  ...................................................................................................................................... 19 
INVESTING IN WOMEN -LED BUSINESS  ..................................................................................................................... 20 
WOMEN USE OF FINANCIAL SERVICES  .................................................................................................................... 22 
Table 3. Use of financial services in the Amazon countries ...................................................................... 22 
5. ACCESS TO LAND AND WOMEN TERRITORIAL CARE  ................................ .................................. 22 
6. BIOECONOMY: CHALLENGES TO WOMEN PARTICIPATION IN VALUE CHAINS  .....................  25 
7. STAKEHOLDER SOCIALIZATION PHASE I: GENDER OUTCOMES  ....................................... 29 
SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FINDINGS  .................................................................................................................................. 29 
SOME SPECIFIC WOMEN FINDINGS  ................................................................................................................................... 29 
PARTICIPATION IN THE DIALOGUE TABLES  .......................................................................................................................... 30 
8. REFERENCES  ................................ ......................................................................................................... 32 Gender documentation for FP173


---
*Page 145*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
More than 34  million people, including 420 indigenous peoples, live in the Amazon Region 
(Panamazonía or Gran Amazonía) and depend on nature for food security, livelihoods 
and shelter . The average percentage of Amazonian women varies between 48.3% and 
49.7% of the population and differs according to different ethnic groups that are identified 
in each country. Two- thirds of the Amazonian population are Brazilian, and more than 
half live in urban centers. The most populous cities are Manaus and Belém in Brazil, with 
about 2 million inhabitants each  
 
The six countries that are included in  the program The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund - Brazil, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname-  present similar development indicators 
in education, employment, entrepreneurship, political representation, access to finance 
and property. However, significant gender gaps continue to exist for women due to 
cultural and structural barriers in these countries, which are widened in rural areas and 
among indigenous and afro descendant women.  
 
Women play a fundamental roll in the Amazonia.  As users of forest products and 
guardians of traditional knowledge,  women have always been involved in the Amazonia. 
Nevertheless, their access to forest resources and the economic benefits generated by 
the biodiversity is limited compared to men’s.  
 
On the other hand, t he emergence of COVID -19 has revealed the fundamental role that 
women play in the first line of emergency and their role as caregivers at  home that has 
interfered with their job performance. The economic recession has hit women more than 
men because (i) women are more present in the sectors most affected by the coronavirus 
crisis  (tourist and trade among other)  and (ii)  the care of children without schools and 
other dependents has forced many women to leave their jobs, take part -time jobs, work 
in informal  sector or take jobs with lower salaries. About 12 million women in LAC left the 
regional workforce due to job destruction.  
2. GENDER CONTEXT1 
 
Legal, regulatory and institutional framework . The s ix countries  have ratified or acceded 
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW)2 and its optional protocol. They also have ratified the Inter -American 
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women 
 
1 The indicators included to show existing gender inequalities in the seven Amazonian countries of the project 
reflect data prior to the outbreak of the coronavirus. Its impact is known to have widened the gap in many of these 
indicators, especially in labor market participation, unemployment, part -time work, and unpaid work that includes 
housework and dependent care. In some cases, data obtained during the presence of a pandemic have been 
added.  
2 CEDAW is an international treaty adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly. Described as an 
international bill of rights for women, it was instituted on 3 September 1981 and has been ratified by 189 states .


---
*Page 146*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
(Convention of Belem Do Para)3. Their c onstitutions address equality before the law and 
no one can be discriminated against on the basis of sex . Most countries has performed a 
normative reform effort to establish an adequate framework for development. However, 
normative advances still face a deeply patriarchal and androcentric culture that is 
reflected in many social and institutional practices.   
 
A. BRAZIL  
 
The 1988 Constitution symbolizes the legal framework for the re- democratization of 
Brazil. For the formulation of the 1988 Constitution, popular participation was ensured. 
With regard to women's participation, the Charter of Brazilian Women to the 
Constituents stands out, whic h compiled the main demands of women's movements.  
 
The 1988 Constitution stands out, also innovating by inaugurating its Text bringing 
fundamental rights, and already in its Article 5, expressly establishes equality between 
men and women in general. Another point of significant changes is the family. The old 
Civil Code of 1916 contained several provisions that placed women in an inferior role 
within the family entity. Thus, in this regard, the following constitutional provisions stand 
out that the rights an d duties relating to the conjugal society are exercised equally by 
men and women and that the State will ensure assistance to the family in the person of 
each of its members, creating mechanisms to curb violence in the context of their 
relationships.  The 1998 text was concerned with expressly introducing the prohibition of 
discrimination in the labor market on the grounds of gender or marital status.  
 
The Ministry of  Women, Family and Human Rights , former Ministry of Human Rights 
(2016 –2018) and Secretariat for Human Rights of the Presidency of the Republic 
(1997 –2015) is an office attached to the Presidency  of Brazil. Its purpose is to 
implement, promote, and protect  human rights,  civic rights, and the  rights of children, 
adolescents, women, families, the elderly, and the disabled.  
 National Secretariat of Policies for Women (SNPM)  is linked to the Ministry of 
Women, Family and Human Rights and its main objective is to promote equality between men and women and combat all forms of prejudice and discriminati on inherited 
from a patriarchal and exclusionary societ y. Since its creation in 2003, SNPM has been 
fighting for the construction of a more just, egalitarian and democratic Brazil, through the valorization of women and their inclusion in the country's social, economic, political and cultural development process. The Decree nº 9.417, of June 20, 2018, transferred the National Secretariat of Policies for Women to the organizational structure of the Ministry of Women, Family and Human Rights  
 
3 The Convention of Bel em do Pará is an inter national human rights instrument adopted by the Inter -American 
Commission of Women (CIM) of the Organization of American States at a conference held in Belém do Pará, Brazil 
on 9 June 1994. It is the first legally binding international treaty that criminal izes all forms of violence against 
women, especially sexual violence


---
*Page 147*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
 
In 2004,  the Nacional Plan of Policies for Women  was created to combat gender 
discrimination and to consolidate educational policies for an equal gender perspective. 
Those plans are renewed periodically. Contributes to the strengthening and 
institutionalizati on of the Policy  National Convention for Women approved from  2004, and 
endorsed in 2007 and 2011,  respective conferences. As a national plan, it reaffirms the 
guiding principles of the National Policy for Women:  (i) women's autonomy in all dimensions 
of life;  (ii) search for effective equality between women and men, in all spheres;  (iii) respect 
for diversity and combating all  forms of discrimination;  (iv) secular character of the State;  
and universality of services and benefits  offered by the State;  (v) active participation of 
women in all  the public policy phases; and (vi) transversality as a guiding principle of all 
public policies.  
 
Programs such as “Minha casa, minha vida” (My house, my life),  created in 2009 to help 
people with low -income to buy their own house, almost 80% of the beneficiaries are women; 
and the “Bolsa Familia”  (Family Packet),  created in 2003, through which payments are 
transfered by the government to poor families, in the name of the woman of the family, are 
consolidating the role of women in social life.  
  
Laws with an impact on the rights of women  
Law Nº 11.441  (2007)  
Divorce and dissolution of 
marriage  
 Allowed both consensual divorce and consensual 
separation to be dealt with in the civ il registry so that 
divorce, separation, and inventory and division of 
assets would become extra judicial affairs when the 
parties agreed on its terms  
Law Nº 12.705  (2012 ) 
Employment 
discrimination, gender 
discrimination  This law allowed women to serve in the Brazilian 
army.  
Law Nº 9.029  (1995)  
Abortion and reproductive 
health rights, employment 
discrimination, gender 
discrimination  Article 1 prohibits any discriminat ory and limiting 
practice for the effect of access to employment, or 
their maintenance, by reason of sex, origin, race, 
colour, marital status, family situation or age.  
Law Nº 11.340  (2006 ) 
Domestic and 
intimate  partner  violence, 
international law  
 The law criminalized different forms of domestic 
violence against women, established stricter 
punishment for offenders, facilitated preventive 
arrests, and created other special protective and 
relief mechanisms for women, including special 
courts, designat ed police stations, and shelter for 
women.


---
*Page 148*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Law No. 13.104/2015 (“Lei 
do Feminicídio”)  (2015) 
Female infanticide and 
feticide, femicide  On March 9, 2015, Brazil’s existing criminal code was 
amended to criminalize femicide, with sentencing 
ranging from twelve to thirty years of imprisonment.  
Domestic Case Law . Law Nº 
13.811 (2019) Forced and 
early marriage, gender discrimination  This law amends Article 1,520 of the Civil code in 
order to establish that only persons who have 
reached the age of marriage determined in article 
1,517 of the Civil Code may marry. This is no longer 
permitted as a reason to marry younger than the age 
of 16.  
The Maria da Penha Law. 
Federal law number 11.340 
(2006).   The law regulates  violence against women in every 
aspect of the domestic life and is regarded as a 
milestone in terms of national legislation on gender.  
  
 
B. COLOMBIA  
 
The 1991 Constitution establishes (i) the principle of non- discrimination for reasons of 
sex, race, national or family origin, religion, language, political or religious option (article 
13), (ii) equal rights and duties of the couple in family relationships, (iii) the sanction of 
any form of violence in the family that is considered destructive of their harmony and 
their (article 42); (iv) the adequate and effective participation of women in the decision-
making levels of the Public Administration (article 40) and (v) equal rights and 
opportunities for men and women and establishes that women may not be su bjected to 
no kind of discrimination and that she will receive special assistance during pregnancy 
and after childbirth and will receive food allowance (art. 43).  
 
The Presidential Council for the Equity of Women, dependent on the Vice 
Presidency of the Republic, has assigned the following functions among others: (i) 
designing policies, plans, programs, projects and necessary provisions designed to 
promote equality gender and empowerment for women, (ii) design and implement 
follow- up mechanisms for complying with internal legislation and treaties, international 
agreements and accords that relate to gender equality for women and (iii) establishing 
strategic alliances with other sectors of government, as well as with the private sector, 
women's organizations, international organizations, organizations from civil society 
(ONG, universities and research centers), for the implementation of a public gender 
policy.  
 
In the last three decades, national governments have developed different policies for 
women: in 1992, the Comprehensive Policy for Women was formulated; later, in 
1994, the Participation and Equity and Women's Policy ; in 1999, the Plan for Equal 
Opportunities for Women; in 2003, the Women Peace Builders Policy  and in 2013


---
*Page 149*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
the Gender Equality Policy for Women. The formulation of these policies, since then, 
has been led by the entities responsible for the issue of gender equity.  
  
Laws with an impac t on the rights of women  
• Law 25 of 1992 which regulates the cessation of civil effects of religious marriages by 
divorce  
• Law 48 of 1993 determines the voluntary military service of women and exceptionally 
compulsory when the circumstances determine i t. 
• Law 100 of 1993 by means of which the general social security system is created, 
which regulates the principle of universality of health and social security without any 
discrimination. It draws attention to the pregnant woman, prenatal control, deliv ery care, 
postpartum control and breastfeeding.  
• Law 43 of 1993 which regulates the acquisition, resignation, loss and recovery of 
Colombian nationality without distinction of gender  
• Law 82 of 1993, where the female head of the family is supported to provide better 
conditions of access to credit, education, employment, housing, microenterprise, 
among others.  
• Law 115 of 1994 through which the general education law is issued  
• Law 119 of 1994 where the restructuring of SENA is carried out; non -formal  education 
for work has a social impact for women  
• Law 181 of 1995 by means of which the principle of democratization without 
discrimination of sports, recreation and use of free time is established.  
• Law 182 of 1995 which talks about television, and establishes the protection of gender 
equality  
• Law 201 of 1995 by means of which the delegated attorney's office for the minor and 
the family is created  
• Law 248 of 1995 by means of which the Inter -American Convention to prevent, punish 
and eradicate violence against women is ratified.  
• Law 258 of 1996 by means of which the affectation to family housing is established 
and other provisions are issued  
• Law 294 of 1996 through which domestic violence is sanctioned  
• Law 360 of 1997 by means of which the crimes against sexual freedom and human 
dignity are stipulated  
• Law 387 of 1997 through which prevention and comprehensive care for the displaced 
population is established.  
• Law 581 of 2000, which regulates the adequat e and effective participation of women 
in the decision -making levels of the branches of public power.  
• Law 731 of January 2002, by which regulations are issued to favor rural women.  
• Law 823 of 2003 by which rules on equal opportunities for women are i ssued"  
• Law 1009 of 2006 by which the observatory with gender issues is created on a 
permanent basis


---
*Page 150*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
• Law 1257 OF 2008 that Guarantee the Right of women to live a free life without 
Violence.  
• Law 1413 of 2010 for the Inclusion of the Care Economy in the System of National 
Accounts.  
• Law 1719 of 2014 by which some articles of Laws 599 of 2000 and 906 of 2004 are 
modified and measures are adopted to guarantee access to justice for victims of sexual violence, especially sexual violence. on t he occasion of the armed conflict, and other 
provisions are issued  
 
C. ECUADOR 
 The 2008 Constitution acquires a series of commitments to achieve gender equality, 
including: promotion of parity in the appointment of public positions, elimination of violence in the private and public sphere against women, formulation and execution of 
policies to achieve equality of men and women, guarantee of women's access to property and in decision- making in the administration of a conjugal society, guarantee of 
equality in  access to employment, recognition as productive work of labor unpaid self -
support and human care that takes place in homes, assurance of actions and services of sexual and reproductive health and protection under the law of pregnant women.  
 
As of the appr oval of the 2008 Constitution, the different public policies generated by 
the State are oriented towards the effective enjoyment of rights to achieve equality 
between women and men; the gender approach is incorporated in plans and programs; and technical assistance is provided for its mandatory application in the public sector.  
 The National Council for Gender Equality  was created in 1970 as the Department of 
Women. Later, in 1984, it became the National Office for Women. In 1986, it took the category of National Directorate for Women, of a technical operational nature, to promote full equality of women in political, legal, psychological, economic, educational, ethical, cultural life and to improve their living conditions and participation within the Ministr y of Social Welfare.  
 In becomes the National Council of Women CONAMU, with administrative, financial and 
technical autonomy, attached to the Presidency of the Republic, whose objective was to ensure the incorporation of the gender approach in plans, progr ams and projects, and 
provide advice and assistance technique for its mandatory application in all public sector organizations, through the formulation and implementation of Equal Opportunity Plans. Its objective is to ensure the full validity and exercise of the rights and rights of 
women and the LGBTI population.  
 The National Agenda for Women and LGBTI people  2018- 2021 is a mandatory 
instrument of national planning and is aligned with the National Development Plan 2017- 2021, it becomes the macro strategy to mainstream the principle of equality and 
non-discrimination due to Gender, both for public management an d for the


---
*Page 151*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
empowerment of rights holders, a fundamental element of the entire legal system and of the democratic political system.  
 
Legal or normative instrument s with an impact on the rights of women  
Organic Code of the 
Judicial Function  Determines the competence and jurisdiction of judges of 
violence against women and the family  
Code of Democracy or 
Organic Law on Elections and Political Organizations  Regulates the application of parity between men and 
women in the lists for multi -person elections; It establishes 
as impediments to being candidates the having exercised gender violence and not complying with the child support 
payments.  
Organic Law of the 
Legislative Function  
 It transversally incorporates the focus on women's rights 
and gender equality, through the creation of the Legislative 
Technical Unit, whose objective is to accompany the 
process of creating the norm and provide the Specialized 
Commissions and the Plenary with, of a non- binding report 
on topics such as the use of non- discriminatory language in 
the standard and the gender impact of the suggested 
standards  
Organic Law of the 
Council of Citizen Participation and 
Social Control  Guarantees citizens, individually or collectively, equal 
rights, conditions and opportunities to participate, influence and decide in the public life of the State and society  
Organic Code of 
Territorial 
Organization, 
Autonomy and 
Decentralization  The Cantonal Councils for the Protection of Rights will have 
as attributions the formulation, mainstre aming, observance, 
monitoring and evaluation of municipal public policies for 
the protection of rights, articulated with the public policies of 
the National Councils for the Equality.  
 
Organic Code of 
Planning and Public Finance  
 It establishes that coor dination spaces will be established in 
the exercise of planning and public policy, in order to incorporate gender, ethnic -cultural, generational, disability 
and mobility approaches.  
The Comprehensive 
Organic Criminal 
Code  Typifies three types of crimes of  violence against women or 
members of the family nucleus: physical violence, 
psychological violence and sexual violence  
Children and 
Adolescents Code  Establishes protection mechanisms against mistreatment, 
abuse, sexual exploitation, trafficking and loss of children and adolescents. It stipulates visitation rights, parental 
authority and food.  
Work Code  
 It specifies the rights of working women and men, maternity 
and paternity leave, the prohibition of untimely dismissal for 
maternity , the obligation to enroll in insurance for medical 
and social benefits.


---
*Page 152*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Law on Violence 
against Women and the Family (Law 103)  It makes an explicit approach to violence against women 
and the family. It includes protection measures for victims and the prosecution of the perpetrators of this type of violence. Article 1 protects the physical and mental integrity and sexual freedom of the woman and the members of her 
family.  
Free Maternity and 
Child Care Law  Guarantees the right of women to free quality and warm 
health care, during pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum, 
access to sexual and reproductive health programs.  
Organic Law of Public 
Service of 2010  Guarantees the equal presence of men and women in the 
nomination and appointment positions, in the selection 
processes and incorporation into the public service.  
Organic Law of 
Bilingual Intercultural 
Education  Establishes equality between men and women, includes 
people with diverse sexual orientation and gender identity, 
in order to achieve a change in di scriminatory cultural 
conceptions of any kind, in the educational system.  
Organic Law of Higher 
Education  Establishes the principle of co -government that is 
understood as the shared management of universities and polytechnic schools in accordance with the principles of 
quality, equal opportunities, alternation, equity and gender 
equality.  
Organic Law of 
Communication Prohibits discriminatory content for reasons of ethnicity, 
place of birth, gender identity, cultural identity, health 
status, sexual orientation, judicial past and immigration 
status.  
Organic Law of 
Popular and Solidarity Economy  
 It establishes as popular economic units those that are 
dedicated to the care economy, among other activities. It defines the people responsible for the care economy, such as those who exclusively carry out activities for the reproduction and sustainability of people's lives, in relation 
to the preparation of food, human care and others.  
  
D. GUYANA  
 The 1980 Constitution with 1996 reforms  states that (i) w omen and men have the right 
to equal pay for equal work, (ii) women and men have equal rights and the same legal status in all spheres of political, economic and social life and that all forms of discrimination against women on the basis of their sex is il legal and (iii) the exercise of 
women's rights is ensured by according women access with men to academic, vocational and professional training, equal opportunities in employment, remuneration and promotion, and in social, political and cultural activity, by special labour and health protections measures for women, by providing conditions enabling mothers to work, and


---
*Page 153*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
by legal protection and material and moral support for mothers and children, including paid leave and other benefits for mothers and expectant  mothers.  
 The Women’s Affairs Bureau  has been housed within the Ministry of Labour, Human 
Services and Social Security since 1981, and has played a role in policy changes, and legislative and administrative measures to guarantee women equal opportunities in 
education, training, and employment. Throughout the years, it has primarily focused on counselling services and legal aid, with the addition of training of police officers after the Domestic Violence Act was passed in 1996. In 2005, the CE DAW Committee 
commented in Guyana’s periodic report that it was concerned about the effectiveness of the national machinery engaged with gender issues. Of particular concern was the insufficient allocation of human and financial resources, which continues to limit the bureau’s capacity
4.  
 
Laws with an impact on the rights of women  
Domestic Violence 
Act  Improve access to justice, and create user -friendly 
service for victims  1996  
Prevention of 
Discrimination Act  Prohibits all forms of discrimination  1997  
Amendment of the 
Constitution  
 Incorporating the Belem do Par Convention on the 
Prevention, Punishment and   
Age of Consent Act  
 The age of sexual consent is 16 years for females.  2006  
Marriage Act  
 Prohibit s marriage before the age of 16. Regulates 
the legal age of marriage without parental consent 
at 18 years (age of majority in Guyana)  
 2006  
Prevention of 
Crimes Act, Act No. 11  
 Mandatory supervision of persons convicted of 
domestic violence, molestation, rape, sexual exploitation, pornography, incest, prostitution and 
kidnapping  2008  
Protection of 
Children Act and 
Childcare and 
Protection Agency 
Act  
 Provides for the protection of children who are 
abused in any way or in vulnerable or unsafe  or 
unhealthy situations or who are neglected or 
abandoned  2009  
 
4 UNDP. 2015. Where are the women. A Study of Women, Politics, Parliaments and Equality in the CARICOM 
Countries. GUYANA Case Study


---
*Page 154*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Sexual Offences 
Act  
 Offers a framework for dealing with gender -based 
violence  2010  
The Election Laws 
(Amendment) Act15  Makes provision for a quota of onethird  women on 
the lists of candidates for national and local 
elections.  
 2000 
 
E. PERU  
 The 1993 Political Constitution  of Peru establishes that no one should be 
discriminated on the basis of origin, race, sex, language, religion, opinion, economic condition or of any other nature.  
 The mission of the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations  is to become an 
integrated, modern and articulating sector, leading the sector's policies in a decentralized manner and contributing to overcoming poverty, inequality and exclusion, 
aimed at people living in poverty and vulnerable groups, with a focus on comprehensive human development and equity, generating equal opportunities for men and women.  
 The General Directorate for Gender Equality and Non -Discrimination  oversees 
compliance with national and sectoral policies for Gender Equality and Non-Discrimination at the national level within the framework of the decentralization process and within the scope of its competence (Supreme Decree No. 003 -  2012- MIMP) 
 The Gender and  Climate Change Action Plan  is a management instrument that seeks 
to guide the action of different entities of the Peruvian State so that within the framework of their competencies related to mitigation and adaptation to climate change, it contributes to e quality between men and women. women in the following prioritized 
areas: Forests, Water Resources, Energy, Food Security, Solid Waste, Health, Education and Risk Management.  
 
National regulatory framework that impacts on women  
Law No. 28983  Law of Equal Opportunities between Women and Men. This norm 
establishes that the State has the duty to adopt all the necessary 
measures to promote and guarantee equality between women and 
men in order to eradicate all forms of discrimination (art. 4)  
Supreme 
Decree No. 
027-2007 -PCM  Defines and establishes mandatory national policies. (Equality of 
men and women). Annually approves indicators for each National 
Policy  
Supreme 
Decree No. 
004-2012- MIMP  Constituted the Permanent Multisectoral Commission, an instance  
that must monitor and contribute to the effective fulfillment of its 
strategic objectives and expected results, as well as its 
sustainability over time.


---
*Page 155*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Supreme 
Decree No. 005-2015-
MIMP,  Formalizes the use of the National System of Gender Indicators. It  
considers this system as an instrument for the follow -up monitoring 
and evaluation of policies on gender equality.  
Supreme 
Decree No. 
008-2019- MIMP  Approves the National Gender Equality Policy. Six priority 
objectives are established in it: Reduce violence against women; 
guarantee the exercise of their rights to sexual and reproductive 
health; guarantee the access and participation of women in 
decision- making spaces; guarantee the exercise of the economic 
and social rights of women; reduce institutional barriers that hinder 
equality in the public and private spheres between men and 
women; and r educe the incidence of discriminatory socio- cultural 
pattern s in the population.  
    
F. SURINAME  
 Suriname's Constitution of 1987 with Amendments through 1992 states that (i) no one shall be discriminated against on the grounds of birth, sex, race, language, religious origin, education, political beliefs, economic position or any other status, (ii) supplying special protection on the job for women before and after pregnancy, for minors, disabled persons and for those who are engaged in work which demands special efforts or who work in unhealthy or dangerous conditions , (iii) working women shall be entitled to paid 
maternity leave, and (iv) all employees have, independent of age, sex, race, nationality, religion or political opinions, the right to a remuneration for their work corresponding to quantity, type, quality and experience on the basis of equal pay for equal work.  
 The Bureau for Gender Policy was established in 1997 and became officially 
operational in 1998. In 2015 the name of the bureau was changed to the Bureau of Gender Affairs (BGA). The goal of the BGA is  to be the central cog of the national 
machinery for gender policy, with the objective to develop, coordinate, monitor, evaluate and disseminate a national gender policy that will create a balanced development with equal opportunities for men and women.  
 Since it was set up, the Bureau has developed two Integrated Gender Plans of Action (IGAP 2000 -2005 and IGAP 2006- 2010) and installed Gender Focal Points (GFPs) in 
various ministries as part of the government’s Gender Management System. Suriname’s Multi -Annual Development Plan 2001- 2005 was led by a rights -based 
approach to development, and identified gender as a cross -cutting issue across all 
programs, projects and activities.
5 The development of gender policies for rural areas 
 
5 Ministry of Home Affairs. 2018. National Report Situation Analysis of Women and Men in Suriname.


---
*Page 156*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
was emphasized in that plan  In the Suriname’s Development Plans  2012- 2016 and 
2017- 2021 Gender is addressed in a separate chapter and is also being considered a 
cross cutting issue.  
 The Ministry of Home Affairs, and in particular the BGA, is responsible for the implementation and monitoring of CEDAW. Suriname has worked or adjusted the 
following national legislation  since the ratification of the CEDAW:  
 
• Revision of the Criminal Code with regard to the trade in women and minors in 2006.  
• Revision of the Criminal Code with regar d to sexual crimes in 2009.  
• Bill against Stalking in 2012: according to this law preventive measures can be taken 
by the public prosecutor to protect a possible victim.  
• Adoption of the law on National Basic Health Insurance (2014).  
• Adoption of the law on Minimum Hourly Wage (2014).  
• Adoption of the law on General Pension (2014).  
• ILO Convention concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers of 
Equal Value (Equal Remuneration Convention), 1951 no. 100, Geneva, 01 June 1951 
(2016): equal pay for men and women.  
• Law approving the accession of the Republic of Suriname to the ILO Convention 
concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers of Equal Value (Equal 
Remuneration Convention), 1951 no. 100, Geneva, 01 June 1951 (2016): equal wages for men and women.   
• Law approving accession of the Republic of Suriname to the Convention concerning 
Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation, (Discrimination Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 no. 111, Geneva, 25 June 1958 (2016): policy for 
equal opportunities to prevent discrimination concerning labour.  
• Law on Labour Mediation (2016).
6 
 At present, a Law on Sexual Harassment and a bill on paid maternity leave are on draft.  
 Education.  The literacy rat e average 93% in the countries  of the progr am and is similar 
between men and women in countries such as Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador, with gender 
gaps pronounced in Peru, Suriname and Bolivia  where the gap reaches 8 points of 
difference (M: 88.6 % H: 96.5%).  
 Regarding educational attainment, most of the countries present educational gender gaps 
for men present at the three educational levels. In primary education, the greatest gap can be seen in countries such as Ecuador , Suriname and, especially, in Guyana, where 
a low level of schooling is also perceived in both sexes (M: 76% H: 67%). In secondary education. The number of women enrolled is higher than that of men, except in Peru where there is a three -points percentage difference that favors men (M: 87.7 H: 90.9). In 
 
6 Idem


---
*Page 157*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
tertiary education, all the Am azonian countries present a higher number of enrollments 
among women with large differences in the number of people enrolled between  them , for 
example, Suriname has  18% of women enrolled in tertiary education and  8% of men, 
while  in Peru 72.7%  of women acc ess this type of education compared to 68.7%  of men.  
 Employment.  Although women have a higher rate of education than men, the latter face 
major inequalities to access employment. All countries present gaps in the participation of women in the labor force, although these gaps are wider in some countries such as Guyana, w here only 45% of women participate in the labor force compared to 83% of 
men, and smaller in others such as Peru,  where women represent 73.3% compared to 
87.3% of men.  COCIV -19 update: ECLAC estimates that the female participation rate in 
2020 will be 46%,  a decrease of 6 percentage points compared to 2019. This means that 
about 12 million women left the regional workforce due to job destruction.  
  The percentage of unemployment among women is higher in all countries and varies 
between 14% in Brazil and the largest gender gap in unemployment occurs in Suriname 
where 11.45% of women are unemployed compared to 4.38% of men.  COCIV -19 update: 
ELAC estimates that with the reduction of the participation of women in the labor market, the estimated female unemployment in the LAC region rate decreases to 12.0% in 2020,  
 The part -time employment has one of the widest gender gaps. All the Amazonian 
countries present large gaps that show women occupying these jobs. For example, in Ecuador 43.3% of females work  part-time compared to 23.89% of men. Similar figures 
can be observed in Colombia (M: 26.1% H: 8.5).  
 
Women dedicate between 3 and 5.5  hours per day to unpaid work while men dedicate 
between 75 minutes and 3 hours depending on the country, Peru (M: 5 hours H: 2 hours ) 
and Ecuador (M: 4.7 hours H: 1 hour) are the countries with the widest gap.  
 Political representation. Women are poorly represented in the parliaments of their 
countries . They  represent between 15% and 38% of parliamentarians .


---
*Page 158*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment  
 
 
 
Table 1. Main gender indicators in the Amazonian countries ( pre-COVID -19)7 
 
7 The results of some indicators are not included as the data for some countries is very limited. Although these 
data are not available for all countri es, the general trend for the rest of the countries sets the trend for the region 
in each indicator.   
Gender Indicator  
  Brazil  Colombia  Ecuador  Guyana  Perú  Suriname  
Population sex ratio 
(female/male)   49.17  52.9 50.03  49.8 49.66  50.28  
 50.83  47.1 49.97  50.2 50.34  49.72  
Labour force 
participation rate, %   60.6 63.7 59.8 46.4 73.3 43.6 
 80.2 85.9 84.7 70.7 87.2 69.7 
Wage equality for 
similar work, 1 -7 (best)   3.52 3.75 4.02 n/a 3.56 n/a 
Unemployed adults, % 
of labour force (15 -64)  14.46  12.12  4.67 15.2 7.68 11.45  
 11.14  7.34 3.11 10.3 5.64 4.38 
Workers employed 
part-time, % of 
employed peopl e  35.51  26.10  42.3 n/a 32.06  44.8 
 21.00  8.50 23.89  n/a 17.13  27.5 
Proportion of unpaid 
work per day, 
female/male ratio   13.33  17.54  19.78  n/a 23.56  n/a 
 3.13 4.54 4.50 n/a 8.95 n/a 
Literacy rate, %   93.4 95.3 92.1 90 91.7 92.7 
 93.0 94.9 93.8 87 97.1 96.1 
Enrolment in primary 
education, %   94.7 93.2 96.1 64.3 93.1 87.7 
 94.8 92.7 93.1 93.0 92.4 84.4 
Enrolment in 
secondary education, 
%  83.2 80.2 86.5 84.4 87.7 64.0 
 80.3 74.9 84.2 80.4 90.9 52.0 
Enrolment in tertiary 
education, %   59.5 59.7 48.4 15.4 72.7 15.7 
 43.5 51.1 41.5 7.8 68.7 9.5 
Women in parliament, 
%  15.0 18.7 38.0 35.7 15 29.4 
 85.0 81.3 62.0 64.3 85 70.6 
Firms with female 
majority ownership, % 
firms   50.20  
 17.30  17.70  58.3 
 19.4 15.3 
 49.80  
 82.70  82.30  41.70  
 80.6 84.7 
Firms with female top 
managers, % firms   19.40  18.9 22.90  17.7 19.9 11.9 
 80.60  81.1 77.10  82.3 80.1 88.1


---
*Page 159*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment  
 
 
 
 
Source: Prepared by authors base on the data available on the Global Gender Gap Report 2020 and 
2021  of the World Economic Forum / *UN WOMEN. 2019. Guyana Women ’s Health and Life Experiences 
Survey Report . / **Refers to intimate partner violence only. Joel Joseph et al. 2019 National Women ’s 
Health for Suriname. BID.  /**** STEMS  Graduates. Global Gender Gap Report 2016  
 
 Violence against women.  Regarding intimate partner violence, the violence against 
women (VAW) is the one with the most comparable statistics between countries, the Andean region has the highest rates of intimate partner violence in all Latin America and the Caribbean. Also,  we c an see in the graph below,  that the countries of the Amazon 
region have high rates of violence against women, Ecuador, Colombia,  and Peru are 
among the countries with the highest rates.   Women’s access to 
land use, control & 
ownership, 0 - 1 (worst)   0.25 0 0.25 0.25 0 n/a 
Women’s access to 
non- land assets use, 
control & ownership, 0 -
1 (worst)   0.25 0 0.25 0.25 0 n/a 
STEMS, attainment %   10.70  13.76  8.03 5.16 
 24.44  14****  
 28.60  35.12  26.47  41.13  
 36.82  15****  
Agri., Forestry, 
Fisheries & Veterinary, 
attainment %   2.10 1.24 1.86 0.94 
 1.74 n/a 
 3.31 1.97 4.71 4.55 
 3.51 n/a 
Prevalence of gender 
violence in lifetime, % 
women   33.5 37.4 37.5 55* 33.2 32**


---
*Page 160*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Table 2. Prevalence of intimate partner viol ence, physical or sexual  
  
3. AMAZON POPULATION  
 
Social groups and division by sex  
 
The Amazon Region has a population of about 34 million people, of which 2,188,122 people are indigenous (approximately 4.6% of the Amazonian population) (IACHR, 2019; RAISG, 2020). There is no clarity on how many “ pueblos indígenas ”
8 live in this region: 
some sources, such as the OTCA (2018:12), estimate that there are around 420, while 
the AmazonIan Georeferenced Socio- Environmental Information Network (RAISG, 2020) 
registers a total of 410. Similarly, it is not known exactly how many indigenous peoples i n 
voluntary isolation and initial contact (PIACI) there are in the region: RAISG (2020) 
documents the existence of 82 PIACI but the OTCA (2018) estimates about 200. In 
addition, indigenous territories cover approximately 28% of the Area of the Amazon.  
 
 
8 “Pueblos indigenas” mean peoples in English. According to the OIT Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 
1989:  (a) tribal peoples in independent countries whose social, cultural and economic conditions distinguish them 
from other sections of the national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially by their own 
customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations;  (b) peoples in independent countries who are regarded as 
indigenous on account of their descent from the populations which inhabited the country, or a geographical region 
to which the country belongs, at the time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment of present s tate 
boundaries and who, irrespective of their legal status, retain some or all of their own social, economic, cultural and 
political institutions.


---
*Page 161*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
The other communities that live in the region are distributed as follows: 82% peasants, 
14% Afro- descendants, 2% colonos, 1% riverbanks and 1% fishermen (Panamanian 
Ecclesial Network -  REPAM, 2019). These proportions vary from country to country. For 
example,  in the Ecuadorian Amazon 33.12% of the population is recognized as 
indigenous, 59.33% as mestizo, 3.48% as white, 1.38% as Afro- Ecuadorian and the rest 
in other categories such as black, mulate and montubio (INEC, 2010). For its part, in the Colombian Amazon more than 70% of the population is not identified with any ethnic group and belong to peasant communities; meanwhile, the indigenous population slightly exceeds 23% and people who identify as black or mulatto are over 2% (DANE, 2018).  
 The division of the Amazonian population by sex has not been accurately identified. However, based on the information recorded by the latest national censuses, it can be estimated that for five countries in the Amazon region -  Bolivia , Colombia, Ecuador, Peru 
and Venezuel a - the average percentage of Amazonian women is between 48.3% and 
49.7% of the population. This population varies according to the different ethnic groups that are identified in each country. In Colombia, 307,280 Amazonian women do not self -
identify with an ethnic group, 82,900 self -identify as indigenous and 9,427 as Black, 
Mulato, Afro -descendant or Afro- Colombian (DANE, 2018). Most women in the 
Ecuadorian Amazon identify as mestizas (210,462) and indigenous (121,463) (INEC, 2010). Finally, in Peru 735,597 Amazonian women identify as mestizas, 66,095 as native or indigenous to the Amazon and 38,109 as Quechuas (INEI, 2017). [1]  
 Most of the population is Brazilian, accounting for more than 70% of the total population. Such population is followed by that of Peru and Colombia with an estimated 13% and 4% of the total Amazonian population, respectively (Cities and Local Governments U nited -
CLGU et. al, 2019). However, the most populous cities are Manaus and Belém in Brazil, with about 2 million inhabitants each. In addition, there are other intermediate cities, such as Iquitos in Peru, with a population of more than 400,000 inhabitant s (INEI, 2017). 
Among the small municipalities of the region are other important cities such as Leticia (Colombia), Tabatinga (Brazil) and Puerto Maldonado (Peru), where the population ranges from 50,000 to 80,000 people (INEI, 2017; National University of  Colombia, s.f).  
 
Gender relations in the Amazonia  
 
According to a paper published by CIFOR  (CIFOR, 2015) there  are several features of 
gender relations in the Amazon, however, each of these varies greatly depending on the social and environmental context from specific Amazonian social groups:  
 
• Strong community identity and political commitment among ethnic, occupational and other social groups discourages attention to gender inequality that belies community unity.  
• Patriarchal cultural values among some i ndigenous groups and among the general 
population in northeastern Brazil assume that men represent the family and the


---
*Page 162*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
community in public arenas, leaving women without independent autonomous property rights and representation in decision making related to forest management.  
• The division of labor by gender is often linked to different physical spaces and arenas of activity: for example, women may engage in reproductive and productive activities in the homestead/community gardens, swidden gardens, (including  
livestock, agroforestry and non- timber forest products [NTFPs]), while men 
dominate in hunting, agricultural clearing and logging activities for the commercial market. In non- indigenous communities, women´s arenas are often more limited – 
and men typicall y dominate agriculture.  
• Women’s productive work is often invisible to markets and outsiders due to its association with the home, family, and subsistence and because of limited market access.  
• Physical isolation of many forest communities makes women’s coll ective action 
more difficult, and limits access to social services and other benefits of citizenship rights.  
• Programs to support community forest management have influenced community and family gender dynamics, often creating or exacerbating gender inequal ities by 
focusing resources on a small group of male timber managers and neglecting NTFPs and broader forest management tasks.  
• Over the past three decades, Amazonian women have found diverse ways to organize in support of their community struggles for land and other resources, to 
demand services from government and NGO projects, and to gradually build their 
skills and leadership within broader community and public arenas.  
 
4. WOMEN IN FINANCE  IN LAC  
 
Women -led businesses   
There is mounting global evidence of a correlation between gender diversity and superior 
business results and then investor returns. McKinsey forecasts a GDP annual growth 
opportunity of US$ $2.6 trillion for Latin America in 2025 in a world in which women  
participate in the market economy to an identical extent as men . However, gender 
diversity in companies in LAC is currently low, particularly at leadership levels. The same study concluded that publicly listed companies with higher female representation y ielded 
44% higher returns on investment and 47% higher profit margins.  Despite this evidence, 
63% of LAC companies declared that gender diversity is not a strategic priority
9. 
In the Amazonian countries, the presence of women on boards of directors is ver y low, 
with a participation between 8.4% in Brazil and 15.1% in Colombia. The figures improve 
 
9 McKinsey, Women matter: A Latin American perspective: unlocking women’s potential to negate corporate pe rformance, 2015


---
*Page 163*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
a little in the companies where women are majority owners, although they do not exceed 
20% in any of the 7 countries in this study. Additionally , the number of companies with 
women in senior management varies between 11.9% in Suriname10.  
Women represent more than 40% of the economically active population in LAC. Only 17% of them are entrepreneurs in the formal economy. The main barriers they encounter to forming  formal companies are (i) difficulties in leaving the informal sector (more than 60% 
of LAC women work in this sector
11) or going beyond microenterprises, reducing their 
earning potential, (ii) gender barriers that prevent them from working longer hours outside the home, (iii) ignorance of the financial market and existing opportunities, (iv) reduced 
levels of financial education, (v) lack of female roles to follow in business, (vi) lack of 
support networks and (vii) difficulties in accessing financing without legal ownership or 
guarantee
12. 
 According to a study of 35 entrepreneurs in 15 countries in LAC, a high number of women entrepreneurs in the region feel that they have been discriminated against because of their gender (27% versus 4% for men). 50.6% of the women surveyed affirm that there is a general inequality in entrepreneurial opportunities, including access to resources, adequate training and business advice
13. 
 The main reason women- led businesses fail is lack of access to capital. LAC is the region 
with the second highest rate of bankruptcies of companies run by women worldwide. While most male entrepreneurs indicate that they have closed their companies due to low profitability. Women entrepreneurs point to the difficulty of obtaining financing as the main 
impediment to continue with their businesses. The credit gap in LAC is $5bn for women-
led micro businesses and $93bn for women- led SMEs
14.  
The Global Banking Alliance ensures that women clients show a stronger saving behavior 
(16% more likely than men to save for futures), with lower risk (on average, they are more 
likely to repay loans), with higher growth and lower attrition . Evidence shows that financial 
intermediaries that implement programs that effectively meet the needs of women see excellent financial returns.  
Investing in women- led business  
Currently, the supply of gender -lens financial products in LAC is limited since, on the one 
hand, only a few  fund managers consider gender in their investment analysis and, on the 
other hand, no efforts are made to search for the growing portfolio of women- led 
 
10 World Economic Forum . Global Gender Gap Report 2020 . 
11 http://www.unwomen.org/es/news/in- focus/csw61/ women -in-informal -economy  
12 Buckland, Leonora et al. Gender Lens Investing: How Finance Can Accelerate Gender Equality in Latin America and the Caribbean. IDB Invest. 2019  
13 G. Cardoz, A. Fernandez, C. Ilie, H. Tejada, Entrepre - neurship and Gender in Latin America, INCAE Business School, February 2018   
14 IFC. MSME Finance Gap, 2017.


---
*Page 164*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
businesses. Furthermore, financial intermediaries are  dominated by men, especially at 
decision- making levels.  
Despite this, a gender -lens investing for women- led business is emerging in various types 
of assets  in LAC . In public markets, bonds are being created for socially responsible 
investors interested in promoting gender equality. In private markets, the microfinance sector has a long tradition, particularly in countries such as Peru, and Colombia. 
Commercial banks have worked with institutional investors, including multilateral development banks (MDBs), to address the small and medium -sized enterprise (SME) 
credit gap faced by women- led businesses. These banks offer specific lines of credit and 
technical assistance to SMEs run by women. In addition, other investments in private markets such as venture capital (VC) and private equity (PE) funds are growing very fast in the region, especially in Brazil, Mexico and Colombia
15. 
IDB’s program Women Entrepreneurship Banking (weB)  facilitates 
access to financial and non- financial services (training, mentoring, 
networking) for women- led businesses in LAC through advisory services 
and investments into financial intermediaries. It has supported 19 banks in 12 countries, approving near ly $800 million in investments and $5 million in 
technical assistance, to develop and market products and services for women- led MSMEs. The banks which are participating in the program are 
making impressive advancements serving their female customers.  
Pro Mujer is a leading microfinance organization in Latin America 
dedicated to improving the livelihoods of women in Latin America through a combination of financial, health, and educational services. Their integrated approach includes financial services (loans, savings, insurance), training in basic business skills and entrepreneurship, health education (e.g., on gender -based violence, disease prevention, wellness, and personal 
development, etc.) and health screenings (cancer screening, diabetes testing, blood  pressure checks). In 2017, Pro Mujer disbursed more than 
USD 393 million in loans and served 276,000 women. Pro Mujer’s services 
are offered primarily through a communal bank and its clients have an 
average repayment rate of 97%.  
In 20120, IDB Invest structured and subscribed a Gender -focused Social 
Bond issue by Banco Davivienda SA (Davivienda) . The deal, worth $100 
million has a 7- year maturity. This is the world's first issue of a gender -linked 
bond based on achieving outcomes. The bond will be exclusiv ely used by 
the issuer to finance the growth of its women- led SMEs portfolio (WSMEs), 
as well as the purchase of social interest houses by women in Colombia.   
 
15Buckland, Leonora et al. Gender Lens Investing : How Finance Can Accelerate Gender Equality in Latin America and the Caribbean. IDB Invest. 2019


---
*Page 165*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
Women use of financial services  
 
Table 3. Use of financial services in the Amazon countries  
 
 
Financial Indicator  
  
Brasil  Colombi
a Ecuador  Perú  
Financial institution 
account  
  68% 41% 42% 34% 
 73% 49% 60% 51% 
Saved at a financial 
institution   10% 7% 8% 6% 
 19% 11% 17% 11% 
Borrowed from a 
financial institution   7% 13% 8% 12% 
 10% 16% 16% 18% 
Borrowed to start, 
operate, or expand a 
farm or business   3% 5% 5% 4% 
 7% 9% 10% 8% 
Credit card ownership   22% 10% 4% 8% 
 33% 18% 13% 16% 
Used the internet to 
pay bills in the past 
year  10% 7% 3% 4% 
 13% 9% 9% 5% 
Used a mobile phone or 
the internet to access 
an account   12% 7% 4% 4% 
 14% 10% 7% 7% 
Made or received 
digital payments in the 
past year   57% 33% 24% 26% 
 59% 42% 40% 42% 
Source: Prepared by authors with data from the Global Findex Database 2017 (World 
Bank)  
 
 
5. ACCESS TO LAND AND WOMEN TERRITORIAL CARE  
 
Although in the region there are some large and medium urban centers -  such as Manaus, 
Belém or Iquitos -  the territory is eminently rural. In rural areas, the predominant forms of 
land management are protected natural areas, indigenous and community terri tories, and 
private properties including different productive activities. However, the land tenure of 
these different figures is distributed unequally among men and women, as it is usually Amazonian men who have ownership and administration over the land. For example, in 
the Ecuadorian Amazon only 11.85% of women have their own land, while 88.2% of male producers own it (PROAmazonía, 2019). Likewise, in Colombia, women's access to land


---
*Page 166*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
tenure is precarious and their ownership, or  even inheritance rights and shared tenure 
with partners or spouses , is rarely recognized (UNDP, 2011; Zorio, 2015).  
 There are different social, economic, legal and cultural factors that can explain this inequality in land tenure. For instance,  Amazonian women have less access to st ate 
identification or visibility processes that allow them to participate in formalization processes.  In the Peruvian Amazon about 19% of women who speak a native language 
and 7.2% of those who speak Spanish do not even have a National Identification Docum ent (Villar, 2013). In addition, although there is a shared tenure w ithin collective or 
community properties it is Amazonian men who assume mostly the custody and administration of the lands (PROAmazonía, 2019).  
 However, although Amazonian women do not exercise ownership over land widely,  they 
do play an essential role in territorial management and local forms of environmental 
practices of conservation within I ndigenous, Peasant and Afro- descendant peoples. This 
is mainly because women oversee home and family care, which also often encompasses the care of the natural environment. In fact, a PROAmazonía study (2019) shows that in the Ecuadorian Amazon women usually devote, on average, 23 hours a week to reproductive work, almost 17 hours longer than men. Al though this gap has variations 
according to different local  communities , it has been found that usually all Amazonian 
women spend much more time on this type of work than men.  
 In addition, women are also active in the productive activities of agriculture, livestock, forestry, and fisheries in which different forms of environmental care and sustainable use of natural resources are exercised. In the Ecuadorian Amazon, 30.6% of women engage 
in these activities, just seven percentage points less than men, approximately (PROAmazonía, 2019). In the case of the indigenous population,  it has been identified 
that indigenous women mainly assume the care of the chakras as scenarios of family agricultural production that allow subsistence, the conservation of diversity and, in many cases, the generation of economic surpluses for the home (PROAmazonía, 2019). In the 
case of productive units of peasant or mestizo families, women have a high participation in productive activities but also in decision- making and resource management.  
Women are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Some research argued  
that this is the case because they have fewer economic resources to mitigate impacts, for example on productive systems of agriculture, livestock and tourism (Montalvo, 2019). Women family and environmental care activities create a str ong dependence on natural 
resources so that any change in such resources has tremendous effects o n their 
livelihoods  as well as on their personal and social wellbeing. More importantly, "in rural 
areas women depend directly on the resources of their enviro nment, on greater soil 
wealth, on greater clean water, for greater and better forest management, for greater and better seed management, greater chances of subsistence of families in decent conditions" (PROAmazonía & ONUMujeres, 2019:28). In addition, w omen face increased 
risks of contagion of tropical diseases, such as malaria, ZIKA, and dengue (Montalvo, 2019). Some studies in the Peruvian Amazon find that women are differentially affected


---
*Page 167*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
by deforestation. This is because, while men own land and can take advantage of tree 
felling for timber sales or the expansion of productive activities, deforestation degrades the fundamental natural resources most women use to ensure the livelihoods of their families (Villar, 2013).  
 That is why, different organizations  stress the importance of including a gender 
perspective in forest management, biodiversity conservation, climate change mitigation and sustainable development (OTCA, 2019; PROamazonía & ONUMujeres, 2019, Our Future Forests -Amazonia Verde, 2021). In partic ular, there is a growing call to foster a 
greater participation of women in the management of protected natural areas and 
indigenous and community territories. Together, these forms of ordering occupy more than 47% of the Amazonian territory. In fact, in t he Amazon there are about 500 protected 
areas  and they are estimated to cover a territorial extension of approximately 2,123,000 
km2 (RAISG, 2018; RAISG, 2020). The country with the highest coverage of protected areas is Brazil with more than 50% and is followed by Venezuela and Peru with approximately 14% and 10%, respectively (RAISG, 2017).  According to the Amazon 
Network of Georeferenced Socio- Environmental Information, there  are two areas (of 
direct and indirect use) that could benefit from a more substantial inclusion of women within governance s chemes:  
 
 (i) Areas of direct use in which natural resources are conserved within the 
framework of management plans that regulate and control the different uses. These areas can occupy just under 12.4% of the Amazon territorial extension and more than 50% of the Pr otected Natural Areas of the Amazon (RAISG, 2020).  
 (ii) Areas of indirect use where biodiversity protection is promoted in parallel with 
research, education and tourism, although human settlements are generally not allowed. It is estimated that these areas can occupy about 12% of the Land coverage of the Amazon and make up just over 48% of the Protected Natural Areas of the region.  
 
This is particularly relevant because there are 2,275 indigenous territories covering more than 2,300,000 km2 of the Amazon ( RAISG, 2020). The land tenure categories of these 
territories may vary between: Officially recognized traditional occupation and use d 
territories; Territories of traditional use and occupation without official recognition; Indigenous Reserve or Intangible Zone (for PIACI); Indigenous Reserve Proposal (RAISG, 2020). The countries with the largest number of indigenous territories are:  Brazil 
with an area of 1,156,000 km2, Peru with an area of 308,341 km2 and Colombia with an area of 262,912 km2. Most of these  indigenous territories are officially recognized and 
occupy 21.9% of the coverage of the general Amazon (RAISG, 2017).  Different studies 
have highlighted that the power of women in decision- making is low or medium compared 
to that of men who are mainly responsible for the administration of resources (PROAmazonía, 2019).


---
*Page 168*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
However, there are already multiple organizations that have strong representation and visibility of women. In Brazil, the Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Brazilian Amazon ( COIAB) and the Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (APIB) have a high 
representation of women promoting indigenous rights and environmental sustainability (Lima and Vieira, 2019). Amazonian women (both indigenous , peasant and Afro-
descendant) have played a central role in the management of different protected areas 
and indigenous or community territories because they have led many of the care activities and, in recent years, have been actively involved in sustainable production processes (Lima and Vieira, 2019). M any of these processes respond to the emergence of 
bioeconomy strategies to use natural resources from local knowledge and conserve the tropical forest in parallel (Lima and Vieira, 2019; RAISG, 2020). Thus, these areas have great potential  to mitigate the negative consequences of contemporary environmental 
degradation and ensure the conservation of  the biological resources that underpin the 
various emerging bioeconomy initiatives. In fact, 72% of Protected Natural Areas and Indigenous Terri tories are free from environmental degradation related to threats of 
deforestation, fire, illegal mining, pollution, among other factors (RAISG, 2020). There are even multiple studies that point to the relationship between the delimitation  of these 
territo ries and the positive impact on deforestation, which favors the maintenance of 
ecosystem services crucial for bioeconomy such as: carbon capture, biodiversity protection and conservation of hydrological systems (RAISG, 2020).  
  
6. BIOECONOMY: CHALLENGES TO WOMEN PARTICIPATION IN VALUE 
CHAINS  
 The Amazon faces multiple challenges associated with deforestation and environmental pollution that occur mainly by unsustainable economic activities (RAISG, 2020).  In recent 
years, therefore, the re is a growing need an d call  to generate productive systems that 
take advantage of biodiversity in a sustainable way, contribute to its conservation and include indigenous women, peasants, Afro- descendants and inhabitants of small and 
intermediate cities as well as other member s of those social groups. In this context, 
"bioeconomy, a green and sustainable economy, emerges as an innovative alternative to use natural resources by retributing and incorporating the knowledge of local communities and understanding the importance and value of keeping the tropical forest standing, no longer perceived as an extraction site" (RAISG, 2020: 63). There is not enough data available t o quantify gender gaps within current  bioeconomy initiatives in the Amazon,  but 
here we present some of the gender gaps that are referenced in the  existing  literature.  
 Taking a step forward to include women into bioeconomy efforts is premised upon the  
central role that women play in  such value keeping practices and the possibilities that 
involved in value chains that harness and preserve  natural resources such as trees, 
seeds, medicinal plants, insects, fruits, among others.  However, there are still some gaps 
for women to be able to have sufficient participation in t hese processes and to include the


---
*Page 169*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
knowledge of the local communities they belong to. Some of these gaps are related to  
ownership  of productive assets  (land, animals, capital); distribution of the use of time in 
productive and household tasks; access to formal economies; equitable distribution of investments and profits; access to information and technology, among others. In this sense, there is a call from different international organizations to recognize t hat in agrifood 
systems - and in general in sustainable value chains - women have more difficulties in 
accessing productive resources and socio- economic benefits (FAO, 2013; ODCE). More 
importantly, m any of these institutions emphasize that gender equity and the 
consolidation of sustainable value chains are interdependent goals. This is because women's active inclusion in bioeconomic alternatives can lead to greater social and 
environmental sustainability . This is the case because unequal economic system s 
generate higher costs and become inefficient (World Bank, 2001; World Bank, IFAD and FAO, 2009).  
 Another of the gender gaps  that exist in the  current trends of  bioeconomy in the Amazon 
is that women still have little leadership in economic projects.  That is why there is a 
growing interest to foster such women roles for instance in certain initiati ves based on the 
sustainable use of Brazilian walnut, acai, tourism, among other s. One of these 
experiences is that of the Xikrin women of the Indigenous Territory of Trincheira Bajacá in the Brazilian Amazon. Since about 2014, these women have taken advantage of their traditional environmental and forest care roles to implement sustainable natural resource management projects, particularly non- timber forest products. One of the products they 
have taken advantage of is Brazil nut, as in their projects they have included family processes of collecting, washing and processing the walnut (Lima and Vieira, 2019). In addition, they have led negotiations to skip intermediaries in order to generate fairer 
income for themselves and their families. These women have also expanded traditional knowledge and practice as a bio- business model: the processing of babassu oil for 
cooking and producing cosmetics (Lima and Vieria, 2019; FUNAI, 2019). With these -  and 
other projects of flour  production and agriculture -  they have managed to generate better 
income while working on the conservation of their  cultural practices and their  forests.  
 In general, one of the problems of inequality faced by women in the green economy (or bioeconomy) is reaching work ing spaces and value chains that have traditionally been 
exclusive scenarios for men (Schmitt and Gómez -García, 2015). Therefore, the case of 
Brazil nut or chestnut has been an opportunity to promote gender equity in bioeconomy, as it has created more opportunities for women in the use of non- timber forest resources. 
This productive alter native has involved indigenous, peasant and urban women who work 
seasonally in B razil's nut harvesting and who have found job and market opportunities to 
improve their economic conditions and quality of life. It is estimated that only in the city of Ribera lta by the early 2000s, 75% of the population used in chestnut extraction was 
women (Montero and Pavedo 2003 in Schmitt and Gómez -García, 2015).    
 In addition, many Amazonian women face a gap in income generation and access to knowledge and technical tools.  A bio -business that has tried to respond to these gaps is


---
*Page 170*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
the case of more than 240 women in the Bolivian  Amazon who process fruits like acai, 
copoazú, among others (UN Women, 2019). Most of these women are indigenous mothers head of household, although other peasant women are also involved within communities. This group of women has managed to have additional sources of income for their homes through the sustainable use of Amazonian fruits. In addition, in a constant dialogue with the United Nations, t hey have gained access to technical knowledge, 
training and technologies to manage processing machinery, manage their own financial resources, participate in public settings, negotiate with other actors and prevent gender -
based violence (UN Women, 2019). T he contribution of this bio- business to forest 
conservation is mainly the spread of good environmental management practices to prevent tree felling (which generate economic resources while standing), control burning during summer periods and properly manage solid waste (UN Women, 2019).  
 Another  barrier to the participation of Amazonian women in bioeconomy is the weak 
bonding of peasant and riverside women in leading way in leading bio-businesses . One 
experience that has tried to respond to this barrier is the case of a community of peasants and riverbanks in the northeast of Pará in the Brazilian Amazon. After the 1980s this region suffered high environmental damage from palm extraction, sugarcan e 
agribusiness and the Tucurí dam. These factors impacted, among other things, the 
availability of acai palm in the area (Cunha, 2006). For this reason, a group of leaders consolidated a strategy of recovery of the acai palm in order to take advantage only  of its 
fruit, ensure repopulation in the area and generate greater economic income through export to the North American market (Cunha, 206). In principle this bio- business only had 
collaboration from some women but after a few years of implementation many  peasant 
and riverside women became more actively involved and consolidated the Igarapé- Miri 
Women's Association. Women even became protagonists of the project as they began to hold senior positions in the bio- business model and participate more equitably in income 
(Cunha, 2006).   On the other hand, some international institutions have identified that one of the main barriers to women's participation in the green economy is that they tend to spend many 
hours in everyday practices of family and territorial care which  impedes their participation 
in economic alternatives  (DCED, s.f.). In the Ecuadorian Amazon this time -gap is  18 
hours, as women spend a total of 78.5 hours per week on all their paid, unpaid and subsistence work, while Amazonian men spend only 60 (PROamazonía, 2019). In addition, even if women engage actively in certain activities that may involve monetary exchanges they are not paid for their activities  (directly or indirectly ). This situation  may 
(i) re -encourage Amazonian women to family care activities most and (ii) prevent the 
development of other activities crucial for their  insertion into bio- businesses, such as 
education and political participation (Proamazonía, 2019).  
 Finally, one of the f actors affecting women's participation in bioeconomy is the uneven 
distribution of means of production and income.  As mentioned above, very few 
Amazonian women have access to land ownership, which affects their decision- making


---
*Page 171*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
power over objects and forms of production (central elements in sustainable production of bio businesses ) (Proamazonía, 2019). In addition, this generates an unequal 
distribution of income, as Amazonian men usually have the power over surpluses produced; Amazonian women, for their par t, tend to have low economic power because 
of lack of income (Proamazonía, 2019). For example, in the case of the Amazon department in Peru, there is a wage gap of almost 35% between men and women (Villar, 2013: 38). This, coupled with other variables such as the low possibility of formal 
identification (DNI) of Amazonian women, access to land and capital, implies that women 
have less access to the basic elements to consolidate a bio business .  
 Access to credit in the Amazon is  also limited, there is a problem of access to financial 
institutions in a general, i.e. neither men nor women access financing.  For example, in 
Ecuador, the total amount of credit delivered to the Amazon region represents only 5% of the country's total
16. The information shows that credit access opportunities for the 
Amazonian population are limited, and some barriers are the requirements, which generally must ensure the holding of material resources such as land and a fixed income. The Amazonian women are disadvantaged against men, as they do not own the land and do not enter the formal labour market, thus increasing the determinants of poverty in women in the region.  
 In sum, the participation of Amazonian women in bioeconomic alternatives still presents 
multiple gaps related to pre -existing inequality conditions of women's livelihoods and 
economies in the region. On the one hand, gaps still persist in working conditions, as Amazonian women tend to have more precarious conditions than men. Specifically, Amazonian women have less access and stability in the labour market; for example, in the Ecuadorian Amazon only 12.84% of women access full employment (PROamazonía, 2019: 25). In addition, in the work they carry out they have lower social benefits, such as social security: in Ecuador only 21.15% Amazonian women have affiliation to compulsory social insurance (PROamazonía, 2019: 25). According to the Donor Committee for Business Development (DCED), the other barrier women face to better participation in 
the formal economy in green initiatives and sustainable value chains is that they tend to have a lower degree of education than men, making it difficult to transition to the labor market (DCED, s.f.). An example of this is that in the Peruvian Amazon the average illiteracy gap between men and women is 24.36 percentage points (Villar, 201). Barriers 
to the economic empowerment of women in the Amazon due to the sexual division of labor  and cultural imaginaries exclude them from entering the labor  market which 
deepens poverty and creates gender inequalities in the use and control of resources. This is because the responsibilities of taking care of the family and kids limit women's abili ty 
to enter the labor market. Although Amazonian women are mainly engaged in agriculture, 
they are responsible for caring for the chakra, but they do not have control over the use of resources and income and do not access funding or credit.  
 
16 Diagnosis of the situation of Amazonian women, 2019, (MAE, MAG, PNUD, GFC, GEF, ONU Mujeres) , 
Ecuador


---
*Page 172*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
[1] These estimates do not include those provinces, states or departments that have small 
portions over the Amazon region; for example, the Meta department in Colombia, the 
Department of La Paz in Bolivia , among others.  
 
7. STAKEHOLDER SOCIALIZATION PHASE I: GENDER OUTCOMES  
 
Summary of the main findings    
 
•  38% of all expressed concerns in the Amazon are linked to the protection of the 
Amazon basin.   
• Protection -related comments are more common amongst men than women (gender 
gap: 5%).    
• Women talk more about citizen initiatives aiming to solve the issues in the region, 
especially in Brazil. These citizen initiatives could be “Rainforest Guardians”, forming themselves across countries or food banks.   
• Brazilians in the Amazon are experiencing increasing trends of food insecurity, which led to such a solidary response in the creation of food banks. 100% complaints related to craftmanship come from women,  complaining about their food 
insecurity, caused by  their employment informality and lack of tourism.   
•  Bio-businesses are being identified in all Amazon countries. Some of them have a 
strong vision of  sustainability, applying indigenous cosmologies to their production 
techniques,  in cocoa and coffee agric ulture, but also in technologies, due to the 
collaboration between universities, big companies,  and indigenous associations.    
• Guyanese citizens are showing enthusiasm about different  PPPs (public private 
partnership)  aiming to position Guyana as a  bio tourism  destination.   
•  The Kichwa community in Ecuador is asking for the respect of the river Napo flow, 
as it is the source for their economic activities, including sustainable fishing. If they 
find snails in the morning in the riverbank, that means that the following day there 
will be abundant fishing.  
 
Some specific women findings 
 
In Peru, citizen discussion is closely related to women. There are numerous organizations 
of women that are aimed to defend their territories.  For instance, a group of women


---
*Page 173*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
associated to protect the Amazon has created a digital inventory of threatened species of 
trees.    
  
In this sense, many of the organizations are entailing a digital approach gathering women 
from a variety of countries. For example, ‘Fondo Indígena Mujer  Amaz ónica’ is a 
scholarship program designed to indigenous women in the Amazonas leading initiatives 
in their communities.    
  
Finally, access to the credit market is a crucial demand of women in the region. In 
Putumayo, Colombia, women entrepreneurship is bei ng considered in the reconstruction 
of the capital.    
  
 
Participation in the dialogue tables  
 
The dialogues included 7 tables, all of them with a good representation of women. 
There was one specific table to address gender issues.  
 In the gender table r epresentatives were 99% women from the National (Peru) 
Women's Promotion Network (RNPM), Union of Indigenous Women of the Amazon (UMIAB) from Brazil, Ecuador's  Waorani  Women's Association (AMWAE) 
and Oshum  Afro-Colombian Women's Association, to name some of them.   
 The m ain insights  at these table were the following:  
• Common view: Deforestation, caused by extractive industries, is a threat to biodiversity, traditional crops, amongst them, source of ancestral medicine.


---
*Page 174*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
• New inputs: Importance to contribute to reduce machismo in the organizations 
and help women to reach economic independence as a powerful factor of respect.   
• Potential opportunities: Create business opportunities of ancestral medicine as opportunity for development.   
 Women’s repres entation for the rest of the tables is as follow:  
• Indigenous People (Spanish speakers)   (28% of women)  
• Peasants and local groups (Spanish speakers)   (29% of women),  
• various perspectives (English speakers)   (50% of women),  
• Indigenous people (Portuguese s peakers)   (56% of women),  
• Afro descendants and local groups (Portuguese speakers)  (44% of women),  
• International Civil Society Organizations (50% of women)


---
*Page 175*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
  
8. References   
  
Ciudades y Gobiernos Locales Unidos (CGLU), Federación Latinoamericana de 
Ciudades, Municipios y Asociaciones de Gobiernos Locales (FLACMA), 
Asociación de Municipalidades de Bolivia (AMB), Organización Internacional del 
Trabajo (OIT), Fondo Andaluz de Municipios para la Solidaridad Internacional 
(FAMSI). 2019.  Ciudades amazónicas. Aprendizaje entre pares sobre el uso 
sostenible de los ecosistemas terrestres. Disponible 
en: https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/peer_learning_23_ciudades_amazoni
cas.pdf    
Comisión Interamericana de Derechos Humanos - CIDH. 2019.  Situación de los derechos 
humanos de los pueblos indígenas y tribales de la Panamazonía.  Disponible 
en: http://www.oas.org/es/cidh/informes/pdfs/Panamazonia2019.pdf   
Cunha, E. (2006). Mutirão e trabalhadores rurais de Igarapé- Miri: Açai como alternativa 
economica no contexto de gênero. Belém, Brazil: Universidade Federal do Pará, 
Núcleo de Altos Estudos Amazônicos (NAEA, Paper No. 206.   
Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística-  DANE. 2018. Censo Nacional de 
Población y Vivienda, Colombia 
2018.  http://systema59.dane.gov.co/bincol/RpWebEngine.exe/Portal?BASE=CN
PVBASE4V2&lang=esp    
Donor Committee for Enterprise Development -  DCED. (n.d.).  Women’s participation in 
green growth. A potential fully realised? https://www.enterprise-
development.org/wp-
content/uploads/Wome ns_participation_in_Green_Growth.pdf    
FAO. 2016.  Developing gender -sensitive value chains –  A guiding 
framework . Rome.  http://www.fao.org/3/i6462e/i6462e.pdf    
Fundacao Nacional do Indio - FUNAI. (2019). Projeto empreendedor de mulheres Xikrin 
alcança reconhecimento 
internacional.  http://www.funai.gov.br/index.php/comunicacao/noticias/5279-
projeto- empreendedor -de-mulheres -xikrin -alcanca- reconhecimento-
internacional    
Instituto Nacional de Estadística-  INE. 2012. Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda, 
Bolivia 
2012.  http://datos.ine.gob.bo/binbol/RpWebEngine.exe/Portal?BASE=CPV2012
COM&lang=esp    
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos -  INEC. 2010. VII Censo de población y VI de 
vivienda 
Ecuador.  http://redatam.inec.gob.ec/cgibin/RpWebEngine.exe/PortalAction?&M
ODE=MAIN&BASE=CPV2010&MAIN=WebServerMain.inl    
Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática. 2017. Directorio Nacional de centros 
poblados. Censos Nacionales 2017 Perú: XII de población, VII de vivienda y III 
de comunidades


---
*Page 176*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
indígenas.  https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/MenuRecursivo/publicaciones_digital
es/Est/Lib1541/index.htm    
Lima, L. & Vieira, E. (2019). Indigenous Women: Keepers of the Amazon Rainforest. The 
Nature Conservancy.  https://www.nature.org/en- us/what -we-do/our -
insights/perspectives/indigenous -women -xikrin -amazon- rainforest/    
Montalvo, N. (2019). Introducción. En PROAmazonía,  Diagnóstico de las mujeres 
amazónicas  (6-19). Ministerio de Ambiente y Agua del Ecuador, Ministerio de 
Agricultura y Ganadería, Programa de Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo, 
Green Climate Fund, Global Environmental Facility, UN 
Women.  https://www.proamazonia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/Diagnostico- de-mujeres-Amazonicas -3.pdf    
Montero, L. & Pavedo, P. (2003).  Ser castañera: condiciones productivas e condiciones 
laborales de la industria de la castaña en Riberalta.  La Paz: Centro de Estudios 
para el Desarrollo Laboral y Agrario (CEDLA).   
ODCE. (2010). Gender and Value Chain Development. Copenhagen:  the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Denmark.  https://www.oecd.org/derec/denmark/45670567.pdf    
Organización del Tratado de C ooperación Amazónica - OTCA. (2018a).  Análisis 
diagnóstico transfronterizo regional de la Cuenca Amazónica ADT.  Brasilia: 
OTCA   
______________. (2018b).  Informe regional sobre la situación de los bosques en la 
región amazónica. Brasilia: OTCA.  http://www.otca -
oficial.info/assets/documents/20 181203/5d6be8f9271304c91c0812cd60309a9f.
pdf   
Programa Integral Amazónico de Conservación de Bosques y Producción Sostenible 
PROAmazonía. (2019).  Diagnóstico de las mujeres amazónicas.  Ministerio de 
Ambiente y Agua del Ecuador, Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería, Programa 
de Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo, Green Climate Fund, Global 
Environmental Facility, UN Women.  https://www.proamazonia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/Diagnostico- de-mujeres -Amazonicas -3.pdf    
Red Amazónica de Información Socioambiental Georreferenciada -  RAISG. 
2017.  Amazonía 2017. Áreas protegidas. Territorios indígenas.   
______________. 2018. Amazonía en números - Mapa online. Disponible 
en: https://www3.socioambiental.org/geo/RAISGMapaOnline/   
______________. 2020.  Amazonía bajo presión 2020.  RAISG: Sao Paulo, Belém, Lima, 
Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bogotá, Quito y Caracas.    
Red Eclesial Panamazónica - Repam. 2019. Atlas Panamazónico: aproximación a la 
realidad eclesial y socioambiental. Disponible 
en: https://www.bivica.org/files/5526_atlas -panamazonico.pdf   
Rodríguez, A., Mondaini, A. y Hitschfeld, M. (2017).  Bioeconomía en América Latina y el 
Caribe: contexto global y regional y perspectivas.  Santiago de Chile: CEPAL.    
Schmink, M. & Gómez -García, M. A. (2015). Under the canopy. Gender and forests in 
Amazonia. Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), Occasional Paper No. 121.  
https://www.cifor.org/publications/pdf_files/OccPapers/OP -
121.pdf


---
*Page 177*
---

 The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender Assessment   
 
 
 
UNDP. (2011). Colombia rural. Razones para la esperanza. Informe Nacional de 
Desarrollo Humano.   
Universidad Nacional de Colombia. s.f. La Amazonía. Disponible 
en: http://amazonia.unal.edu.co/index.php/homepage/historia/la-
amazonia#generalidades   
UN Women. (2019). In the Bolivian Amazon, women are protecting the forest and 
empowering themselves.  
https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2019/9/feature- in-the-
bolivian -amazon -women- are-protecting- the-forest -and-empowering -
themselves    
Villar, E. (2013).  Diagnóstico de Género en la Amazonía: Amazonas, Loreto, Madre de 
Dios, San Martín y Ucayali . Lima: USAID.   
World Bank. (2001). Engendering development through gender equality in rights, 
resources, and voice. World Bank Policy Research Report. Management 1: report no. 36546- MW. Washington, DC.   
World Bank, IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development) & FAO. (2009). 
Gender in agriculture sourcebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.   
Zorio, S. (2015).  Tierras, mujeres y niñez. Familia y conflicto armado.  Derecho 
del Estado  (35): 295 - 315.


---
*Page 178*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
Gender  and Diversity Action Plan  
 
The Gender and Diversity Action P lan articulate s complementary activities with targets on gender and inclusion of indigenous peoples, Afro descendants, 
and peasant communities  of the Amazon. Activities will focus in  at least 14 areas, urban and rural , in the seven countries of the Amazon biome. To identify 
these areas , a two- stage process  will be followed . First, the IBD will conduct an assessment study that ought to be ready for the beginning of the project 
implementation  to understand:  (a) the different local businesses inserted into bio- economy trends , including those owned by indigenous peoples, Afro 
descendants, and peasant  communities , (b) the participation of women in value chains  and their financial gaps (in particular for the countries where we do 
not have data, see Gender Assessment) ; (c) analysis of the main challenges these businesses  face. In a second stage and informed by the results of these 
studies,  the project team will focus its support to promising initiatives with potential for economic, social, and environmental sustainability  (at least 1 rural area 
per country) ; d) a baseline study of the areas prioritized for the trainings and interventions of output 4 and 5.   
 For outputs 1, 4 and 5 we will work with two different approaches  i) individuals who are willing to participate in the training strategies  the project will create 
(mainly in urban areas)  and ii) co -creation of capacity building programs with local communities and/or  schools that are interested in including them in their 
own rural territories.  For outputs 2 and 3 the project will work with the  financial intermediaries included in components 1 and 2. The main budget is directed 
to training programs t hat promote the social capital needed both for environmental conservation and local governance and bio- economy. Depending on the 
local needs , those programs in the Gender and Diversity Plan although disaggregated here are conceived as  articulated  activities in order  to make a better 
use of the available budget  and to shape activities that may be replicable in other areas of the Amazon.  
 
Gender Action Plan  
 
ACTIVITIES  INDICATORS AND TARGETS  TIMELINE  RESPONSABILITIES  COST  
 
Impact Statement:                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
• Increase bio- businesses that contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation in the Amazon, including those owned or led by women,  indigenous peoples , 
afro descenda nts, and peasant communities.  
 
Outcome Statement: Improved necessary skills for bio- business to participate  in value chains  and financial services. 30% of financial instruments will  finance women-
led bio businesses.  
Output 0: Assessment study on gender  and biodiversity  on bio -business value chains  
0.1 The project will conduct an assessment 
study to understand better  (a) the 
different local businesses inserted into 
bio-economy trends, including those 0.1 1 study on gender and 
diversity on bio -economics 
value chains  to understand 
bio-business trends and the 0.1  By the end of 2021 a study 
is developed  - IDB $ 100,000 (this 
activity will be 
finance by


---
*Page 179*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
owned by  women,  indigenous  peoples, 
Afro descendants, and peasant 
communities, (b) the participation of 
women in value cha ins and their 
financial gaps; (c) analysis of the main 
challenges these businesses face. This 
activity will be the same for the GAP and 
the DAP.  
 participation of women and 
indigenous peoples, Afro descendants, and peasant 
communities .  resources other 
than the GCF)  
Output 1: Portfolio of services  to promote the promote bio-business owned or led by women,  
1.1 Develop a training program for 
women entrepreneurs in bio-businesses  (productive skills, 
managerial skills, economic 
empowerment, socio- emotional skills, 
financial access, etc)    
1.2 Develop an online community for women entrepreneurs in bio-
businesses that allow s them to share 
experiences and resources.  
1.3 Support  women- led bio-business  with 
pre-feasibility studies,  market studies 
and business plans, with their respective economic and financial 
viability projections.   1.1 Training program:   
- 2 training programs  
developed per count ry for 
women entrepreneurs  
- Number of women trained 
disaggregated by rural and 
urban, indigenous and other 
communit ies’ identification   
- Number of women that after 
the training access to credit.  
1.2 Online community:  
- 1 online community for 
women entrepreneurs 
developed that allow wome n 
to share experiences and 
resources  
- Number of women enrolled in 
the community disaggregated 
by rural, urban, indigenous  
and other communities’ 
identification  
1.3 - Number of prefeasibility 
studies developed, 
disaggregated by rural and 
urban, indigenous and other 1.1 - By the end of Y1: 6 
training programs  
developed.  
- By the end of Y2: 12 
training programs developed  
1.2 – By the end of Y1: 1 online 
community developed.  
1.3 - By the end of Y2: at least 
30% of studies developed  
- By the end of Y 3: at least 
60% of studies developed  
- By the end of Y4: at least 
90% of studies developed  
- By the end of Y5: 100% of 
studies developed  
  
 
  • IDB 
• Executing agencies  
• Financial 
intermediaries   Total $ 1 400.000  
 
 
1.1 $600.000 
1.2 $100,000  
1.3 $700,000


---
*Page 180*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
communities’ identification  to 
help women to start or improve 
their bussiness  
- Number of women- led 
business supported to 
transition from the informal to 
the formal sector, 
disaggregated by rural and urban, indigenous and non-
indigenous  
- At least 50% of women- led 
business supported to 
transition from the informal to the formal sector, make the 
transition.  
  
Output 2: Financial intermediaries incorporate a gender -lens in their portfolio  
2.1 Financial intermediaries receive 
gender awareness training  
2.2 Identify  bottlenecks and define 
changes for the integration of a gender perspective within the relevant 
financial-  services providers . 
2.3 Propose a road map for the financial intermediaries to include a gender -
lens and propose changes to solve 
the bottlenecks  detected in the 
analysis  2.2. 
2.4 Design a credit program  for women 
entrepreneurs which adapt s to 
specific needs of  urban, rural, 
indigenous , afro descendant and 
peasant  women . The credit program 
should be tailored to be used in each 
of the 7 countries.  2.1 90% of financial intermediar y 
institutions  trained  on gender 
awareness  
2.2 1 study of bottlenecks developed that include specific 
bottlenecks per countries.  
2.3 1 regional  roap map for 
financial intermediaries is developed with specific 
recommendations for each 
countr y 
2.4 - 1 credit program for women 
developed that adapt to 
women needs  
- Number of women that use 
the credit program disaggregated by rural, urban, 2.1 - By the end of Y1: 10% of 
financial intermediaries trained  
- By the end of Y2: 30% of 
financial intermediaries 
trained  
- By the end of Y 4: 90% of 
financial intermediaries trained  
2.2 By the end of the Y 1: 1 
studied is completed  
2.3 By the end of the Y 2: 1 
roap map for  financial 
intermediaries developed  
2.4 By the end of the Y2: 1 
credit program for women developed  • IDB 
• Executing agencies  
• Financial 
intermediaries   Total: $2 20.000  
 
2.1.  $70,000 
2.2   $70,000 
2.3   $50,000  
2.4   $30,000


---
*Page 181*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
indigenous and other 
communities’ identification  
Output 3: Create a n evaluation  system to promote access to credit with a gender -lens in bio -business  
3.1 Develop an evaluation  to promote 
access to credit for : 
1. Women- owned or led companies  
2. Companies that support gender 
equality and diversity inclusion in 
the workplace and are gender 
certified  
3. The production of goods and 
services that respond to the 
needs of women, indigenous 
peoples, afro descendants and 
peasants.  3.1 Evaluation  system  developed  
- 40% of businesses that 
access credit include a gender lens   3.1 - By the end of Y1:  1 
gender criterion to access 
credit developed  
- By the end of Y1: 10% of 
businesses that access 
credit include a gender lens  
- By the end of Y2: 20% of 
businesses that access 
credit include a gender lens  
- By the end of Y3: 30% of 
businesses that access 
credit include a gender lens  
- By the end of Y4: 40% of 
businesses that access 
credit include a gender lens  
 
 
  • IDB 
• Executing 
agencies  
• Financial intermediaries   Total: $30.000


---
*Page 182*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
Diversity Action Plan  
 
ACTIVITIES  INDICATORS AND TARGETS  TIMELINE  RESPONSABILITIES  COST  
Impact Statement : Increase the bio -business capacities of indigeno us peoples , afro descend ent and peasant s that contribute to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in the Amazon, i ncluding a gender perspective.  
 
  
Outcome Statement: Improved trainings directed to t he needs of  indigenous, afro descendant s, peasant  communities and women within such communities. 
Given the budget, t his is conceived as a pilot directed to at least one area of each of the Amazonian countr ies.   
Output 0.1: Assessment study on gender and biodiversity on bio -business value chains  
0.1 The project will conduct an 
assessment study to 
understand better (a) the 
different local businesses 
inserted into bio- economy 
trends, including those 
owned by women, 
indigenous peoples, Afro 
descendants, and peasant 
communities, (b) the 
participation of women in 
value chains and their 
financial gaps; (c) analysis 
of the main challenges 
these businesses face. This 
activity will be the same for 
the GAP and the DAP.  
 0.1 1 study on gender and 
diversity on bio -economics 
value chains to 
understand bio- business 
trends and t he 
participation of women 
and indigenous peoples, 
Afro descendants, and 
peasant communities .   0.1 By the end of 2021 a 
study is developed  - IDB $ 100,000 (this activity will be 
financed  by resources other 
than the GCF)  
Output 4:  Strengthening capacity building in indigenous and other local communities of environmental governance   
4.1 Develop formal and informal training 
strategies in local universities, technical and professional programs,  or schools 
directed to the 7 rural areas prioritized at 
least one in each country (environmental 4.1 At least 6 programs 
implemented in the different 
Amazonian countries, including 
a gender perspective to enroll 
and visibilize local women 4.1 By the end of Y1: at least 3 
programs co- created  
By the end of Y2: 100% of all 
programs started implementation 
and 30% of women enrolled  • IDB 
• Executing agencies  
  Total: $1.500.000  
 
Disaggregated by 
activity:


---
*Page 183*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
conservation, sustainable agriculture, bio -
economy and tourism-  articulated with 
cultural territorial management). It also 
includes the design and implementat ion of 
a conflict resolution and risk protocol with 
a gender perspective.  
  
 
4.2 Create or strengthen local 
environmental plans articulated both: to indigenous, afro descendants or other 
forms of cultural territorial management 
and local governments. This activity 
includes a focus on nature´s contribution 
to local communities and women.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4.3 Define and implement strategies to 
promote conservation in indigenous, afro 
descendant and/or peasant territories  
 
  cultural role in conservation and 
bio-economy in order to 
strengthen indigenous and 
other local capacities’ to  better 
articulat e their livelihoods and 
economies with environmental 
conservation practices.  
  
4.2 At least 10 plans created or 
strengthened to ensure the 
promotion of social and cultural ways of territorial management, 
including those of women  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
4.3 At least 6  area strategies 
designed and implemented (1 per country) in order to foster  
intercultural community forms of 
governance and conservation    
  
 
 
  
 
4.2 By the end of Y 2 at least 5 
plans in formulation including a 
chapter with a gender 
perspective (active recognition of women participation and 
governance structure including 
women management)  
 
By the end of Y4 all the plans 
designed and implemented 
including a chapter with a 
gender perspective (at least 1 
plan per country and 2 for Brazil, 
Peru and Colombia).  
  
 
4.3 Articulation strategies 
designed by the end Y2  
Articulation strategies 
implemented by the end Y4   4.1 $800.000  
4.2 $500.000  
4.3 $200.000   
Output 5:    Promoting the local capacities of indigenous, afro descendants and peasant bio -business   
5.1 Develop a training program for 
indigenous, afro descendent or peasant 
entrepreneurs in bio -businesses 5.1 Training programs ( 6):   5.1 -By the end of Y2: 100% of 
local business started training at 
least 30% of women  • IDB 
• Executing agencies   Total: $1.850.000  
 
5.1 $700.000


---
*Page 184*
---

   The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan  
(productive skills, managerial skills, 
economic empowerment, socio- emotional 
skills, financial access, etc) that include 
the design and implementation  of a 
conflict resolution and risk protocol with a 
gender perspective. This activity will be directed to the rural areas prioritize as 
pilots of the project (at least 1 in each 
country).  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Prioritization of a sample of 
sustainable entrepreneur ships in each 
country (this process ought to take into 
account: indigenous and women 
participation, projects that focus on 
profitable business, those that may provide more employment generation etc)  
  5.3 Develop pre- feasibility studies, 
including market s tudies and business 
plans, economic and financial viability projections understanding the cultural and 
social contexts  
 
 - Number of training programs 
for local entrepreneurs 
developed.  
-Number of indigenous, 
afrodescendant and 
campesinos trained 
(disaggregated)  
-Number and percentage of 
women trained within each and 
communities  
-Conflict and risk protocols 
designed in every area of 
implementation of the pro gram  
 
These training intend to 
strengthen the active 
participation of indigenous and other local communities in bio-  
business.  
 
 
5.2 Sample of entrepreneurships defined with 
local communities in each of 
the areas of intervention to promote those that have more 
viability (socially and 
economically).  
 5.3 Number of prefeasibility 
studies developed (we are targeting ate least 1 rural area 
in each country to work)  
 
 
 -Implementation of protocols by 
the end of year 1 and throughout Y2 and Y3 .  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
5.2 Priorization that includes at 
least 30% of projects that 
actively involve women both in production and business 
management.  
 
 
 
5.3 By the end of Y: 100% of 
studies developed for local business taking into account 
value chain analysis for women  
 
 
 
 
 5.2 $ 50.000  
5.3 $ 700.000  
5.4 $ 200.000  
5.5 $ 200.000


---
*Page 185*
---

The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund:  
Annex 8 Gender and Diversity Action Plan 
5.4 Training of local entrepreneurs to 
facilitate their incorporation in the different 
stages of the value chain given the 
specific bo ttlenecks identified in 5.1 and 
5.3 (including finance components)  
5.
5 Design of a sociocultural protocol that 
guarantees the social, environmental and 
cultural viability and sustainability of the projects for indigenous and other local community business  5.
4 Training programs:  
-Number of training programs
for local entrepreneursdeveloped.-Number of indigenous, afr
o
des
cendant and/or campesinos
trained-Number of women trained
T
hese trainings intend to 
facilitate the incorporation of local owned business to the 
market  
5.
5 Sociocultural protocols 
developed including a gender mainstreaming throughout the 
protocol in order to comply with social, cultural, environmental, and economic viability respecting the protocols of local governance  5.4 By the end of Y2: 100% specific trainings needed defined  
30% of such trainings directed to the participation of women in the bio-economy projects strengthen  
5.
5 By the end of Y3 all the 
necessary socio -cultural 
protocols created (at least 1 per  
country and all of them including a gender perspective)  
______________