=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210606175722+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 21 for Word
/ModDate: D:20210607112023+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20155


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  IV 
Funding proposal package for FP 168 
 GCF/B. 29/02/Add.04 
7 June 2021  Meeting of the Board  
28 June –  1 July  202 1 
Virtual meeting  
Provisional Agenda Item  11 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Leveraging Energy Access Finance ( “LEAF ”) Framework”  
submitted by  the African Development Bank  (AfDB) ; 
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities  or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Leveraging Energy Access Finance ( “LEAF ”) 
Framework” submitted by  the African Development Bank (AfDB)  is being circulated on a limited 
distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of 
certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity        1 
No-o
bjection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)             56  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                
65 
I
ndependent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment         69 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                76  
assessment  
Gender documentation                78


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Leveraging Energy Access Finance (LEAF)  Framework  
Unlocking Local Currency Debt Capital to Scale up Decentralized/Distributed Renewable Energy in Africa  
Country(ies):  Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Tunisia, Ethiopia, Guinea  
Accredited Entity:  African Development Bank   
Date of first submission:  2020/12/27  
Date of current submission  2021 /05/20 
Version number  V8


---
*Page 4*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 5 5 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION 
 Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
 
Note to A ccredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to 
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in 
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be reflected in all 
relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60 . 
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard 
time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are 
asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 2 OF 5 5 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Private   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable Not applicable  
  
A.4. Result area(s)  Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme 
targets. For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF 
budget  devoted to it. The  total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities , industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions : 
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF con tribution:  
100%  
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  28.8 million tCO2e  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact :  N/a 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  959.9 USD  
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 
million)  
 A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  170.9 USD  
For multi -country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be 
consistent  with A.8.  
☒ Grant  10.9 million US$   
☒ Loan   80 million US$ 
☒ Guarantee  80 million US$ ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based   
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  a) Disbursement/ 
commitment / 
implementation  period: 6 
years  
b) Repayment period, if 
applicable: up to 12 years  A.12. Total lifespan  25 years


---
*Page 6*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 3 OF 5 5 
 
 A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  7/30/2021  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s 
safeguard policy and  GCF 
ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
I-2 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  If not the A ccredited Entity, please i ndicate the full legal name of the Executing 
Entity (ies) and provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there 
can be more than one Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the 
National Designated Authority. R efer to the definition of Executing Entity in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement.  
 
The Accredited Entity, the African Development Bank, is the executing entity for the  
majority of the transactions under the LEAF  Framework.   
 For transactions whereby partner funds or financial institutions (FIs) financ e a portfolio 
of DRE companies , the f und or FI  will be the  executing entit y. 
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages )


---
*Page 7*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 4 OF 5 5 
 
 Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:  
1. Climate change problem  
2. Proposed interventions  
3. Climate impacts/benefits  
 
The Climate Change problem facing Africa is substantial, with over 570 million people lacking access to electricity, 
notably in Sub- Saharan Africa where the problem is particularly acute. Failure to address this situation will continue to 
undermine Africa’s growth and stability as a continent. There exists a tremendous opportunity to make a tangible, 
sustainable difference to the people of Africa through the proposed LEAF Framework, which will deliver Distributed and Decentralised Renewable Energy (DRE) solutions to tackle the energy shortfall whilst dramatically reducing carbon 
emissions and simultaneously boosting local economies and businesses.  Sub-sectors considered for LEAF financing 
include solar home systems, solar solutions for commercial and industrial use and mini -grids . 
 Proposed intervention  
Levering Energy Access Finance (LEAF ) is a US$ 900+ million
1 Framework  with the overarching objective to unlock  
local currency debt and overcome market barriers to support the growth of DRE . In particular, the Framework, via  a 
US$ 33 4.9 million funding contribution from the GCF and AfDB , aims to: (i) enhance local markets  by de- risking the 
DRE space through guarantees and subordinated debt , unlocking local currency debt finance and scaling up 
investments; and (ii) create capacity within local banks and financial institutions  to engage and finance DRE businesses , 
structur e strong financing transactions , and support governments to create enabling policies  for private investment . 
This Framework  is part of  the Bank’s wider off -grid strategy  which includes the SEFA Fund and the Green Mini Grid 
Programme. This proposal focuses on decentralised and distributed renewable energy generation in six  countries: 
Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Guinea, based on the market potential for renewables and project pipeline 
of DRE initiatives being developed by AfDB.  
 Climate change mitigation . Scaling- up renewable energy is a necessity to meet growing electricity demand whil e 
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions . Despite significant  investment over the last decade in power generation and 
distribution, many African countries still face considerable challenges in achieving universal access to sustainable, 
clean, affordable,  and reliable sources of electricity. Power distribution networks across Africa are unable to reliably 
serve the existing industrial, urban and rural customer base.  Rural communities often rely on fossil -fuel based solutions 
such as kerosene and diesel as well as disposable batteries  (lead acid batteries) as energy sources , all of which 
caus e damage to humans , the climate and pollute the environment. According to IEA’s 2020  Africa Energy Outlook 
report, Africa was the world’s second largest diesel importer , and with burning of wood biomass account ing for over 
80% of energy consumption in SSA, primarily for cooking. While African countries are facing growing demands for 
energy to meet their infrastructure deficit,  doing so currently leads  to an increasing emission trajectory as a result of 
use of fossil -based energy and biomass energy sources2. The countries  have an opportunity to ‘‘ ’leapfrog ’ the fossil -
fuel-based growth strategies of  developed countries”3 by investing in green energy . The LEAF  Framework  contributes 
to climate mitigation by promot ing and support ing the transition from high- carbon electricity solutions to cleaner and 
more sustainable low -carbon technologies . It also contribut es to clean energy solutions  for rural populations who 
currently do not have access to electricity.  
 Climate change adaptation  co-benefits . Increasing the access of a 
population to clean and reliable energy (mini -grid 
and off -grid technologies) and solar -powered productive assets is expected to strengthen households' adaptive 
capacity and resilience through economic, social and e nvironmental co- benefits. The electricity systems and appliances 
can unlock access to additional income- generating activities, new businesses and foster economic growth, improving 
the people's socio- economic resilience impacted by such electrification. Acc ess to knowledge and information via 
information technology  enabled through electricity, helps communities connect with formal and informal support 
networks ( government, aid agencies etc.) and recover faster from the impacts of disasters. Additionally, women and 
other marginalised groups such as young girls, children and the elderly are known to improve their circumstances and 
health from energy access, mainly through reduced vulnerability to pollution associated with charcoal and fuelwood 
consumption, incr eased security and learning time for schools.  
 
Climate impacts/benefits  
By unlocking local currency debt  and increasing the availability of financing, the LEAF  Framework  will increase access 
to clean and reliable energy and support the diversification of renewable energy options , contributing to climate change 
mitigation and adaptation co-benefits  in the selected countries . Direct mitigation benefits include an additional 386 MW 
of generating capacity through renewable energy solutions, resulting in approximately  28.8 million tCO2 emission 
reductions over the lifetime of the systems. The Framework aims to provid e 1.18 million households and businesses 
with green,  reliable energy solutions and productive use appliances .


---
*Page 8*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 5 OF 5 5 
 
  
4 https://www.iea.org/data- and-
statistics?country=WEOAFRICA&fuel=Energy%20supply&indic ator=TPESbySource 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Climate change problem  
Climate change problem: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. Describe the 
mitigation needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate hazards and associates risks based on 
impacts, exposure, and vulnerabili ties) that the proposed interventions are expected to address. Also describe the most 
likely scenario (prevailing conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed interventions. Include baseline information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including the mitigation 
and adaptation needs, should be included in the feasibility study.  
 
Opportunity provided by  decentralised renewable energy  
Despite significant investment over the last decade in power 
generation and distribution, many African countries still face 
considerable challenges in achieving universal access to 
sustainable, clean and reliable sources of electricity.  
 Africa’s 
current electricity generation sources rel y mainly on fossil fuel 
(79%) and hydro (16%)4 (see Figure 1). Without a massive 
transformation to renewables, an increase in electricity 
demand would increase Africa ’s GHG emissions leading to a n 
upward emission trajectory . The shortfall in generation 
capacity and access to the grid results in over 570 million 
people that lack access to electricity, mostly concentrated in rural regions in Sub- Saharan Africa. In these communities 
people often rely on a range of unsustainable, expensive, 
high carbon and harmful ( to human health and the 
environment) energy sources to meet their power needs, including fossil -fuel based solutions such as kerosene and 
diesel as well as  disposable batteries. Scaling- up renewable energy penetration is a necessity to meet electricity 
demand whilst reducing GHG emissions  and ultimately promoting sustainable development.  
 0,00%5,00%10,00%15,00%20,00%25,00%30,00%35,00%40,00%45,00%Africa's electricity generation by source 
Figure 1: Africa's electricity generation by source (source, IEA, 2020)


---
*Page 9*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 6 OF 5 5 
 
 While many African countries have targeted ambitious 
electricity access goals and a transition to renewable 
energy, the cost of grid extensions remains  prohibitive.   
With Africa having  abundant solar resources, the 
potential for solar solutions at different scales i.e. 
households, industrial and utility -scale is enormous  (see 
figure 2). For rural populations  distant from the grid, 
decentralized renewable energy solutions such as mini-
grids  and solar home systems  represent cost -effective 
solutions to increase access to electricity.  The IEA (2017)  
estimates  that by 2040 approximately  25% of 
households’ electricity access needs to come from off -
grid solutions.  With demand for these solutions 
increas ing, t echnology advancing and innovative 
business and supply models  being developed, the off -
grid sector has attracted a considerable number of 
private developers . For example, MKOPA in Kenya has 
introduced the pay -as-you-go model , using mobile 
payments for solar home system ( SHS)  technology , a 
model that has disrupted the way payments are collected  
in rural areas ; mini-grid developers are using smart 
technologies for energy efficient measures and pre-
payments of electricity ; and developers are exploring 
energy -as-a-service models to improve affordability of 
captive power for businesses . As a result of th ese 
dynamics,  the off -grid sector has seen considerable 
growth in recent  years , leading African countries to 
include off -grid solutions as part of their electrification 
strategies , with the aim of achieving SDG 7  and to reduc ing their carbon emissions .  
 Green m ini grids  are the most effective and least -cost way to provide access to energy in off-grid areas with high  levels 
of population density and economic activity . They can be easily deployed,  they are flexible, scalable, and can connect to 
the main grid when the national grid expands. They contribute to carbon emission  reductions , reduce pollution  and 
environmental  degradation,  and creat e new jobs and business opportunities.  Most mini  grid systems have a productive 
life span of 15 to 25 years, which can be extended with new investments .  
 Solar Home S ystems (SHS) provide rural , low-density populations  with affordable and safe solar electricity. They usually 
span from basic packages , offering lighting and phone charging,  to larger packages including solar powered appliances 
such as fans and TV s. SHS are usually paid on a pay -as-you-go basis (prepayment of electricity consumed through mobile 
money) allowing SHS companies to reduce the costs and risks associated with payment collection. SHS are equipped 
with remote controllers that can block electricity supply once prepaid electricity is consumed or a payment is missed. They  
present an electricity solution for sparsely populated areas and communities with low purchas ing power. They provide a 
cleaner  source of energy by replacing low -quality kerosene lamps with modern light and a proper electricity installation . 
SHS may support additional revenue- generating activities and small business activities.  
 Whilst  commercial and industrial solar f or businesses  (C&I or captive power) is a nascent market in Africa, Bloomberg 
(2019) estimates that the sector is expected to grow considerably. A  combination of falling solar module prices  and high 
energy cost s for both diesel generator s and the grid in the focus countries are paving the way for solar systems for self -
consumption. C&I  solar present s a clean electricity solution for businesses that currently rely on diesel generators for 
electricity access or as backup power in case of power cuts. Solar  C&I help s to displace diesel generators in Sub- Saharan 
Africa and support businesses to transition to clean electricity  and reduc ing electricity costs.  
 Despite market growth, cost reduction in technologies and improved policies, there remain challenges related to access 
to private capital and a lack of a conducive enabling environment that are hindering the deployment at scale of DRE.   
 
Access to finance needs  
Scaling
 DRE solutions requires significant private sector investment. Most African countries rely on hard currency debt for 
the financing of energy infrastructure, typically creating significant exchange rate risks  (especially as most of their revenue 
from consumers’ payments is in local currency)  that are difficult to hedge and which can have profound implication s for 
Figure 2 Solar potential Africa  (Source: Solargis, 2019)


---
*Page 10*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 7 OF 5 5 
 
  
5 Green mini grids are mini -grids that generate their power from renewables using battery storage  energy costs if they crystallize. The SHS, Green Mini -Grid ( GMG )5 and C&I s ub-sectors have different  financing 
requirements, for instance in terms of scale, working and investment capital, tenor or term; and represent different risk 
profiles from a debt provider perspective. The growth in the SHS market has led to the emergence of established pl ayers  
operating at a scale that  requires  access to local currency and commercial finance to support the sustainable growth of 
their organisations, rather than just raising more equity. In particular , these companies are looking to leverage the value 
of their consumer receivable assets - the bundle of loans that they have given to their customers to buy their products. 
They can either do this by borrowing on- balance sheet , using the value of the receivables as collateral, or by applying an 
off-balance sheet securitisation approach involving the creation of an SPV.  Most of the transactions in the C&I space have 
involved businesses making outright purchases of solar equipment, which is prohibitive to  scaling up the sector. With the 
emergence of leasing and solar -as-a-service business models by C&I providers, these companies seek to  raise local 
currency financing from local/ regional banks.  The green mini-grid market is at early stages of development  and the viability  
of the projects vary significantly based on technology , consumption and location.  GMG  developers  require longer tenor 
loans to scale their operations  and to complement commercial equity. GMG projects often require grants or subsidies  to 
improve the viability of the project . 
 
There is a strong case for developing the capacity and capabilities of local financial intermediaries to provide competitivel y 
priced term credit products. Despite the potential of DRE solutions and growing market  demand, there are particular  
market hurdles currently preventing local financial intermediaries from engag ing the sector.  The risks associated with 
renewables projects are perceived to be high by commercial  investors and financial institutions, mainly due to a lack of 
capacity to assess such projects and a lack of historical track record. In particular, financing of DRE  projects has been 
limited  given a variety of factors including: (i) limited access to private capital  and local currency financing; (ii) tenor 
mismatch; (iii) high costs of capital and collateral requirements which impact the affordability of proposed energy solutions ; 
(iv) risk related to consumers’ default payments; and (v i) the high transaction costs for  financiers and developers, including 
development finance institutions. Low savings rates across the region and capacity limitations at local financial institutions 
also restrict the availability of finance (especially in local currency). These market barr iers have so far prevented the 
participation  of local financial intermediaries to finance DRE businesses.   
 Credit enhancement instruments can play an instrumental role in increasing the supply of finance from local  banks  and 
commercial investors  by derisking and strengthening  the bankability of projects , thereby catalysing  the participation of 
commercial investors in the sector. Guarantees and subordinated debt will mitigate the risk of payment defaults for LFIs and commercial investors, allowing for lower collateral requirements and tenor extensions and,  where possible,  improv ing 
the financing terms on offer from lenders and investors.  
 Mitigation and Adaption Needs  and Benefits  
The Framework  will contribute to climate change mitigation and reduced carbon intensity through s caling- up renewable 
energy to meet the growing electricity demand. LEAF will mitigat e greenhouse gas emissions  in the selected countries 
through enabling the deployment of SHS and green mini -grids at scale, providing households and small businesses with 
emissions -free access to energy and displacing fossil fuel energy solutions. Captive power solutions will displac e diesel 
generators and the fossil fuel -based grid for commercial  and industrial use, helping businesses transition to clean 
electricity, reduc ing over time their electricity bills when systems are paid back, and promot ing DRE in each country.  The 
Framewor k is expected to establish 3 86MW generating capacity through off -grid renewable energy solutions, thereby 
avoiding a total of 28.8 million tCO2 (over the lifetime of the DRE equipment installed as a result of the LEAF projects).  
 
The first phase of the Framework focuses on six countries –  Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Guinea. Climate 
observations and projected changes  in these countries  include r ising temperatures and evaporation rates , increased 
interseasonal  and unpredictable rainfall patterns , more severe dry seasons and r ising sea levels . This leads to increased 
droughts, floods , landslide s, storms , and wildfires  in the countries . In Kenya, Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Ethiopi a, 
agriculture is dominated by small -scale subsistence farmers who remain heavily dependent on rain. O nly 1 -3 percent of 
cultivated land is irrigated in these countries . This leaves the sector , that is the primary livelihood for the majority of 
households , highly vulnerable to changing climate and weather patterns , including severe climate induced drought and 
shorter rainy seasons.  Furthermore, i ncreased evaporation rates and more severe drought s threaten hydropower 
production  in Kenya, Nigeria, Ghana and Guinea. Hydro production, which accounts for about one- half of domestic 
electricity production  in Kenya, reduced e.g. by up to 40 percent in drought years, leading to persistent power outages 
and reliance on more expensive petroleum- based thermal generation.  Lastly, c limate change will likely exacerbate health 
issues related to respiratory infections (already responsible for 19 percent of deaths in Nigeria) as air pollution is expect ed 
to worsen with rising temperatures .


---
*Page 11*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 8 OF 5 5 
 
 By increasing  access to electricity  and solar powered productive tools and appliances , the LEAF framework is expected 
to provide adaptation co- benefits by : i) increas ing economic and educational opportunities , and enabl ing the creat ion of  
new livelihood strategies, diversif ying and increasing income streams ; ii) encourag ing more active engagement in society 
and access to information related to climate , agro-climate and early warning information through solar powered 
communications and ICT  (radios, TVs, and mobile devices ); iii) improv ing health by displac ing harmful fossil -based 
solutions  with clean energy solutions, thereby eliminating indoor pollution ; and iv) provid ing affordable, reliable and clean 
energy, reducing dependence on hydropower production that is sensitive to climate change.  Depending on opportunities 
in the countries, LEAF may in particular  provide adaptation co-benefits to farmers through: v)  improved crops processing 
or use of drip irrigation powered by solar pumps to improve crop production and/or diversif y livelihood  options (gardening 
and horticulture) ; and v i) improved food and nutrition through refrigeration and small agro- processing opportunities at 
various scales -  household to industrial (e.g. drying, packaging, cooling, crushing, and processing) .  
 
Considering that most projects target off -grid and climate- vulnerable communities , adaptation benefits are expected as a 
result of LEAF . The LEAF Framework is a mitigation programme, as opposed to crosscutting, given is not possible to 
quantify  adaptation impact  at this stage given that underlying projects are unknown at the time of submission of the funding 
proposal and lack of data.  To increase understanding of  adaptation benefits of DRE projects, the Programme will  conduct 
a comprehensive study/assessment per country,  focused on the relevant technologies targeted in the countries  by LEAF. 
These assessments  will confirm climate change hazards in the geographic areas based on science, 
climate  vulnerabilities  and exposure, and the  link between these climate vulnerabilities and energy access  to reduce 
vulnerability of beneficiaries. The reports are expected to include  (guidelines on) indicators to measure  adaptation  impact 
in the DRE sector. These knowledge documents and information can be used to confirm potential  adaptation impa cts of 
LEAF sub- projects , as well as  provide guidance to  the GCF,  AfDB and other stakeholders when designing DRE projects 
with integrated adaptation  benefits  in the future.   
 
The Do -Nothing Option  
In order to understand the most -likely outcome should the LEAF  Framework  not be pursued to conclusion,  it is necessary 
to appreciate the market barriers (see section B2) limiting investments from the private sector, especially local financial 
institutions  and commercial investors  in DRE  solutions highlighted above.  LEAF will address the high perceived risk, high 
costs of capital, high collateral requirements and tenor mismatch by providing credit enhancement instruments, while it 
addresses the lack of capacity of LFIs to assess and engage DRE  projects through the TA component.  In the absence of 
the LEAF  Framework , these existing market barriers will continue to inhibit the successful deployment of DRE at scale, 
resulting amongst others in limited green energy access offers in off -grid areas where the population will continue relying 
on fossil fuel and disposable batteries for electricity, overall l eading to approximately 2 8.8 million tCO2e of GHG emissions 
that could other wise be avoided.  Public policy ins truments in the program countries are being used to try to, directly and/or 
indirectly, help promote DRE (e.g. gradually phasing out electricity price subsidies, partial  grants for equipment purchase, 
etc.) but are not considered enough for it to happen at scale without support from the private sector (e.g. thanks to 
concessional finance, de- risking instruments and capacity building by LEAF).  Energy sector investment s will need to more 
than double from today’s level in order to achieve  universal electricity access by 2030, requiring an annual average 
investment of USD 51 billion (IEA, 2018). In addition to public financing , significant private financing is required to addr ess 
energy needs and climate change.  
 
Methodologies Used  
To quantify the mitigation impact of the LEAF  Framework  (accumulated baseline emissions avoided)  the following 
indicators  are used,  and steps followed:  
• Estimate d RE capacity (MW) to be installed in each country;  
• Estimate d annual production per technology / RE system (MWh);  
• Assumptions made to establish baseline emission factors according to different methodologies / baseline 
sources ; 
• Estimate d annual million tCO2e avoided by the implementation of the Framework per country and RE system;  
• Estimate d the lifetime of the three different RE systems (5 years for SHS, 25 years for mini -grids and captive 
power); and  
• Total avoided GHG emissions during the lifetime of the dif ferent RE systems.  
 
Country -specific context  
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/area of the proposed interventions including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.  
 
The first phase of the Framework focuses on six countries - Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Guinea –  with 
proven market potential and where the Bank is actively pursuing investment opportunities. Specifically, LEAF will play an 
instrumental role in supporting the Bank’s business development eff orts in these countries, including financing leading


---
*Page 12*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 9 OF 5 5 
 
 market players in the SHS and C&I space, greenfield initiatives in Tunisia with local banks, and SEFA -supported mini -grid 
acceleration programmes in Nigeria, Guinea and Ethiopia. This country diversity will enable the Bank to explore 
differentiated market development strategies, from first generation mini -grid scale- up programmes (Ethiopia and Guinea), 
to expansion of established SHS and C&I companies (Kenya, N igeria and Ghana), and acceleration of renewable energy 
transition of  businesses (Tunisia).  The focus on the different sub- sectors  in the countries is based on market potential and 
enabling regulatory framework, however, the programme can support all subse ctors in the 6 countries pending 
opportunities and state of the market.  
 
Ghana . Ghana is a low -middle income country of 30.4 million, with a GDP per capita of $US 2,202. Its main productive 
sectors are services (44% of GDP), industry (32% of GDP) and agriculture (17% of GDP).  The country has an overall 
electrification rate of 82%, leaving 6 million people without energy access.  It relies on hydro and thermal power for its 
energy, with contributions of 38% and 61% of installed capacity respectively and produces 49% of its electricity from Hydropower and 51% from natural gas (IEA, 2018). Its overdependence on hydro sources for electricity generation leads 
to significant generation capacity variation due to its uncertain rainfall pattern and inflows into t he hydropower facilities 
(Trading Economics, 2020).  
 
Scaling up renewable energy is one of the key objectives of the country’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) with a target to increase penetration by 10% by 2030 . The enabling environment for of f-grid solar in Ghana is seen as 
highly supportive . Established PAYGO SHS companies include PEG, Zola, Azuri and Translight  Power , seeking growth 
capital to expand their businesses . With tariffs for C&I customers being relatively high, by Sub- Saharan Afric an standards , 
currently US$0.25/kWh for commercial and US$0.16/kWh for industrial use, the commercial case for renewables captive 
power solutions is strong (see Figure 3
). Key players in the C&I space  include  Daystar Power, Yingli Namene and 
Translight Solar. Ghana's total GHG emissions in 2017 were 53.3 MtCO2e, with energy being a predominant source of 
emissions, accounting for 50%.  Ghana's emission reduction goal is to unconditionally lower its GHG emissions by 15 
percent relative to a business -as-usual (BAU) scenario emission of 73.95MtCO2e 2 by 2030. Through the LEAF's 
proposed interventions, a reduction in GHG emissions is estimated of approximately 1. 6 MtCO2e , which would be over 
14% of the unconditional emissions reduction target . LEAF  will thus contribute substantially towards the national emission 
reduction target.  
   
Nigeria . Nigeria has a population of 201 million and a GDP per capita of US$ 2,230. Its main productive sectors are 
services (50% of GDP), industry (27% of GDP) and agriculture (22% of GDP). Nigeria’s overall electrification rate is 54%, leaving over 92. 4 million people behind. Nigeria produces approximately  82% of its electricity from fossil fuel s and the 
remainder  primarily  from hydro (IEA, 2018). As a result of inadequate supply, households, companies, and industries have 
resorted to purchasing self -generation technologies, predominantly in the form of small -scale diesel and petrol generating 
sets. It is estimated that consumers spend between US$14 billion and US$30 billion each year  on such solutions . Poor 
grid reliability and fal ling costs of solar technology compared to back -up diesel generators contribu te to making the 
Nigerian C&I market the largest in SSA. Key players in the segment include Daystar Power, Consistent Energy and 
Crossboundary Energy, all of which require significant investments to grow  their businesses.  
 13.2 million people in Nigeria w ould be best served by mini-grids, representing an annual mini -grid market size of USD 
$994 million. Mini -grid regulations introduced  in 2017 pave the way for the sector with a robust Multi -Year Tariff Order 
policy supporting isolated and grid- connected mini -grids. Key players in this sector  include Green Village Energy (GVE), 
Blue Camel Energy and Arnergy.  The Nigerian SHS market is well establishe d through  companies such as Lumos, Azuri, 
D.Light and Greenlight Planet. SHS companies have expressed interest in trying to adopt the consumer receivables 
financing model , offering opportunities for (local currency) investment. High collateral requirements  (as high as 120%), 
high interest rates and short tenors are some of the challenges in accessing financing from LFIs. Credit enhancement 
products and concessional debt can play an instrumental role in crowding- in local financial markets.  
 
LEAF complement s the Bank’s and other partners ’ efforts in develop ing the DRE market in Nigeria, including  the Nigeria 
Electrification Project initiative (financed by AfDB and the Worldbank) that seeks to provide electricity access to off grid 
communities through renewable power sources and the Bank’s established efforts in building the mini -grid industry, 
includi ng AMAP , which  aims to transform the scale of public and private investments in mini -grids and the Green Mini -
Grid Market Development Programme. Nigeria’s total GHG emissions in 2017 were 483.2 MtCO2e, with the energy  sector  
accounting for 37% of emissions . Through the proposed interventions of the LEAF, a reduction in GHG emissions is 
estimated of approximately 10.5 MtCO2e.   Therefore, LEAF will provide additionality by addressing some of the market 
barriers facing rapid deployment and uptake of mini grids. It will compliment ongoing effort to use a systemic approach to 
increase electricity access in off -grid communities. LEAF will support capacity strengthening of regulatory activities to 
scale up of private investments through the deployment of innovative business models and financing that focuses on achieving cost reductions in mini  grids.


---
*Page 13*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 10 OF 5 5 
 
 Kenya . Kenya has a population of 52.5 millio n and a GDP per capita of US$ 1,820. Its main productive sectors are 
services (43% of GDP), agriculture (34% of GDP ) and industry (16% of GDP).  Kenya’s economy is highly dependent on 
climate sensitive sectors such as agriculture, energy, manufacturing and tourism. Climate change impact has caused 
considerable losses across the country’s different sectors over recent  years; economic losses resulting from droughts and 
floods are estimated at 3% of Kenya’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP)  (Kenya, 2015) .  Kenya has a 75% electricity access 
rate. Produc tion of  electricity mainly comes from geothermal (44%), hydro (34%) and fossil fuel (18%).  In 2018, Kenya 
launched its 5-year national electrification strategy to increase access to energy in the country and achieve  100% of 
energy from renewable sources . In the plan, the Government of Kenya has recognized the importance of leveraging 
private sector capital and innovative DRE models. The plan includes expansion of the grid (3 million connections), 
additional mini -grids (35,000 connections) and SHS (2 milli on connections)  (Kenya, 2018) . To achieve universal access 
to electricity, the plan estimates that Kenya requires USD 458 million of private sector investment in solar home systems.  
However, lack of incentives for private sector participation is identified  as one  of the barriers that limit  universal access . 
LEAF ’s interventions will therefore provide the needed incentives  to enhance private sector investments and supporting 
governments to create the enabling policies  needed for private investment .  
 
Kenya  is the birthplace place of pay -as-you-go SHS  models, that are being rolled out across Africa , and has one of the 
most developed SHS markets on the continent . SHS companies  have been mainly financed through equity and hard 
currency loans. As the sector continues to mature, the larger  companies will need to apply consumer receivables financing 
models to free up the working capital required to support expansion and sustainable growth.  Although there ar e some 
examples of companies raising local currency debt, e.g. Mkopa, challenges persist with  local banks not willing to lend on 
reasonable terms , contributed to by their lack of understanding of the business model and the perceived credit risk of SHS 
providers.  C&I presents an opportunity for Kenyan businesses to significantly reduce their energy costs going forward. 
Access to debt finance is noted as a main constraint of C&I developers  seeking  to expand operations. The  C&I market is 
relatively new market,  which is why local banks have yet to build up an understanding of it .  
 
Kenya’s  total GHG emissions in 2017 were 49.7 MtCO2e, with the energy  sector  being a predominant source of emissions, 
accounting for 63 % of emissions. In its updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), submitted in December 2020, 
the country increased its ambition to abate emissions by 32% (up from 30%) by 2030 relative to the business as usual 
(BAU) scenario. Among the  priority mitigation activities include use of clean, efficient and sustainable energy technologies 
to reduce over reliance on fossil and non- sustainable biomass fuels. Through the proposed interventions of the LEAF , a 
reduction in GHG  emissions is estimated of approximately 1. 2 MtCO2e , which will contribute to emission reductions that 
arise from energy demand.  
 
Tunisia . Tunisia has a population of 11.7 million and a GDP per capita of US$ 3,320. Its main productive sectors are 
services (59% of GDP), agriculture (23% of GDP ) and industry (16% of GDP). Tunisia is a lower -middle income country 
that has been pursuing economic liberalisation policies since the  1980s. In more recent times, growth has been averaging 
at 2% over the last ten years (World Bank , 2020). In Tunisia, the growing economy and rise in  living standards has 
contributed to a significant increase in electricity consumption leading to frequent grid saturation.  Tunisia has an electricity 
access rate of 99% . Approximately 94% of the installed electricity capacity in the country comes from natural gas, with 
renewable energy sources accounting for the remaining 6% of the country’s energy mix ( wind power, solar and hydro)  
(Tunisia Ministry of Energy, 2019) . Tunisia’s total GHG emissions amounted to 40.73 MtCO2e in 2017, with the energy 
sector representing 69% (28.16 MtCO2e).  
 
Facing a political and economic crisis as a result of the 2011 revolution and accompanying political instability, Tunisia is 
phasing out electricity subsidies, affecting businesses already under strain due to the economic crisis and now the COVID -
19 pandemic.  Solar installations are becoming more attractive to C&I customers considering the reduced cost of solar 
technology and expected reduction in tariff subsidies ( increas ing the  electricity price , with all subsidies expected to be 
eliminated by 2022). Most systems are currently bought upfront, which is prohibitive for scaling up the sector. C&I 
companies are seeking capital for leasing models.  High collateral  requirements have been prohibitive for businesses to 
obtain finance from LFIs . Guarantees can alleviate the credit risk to financial institutions and encourage them to offer 
loans to customers to support renewable energy or energy efficiency proj ects.   
 
The Tunisian Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) establish an overall goal of a 41 per cent reduction in the 
country’s GHG emissions intensity by 2030 (compared to 2010 levels). The energy sector is responsible for more than 
half of Tunisia’s emissions  and Tunisia aims to reduce its carbon intensity by 46 per cent  compared to 2010 levels. To 
meet its mitigation goals, the government aims to increase the share of renewable energy a gainst total electricity 
generation to 30 per cent by 2030 as per the Tunisian Solar Plan (TSP) .  To attain this,  target  the GoT set a target capacity 
of power production of 3,815MW, comprising of wind (1,755MW), solar PV (1,610MW), concentrated solar power 
(450MW) and biomass resources (100 MW) . The Framework intends to contribute to mitigation impact in Tunisia by a


---
*Page 14*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 11 OF 5 5 
 
 total of an estimated 1. 5 million tCO2e , through captive power solutions which would approximately amount to 6% of the 
2017 energy sector emissions.  
 
The TSP is the main element of public policy to promote and scale up clean energy in Tunisia, including DRE. However, 
the country’s track record as well as the opinion of the private sector stakeholders (LFIs, project developers) confirms that  
the incentive mechanisms thus far put in place (limited grants for equipment purchase, RE power purchase at subsidised 
prices by STEG) are not enough to enhance the scaling up of renewable energy development in the C&I sector (particularly 
both SMEs and small IPPs). PST structures the legal framework into three categories: (i) Authorization for smaller IPPs 
of up to 10 MW for solar and up to 30 MW for wind; (ii) Concessions for power plants over 10 MW for solar and over 30 
MW for wind; and (iii) Self -consumption that allows any public or private local body to produce electricity from DRE for 
self-consumption (Law Nr 2015- 12 Art . 5), the sale of electricity surplus to the national utility company STEG (Decree Nr 
2016- 1123) and the supply of DRE from a third party to businesses for a capacity of above 2 MW (Decree Nr 2020- 15). 
This regulatory framework had an initial target capaci ty of 180 MW by 2020. However, only 30 MW of DRE has been 
developed to date mainly due to a lack of access to finance.  In Tunisia, LEAF will support the energy diversification and 
security, accelerating the country’s transition to renewable energy.  
 
Ethiopia . Ethiopia has a population of 112 million and a GDP per capita of US$ 858. Its main productive sectors are 
services (37% of GDP), agriculture (34% of GDP ) and industry (25% of GDP).  The overall electrification rate in Ethiopia 
is 44%. Ethiopia’s c urrent energy profile reflects a staggering dominance of bioenergy. Biomass constitutes approximately 
90% of total final energy consumption, fossil fuels account for 8.5%, and renewable electricity  accounts for  only 1.5%. 
Ethiopia currently consumes an est imated 0.1 MWh per capita per year , half as Kenya and Nigeria (each 0.2 MWh per 
capita) and only 7% of Tunisia’s per capita consumption as a comparison. H owever, current electricity demand growth is 
more than 25% per annum, one of the highest growth rates in Africa.  
 
The electric grid system consists almost entirely of hydropower, with wind and geothermal completing the mix.  Given the 
country’s heavy reliance on hydropower, climate change and climate variability are key concerns for the reliability and 
consistency of power generation and supply  (Cities Alliance, 2017) . Climate change models suggest a future increase in 
variability of hydro resources. Substantial legislative changes are being implemented to promote private sector off -grid 
solutions under the second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II)  (Ethiopian Energy Authority, 2020) . There is a 
significant potential for mini -grids to increase electrification rates . 13 million people would be best served by mini -grids, 
requiring a total CAPEX investment  of US$ 2.581 million. Significant policy and market reforms are required to foster 
growth in mini -grid sector  especially through private sector investment, whose participation in the country remains limited  
due to factors such as lack of access to  affordable debt finance. The LEAF programme interventions will address this 
challenge and enable the scaling up of  investments  from private sector  in the mini -grid sector, subsequently reduc ing the 
use of diesel generators and resulting emissions.  As the national utility does not operate mini -grids at a large scale as 
they tend to be too small and scattered for efficient management the private sector’s role is important in filling that gap.   
Ethiopia’s National Electrification Program 2.0 targets to achieve 35% of electricity access by 2025 from off grid solutions.  
Total GHG emissions in 2017 were 193.6 MtCO2e, w ith energy accounting for 26% of emissions. Through the proposed 
interventions of the LEAF , a reduction in GHG  emissions is estimated of approximately 11 MtCO2e.  
 
Guinea . Guinea has a population of 12.8 million and a GDP per capita of US$ 1,064.  Guinea’s economy was badly hit 
by the 2014 –2015 Ebola outbreak and recent commodity price shocks resulting from weak global economic growth, 
appreciation of the dollar, and rising borrowing costs. 70% of Guineans earn their living in a climate- sensitive se ctor, 
growing crops such as rice and cocoa which are highly vulnerable to changes in climate. Guinea is known as Africa’s “water tower” , the country’s highlands being home to the headwaters of three major river systems, the Gambia, the Niger, 
and the Senegal.  Guinea produces 67% of its electricity from hydro and the remaining 33% from fossil fuels  (Indexmundi, 
2020) . Guinea suffers from recurring floods and climate change is exacerbating this challenge. Given that several dams 
along the rivers provide much of the country’s hydropower, climate change is expected to reduce flows of northern rivers, 
such as the Milo, by up to 70 percent by 2100 (USAID, 2018) , negatively impacting energy supply.   
 
Guinea’s electricity access rate is 44%.  It is estimated that 5.94 million people in Guinea would be best served by mini -
grids. The AfDB , through SEFA , has provided financial support to the Guinean government to finance pre- feasibility 
studies targeting the construction of 57 green mini -grids in  rural areas. LEAF will support  these efforts and the scaling of 
GMG by providing guarantees and subordinated debt at concession al rates to unlock debt and local currency financing.  
Total GHG emissions in 2017 were 44.8 MtCO2e, with the energy  sector  accounting for 13% of emissions. Based on its 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), Guinea intends to produce 30% of its energy (excluding wood- energy) from 
renewable energy sources. Through the proposed interventions of the LEAF , a reduction in GHG  emissions is estimated 
of approximately 2. 9 MtCO2e.


---
*Page 15*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 12 OF 5 5 
 
 Considering the specificities of the focus countries, LEAF’s s trategy is therefore to financ e a series of markets at different 
maturity level s so that the experience can be widely  shared for the future pathways of diverse countries facing similar 
challenges . 
 
Whilst SHS and mini -grids support energy access, the rationale for C&I is highlighted by the potential of solar technology 
as a cheaper an d cleaner technology than current solutions as demonstrated by the following diagram that provides a 
comparison of C&I and grid tariff in Nigeria, Kenya and Ghana : 
 
 
Figure 3: Economics of grid  and C&I  tariffs in selected focus countries (source: BNEF, 2019)  
 
 
Related projects/interventions  
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are related to the proposal from other domestic or international sour ces of funding, such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation 
Fund, Climate Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, 
replication, etc.). Please identify current gaps and barriers regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further 
how this project/programme complements or addresses these.  
 Complementarity with other GCF initiatives.  The LEAF  Framework  will complement existing GCF projects that support  
DRE , including  the Universal Green Energy Access Programme (FP027), Transforming Financial Systems for Climate 
(FP095), KawiSafi Venture Fund (FP005), and EBRD SEFF Co- financing Programme (FP025) , by
 deploying credit 
enhancement instruments, such as  first loss guarantees , partial credit guarantees , tenor extension guarantees  and 
subordinated debt . Additionally,  LEAF  will support larger  projects (greater than $US 20 million project size) , develops 
recei vables -backed financing structures and has a different geographical coverage than other proposals.  The Framework 
will unlock local currency and commercial financing and crowd in local financial institutions and private investors to scale DRE.  
 
Complementarity with other AfDB initiatives.  LEAF will play an instrumental role in supporting the Bank’s business 
development efforts in these countries  through a number of programmes with targeted finance and technical assistance 
including: the Sustainab le Energy Fund for Africa ( SEFA provides financing for the 
design and preparation of bankable 
projects, investment capital for small and medium sized sustainable energy projects, technical assistance for capacity 
building in enabling environment for green energy ), the Green MiniGrid Market Development Programme (that supports 
the scale- up of investments in GMG projects through a broad range of interventions to improve the enabling environment, 
including market intelligence, business development suppor t, policy and regulatory support, access to finance, and quality 
assurance) , the Facility for Energy Inclusion’s On- Grid Window (a USD 400 million debt fund to provide flexible, 
sustainable, and efficient financing to support the expansion of energy access  through the development of small -scale 
renewable energy generation and mini -grids)  and SEF A's support for  the development and launch of the Nigeria Energy 
Access Fund (NEAF), a new private equity fund developed by All On, a Nigerian impact investment . The LEAF  Framework  
will support a larger scope of DRE compared to the DESCO Financing Framework , including SHS, captive power and 
mini grids . Its value proposition compared to other AfDB initiatives are the credit enhancement instruments (subordinated


---
*Page 16*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 13 OF 5 5 
 
 debt and guarantee s), which allow for de -risking the sector and enhancing local currency financing to scale up DRE 
initiatives and programmes.  
 
Framework relevance in light of Covid -19  
The LEAF  Framework  is particularly relevant in  light of the Covid- 19 crisis and the emerging needs of the energy access 
sector. Due to reduced budgets and increased debt, country governments are refocusing priorities and resources towards 
their Covid- 19 response and the emerging strained economic reali ties, potentially threatening their ability to reach 
ambitious national energy transition goals. LEAF  supports access to finance which is expected to become scarcer in future 
years as a result of the economic impacts of the crisis, and it will accelerate t he achievement of SDG 7 : Access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern electricity for all . The following points summarize the Framework ’s 
contribution to Covid- 19 response:  
• The Framework  pipeline includes the COVID -19 Off -grid Recovery Platform ( CRP) , a cornerstone operation of 
the AfDB’s response to the COVID -19 pandemic in the energy access  sector. The main objective of the Platform 
is to support DRE companies’ resilience amid the pandemic shock. Access to finance for DRE is likely to become 
more challenging. Uncertainties arising from the impact of the pandemic and the resulting economic downturn are 
likely to make local FIs even more risk averse leading to them suffering higher credit losses and a resultant 
negative impact on overall asset quality, capital and liquidity. The Framework ’s de-risking instruments will address 
this by relieving local financial institutions from additional risks.  
• Access to energy is critical to the provision of healthcare services for the powering of lighting, refrigeration, medical 
equipment, and other appliances. In sub- Saharan Africa, an estimated 30% of healthcare facilities have access 
to energy. A key challenge precluding healthcare identification is the definition of viable business models that can 
ensure the long- term delivery of energy services . LEAF may finance DRE companies that provide electricity for 
health centers .  
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages  plus diagram ) 
 
Market Barriers  
 
Limited access to finance and de -risking instruments: 
Private investment in the DRE s pace has historically been limited due to questions concerning the commercial viability of 
such projects. The DRE business model relies mainly on an income stream from consumer payments as a result of their energy consumption. In this case consumers play the role of multiple off -takers. Whilst a multiple off -takers model reduces 
the concentration risk of payments, there are new challenges to secure steady revenue as target consumers in remote 
off-grid areas have low -incomes, low purchasing power, and seasonal revenues, mainly from the agricultur e sector. The 
commercial viability of mini -grids is affected by non- cost reflective tariffs which reduces  electricity prices for consumers. 
Households and small businesses in rural areas limit their consumption of electricity due to affordability issues. C ompanies 
often rely on equity investment and venture capital to finance their projects, types of capital which are often unsuited to 
longer tenors.  
 
Commercial banks prefer to provide short -term loans at high rates,  and, in some cases, they refuse to finance DRE 
businesses as this is the case with some banks in Kenya and Nigeria. For Development Financing Institutions such as 
AfDB, financing the sector is often challenging as many DRE businesses are small -scale and D FIs are not designed to 
finance small projects. DFIs often rely on financial intermediaries such as funds and local banks to finance portfolios of these small -scale projects. De- risking instruments such as guarantees are also limited as these have been traditionally 
used for large investment projects and less for projects which rely upon consumers’ revenue.   
 
Scar ce affordable capital in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic:  
To respond to the COVID -19 pandemic, African government s have refocused their priorities and resources towards their 
Covid -19 response and the emerging strained economic realities. As such , countries have increased debt, potentially 
threatening their ability to reach ambitious national energy transition goals. The lack of access to finance 
for DRE 
companies has been exacerbated by the pandemic and is expected to become scarcer in future years following the 
economic crisis created by the pandemic. With the lockdown limiting sales activities and limited access to capital, DRE 
companies are particularly hit by the pandemic and are struggling to mobilise capital to survive the crisis and grow. Furthermore, DRE  solutions are critical  for off-grid healthcare facilities as they  present a faster solution to ensure delivery 
of essential energy services . Both relief and recovery capital are much needed to safeguard the sector and continue the 
green electrification agenda of African countries.  
 
Limited access to local currency finance :


---
*Page 17*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 14 OF 5 5 
 
 As mini -grid, SHS and C&I businesses rely on consumer payments, local currency debt plays a crucial role to finance 
growth and expansion of DRE companies. It reduces the risk of currency mismatch between loans and revenues . In 
countries with volatile currency such as Kenya, Nigeria, Ghana and Tunisia, the currency risk leads to significant increase 
of the financing costs. However, despite the growing demand for local currency financing, local banks have been largely 
absent in the DRE sector.  
 
Lack of local FI capacity and  market data:  
According to the market assessment study (CEPA, 2019), local financial institutions (FIs) including banks and leasing companies lack the required experience and financial capacity to assess and develop robust financing structures to 
finance and mitigate key risks of DRE. The lack of capacity is often justified by the relatively nascent nature of the market 
and the resulting limited market information. Further more
, data and benchmarking studies are required to increase 
investors’ confidence in the sector.     
 Enabling Environment: 
Although the private sector plays an important role in the DRE sector, enabling policies are often designed to enable 
public investments and often fail to address the key regulatory challenges of private stakeholders. Mini -grid investments 
often face a lac k of licensing framework s for private mini -grids and cost -reflective tariffs, like in Ghana and Ethiopia. In the 
C&I space , few countries are adopting net metering regulation. In Ghana, the n et metering regulation, which allows 
consumers to sell the surplus of electricity produced to the grid, has been put on hold following a pilot conducted by the 
national utility company. In Tunisia, sales of surplus electricity have  been capped to ensure utility revenue. Licensing 
processes are unclear and lengthy , leading to additional risks in investments. Finally, regulation is often inefficient and 
complex and, in some countries , for example in Tunisia , requires an independent regulator to support private investments. 
By addressing financing and policy barriers in the focus countries, the Framework will harness the potential of DRE to 
accelerate access to electricity and enable businesses transition to clean electricity.  
 Without addressing these barriers,  private investments will remain limited to international and impact investors and the 
broader pool of commercial investors will not be able to invest, limiting the deployment of DRE solution s. 
 The following table summarises the key barriers and how they will be addressed by the Framework.  
  
Type of barrier  Barrier  Area of intervention  Programme activities that address the identified barrie  
1. Financial  
 - Limited access 
to finance and 
de-risking 
instruments  
- High capital cost  
- Tenor mismatch 
between 
available loans 
and required 
DRE capital terms  
- A large market 
of small -scale 
DRE businesses  
 1.1 mobilise and de -risk 
commercial investment in SHS, 
mini-grids, C&I Activity 1.1.1: provide concessional guarantees to unlo  
commercial investment  
 
Activity 1.1.2: provide subordinated concessional debt 
instruments to cover commercial investors risk and ma  
concessional capital available  
 
Activity 1.1.3: Develop structured facilities and receiva
backed financing transactions to mitigate consumer s d  
risk 
 
Activity 1.1.4: Deploy concessional sub- debt and guara   
finance a portfolio of DRE businesses through Financi  
Intermediaries (holding company, Fund, multi DRE com  
SPV – aggregators)  
 
Activity 1.1.5: Deploy tenor extension gua rantees to LF  
Limited access to 
local currency 
finance  1.2. mobilise local currency 
finance in SHS, mini -grids, C&I  Activity 1.2.1: Provide concessional guarantees (first lo
passu) to local currency funding provided by commerc  
investors  
 
2. Covid -19 
crisis  Scarce affordable 
capital for growth  2.1 deploy and mobilise COVID -
19 recovery funding for DRE 
companies in mini -grid, C&I, SHS  Activity 2.1.1: Provide concessional debt to DRE comp  
through the Covid -19 Off -grid Recovery Platform  or an 
intervention of similar nature  
3. Lack of 
capacity  Lack of local FI 
capacity to engage DRE  3.1 provide TA support to LFIs to 
increase their investment in the DRE space  Activity 3.1.1: Capacity building of FIs to increase their 
understanding of the market and identify, assess and f  
DRE companies  
 
Activity 3.1.2: Support the structuring of strong and via  
innovative financing structure


---
*Page 18*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 15 OF 5 5 
 
  
6 The estimated number of 20 LFIs is indicative as it is based on the current indicative pipeline  
7 IEA (2019). Africa Energy Outlook 2019.  Unclear/complicated/ 
licensing framework,  
Lack of independent 
regulator, High VAT 
and import duty,  
Prohibitive net 
metering (C&I)  
and tariff (mini -grid) 
regulations  3.2 support governments in 
enabling policies for private investment in SHS, Mini -grid, C&I  
 Activity: 3.2.1: TA to focus countries to support the 
development of enabling policies and frameworks  
 
Existing gaps in the 
interlinkages between energy access and 
adaptation  3.3 country level a daptation 
assessments  Activity 3.3.1:  A country -level assessment will be underta  
for each country  to determine the link between energy ac  
and adaptation and confirm potential adaptation impact .  
Remaining gender 
gaps and inequalities 
in the DRE sector 
leading to lower 
share of women as 
customers and 
employees  3.4 Address existing gender gaps 
and inequalities in the DRE sector  Activity 3.4.1:  Conduct national gender assessments and 
refine gender action plans for each country  
 
Activity 3. 4.2:  Support the development of strategies and 
marketing  campaigns for DRE companies to increase sh   
female customers  
 
Activity 3.4.3: Develop gender inclusive recruitment and  
policies to increase women at the workforce of DRE 
companies  
 
Through the LEAF activities listed above, the framework intends to create the following  outcomes:  
• Establish 3 86MW generating capacity through off -grid renewable energy solutions, of which some may also feed 
into the grid, generating annually 1.2 million MWh energy.  
• Reduced emissions by 2 8.8 million tCO2 over the lifetime of the equipment implemented by the sub- projects.  
• Increased access to electricity to over 5. 9 million people, including 50% women.  
• Improved ability of an estimated number of 20 local FIs6 to self -support future lending activities once the 
Framework period is complete.  
• The development of stronger country -level DRE policies, enabling further private sector investment as DREs 
become more attractive.  
 LEAF theory of change diagram.   
Energy is responsible for a large proportion of emissions in the target countries, where fossil fuel-based energy sources 
dominate the market. As energy demand rapidly increases in the target economies ( electricity demand is expected to be 
more than double by 2040 compared  to today
7), increasing the proportion of RE sources will become urgent, if 
development is to follow a low -carbon pathway. Use by vulnerable households  of renewable energy powered productive 
tools and appliances,  is expected to strengthen  their adaptive capacity and reduces  exposure to climate risks  through 
adaptation co- benefits . To support these countries in their energy transition plans, key barriers must be lifted, including 
first and foremost, the provision of additional capital to support private sector investment in renewable energy, but also 
barriers related to risk perception attached to D RE investments among local F is and commercial investors . The Framework 
will facilitate private sector access to commerc ial and local currency financing, building the capacity of local stakeholders 
to deploy DRE at scale. The key proposed solutions to address the barriers are: (i) deploying de- risking concessional 
financing instruments (first loss guarantee, subordinated and concessional debt); and (ii) capacity building and technical 
support to financial institutions and governments. Without addressing these barriers, the market for DRE investments is likely to remain limited in the focus countries and commercial and local investors will not be willing to bear the associated 
risks. Cost of capital will remain high as the perception of high- risk will remain and access to local currency finance will 
remain either unavailable or too expensive. In lifting the market barriers, DR E companies will gain access to additional 
commercial capital, enabling them to grow and expand their businesses, resulting in additional clean energy connections 
and reducing and/or avoiding GHG emissions.  
 
Assumptions underlying the theory of change incl ude a continued rate of rapid growth in demand for renewable energy 
solutions to address lack of energy or 
obtain reliable, clean and cost -efficient energy. The decentralized renewable energy 
sector is growing with an increasing number and size of private sector companies in Africa, and examples of profitability 
even under current policy conditions are available. The project also assumes that to expand business operations, DRE


---
*Page 19*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 16 OF 5 5 
 
 companies will continue to seek to raise local currency financing from local banks and that there will be an increasing 
number of operations who can absorb the finance provided under LEAF. It is also assumed that l ocal financial institutions 
will be willing to lend to the DRE sector , once appropriate de- risking instruments and capacity building support are 
provided, enabling them to engage the sector. Finally, the project is based on existing country governments’ willingness 
to develop enabling policies to support DRE and encourage greener energy solutions to diversify the energy mix in their countries.  
 The theory of change diagram in the figure below details how the Framework activities lead to achieving program goals 
based on activities, results, and outcomes.  
  
 
Figure 4: Theory of Change of the LEAF Framework  
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
Definition of the project/programme  
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the 
expected Fund- level impact and outcome results. Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.  
This should be consistent with t he financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators 
provided in section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5.  
 
The LEAF Framework has the overarching goal to accelerate access to clean electricity whilst reducing GHG 
emissions. It will achieve this by unlocking access to finance and local currency debt by de-risking investments  
for the private sector  to support the growth of DRE businesses  offering solar home s ystems (SHS), green mini -grids and 
captive commercial  and industrial (C&I) solutions . Specifically, the programme will avail credit enhancement instruments, 
including GCF concessional partial credit guarantees (PCG)  and concessional subordinated debt, to strengthen 
bankability and catalyse the participation of commercial investors in the sector, including local financial intermediaries 
such as local banks and leasing companies (LFIs) for local currency finance. LEAF seeks  a contribution of US$ 160 million 
from the GCF for de- risking and blending with AfDB projects in the form of concessional credit enhancement instruments, 
including: (i) PCGs to mitigate the risk of payment defaults for LFIs and commercial investors, allow ing for lower collateral 
requirements and tenor extensions; (ii) subordinated debt to mitigate the risk of payment defaults and improve the financial 
profile of projects crowding in LFIs where possible. PCGs and subordinated debt will cover innovative financing structures 
such as receivables -backed facilities for lease- to-own business models for households and businesses; and (iii) 
concessional debt funding to reduce cost of capital and improve the bankability of projects, particularly in the context of COV ID-19 recovery. AfDB will contribute with US$ 160 million in Partial C redit Guarantees and debt  provided at market 
rate. The programme is expected to leverage financing from local financial institutions, funds, commercial investors or 
developers worth US$ 625 million. In addition to the finance provided, the Framework will provide technical assistance


---
*Page 20*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 17 OF 5 5 
 
  
8 AfDB is providing the TA financing in collaboration with partners and by mobilizing TA funding from other 
funds  – US$ 1 0.9 million provided by GCF and US$ 4 million by AfDB8 – to enhance local financial institutions capacity for DRE 
investments, support governments in creating an enabling environment for private investment , establish financially sound 
financing facilities and transactions , confirm adaptation impact through pr oject -level adaptation assessments , and address 
existing gender gaps and inequalities in the DRE sector . 
 
The Framework focuses on off -grid renewable energy generation in six priority countries: Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, 
Tunisia, Ethiopia and Guinea.  The rationale for these countries is based on:  (i) the existing DRE market size; (ii) these 
countries possess active energy transition programs; iii) the countries are aligned with business development efforts and 
complement investment opportunities pursued by the Bank; and (iv) although access to finance and local currency capital 
remain key hurdles to unlock the full DRE growth potential, local financial institutions , including local banks and leasing 
companies , are willing to invest in the market providing they have access to de- risking instruments and capacity building. 
The country diversity will enable LEAF to explore differentiated market development strategies . Based on the state of the 
market and regulatory framework, LEAF is looking to play an instrumental role in financing the expansion of leading market 
players in the SHS and C&I space (Kenya, Nigeria and Ghana),  accelerating energy -efficiency focused businesses and 
greenfield initiatives in Tunisia, and support mini -grid acceleration programmes in Guinea, Nigeria and Ethiopia.  However, 
the programme may invest in all subsectors in the countries, given opportunities exist and and pending supportive 
regulatory framework; which may develop during the 6 year implementation period. To maintain a country diversified 
portfolio and based on potential and opportunities in the countries, LEAF will invest between 5% to 30% of GCF resources 
in each country.  
  
Market studies conducted by AfDB ( CEPA, 2019 ) (AfDB GMG, 
2017) (AfDB GMG, 2020) confirm a market potential of close to 
US$ 7.2 billion in the 6 countries with potential for growth. This 
is an estimate largely based  on development plans of leading 
DRE companies , and when including potential  DRE market 
growth, it  is even larger . In terms of  demand for local currency 
funding , the feasibility study  confirms that the amount of 
resources , including technical assistance,  dedicated to 
developing the pipeline and transactions  is an  important factor  
for the successful deployment of local currency guarantees . 
Capacity of local financial institutions needs to be strengthened 
to identify and assess the financing opportunities in the DRE 
space, highlighting the importance of the technical assistance 
component  of LEAF .  
 In summary , the Framework  aims to enhance local markets  by 
de-risking the DRE space, unlocking local currency debt 
finance,  and scaling up investments;  and provide technical 
assistance to (i) strenghten capacity within local banks and 
financial institutions and structuring financially sound 
transactions ; (ii) supporting enabling policies and frameworks ; 
(iii) confirm the adaptation impact; a nd (iv) address existing 
gender gaps and inequalities in the DRE sector . This 
Framework  is the first phase of the Bank’s wider DRE  strategy.  
 
Figure 5: Focus countries of the LEAF Framework


---
*Page 21*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 18 OF 5 5 
 
  
9 This instrument corresponds to AfDB instrument Standard Subordinated Debt : This form of debt typically makes interest and principal  
payments on a mandatory basis. However, the right to receive payment is subordinated to the prior payment of senior creditors  of the 
borrower. Therefore, standard subordinated debt will absorb losses in the event of l iquidation.  
10 As per AfDB Gui delines of PCG instr uments    
Figure 6: LEAF high- level Framework Structure  
Framework approach  
LEAF  is a long -term initiative, consisting of financial support for DRE projects that aim to achieve large- scale impacts. It s 
Framework approach will enable:  
• Continuous engagement with the different countries and strong country ownership ; 
• Support for a sector -wide transformation, to up- scale DRE investments. A Framework approach is required since 
a single project will have neither the scale or the profile to galvanise the necessary sector transformation and the 
essential paradigm shift towards DRE.  
• A demonstration effect across the continent (Kenya, Ethiopia  in East Africa, Ghana, Nigeria and Guinea in West 
Africa, and Tunisia in North Africa) enabling stakeholders to learn to further develop, apply and commercialize 
sustainable DRE projects; and  
• Increase implementation efficiency (time and resources) where the cost of the Framework’s support team is 
spread across multiple projects.  
 
Structure of the proposed Framework:  
 
Component 1: De -risking  
The feasibility report  confirms both the advantages of local currency debt and the demand for commercial and local 
currency financing for DRE projects . De-risking instruments will unlock  commercial capital and may reduce overall project 
capital costs.  GCF’s support will primarily take the form of an envelope for concessional  credit enhancement 
instruments , including: (a) Subordinated Debt9 and (b) Partial Credit Guarantees10 (PCG) . These will be co- invested on 
pari-passu and pro- rata risk sharing terms with the exception of pricing with AfDB investment s, including PGCs  and debt  
in compliance with AfDB’s financing instruments guidelines and pricing framework for non- sovereign operations . This will 
provide the level of de- risking and blending required to crowd- in private sector investors and developers into the 
sustainable energy space. Additionally, LEAF will support structured transactions such as receivables -backed financing 
structures to mitigate the risk of payment defaults of consumers.  While the proposed instruments aim to provide a credit 
enhancement solution, the ir diversification is required because: (i) it addresses the specificities of the business models. 
For example, SHS and C&I solutions  are based on future cashflow of receivables, whilst mini -grids may rely on subsidies 
(provided by the government or other institutions); and (ii) it creates  flexibility to address  the different credit risk  profiles 
experienced by projects and underlying country risks. In general, investors  (i.e. GCF and AfDB) in sub- tranches and first 
loss tranches  will accept the higher levels of risk associated with these tranches. This supports the objective of attracting 
commercial investors, who are prepared to financ e the lower -risk senior tranches.  
 Output 1.1: USD 575 million  additional capital deployed for SHS, captive power and green mini -grid 
businesses  as a 
result of GCF and AfDB funding


---
*Page 22*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 19 OF 5 5 
 
  
• Activity 1.1.1: provide concessional guarantees to unlock commercial investment : GCF and AfDB  will provide 
(concessional ) partial credit guarantee instruments (first loss  and others ) to share the risk of underlying debt 
transactions with FIs and commercial investors so that they can provide funding with attractive terms. For 
developers, the provis ion of a guarantee will enable them to access loans from banks in cases where they might 
otherwise be unable to meet the collateral and guarantees requirements (such as the parent company or 
shareholders guaranteeing the loan) of the banks (i.e. the guarantee would substitute for part of the collateral 
requirements). The underlying risk, or part thereof, of the underlying borrowers (DRE developers) will be borne 
by GCF  and AfDB. GCF provides guarantees in USD, the Bank can provide guarantees in either USD or local 
currency. The guarantees cover principal and/or  interest  or other forms of exposure. GCF and AfDB will participate 
in the guarantees pro rata and on the same terms, with exception of pricing.  The guarantees will partially cover 
loans provided by commercial investors or LFIs and their  associated risk exposure to the underlying DRE projects.  
 
Activity 1.1.2: provide concessional subordinated debt instruments :  Subordinated debt (Sub- debt) can help to 
insulate senior debt investors from unacceptable risks and reduce the cost of capital in cases where equity is 
too expensive. This can be especially important where senior debt investors ( e.g., commerc ial banks) are 
unfamiliar with the risks inherent in renewable energy projects. Sub- debt will also address lack of projects’ 
liquidity while providing the level of de- risking required for commercial investors to invest in the DRE space.  
AfDB will be a direct lender to the projects both in its own right and in its capacity as an Executing Entity. AfDB 
and GCF will participat e in the same tranches and on pari -passu risk sharing terms  (with the exception of 
pricing) , aligning interests between GCF and AfDB.  
 
• Activity 1.1.3: LEAF will support where possible the structing of the debt facilities in the form of receivables -backed 
financing structures (RBS) . GCF and AfDB will provide either sub- debt or a guarantee to unlock commercial 
investment into the RBS . In RBS structures, a DRE company (originator) originates assets of receivables 
contracts of solar home or C&I systems to consumers. The contracts entail energy -as-a-service or lease- to-own 
service against future regular payments of consumers.. In order t o achieve the credit quality of the receivables 
and to mitigate the risk related to consumers’ non- payments , adequate credit enhancement levels are required. 
These can be in the form of partial credit guarantees. In general RBS structures present a strong instrument to 
reduce losses as they exclude operating and sales risk and limit the risk to payment defaults , which are mitigated 
through the cushion layer created through excess spread.  
• Activity 1. 1.4: support transactions that finance a portfolio of DRE companies.  As mentioned above, due to the 
small -scale of most of DRE companies, the market is increasingly seeing ‘aggregator’ companies financing a 
portfolio of DRE businesses across various countries. These aggregators are usually in the form of a holding 
company, for example,  a debt fund or an SPV that channels debt to the companies. Whilst the programme wil l 
target larger DRE companies with larger financing needs, these are limited to a handful of companies at this stage of the market. Financing aggregators will support market growth and prepare strong small , local companies for 
future financing for larger tickets. As such, LEAF will support ‘aggregator ’ structures to scale- up investments and 
address this untapped market segment.
 The proceeds of the GCF and AfDB  funding, though either subordinated 
debt or guar antees , will be used to de- risk DRE investments and crowd in local financial institutions and pri vate 
capital to finance a  portfolio of DRE businesses . The financial model will be similar to that of solar home systems, 
mini- grid or C&I projects, but at portfolio level . 
 
• Activity 1.1.5: The facility will support longer tenors through tenor extension guarantees . Where lenders (local FIs 
and commercial investor) cannot, or are not willing to, offer long term debt that matches the needs of a renewable 
project, a credit guarantee can be used to cover credit risk on the longest instalments, allowing lenders to provi de 
longer tenor loans while meeting their prudential requirements and risk appetite.  Tenor extension guarantees aim 
to extend the terms of financing by guaranteeing payments at the longer end of the debt facility, thus incentivizing 
private lenders to bridge any gap. These two variations of credit  guarantees can be combined for greater impact.  
In general, guarantees  help access markets, extend debt maturities, and lower borrowing costs for projects.  
 Output 1.2: Within the overall additional commercial debt mobilised, there is USD 100 million  local currency debt for SHS, 
captive power and green mini -grid companies deployed 
 
• Activity 1.2.1: Provide guarantees  to and subordinated debt  alongside  local commercial banks or commercial 
investors to mobilise local currency funding: Local financial institutions (FIs) in Africa  represent a considerable 
potential source of local currency funding for the DRE space. However, they often require the financial credit worthiness of sponsors which comes in form of collaterals or other non- recourse structures that need de- risking 
measures for projects to achieve financial close. In this activity, AfDB can raise local currency funding for DRE 
companies on attractive terms . GCF co-investment will be delivered  in the form of guarantees  or sub -debt that


---
*Page 23*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 20 OF 5 5 
 
  
11 Mobilized from concessional funds  share the risk  of the facility  (for DRE companies ) with AfDB , local banks and commercial investors . GCF provides 
guarantees  or sub- debt in USD, the Bank can provide in either USD or local currency.  
 
Component 2: Covid Recovery Support – concessional debt  
 
In the context of the COVID -19 pandemic, concessional capital is required to support viable energy access businesses, 
ensure business continuity and the delivery of essential energy services, and to enable economic recovery of those 
companies  and the sector .  
 
Output 2.1: USD [ 70 million] capital deployed and mobilised for COVID -19 recovery in the DRE space  
 
• Activity 2.1.1:  Pro vide concessional debt to DRE businesses through AfDB SEFA Covid -19 Off -grid recovery 
Platform : GCF and AfDB will provide concessional debt11 to support DRE companies impacted by the pandemic, 
ensure business continuity, the delivery of essential energy services and safeguarding the sector and green 
recovery. The COVID -19 Off -Grid Recovery Platform (CRP) unlocks commercial capital to mitigate the negative 
impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic in the energy access sector, while advancing access to clean electricity and 
ensuring a green economic recovery .  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance  
 The technical assistance component , will support : (i) local banks and other financial institutions for enhancing their ability 
to appraise and lend to DRE businesses and projects, including trainings, appraisal toolkits, standardized loan document templates; And support the development and structuring of innovative and financially sound receivables -backed and other 
financing facilities ; (ii) the DRE sector by reinforcing enabling policies, supporting the digitalisation of licensing , operational 
optimization, 
market data and assessments of solar solutions for businesses for auto- production and business plan 
support; iii) country level adaptation assessment s to increase understanding of the link between DRE and adaptation and 
confirm potential adaptation impact  ; and iv) ad dress existing gender gaps and inequalities in the DRE sector . The GCF 
proceeds under this component will be used by AfDB for providing TA directly to beneficiaries and  does not involve on-
granting. LEAF will support governments in the policies space to include off -grid solutions and self -generation power into 
their electrification strategy. It is also essential that countries identify and address regulatory gaps to scale up DRE. The 
regulation needs to create the private sector's enabling environment to generate, distribute, and sell DRE electricity. With 
the adequate legal and financial framework, countries will set the right path to scale up DRE. Capacity building and training 
of key stakeholders will also build an essential element of the program's suc cess.   
 
The below diagram depicts the three key pillars of the TA grant.


---
*Page 24*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 21 OF 5 5 
 
    
Figure 7: LEAF TA components  
AfDB will mobilize donor funds  towards the AfDB portion of the TA .  
 
Output 3.1: Approximately 20 FIs and Banks with increased capacity to assess and finance DRE solutions . Eligible banks 
and institutions for TA support include institutions with local presence in the targeted countries and interest in exploring 
financing options in the DRE sector.  
 
• Activity 3.1.1:  Support local lenders and intermediaries to boost their technical capacity to engage in the DRE 
sector  - i.e. capture market opportunities, assess the investment attractiveness of opportunities and lend to DRE 
projects, including the structuring/ participation in off -balance financing, securitisation and other financing 
mechanisms  
 
• Activity 3.1.2: Structuring str ong and viable innovative financing structure.  Given the innovative nature of the 
targeted transactions , such as receivables backed structures, this TA component will support the development 
and structuring of financially sound and attractive receivable- backed and other structured financing facilities and 
transactions for mainly SHS  and C&I businesses.  
 
Output 3.2: Technical assistance deployed to support governments of the focus countries in creating enabling policies  
 
• Activity 3.2.1:  This activity will include three subcomponents related to  policies and regulatory framework , 
technology and social inclusion.  
o Policies and regulatory framework. This subcomponent will support governments  to develop enabling 
regulatory instruments such as licensing, tariff frameworks, and net metering policies and fiscal incentives 
for private sector investments in DRE. Effective policy and regulatory reforms are also needed to unlock domestic  and commercial finance, including raising awareness and capacity -
building among local 
institutions.   
o Technology. This subcomponent will leverage technology and digitalization to develop and improve 
(digital) systems  and frameworks for licensing, data collection, and electrification progress monitoring. It 
will also advocate and support simplified licensing processes and digitalization of services, and the 
dissemination of information.  
o Social inclusion.  Addresses some of the gender -related barriers identified in the target countries, by 
ensuring gender -inclusive capacity building by providing awareness and develop gender responsive 
policies and frameworks.  
 
Output 3.3 : Country -level a daptation assessment completed for each country .


---
*Page 25*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 22 OF 5 5 
 
 • Activity 3.3.1:  To increase  understanding of  adaptation  benefits of DRE projects, a 
comprehensive study/assessment will be undertaken for each country,  focused on the relevant technologies 
targeted in the c ountries  by LEAF. These assessments  will confirm  i) climate change hazards in the geographic 
areas based on science, ii) climate  vulnerabilities  and exposure, and iii) the link between these climate 
vulnerabilities and energy access  to reduce vulnerability  of beneficiaries  and (guidelines on) indicators to 
measure adaptation impact in the DRE sector  
 
Output 3.4 : Technical assistance deployed addressing existing gender gaps and inequalities in the DRE sector   
• Activity 3.4.1:  Conduct  national gender assessments and refine gender action plans  for each country  
• Activity 3. 4.2:  Support the development of strategies and marketing campaigns for DRE companies to increase 
share of female customers  
• Activity 3.4.3:  Develop gender inclusive recruitment and HR policies to increase women at the workforce of DRE 
companies  
 
These above activities and interventions were selected as they, collectively, form the most sustainable market approach. Other alternatives were rejected, such as:  
• Providing grants or increasing concessionality: as this would distort the market and replace private sector 
investment as opposed to encouraging it through risk -sharing.  
• Direct AfDB funding of projects to DRE: which must be limited to where it is essential , i.e.,  where no alternative 
exists rather than it being seen as a primary course of action. Instead, the Framework builds capacity with local 
FIs to mobilize local curre ncy funding, introduce new FIs to the DRE market sector, and build sustainable 
infrastructure and policies for the future.  
 
LEAF, therefore, supports facilities that finance a DRE company or a portfolio of DRE companies through f unds or financial 
institutions including local banks or leasing companies (aggregator facilities). Interventions will be in the form of private 
sector projects (i.e. framework sub- projects) where AfDB will be the executing entity, the lender of record or guarantor  of 
record for the projects’ transactions. However, in transactions that involve aggregators (i.e. Funds, FIs, leasing companies) 
that provide financing for a portfolio of DRE companies , the aggregator will be the executing entity.  For aggregator 
structures, GCF proceeds will be used for subordinated loans or guarantees on a DRE compan ies portfolio, which includes 
developed and executed transactions by the aggregator.   
GCF proceeds will be used in the focus countries for guarantees  (partial credit guarantees –  PCG) , subordinated loans 
and TA Grant. The maximum amount of funds to be disbursed by the GCF under LEAF is USD 170 .9 million for the 
financing of the Programme, which includes (i) Component 1: USD 70 million to be disbursed as subordinated, 
concessional loans and 80 USD million as guarantees; (ii) Component 2: USD 10 million to be disbursed as concessional loans for COVID -19 recovery for component 2;  and (iii) Component 3:  USD 10.9 million for TA grant s.   
 
Selection criteria and project types  
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans or on-
granting), describe the selection criteria of the sub- project and types.  
 
The below  table provide the eligibility criteria for LEAF ’s underlying transactions  supported by component 1 and 2 of this 
proposal . These eligibility criteria are in line with AfDB eligibility criteria for private sector transactions. The  eligibility 
criteria will be  further specified in the term sheet . 
 
 
LEAF  Eligibility Criteria  
Borrower  
 • DRE Companies (developers) : Viable early to growth stage non -sovereign DRE companies that 
have robust business models focusing on the distribution and financing of Solar Home System, 
Green Mini -Grid and Captive Power solutions  and a demonstrated need for capital to extend their 
business .  
• Aggregators : Holding company /Fund financing portfolio of energy companies  and other 
qualifying borrowers  meeting AfDB Non-Sovereign  guidelines  
Beneficiaries  • Households, businesses, commercial and industrial sector (captive power)  
Geography  • Borrowers registered in a member country of AfDB , and operating in Kenya, Nigeria, Tunisia, 
Ghana, Ethiopia, and Guinea.   Borrowers registered in non- regional member countries of AfDB, 
and operating in Kenya, Nigeria, Tunisia, Ghana, Ethiopia and Guinea may also be considered 
on a case -by-case basis.


---
*Page 26*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 23 OF 5 5 
 
  
12 “And” for corporates and “or” for off -balance sheet project finance like projects (starts -ups fall under corporate 
loan assessment) to align with minimum information required to initiate adequate assessment.  General 
investment 
criteria  • Legal Entity registered and licensed for its corporate purpose  
• In compliance with the local banking or other applicable regulations/laws  
• Demonstrated track record of good operational and financial performance and successful 
commercial development with unqualified audit opinions and/or12 good prospects for meeting all 
its financial obligations and generate adequate surpluses to sustain its long- term viability  
• Sound management, accounting and corporate governance systems that: (i) provide effective 
protection of the interests of all invest ors (shareholders and creditors); and (ii) maintain an 
environment that is favourable and conducive to efficient and sustainable growth of the 
company  
• Demonstrable developmental impact through activities focused on improving access to 
sustainable energy for households and businesses  
• Borrowers are not in default on any debt service obligations  
• Environmental and Social Assessments (e.g. ESIA, ESMP, RAP) aligned with national, AfDB and MDB requirements  
• Compliance with national and AfDB’s E&S requirements  
• Gender and climate change mainstreaming in operations  
• Compliance with AfDB policies  and procedures  
 Solar Home System  Mini-Grid Captive Power  
Technology  • Plug and play individual 
electrification solutions 
that can power small appliances such as 
lights, phone charger, 
TV, fan , SHS kits that 
includes appliances 
(TV, radio, fan, smart 
phones for payments)   
• Minimum Tier 2 
products of the multi -tier 
matrix for access to 
household electricity 
supply  (Multi-Tier 
Framework, 2020)  
• International quality 
standard systems  • Collective electrification solutions 
that connect multiple end 
beneficiaries or power small and medium sized businesses, social 
infrastructure (hospitals, schools 
etc.) 
• Minimum Tier 3 service level delivery  
• Hybridizat ion of existing fossil fuel 
fired mini -grids will not be part of 
the Framework  
• Smart metering  
Grid compatibility in hardware & software  • Captive power 
solutions tailored to the needs of customers, 
businesses etc.  
• Solar PV with or 
without storage  
• Size of up to 25 MW 
• Industries involved in 
the production of 
fossil fuels and 
mining are excluded  
Business 
models  • Pay as you go/lease to 
own  
• Energy as a service:  
Under this  model, 
customers contract a company to install a 
renewable energy 
system and pay rent for 
the system or a fixed 
price per kilowatt -hour 
(kWh) generated over a period of time  
• Other emerging models   
that are assessed to be viable by AfDB  
 • Energy as a service  
• Leasing  
• Other emerging models that are 
assessed to be viable by AfDB  
 • Energy as a service  
• Lend/Rent/Lease to own  
• Other emerging models  
that are assessed to be 
viable by AfDB  
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams )


---
*Page 27*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 24 OF 5 5 
 
 Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional and 
financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or 
any third parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries.  
• Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to 
oversee and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision- making body and oversight 
function, particularly for Enhanced Direc t Access (EDA) proposals.  
• Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the 
AE and the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will administer GCF funds, 
indicate if a Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of the 
assessment.  
• Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and 
country/region) that they are expected to undert ake in the proposed project/programme.  
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, legal 
arrangements, and the flow and reflow of funds between entities.  
 
Institutional background.  The African Development Bank , established in 1964, is a pan-African development institution, 
promoting economic growth and social progress across the continent. The Bank’s development agenda is delivering the 
financial and technical support for transformative projects that will significantly reduce poverty thr ough inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth. The Bank’s commitment to c limate  and green growth is rooted in its Ten Year Strategy  
prioritizing inclusive and green growth, its High Five development priorities including “Light up and Power Africa”  and the  
“New Deal on Energy for Africa” strategy  focused on contributing to energy security, energy access, transition to cleaner 
energy paths  and the promotion of innovation to increase financial flows . The New Deal on Energy for Africa is built on 
five inter -related and mutually reinforcing principles: (i) raising aspirations to solve Africa’s energy challenges; ii) 
establishing a transformative partnership on energy for Africa; (iii) mobilizing domest ic and international capital for 
innovative financing in Africa’s energy sector; (iv) supporting African governments in strengthening energy policy, 
regulation and sector governance; and (v) increasing African Development Bank’s investments in energy and c limate 
financing.   
 
AfDB has established itself as a leading DFI in the energy sector in Africa and has committed  UA 13.8 billion to energy 
sector projects since 2000, of which UA 2.7 billion for the private sector. The different initiatives and projects have resul ted 
in more than 3.7 million connections to the grid since 2000, 560,000 off -grid connections since 2018,  +18.5 GW of 
additional installed energy, of which 5.4GW from renewable energy resources, +22,500 kilometers of transmission lines 
constructed, and +102,000 kilometers of distribution lines constructed. The  Zola Electric Cote d’Ivoire (ZECI)  transaction 
closed in 2019,  pilots a local currency receivables -backed financing structure as targeted under LEAF. The project was 
one of the first large- scale local currency financing structures using securitization techniques for the off -grid renewable 
energy sector in Africa. AfDB provides a partial credit guarantee along with Credit Agricole Corporate and Investment 
Bank (CACIB) covering part of the guaranteed loan facility as catalyst. AfDB and CACIB guarantees enabled the 
mobilization of a local currency loan from Societe Generale Ivory Coast , a local bank.  
 
Implementation arrangements.  The AfDB will be responsible for the overall oversight and delivery of the Framework 
implementation, including identifying, structuring, arranging, and co- financing transactions. AfDB will implement the 
Framework following the terms and conditions agreed under the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and the Funded 
Activity Agreement (FAA). The FAA will include the eligibility criteria that determine the inclusion of projects within the Framework.  Having both AfDB and GCF participating in the same tranches , AfDB will align its interests to those of the 
GCF in each tranche which benefit s from GCF funding or guarantee . 
This section highlights the implementation 
arrangements for LEAF, which  are elaborated further in the term sheet .  
 
With LEAF being a Framework, details of underlying pipeline transactions are indicative at the proposal submission date, 
and pipeline development continues during the implementation phase.  In addition to the African Development Bank, GCF 
proceeds will be  channelled via the Bank to local financial institutions, including commercial banks and leasing companies, 
as well as specialized renewable energy investment funds and DRE companies to execute the funded activities and unlock 
local currency financing. Processing and implemen tation of the Framework will be integrated within AfDB’s 
processes/governance structures.  Each sub- project under the Framework will be processed individually by the Bank  
subject to AfDB’s credit evaluation, due diligence and approval procedures  for committing funds to the private sector . Only 
those projects  qualified under AfDB’s internal criteria and criteria outlined in the FAA will be eligible for further processing 
under the Framework .  
 AfDB’s policies and processes include an assessment of  risks, additionality and development impact, E&S, and due 
dilligence of the counterparty or significant related party , 
including Know -Your -Customer (KYC), Anti -Money Laundering 
(AML) and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) procedures and operational safeguards.  The Bank has strong


---
*Page 28*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 25 OF 5 5 
 
 fiduciary safeguards and internal controls to ensure that its lending is used for its intended purposes. Project assessments 
includes i) i dentification and verification of beneficial ownership, ii) criminal, civi l, and regulatory history, iii) investigations 
or sanctions by international organisations and regulatory bodies, and iv) Politically Exposed Persons and high- risk 
relationships. Based on the assessment, an Integrity Risk Opinion will be prepared and where required a mitigation 
strategy developed. The Bank will not finance a project where the counterparty or significant related party, or any of their 
beneficial owners are on the United Nations Security Council sanctions list. At the time of submission of the funding 
proposal, c onversations are taking place with a number of potential companies/sponsors as part of the pipeline 
development efforts, however these are initial conversations, of which some are entering the project concept note stage, after which wi th project appraisal will follow – following AfDB’s processes and procedures.   
 
 
AfDB will be signatory to the financing documents , both in its own right and on behalf of the GCF, in its capacity as an 
Accredited Entity of the GCF.   
 In transactions where the Bank is not the EE, the specific implementation arrangements and investment criteria governing 
the funding provided will be confirmed in an agreement signed between the Bank and the EE. The agreement will define 
the key investment el igibility criteria (e.g. technologies, geographies, business viability, and other criteria) and terms of 
the sub- investments to be supported by EE (e.g. tenor, pricing, repayment, currency hedging, security, fees, and other 
terms). The Agreement will also define the compliance and reporting requirements of the funding.  Where AfDB is not the 
EE, it will enter into an subsidiary agreement with the relevant EE, in accordance with the provisions agreed and detailed 
in the Term Sheet .. 
 
For managing GCF resources, the GCF Trust Account for  AfDB will be used and the Bank’s role will be to administer the 
funds. Under this scheme, AfDB will be a direct lender or guarantor to the projects in its capacity as an Accredited Entity  
(as well as in  its own right for its own contribution) . Interests between GCF and AfDB are aligned through AfDB and GCF 
participating in the same tranches and on parri-passu risk sharing terms , with exception of pricing . 
 
For the TA grants component, the Bank  will be the Executing Entity whereas the activities will be implemented in 
partnership with consultants and service providers. TA fund management and procurement will follow relevant policies and rules of the AfDB, gui ded by the grant agreement to be signed between the consultant/service provider and the AfDB. 
The AfDB will hold and manage the grant resources and make a direct payment to consultants/service providers.
 
  
The diagram below (Fig. 5) depicts the overall LEAF implementation arrangement  
 
 
Figure 8: Overall structure of the AfDB/GCF Framework  
Typical LEAF financing structures and implementation arrangement s


---
*Page 29*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 26 OF 5 5 
 
 The following describes the typical financing structures that will be covered by the Framework  and their implementation 
arrangements . 
 
Component 1 :  
 
• Partial Credit Guarantee for a facility : an LFI provides local currency debt, GCF and AfDB share pari -passu the risk 
through a PCG.  In this structure a local FI provides the funding and it is covered by a first loss or pari -passu guarantee 
from the AfDB and GCF. The facility ( off-balance sheet or  corporate loan) finances the DRE project . 
 
• Sub-ordinated debt for a facility : GCF and AfDB provide sub- ordinated debt pari -passu to create a facility to unlock 
co-financing from senior commercial lenders. The facility is an SPV, corporate loan or a receivables -backed financing 
structure.    
 
Component 2 :  
 
COVID -19 Off -grid recovery Platform:  (see description above-  section B3,  activity 2.1.1) 
 
The role of local commercial financial banks in the underlying transactions . The LEAF Framework is designed 
considering the market prevailing in the targeted countries where banks are not inclined to assume the risk of the 
underlying DRE companies (developers).  As such, they mainly play a role as a financing party in a structured facility, 
without assuming 100% of the risk of DRE companies. In summary, commercial banks may take the following roles:  
• As a financing party in a structured finance project, such as financing receivables -backed and off -balance sheet 
structures . 
• As a provider of local currency funding to a project. In this case AfDB and other financial parties will share the risk 
of the project with the local bank.  
In none of these cases does AfDB or GCF assume the risk of the commercial bank but rather that of the borrower 
(developer/DRE business) and therefore is essentially obligor risk not FI risk . 
 
Aggregation:  
Although most of the projects are expected to be structured debt facilities where the borrower is a DRE company, there 
are some pipeline projects which will be developed in the form of facilities to specialist FIs (holding company) such as 
debt funds investing in a portfolio of DRE businesses. This type of structure (aggregation) pools financing into a facility 
that channels large volumes of funding into DRE businesses that have smaller financing needs. The facility covers an 
aggregated portfolio of mini -grid, captive power projects, and similar DRE businesses. The role of both GCF and AfDB is 
to de-risk the facility through a guarantee or sub- debt covering the portfolio of DRE businesses. GCF and AfDB will 
participate in the facility with GCF and AfDB taking (partial) risk exposure for the DRE companies. The aggregator will be the executing entity for the portfolio deals.  Aggregation can reduce risk by spreading investments across projects and 
portfolios whilst supporting smaller companies.  
 
Excluded facilities:  
• Lines of credit whereby AfDB and GCF have full recourse to the local FI  and do not take the project risk  
 
Currency hedging strategies  
To the extent possible LEAF will seek to avoid currency mismatches in the operation. The Bank can provide local currency deb
t or a partial credit guarantee (PCG) where appropriate. Currency hedging strategies to mitigate against foreign 
exchange risk will be elaborated on a project -by-project basis by the AfDB transaction team for transactions where the 
instruments are provided in USD, and the underlying loans are denominated in another local currency . 
The best suitable hedging strategy will be firmed up in each respective project’s term sheet.  
 
Flow of Funds:  
In line with the activities  defined in section B3, LEAF will seek different instruments to address the market barriers 
mentioned above. ( Concessional ) guarantee instruments  (PCGs) are proposed to unlock commercial investment, 
making debt more accessible for DRE companies whilst addr essing perceived risk associated with DRE solutions and 
target consumers segments. Guarantees will also help to unlock local currency financing from local FIs, reducing currency 
risk and the cost of debt. For mini -grids and C&I, guarantees support long- term debt capital backing- up longer repayment 
periods for DRE systems , thus making the amounts to be paid on a monthly basis by consumers more affordable. 
(Concessional ) Subordinated debt (Sub- debt) will inject additional capital in the sector, reduce cost of  debt and help 
improve access to capital for DRE businesses. Particularly for mini -grids, sub- debt can play a catalytic role to improve the 
risk profile of investments whilst making loans more accessible. TA grants  will play an important role to remove market


---
*Page 30*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 27 OF 5 5 
 
 barriers related to lack of capacity of local commercial investors as well as gaps in the enabling environment . TA grants 
will flow for activities that are geared to open the market for private investments in order to achieve the main goal of LEAF. 
Whilst the GCF will provide concessional guarantee and debt instruments, AfDB will participate mainly with non-
concessional instruments from its private sector window. However, a portion of AfDB sub- debt will be provi ded by 
concessional debt mobilized from other donors and channeled through AfDB investments. The flow of funds will be further 
specified in the Termsheet .  
 
  
 
Figure 9: Diagram of flow of funds  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Why the project/program requires GCF funding  
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being finance
d by public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other dome
stic or international sources of financing?  
 
DRE  businesses have struggled to attract commercial local currency finance, and instead rely on foreign currency finance, 
particularly US dollars or euros. If the local currency depreciates – or is devalued in the case of fixed / managed FX 
regimes – the busi nesses either must raise tariffs to end users or bear the risk itself to account for the effective fall in the 
revenue that it receives relative to its costs, with the latter often rendering a project or business unbankable. These risks  
demonstrate the benefits and growing need for local currency solutions for businesses and confirm a clear rationale for 
exploring options to increase local currency finance as a contribution to the overall debt financing component of a 
transaction.  
 In Kenya, o nly three out of 43 Kenyan commercial banks have financed a C&I solar  initiative . In Nigeria,  banks are largely 
absent from the DRE market, debt is too costly, tenors are too short (up to 2 years), solar assets are not considered as 
collateral as there is no market for used solar assets and project finance products are not available for  companies to 
borrow against future cashflows . As a result, most companies borrow hard currency 
debt on their own balance sheet, 
taking additional risk in a new market. Like  Kenya and Nigeria, in Ghana and Tunisia local banks have been absent from 
financing DRE companies  or projects . Yet, despite these developments , across the different market segments there are 
a few examples of local currency finance being provided and financing solar assets is slowly gaining traction as more and 
more DRE projects have proven to be commercially  viable  (BNEF, 2019) .


---
*Page 31*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 28 OF 5 5 
 
  
There is a strong case for developing the capacity and capabilities of local financial intermediaries to provide competitivel y 
priced local currency term credit to reduce reliance on hard currency financing. To help meet the demand for finance from 
the renewables sector with the supply of finance from local credit, guarantees and subordinated debt can strengthen the 
bankability of projects and catalyse the participation of commercial investors in the sector, including LFIs to unlock local currency for busin ess growth. Guarantees and subordinated debt will mitigate the risk of payment defaults for LFIs and 
commercial investors, allowing for lower collateral requirements and tenor extensions, and where possible improve the financing terms on offer from lenders  and investors. Furthermore, subordinated debt  will be required  where lenders require 
liquidity to provide finance to the off -grid sectors or to improve terms of the loan to the underlaying borrower . 
 
There are a few examples of facilities that currently provide guarantees in the renewables sector in Afric a – such as 
GuarantCo, InfraCredit and the Africa Guarantee Fund (AGF) . These have confirmed challenges to operating on a fully 
commercial basis.  There are some examples of successful credit enhancement platforms outside of Africa as well, 
however , these are in countries with more developed financial markets . AfDB closed a first transaction of the DESCOs 
financ ing programme for Zola Electric Cote d ’Ivoire (ZECI) in 2019 , piloting a local currency receivables -backed financing 
structure to allow ZECI to provide access to approximately 100,000 rural households with pay -as-you-go solar home 
systems. The project is one of the first large -scale local curr ency financing structures  using securitization techniques for 
the off -grid renewable energy sector in Africa. AfDB provides a partial credit guarantee along with Credit Agricole 
Corporate and Investment Bank (CACIB) covering part of the guaranteed loan facility as catalyst  and enabl ing the 
mobilization of a local currency loan from Societe Generale Ivory Coast, a local bank.  
 
The proposed de- risking instruments and the level of concessionality provided by the GCF are expected to enable and 
attract local financial intermediaries, decrease the cost of local currency debt for D RE companies , while possibly extending 
the tenor at which financing is provided. In turn, eligible DRE companies will have access to financing that : (i) is affordable, 
(ii) matches the currency of their revenues and (iii) accommodates the length of the payback periods on the solar 
equipment they lease to their customer base.  
 
By addressing challenges related to the deployment of local c urrency financing for DRE solutions, GCF funding 
contributes to:  
• Increasing local investment through increased lending to new business models in a nascent sector  
• Unlock ing substantial private capital through credit -enhancement and structured finance  
• Building stakeholders’ capacity i n capital market products such as securitization  structures . The transactions in the 
program lay the ground for subsequent securitization notes  issuance on capital markets  
• Increas ing capacity of LFIs to recognize the opportunity of the distinct and growing investment opportunity of the 
DRE market  
• Attractive yield for local markets and portfolio diversification for local banks  
• Creat ing a conducive environment for private investment in DRE will encourage business model innovation in DRE  
• Enhancing financial capacity and diversifying investment opportunities for local banks  
• Private sector development through increased competition in the SH S sector as well as local linkages  
• Fiscal benefits in the form of tax revenues to the Governments of the target countries  
 Without GCF de- risking instruments:  
• Local banks will be reluctant to invest in DRE  due to a perceived high risk of this relatively new business with 
innovative technology  or on terms not matching the need of the underlying projects.  
• Preventing DRE growth as finance supply is limited  
• Miss the opportunity of accelerating DRE growth and supporting the transition to green businesses  
• Market kick -off in new countries will be slowed down and SDG 7 will be more difficult to achieve as we remain in a 
business as usual scenario  
• It would take c onsiderably longer for the existing market barriers to be removed.  
• Access to finance for climate investments would remain limited to few large borrowers/project sponsors and remain 
too costly for many others  
 
The Framework  thus aims to demonstrate the attractiveness and potential of the DRE sector. The demonstration effect is 
expected to attract and increase future financing from local banks and private investments in the DRE market.  GCF’s 
ability to invest in riskier tranc hes catalyses AfDB’s co -investment and allows the combined funding approach of LEAF  to 
address the market barriers and attract participation from local banks in the transactions. GCF's instrument s priced on a 
concessional basis and blended with AfDB funding reduce the financing cost and improve the bankability of the projects.


---
*Page 32*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 29 OF 5 5 
 
 Furthermore, dedicated , enabling DRE policies are required to allow C&I, mini -grid and SHS to grow. For example, the 
C&I solar market in Sub- Saharan Africa has mostly developed without regulatory support, buoyed by competitive 
economics and unreliable electricity grids (BNEF, 2019). Besides net metering, DRE  companies request that the 
regulator y environment could focus on better enforcement of existing import duty and VAT exemptions on solar modules 
and associated equipment to promote DRE. With the TA grant, the Framework  aims to support an enabling regulatory 
environment to respond to the market demand and growth prospects.  
 
Why the proposed financial instruments were selected  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing 
package. i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? H
ow were co- financing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to t
hat of the co- financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets
 for similar projects/programmes.  
 
The proposed instruments and financing package are selected to provide the level of de- risking necessary to unlock local 
currency financing from commercial banks and local financial institutions, while seeking minimum level of concessionality (to limit market distortion) and risk sharing with local financial institutions. The instruments will provi de 
both credit 
enhancement and liquidity.  
 
The instruments  were selected to address the market barriers identified for the countries . A table describing each barrier, 
proposed solution, and instrument is presented in section B.3.  
 
Level of concessionally  
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investme
nt viable. Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum c oncess
ionality? Who benefits from concessiona lity?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to 
investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial analysis when appropriate.  
 
Whilst businesses are in theory able to make a simple choice on whether to apply local currency, the market realities 
make it a more complicated issue. The pricing is often expensive, sometimes with rates similar to rates of return on equity 
with a volatility driven by limited ability to fix rates . Collateral requirements are high and tenors  often short and not meeting 
project needs.  A key finding from the market assessments is that if guarantees were applied, banks would only make 
minimal, if any, reduction to the interest rate charged. As a result, unless the de -risking instrument (guarantees and 
subordinated debt) fees are subsidis ed, the all -in cost to the borrower would be prohibitive to obtain local currency debt . 
Concessional rates are required at this stage of the market  to improve the bankability of transactions , increase participation 
of LFIs in the financing deals and the ability  of local projects and businesses to borrow in local currency.  
 
Projects under th e Framework  will be financed using the minimum level of concessionally to make the project viable to 
incentivize  private sector lenders and equity investors  to participate. Lending rates will be benchmarked for each project 
based on country risk and typical returns for these countries ; interest rates on loans will be set against the LIBOR or 
whatever the equivalent government T -bill plus a margin. The level of concessional ity will be based on the minimum level 
required to make the project bankable and obtain a reasonable return on equity and debt to attract financiers. The level 
of concessionality may further be based on consumer affordability (concessionality to be reflected in consumer prices)  
and to support  market penetration (enabling expansion and increase access to DRE solutions . The level of con cessionality 
required for each underlying transaction will be assessed during the due diligence phase. The concessi onality will be 
passed on to end- beneficiaries by enabling increased access to DRE solutions (and consumer financing) and where 
possible consumer prices. The level of concessionality will improve bank ability of the project through risk sharing, enabling 
financing to the DRE companies to expand its operations . 
 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Long- run programme sustainability  
Explain how the project/programme sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will be 
ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.


---
*Page 33*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 30 OF 5 5 
 
 Sustainability will be achieved through the execution of the Framework by:  
 
• Increasing private sector investments: The key principle of the Framework is to unlock private sector 
investment through de- risking and blended finance instrument s with a minimum level of concessionality.  This 
approach will reduce the reliance on donor funding and uses de- risking and risk -sharing instruments in partnership 
with the private sector resulting in the support of  commercial ly viable projects and robust fi nancing structure  People 
with access to renewable energy  s given that  the private sector will have ‘skin in the game’ for each project being 
considered.  
• Developing local capital markets:   Currently across the different market segments in the renewables sector, 
the level of participation by local commercial banks and institutional investors is very limited. Increasing the 
involvement of  more local financing institutions  has important benefit s, including: i) increasing investment options 
to promoting diversification of portfolios; ii) promoting alternative sources of finance for renewable projects; iii) 
facilitat ing greater involvement of local developers (local developers  can find it more dif ficult to access finance 
from international sources relative to international developers ); and iv) supporting credit markets mature; there 
are significant spill- over benefits to economies of having wider, deeper, and therefore more efficient, longer term 
credit markets.  
• Building confidence and lending experience in the  DRE finance market : According to a UN SDG report: 
“Adopting comprehensive regulatory Frameworks, leveraging private sector financing, and harnessing the 
potential of decentralised renewable energy solutions are three priority actions that could foster electrification in 
the remaining period“  (UN, 2019). The financing provided under the LEAF  Framework will focus on: (i) leveraging 
private sector financing; and (ii) harnessing the potential of DRE. Through the Framework, local FIs will increase 
their capacity to capture market opportunities and assess DRE projects, enabling them to recognize  the 
investment attractiveness of DRE projects. By de- risking the DRE sector, the Framework unlocks and increases 
local currency finance and builds lending experience and confidence in the DRE market. This is something most local financial institutions currently lack due to both their high- risk perception and inexperience in financing DRE.  
Local financial institutions are more likely to continue investing in the DRE sector beyond the Framework  once 
having gained necessary capacity and lending experience, potentially contributing to sustainability of access to 
finance.  
• Framework approach : LEAF interventions aim to  share risk with the private sector a nd at the same time look at 
markets for a greater impact. The approach is to look at the risk from a broader pers pective, value the financial 
return in a consistent way looking across a portfolio of projects and the objectives to achieve. Having a portfolio 
with a mix of countries from East, West and North Africa will allow us to take more risk in low er-income countries 
and at the same achieve portfolio diversification. The objective is  to think beyond project levels and think in more 
global and systemic terms, moving away from a project by project approach, thereby enabling countries to create 
their own DRE frameworks in the future.  
• Developing enabling policies and frameworks at a country level : The Framework will work closely with and 
build the capacity of institutional stakeholders (ministry of energy, rural electrification agencies, renewable energy 
agencies, utility companies and regulators) in technologies and enabling policies for DRE  and private sector 
investments. It may  also advocate and support simplified licensing processes and digitalization of processes and 
the dissemination of information to improve preparation and processing times of projects . As a result, countries 
will be better  positioned and enable future DRE projects  and investments . 
• Gender mainstreaming to increase women economic empowerment and reduc e gender gaps : The 
framework emphasizes empowering women as consumers, producers and agents of change in the renewable 
energy sector.  The sustai nability of the positive gender impacts of the programme will be supported by  DRE 
companies implement ing gender -responsive policies  and gender mainstreaming being part of training and 
capacity building efforts where appropriate. Interventions under LEAF will  enhanc e access to finance for women 
for investing in DRE solutions, creat e jobs for women with DRE com panies and enabl es the DRE environment 
with gender -responsive trainings  of local banks and financial institutions . LEAF will contribut e to women economic 
empowerment and reduc ing gender gaps in the energy sector.  
• Increasing access to clean, reliable and af fordable energy. Decentraliz ed and distributed renewables  bring 
power generat ion closer  to the consumer, build ing resilience, increasing access to energy and reduc ing exposure 
to power outag es, and build ing greater flexibility into power generation.  
• Structuring and supporting robust financial transactions : The TA component plays an important role in 
building a healthy , sustainable market  as well as robust financial structures  to build the confidence of the private 
sector in the market . Providing capacity building to different stakeholders will ensure the benefits to continue 
beyond the life of the project. The TA will be contributing to t he LFIs’ becoming greener banks and to increase 
the portion of their portfolio on such projects. By combining both financing and technical skills, the framework


---
*Page 34*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 31 OF 5 5 
 
 crowds in private capital, gives and strengthens LFIs’ capacity to elaborate more complex produ cts needing to be 
commercially viable to be implemented in the market.  
• Demonstration effect.  Finally, by demonstrating the potential and success of local currency financing facilities 
in the DRE sector, sharing lessons learned and the development of standardized agreements, the Framework 
aims to attract other local banks and other financial institutions to finance DRE projects.  
 
The LEAF  Framework is a timely  initiative  to increase involvement of the private sector and building on the momentum  
that exists to grow and transform the energy sector to a clean and sustainable energy model.  
 
Long- term ownership and exit strategy  
Include information pertaining to the longer -term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and 
maintenance of investment s (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please 
describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.  
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sec tor or civil society as a consequence 
of the project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
Due to its nature as a Framework  agreement, information pertaining to the long- term ownership, operations, maintenance, 
and contractual arrangements of the infrastructure will be developed on a per -project basi s, following best practices  in 
project structuring and risk management  as well  as relevant  AfDB policies and guidelines . The Framework approach 
enables sustainability, allowing exit from the Framework itself with local countries positioned to  identify, formulate, fund 
and implement  future DRE  projects.  
 
The Framework  will promote innovative financing structures such as securitization structures , particularly for solar home 
systems to tap into local institutional investors . The transactions may be structured as receivables -backed financing 
facilities. A local bank will  provide local currency funding for financing new solar assets once they are sold to a consumer. 
Repayments are tied to the cash receivables due from consumers. These structures reduce the transaction’s risks as it is 
not exposed to the origination risk of  new consumer contracts or  operating risk . All elements of these structures can be 
perpetuated by each country beyond the lifetime of the Framework.  
 
The debt facilities are expected to have tenors of between 5- 7 years, although a maximum tenor of 12 years  can be 
considered depending on the transaction. The disbursement period of LEAF  is 6 years, with a total Framework  financial 
cycle of 18 years.


---
*Page 35*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 32 OF 5 5 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing   
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
170.9 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace 
period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter 
amount     
(ii) Subordinated loans  80 million USD  Up to [12] years  Up to [3] 
years  As agreed in 
termsheet  
(iii) Equity  Enter amount     
 
(iv) Guarantees  80 million USD  Up to [12] years   As agreed in 
termsheet  
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  10.9 million USD      
(vii) Result s-base d 
payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
789 million USD ($)  
Name of inst itution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Indicative 
Pricing  Seniorit
y 
AfDB  Guarantees  
 50 million 
USD ($)  Up to 12 
years  market rate  
 
 pari 
passu 
 
AfDB  Subordinated 
Loans  
 18 million 
USD ($)  Up to 12 
years  
 
Up to  
3 years  market rate  pari 
passu 
 
AfDB  Senior Loans  
 92 million 
USD ($)   Up to 12  
years  
Up to  
3 years  market rate  
  senior  
 
AfDB  Grant  4 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years   
Enter  
years  N/A Options  
 
Local financial institutions  Senior Loans  
 100 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  market rate  senior  
 
Other co- financiers  Senior Loans  
 215 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  market rate  senior  
 
Sponsor/shareholder  Equity  
 310 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  equity return  junior  
 
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
959.9 million USD ($)   
(d) Othe r financing 
arrangements and Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any 
type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).


---
*Page 36*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 33 OF 5 5 
 
 contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)  Please also explain other contributions such as in -kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
GCF investment will leverage an estimated US$ 625  million from the private sector and 
local markets , including US$ 310 million of equity from shareholder or sponsor 
contribution. The Framework  size is estimated at US$ 959.9 million , including AfDB, 
GCF and other investors’ participation . 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co -financing institution can fund a single component or output. 
Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4. This table should 
match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other annexes including 
the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
In case of a multi -country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in 
annex 17, if available.  
 
The focus of the Framework is on mid- to-large sized transactions (starting from USD 20m total capital  cost). For each 
transaction, AfDB will ensure that GCF and AfDB exposure are pari -passu in the considered debt tranche to ensure 
alignment of interest.  
 
The debt facilities are expected to have tenors of between 5- 7 years, although there may be exceptional circumstances 
where a maximum tenor of  up 12 years may be granted (mini -grid or C&I ). 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer?  Yes ☐      No ☒ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please 
provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, 
to the extent possible.  
The TA component will support : (i) local banks and other financial institutions for enhancing their ability to appraise and 
lend, including trainings, appraisal toolkits, standardized loan document templates . It will as well provide transaction 
advisory for structuring financia lly sound and strong receivables -backed and other financing facilities  (ii) the DRE sector 
by reinforcing enabling policies and frameworks; (iii)  increase understanding of  adaptation impact of DRE projects 
through country -level assessments ; and iv) address gender gaps and inequality within the DRE sector.  
 In addition to ‘hard’ constraints of local currency financing, such as interest rates, collateral  requirements and short 
tenors, the banks have limited capacity to provide local currency finance to the sector. Local banks have limited 
experience executing these types of deals, making it time consuming and difficult to complete transactions involving 
them. There is limited understanding of certain segments of the market. Banks are not yet able to appraise the nature 
of the credit risk posed by the companies’ consumer receivables.  The technical assistance support from the GCF will 
strengthen the capacity of local banks and other financial institutions to identify, assess and finance DRE projects .  
 
Receivables -backed financing structures are still fairly novel in the continent.  The TA component will support support 
the structuring of strong innovative financing facilities , building capacity of DRE companies and LFIs to participate.   
 
To address existing regulatory challenges impacting the scaling of the DRE sector, the TA component will support the  
development of  enabling policies in the countries .


---
*Page 37*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 34 OF 5 5 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result 
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for  mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the 
impact for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low -emission sustainable 
development pathways. Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes 
to increased climate- resilient sustainable development.  Calcu lations should be provided as an annex . This should be 
consistent with section E.2 reporting GCF’s core indicators.  
 
Impact for Mitigation  
The Framework  will contribute to climate change mitigation and carbon intensity reduction in the selected countries 
through enabling the deployment of green mini -grids and DRE solar products at scale, providing households and small 
businesses with emissions -free access  to energy and displacing fossil fuel energy solutions. Captive power solutions 
will displace  both diesel generators and fossil fuel -based power from the grid for commercial  and industrial use, helping 
businesses and farmers transition to clean electricity , reduce over time their electricity bills when systems are paid 
back, and promote DRE in the country. The Framework  is expected to establish 3 86MW generating capacity through 
off-grid renewable energy solutions, of which some may also feed into the grid , resulting in approximately 2 8.8 million 
tCO2 e emission reductions over the lifetime of the equipment.  
 
Increased financing available for low -emission energy access and power generation  
The GCF contribution in subordinated debt and guarantees  of US$160 million will leverage US$ 785  million financing 
from AfDB, commercial investors and local banks and financing institutions. GCF’s ability to invest in riskier tranches 
catalyses AfDB’s co -investment  and additional commercial financing required for  the growth and expansion of DRE 
companies . 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project or programme 
investment. Describe the following,  if applicable:  
• Potential for scaling up and replication  
• Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
• Contribution to the regulatory Framework  and policies  
• Overall contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans  
 
In line with the sector market dynamics related to the development of new technologies and innovative business model s 
for DRE initiatives, the Framework aims to promote a paradigm shift from centralized energy solutions to decentralized 
ones. DRE solutions offer a clean, reliable and sustainable solution c ontributing and key to industrialize and power 
Africa. Over USD 1.1 billion has been invested in Sub- Saharan Africa and nearly 200 million off -grid solar products 
have been sold in the rapidly emerging energy access industry in the last decade. As it is ex pected that future 
technology will make the sector even more attractive, the trend towards DRE will continue. C ountries and consumers 
are also increasingly aware of the pressing climate change threat and the need for sustainable energy solutions. Energy 
access companies are capital intensive companies that require substantial grant, equity, and debt investments. Due to 
a growing debt weight, part icularly as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic, countries may  reduce subsidies and 
financing  to the energy sector and plans , further increasing the need for  private sector contribution.   
 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
Through the Framework , the capacity of local FIs to capture market opportunities and assess DRE projects will be 
strengthened, enabling them to recognize investment attractiveness of DRE projects.  
 
By de -risking the sector, using guarantee and concessional debt instruments, the Framework  makes it possible for FIs 
to invest in the market. This increases  local currency investments in DRE initiatives . Local financial institutions are more 
likely to continue investing in the DRE sector beyond the program having gained necessary capacity and lending 
experience, potentially contributing to sustainability of access to finance  for DRE .


---
*Page 38*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 35 OF 5 5 
 
 The Framework  aims to demonstrate that the proposed innovative securitization structure, which has become common 
in more sophisticated financial markets over the last 20 years, does work and can be applied in developing financial 
markets and the energy sector as well.  It lays the ground for replication in other countries increasing future private 
sector financing in the off -grid sector  and development of the financial market . 
 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
The experience gained from the first projects within  the Framework will be shared via  sector workshops and dedicated 
webinars to discuss the results and lessons learned with a view to improv ing the Framework’s performance. The 
experience from the different target countries will be shared between them , and other African countries,  creating a 
regional knowledge sharing platform around DRE and the key subjects  – such as,  how to unlock private investments , 
local currency financing, the key market hurdles for a deployment at scale,  and so on,  supporting DRE companies  to 
develop and grow the market. The objective of knowledge sharing is to galvanize the key stakeholders around the 
potential of DRE to transition to low carbon elec tricity and how countries can harness this opportunity by ‘rethinking the 
way how to electrify the country’ with  a more flexible private sector driven approach.  
 
Contribution to the regulatory f ramework and policies  
The TA component will support the 6 countries in developing enabling policies and frameworks at a country level that 
enable investments in the sector and scaling of the DRE sector. This can take the form in enabling regulatory 
instruments such as licensing, feed- in tariff and net metering policies and fiscal incentives for private sector investments 
in DRE. Contributing to improving the enabling environment in the countries, aims to create a sustainable finance 
market , enabling growth of C&I, mini -grid and standalone solar systems . The focus of the TA will differ from country to 
country depending on the current regulation and the DRE solution. In Tunisia, it will focus on strengthening the self -
consumption regulation in place, for example c ollective energy self -generation and consumption shoul d be allowed and 
specially facilitated/promoted in small industrial parks.  In the other countries , a conducive mini -grid regulation for 
private investment will be improved to attract private capital.   
 
Adaptation Assessments  
The literature on energy access and adaptation to climate change is vast and diverse with often inconclusive findings.  
However,  recent studies confirm synergy bet ween energy access and adaptation to climate change. Although 
qquantifying adaptation benefits for LEAF is challenging due to the lack of data to confirm adaptation impact in the six 
countries  and LEAF being a Framework with underlying projects being unknown at this stage , the programme is 
committed to record the potential impact and increasing information and data on adaptation and energy access. The 
knowledge documents and information develop ed by LEAF will be used to confirm potential  adaptation benefits and 
impact  of LEAF sub -projects, and can as well  support  the GCF,  AfDB and other stakeholders when designing DRE 
projects with integrated adaptation benefits  in the future.   
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the wider benefit s and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals 
and provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
• Environmental co- benefits  
• Social co -benefits  including health impacts  
• Economic co-benefits  
• Gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Environmental co -benefits . By replacing polluting energy sources with renewable energy solutions, the Framework  
will contribute to reduced air pollution  (with the ensuing health benefits for the population) , reduced demand on water 
for hydro, and reduced deforestation . 
 
Social co -benefits . Approximately 5. 9 million people are expected to directly benefit from increased access to 
renewable energy . Social benefits from access to energy through DRE solutions include healthier living conditions 
(polluting energy sources are replaced by a clean solution), safer l iving environments (longer hours of light in and 
around the house) and increased opportunities (such as allowing children to study longer or running a small business).   
 
Economic co -benefits . Scaling up DRE activities  under the LEAF  Framework will  result in the 52,000 direct job 
opportunities and 29,000 direct informal jobs,  increas ing income of approximately  81,000 people. Most direct jobs 
emerge from downstream activities, including sales, installation, operation and maintenance. However, the facility aims 
to also support DRE companies with local upstream activities, such as assembling and manufacturing of systems.


---
*Page 39*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 36 OF 5 5 
 
 Furth ermore, power distribution networks across Africa are notoriously unreliable. Frequent power interruptions can be 
enormously costly for factories and SMEs. Small -to-medium scale grids, captive power, and off -grid solutions contribute 
to the electrification and industrialization in these countries and present a cost effective, low carbon and a reliable 
alternative to the grid. Through the provided energy solutions, LEAF  will contribute to an increase in productivity, 
efficiency and energy security to 395 factories and SMEs.  
 
Gender -sensitive development impact.  The benefits of access to clean energy are felt most keenly by women, who 
often spend more time in the home.  Through the Framework, 2. 95 million women will benefit from increased access to 
energy. Furthermore, the Framework is expected to increase access to clean energy to 800,000  beneficiaries living 
below the poverty line and who are the most vulnerable to climate change .  The programme will also create additional 
jobs in the DRE sector for 1 5,600 women, and 413,000 women including  48,000 poor and female- headed households 
will enter into new SHS, mini -grid and captive power contracts. Through TA, LEAF aims to remove existing gender 
gaps and inequality by working closely with DRE companies, developing policies focused on increasing outreach to 
women as customers and women as part of the workforce.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Descr ibe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups  and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alt ernative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment s gap that prevents government 
from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
 
Countries and beneficiaries context . The focus countries are facing various challenges on their way towards adopting 
a low emission path and  in providing reliable and efficient energy. Economies in these countries are dependent on 
climate sensitive sectors such as agriculture, energy, tourism, water and health. Hydro- electricity is also a dominant 
form of energy on many of the countries’ grids, and increases in drought caused by climate change can threaten 
electricity security. With limited (cash) reserves and coping mechanisms, climate change- induced economic shocks 
often hit low income household hardest, and these groups struggle most to recover from such shocks.  
 
The six countries are classified as lower -middle income countries and millions of people lack access to (reliable) energy, 
especially in rural areas. The  overall  electrification rate in the focus countries is 75% in Kenya, 54% in Nigeria, 82% in 
Ghana, 44% in Guin ea and 44% in Ethiopia (AEP, 2020) , with lower energy access rates for rural areas . Market studies  
conducted by AfDB estimate the combined existing DRE market size to be approximately US$  7.2 billion in the focus 
countries. Renewable energy technologies represent a huge opportunity to electrify and boost economic growth in a 
cleaner, more affordable and sustainable way. Off -grid solutions offer poor -middle income households , previously 
without  electricity , the opportunity  to incorporate affordable lights and basic appliances in to their daily lives, especially 
in remote communities and in many cases, reach people faster and in a more targeted way than grid- expansion alone. 
Captive renewable ener gy solutions present a cost effective, low carbon, reliable alternative to the grid, particularly in 
the Commercial and Industrial (C&I) sectors . 
 
Financial, economic, and institutional needs . Most households cannot afford to pay the full cost of available 
renewable energy solutions/systems upfront and require a loan or financing plan to pay for them . Limited collateral and 
income levels limit financing to lower income potential customers.  
   
The aforementioned financial market barriers have so far prevented the successful deployment at scale of DRE 
solutions in the focus countries despite a high market demand , limiting the sector ’s growth potential.  Energy access 
companies are capital intensive companies that often include inventory and receivables financing and require 
substantial financing to expand and scale operations. Most companies are highly leveraged, borrowing in USD or Euro, 
while their revenues are collected in local currencies, making them vulnerable to FX risk. LEAF  will unlock local cur rency  
and commercial  debt financing for DRE businesses through 15-20 transactions including local banks/F Is to provide  
DRE investments . 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. 
Describe the following:  
• Existing national climate strategy  
• Existing GCF country programme


---
*Page 40*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 37 OF 5 5 
 
 • Alignment  with existing policies  such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
• Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
• Role of National Designated Authority  
• Engagement with civil society organizations  and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples , 
women and other  vulnerable groups  
Existence of and coherence with national climate strategies and policies. Tunisia, Ghana, Nigeria, Kenya, 
Ethiopia  and Guinea have strong energy transition policies, climate objectives and targets for  reducing emissions  (see 
table below ). The main challenge is the capacity  required  to meet these goals and to ensure that energy supply is 
reliable and adequate. LEAF  is well aligned and contributes to the countries' priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development as identified in national climate strategies and plans  and contributing to the following carbon 
emission reductions: 1. 6 million tCO2e in Ghana,  10.5 million tCO2e in Nigeria, 1. 2 million tCO2e in Ken ya, 1.5 million 
tCO2e in Tunisia, 11.0 million tCO2e in Ethiopia and 2. 9 million tCO2e in Guinea. Furthermore, LEAF  will engage and 
strengthen local ecosystems and stakeholders, including local banks and other financial institutions and off -grid energy 
companies  to further scale DRE .  
 
Tunisia  
Confirmed in its NDC, Tunisia seeks to  reducing its greenhouse gas emissions across different  sectors including energy , 
industrial processes , agriculture, forestry and other land use, and waste,  in order to lower its carbon intensity by 41 per 
cent in 2030, relative to the base year 2010. Mitigation efforts will particularly center on the energy sector, which alone 
accounts for 75 per cent of t he emissions reductions contributing to this decrease in carbon intensity. As part of the 
energy transition policy advocated by the State, it is estimated that the energy sector will reduce its carbon intensity in 
2030 by 46 per cent compared with 2010. Th is will be done unconditionally and through its own efforts by 13 per cent 
compared to 2010, i.e. by around 1/3 of its INDC. To achieve the rest of its objective, an additional drop in carbon 
intensity of 28 per cent in 2030 compared to 2010, Tunisia is relying on the support of the international community for 
funding, capacity building and technology transfer. The national effort exclusively concerns the energy sector, which 
accounts for the most significant part of the investment needs.  
 
In response to t he energy challenges the country faces and to harness its renewable potential, the Government of 
Tunisia launched the Tunisia Solar Plan (“Plan Solaire Tunisien” –  PST) . The Tunisian Solar Plan is a major program 
within the energy transition strategy which was launched in 2018 and has the objective of increasing the share of RE in 
the energy mix . The PST targets to increas e energy efficiency and the implementation of polic ies to diversify its energy 
mix, with a strong focus on the development of renewable energy. In particular, the program includes the following 
objectives by 203013: i) Reduce primary energy demand by 30% ; ii) Increase the share of renewable energies in the  
electricity mix to 30% ; and iii) Reduce carbon intensity by 41% . 
 
Ghana  
Sustainable energy security is one of the priorities. Ghana’s emission reduction goal in its NDC is to unconditionally 
lower its GHG emissions by 15 percent relative to a business -as-usual (BAU) scenario emission of 73.95MtCO2e2 by 
2030 (by 12 percent in 2025). An additional 30 percent emission reduction is attainable on condition that external 
suppor t is made available to Ghana to cover the full cost of implementing the mitigation action (finance, technology 
transfer, capacity building). With this external support, a total emission reduction of 45% below the BUA emission levels 
can be achieved by 2030 (by 27 percent in 2025).  
 
The Government of Ghana launched in 2019 its  Renewable Energy Master Plan (REMP) with the goal to provide an 
investment -focussed framework for the promotion and development of renewable energy resources for sustainable 
economic growth, contribute to improved social life and reduce adverse climate change effects. The REMP aims to 
achieve the following by 2030: i) Increase the proportion of renewable energy in the national energy generation mix 
from 42.5 MW in 2015 to 1363.63 MW (w ith grid connected systems totaling 1094.63 MW); ii) Reduce the dependence 
on biomass as main fuel for thermal energy applications; iii) Provide renewable energy -based decentralised 
electrification options in 1,000 off -grid communities; and iv)  Promote loc al content and local participation in the 
renewable energy industry.   
 
Nigeria  
The government has made access to energy for all Nigerians a priority. At present, a significant share of demand for 
energy, and electricity in particular, remains unmet and the grid is unable to reliably serve the existing industrial and 
urban customer base. A shortfall in generation capacity has led to the proliferation of small generators, which are 
inefficient and polluting. Most rural communities remain off the grid, about 60% of the population lack access to 
electricity. At the current rate of grid ex pansion, they will largely remain under -served. The potential to both provide 
 
13 http://www.anme.tn/?q=fr/content/notre -vision


---
*Page 41*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 38 OF 5 5 
 
 energy access and to reduce emissions is enormous. Under a BAU scenario (5% GDP growth) annual emissions are 
projected to grow 114% by 2030 to around 900 million tonnes – around 3.4 tonnes for every Nigerian. Under a high 
growth scenario, with economic growth at 7%, this climbs to over one billion tonnes. In its NDC, Nigeria made  an 
unconditional contribution of 20 per cent below BAU that is consistent with the current development  trends and 
government policy priorities. Moreover, Nigeria can make a significant additional contribution with international support, 
in the form of finance and investment, technology and capacity building. The combined policies and measures can 
deliver i n a cost -effective manner direct development benefits to the country and reduce emissions 45 per cent below 
BAU.  
 
The rural electrification goal of the G overnment of N igeria  is to increase access to electricity to 75% and 90% by 2020 
and 2030 respectively , and a t least 10% of renewable energy mix by 2025. REA’S  off grid electrification strategy  
includes the following objectives for 2023: i) Promote the use of decentralised energy solutions to power households, 
communities & businesses ; ii) Develop 10,000 mini grids which will provide power to 14% of the population; iii) Provide 
reliable power supply for 250,000 SMEs ; iv) Deploy 5 million solar standalone systems for residential and SMEs ; and 
v) Support the FGN’s climate change obligations under the Paris Agreement, with respect to promoting renewable and 
reducing carbon emissions . 
 
Kenya  
Kenya strives to be a newly industrialized middle- income country by 2030. This development is expected to increase 
emissions from the energy sector. The current energy mix, however, is mainly clean with deliberate efforts by 
Government towards enhancing ge othermal, wind, solar and other clean energy development. Kenya seeks to abate 
its GHG emissions by 30% by 2030 relative to the BAU scenario of 143 MtCO2eq and in line with its sustainable 
development agenda. This is also subject to international support i n the form of finance, investment, technology 
development and transfer, and capacity building.  
 
To attain universal electricity access by 2022, the National Electrification Strategy and the Least Cost Geospatial plan 
estimate that over US$ 2.6 billion is required  to be invested in order to reach the unconnected households. The plan 
includes: (i) extension of the grid to reach 2.3 million households; (ii) establishment of mini grids to serve population 
clusters that are too distant from the network and wher e it is not economical to extend the existing grid to reach over 
35,000 households;  and (iii) 1.96 million  households to be served by solar home systems . 
 
Ethiopia   
Ethiopia intends to limit its net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 2030 to 145 Mt CO2e or lower. This would constitute 
a 255 MtCO2e reduction from the projected ‘business -as usual’ (BAU) emissions in 2030 or a 64% reduction from the 
BAU scenario in 2030. At 1.8 tCO2e, Ethiopia’s per capita GHG emissions are insignificant compared to total global 
emissions. If Ethiopia’s contribution is fully implemented, it would reduce per capita emissions to 1.1 tCO2e by 2030. 
The plan to mitigate GHG emissions is built on the following four pillars: i) Improving crop and livestock production; ii) 
Protecting and re- establishing forests; iii) Expanding electric power generation from renewable energy; and iv) 
Leapfrogging to clean  and energy efficient technologies in transport, industry and building sectors. Ethiopia has  already 
removed fossil fuel subsidies to enable enhanced generation and use of clean and renewable energy. 76.7% of 
Ethiopia’s population currently lacks access to clean and reliable energy sources, relying on wood for fuel. The National 
Electrification Program, launched in 2017, outlines a plan to reach universal access by 2025, aiming to supply 35% of 
the population with off -grid solutions.  
 
Guinea   
The inventory of greenhouse gases made for the Initial National Communication (based on emissions for 1994) shows 
that the energy, land- use change and forestry (LUCF) and agriculture sectors are the main emitters. As they therefore 
represent a strategic priority for Guinea in terms of mitigation, they have been included in the INDC. The emissions 
growth rate is taken as 4.4% per year over the period, with emissions rising from 2.1 to 2.7 tonnes CO2eq per capita. 
In total, that would mean a doubling over 20 years and emissions of some 55m tonnes CO2eq in 2030. In its NDC 
(Guinea, 2015), Guinea pledged to undertake GHG mitigation actions, conditional upon receipt of international support. 
Mitigation actions include producing 30 percent of its energy from renewable energy sources, creating an enabling 
environment for  energy efficiency measures, improving the energy performance of the Guinean economy, making 
exploration of mineral resources climate- compatible, and implementing sustainable forest management . In order to 
fight energy poverty, the government of Guinea has  put in place ambitious policies to expand access to electricity to 
reach 35% electrification by 2020 and 100% by 2030, as well as increasing the share of renewables.  
 
Engagement with NDAs  
As part of the requirement for national ownership and alignment with national needs, the AfDB team shared the funding 
proposal with the National Designated Authorities in Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Guinea. The AfDB


---
*Page 42*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 39 OF 5 5 
 
 presented LEAF, its obj ectives and anticipated impact to the Technical Committee of the NDAs and key relevant 
stakeholders. Presentations were followed by discussions on the programme, including feedback from stakeholders 
and clarification of any questions. In order to obtain NO Ls, AfDB has had calls as well with the rural electrification 
agencies (REA) in Nigeria, Ghana and Guinea. The programme was presented and alignment of objectives and 
complementarity to existing initiatives were discussed. The programme received endorsement from the three rural 
electrification agencies.  For the implementation of the Framework, AfDB will work closely with the NDAs in the 6 
countries and other relevant institutions, such as the rural electrification Agencies, to align the targeted transactions 
with other initiatives and with identifying potential pipeline projects and participation of LFIs. It further will support these 
institutions with TA to support an enabling environment for DRE investments and scaling of the sector.  
 
Engagement with LFIs 
Key to the success of this Framework is the participation of LFIs. The TA component plays a critical role in increasing 
the understanding of local banks and financing institutions of the DRE sector  and financing of DRE projects and their 
participation in t he targeted transactions.  During the market assessment, s ome banks have shown an interest in 
exploring products that could help to unlock more local finance for the renewables sector and interest to increase their 
capacity to identify, assess and therefor finance DRE opportunities. LEAF offers support to these institutions to 
strengthen and develop their in- house capacity and the development of potential financing products and credit policies 
with regard to DRE.  The AfDB team has also engaged local banks for potential pipeline projects under LEAF and other 
transactions. As of today, without the availability of de- risking instruments and the ability to improve pricing through 
some level of concessionally, it has proven difficult to include local FIs in the intended transactions.  The identification 
of FIs  for LEAF  will happen through: i) AfDB’s network and relationships with local financial institutions in the countries; 
ii) recommendations and relationships provided by the NDAs, REAs other country institutions ; iii) the consultants 
involved in the implementation of the capacity building component; iv) potential FIs identified in the market assessment; 
and v) recommendations from DRE companies or other stakeholders of the targeted transactions.  
 
Engagement of other stakeholders . 
AfDB is an important partner in developing the renewable energy sector, through originating, designing & implementing 
energy projects, supporting resource mobilization and providing climate finance, as well as policy dialogue. LEAF will 
from AfDB’s extensive netw ork and relations hips in the sector –  including DRE companies, financial institutions, 
sponsors and arrangers , industry organizations etc – to identify  potential  projects in alignment with the programme. 
Furthermore, LEAF will build on and is expected to c omplement established efforts by the Bank, such as interventions 
supported by the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA)  such as the Mini -Grid Market Development Programme.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality  to ensure the 
project is viable  without crow ding out private and other public investments.  Refer to section B .5 on the justification of 
GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total 
financing and mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to 
an appropriate benchmark.  
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF 
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.  
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, 
specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
Financial adequacy and appropriateness of concessionality . The Bank conducted market diagnostic studies on 
the financing needs for renewable energy including DRE in Kenya, Tunisia, Nigeria and Ghana to understand the 
market size of this opportunity.  
 
In addition to this analysis, the Bank  through the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA),  has conducted green 
mini- grid market studies in various Sub- Saharan countries in the context of its Green Mini -grid Market Development 
Program (GMG MDP). The GMG MDP initiative supports the scale- up of investment in commercially  viable green mini -
grid projects through a broad range of interventions to improve the enabling environment, including market intelligence,


---
*Page 43*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 40 OF 5 5 
 
 business development support, policy and regulatory support, access to finance, and quality assurance. The studies 
estimate the green mini -grid market financing need in Ethiopia, Guinea and Nigeria at approximately US$ 5.4 billion. 
Besides regulatory hurdles, the main barriers in the sector relate to limited access to finance, high costs of capital and 
challenges in the investment climate.   
 
Despite the combined existing DRE market size of US$ 7.2 billion in the six  countr ies, access to finance and local 
currency capital remain key hurdles to unlock the full DRE growth potential. The perceived risk of the sector, inability 
to assess attractiveness of DRE investments, lack of lending experience and local currency capital, ar e key limiting 
factors.  
 
The concessional debt and guarantee instruments in the Framework  are required to enhance local markets through 
de-risking the DRE sector and unlocking local currency debt to scale up decentralized renewables. GCF’s ability to 
invest in riskier tranches cataly zes AfDB co -investment and allows the combined funding approach of LEAF  to address 
the market barriers mentioned in this proposal. LFIs have showed some willingness to invest in the market providing 
they have access to de- risking instruments and capacity building. The Framework  provides least concessionality 
needed to make the targeted transactions viable and will crowd in private investment. The principle of minimal 
concessionality will be applied for all considered Framework’s projects. By de -risking the sector, the Framework  unlocks 
and increases local currency fi nance and builds lending experience and confidence in DRE initiatives, demonstrating 
the opportunity and potential of DRE financing.  
 
The financial models demonstrate that the concessionality will reduce the all -in cost of debt, resulting in acceptable 
debt service coverage ratios  (DSCR) . Without the concessionality , the DSCR will be too  low to support commercially  
viable project .


---
*Page 44*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 41 OF 5 5 
 
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical Framework  in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of  any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please  select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows 
as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseli
ne Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term Final  E.2. C ore indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF  core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  1.207.250 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  28.862.364 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project costs 959,900,000    USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  170,900 ,000  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  28.862.364  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  33.26   USD  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  5.92    USD  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  789,000,000    USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  -   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  789,000,000    USD  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 4.62   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  -  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  4.62  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct   
Indirect   
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide 
the data per country in annex 1 7. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct   
Indirect   
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in 
annex 1 7.


---
*Page 45*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 42 OF 5 5 
 
 M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -
emission energy access and power 
generation  M1.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2eq) reduced or avoided -  
gender -sensitive 
energy access power 
generation  Bank 
supervision 
reports , 
reports   0 523.877  
 4.1 million  Demand for 
renewable 
energy is 
increasing.  
Beneficiaries 
have the 
resources 
necessary to 
conduct 
maintenance of 
RE assets .  
M3.0 Increased 
financing available for 
low-emission energy 
access and power generation  M3.1 Volume of 
finance leveraged by Fund funding (USD, 
million)  Bank 
supervision 
reports , 
reports  0 473 789 There is a 
dynamic DRE private sector in place that is able 
to absorb the 
financing.  
FIs are willing to 
enter DRE 
sector, given 
derisking is 
provided and 
capacity is 
strengthened to 
engage the 
sector.  
 
E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verificatio
n (MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term)  Final  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large low -
emission power 
suppliers  M6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy capacity 
installed, generated 
and/or rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF support   Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports , 
industry 
reports  0 118 386 The 
decentralized 
renewable 
energy sector is 
growing with an 
increasing 
number and 
growing private 
sector 
companies .  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large low -
emission power 
suppliers  M6.2 Number of 
households and 
individuals (males and 
females) with improved 
access to low -emission 
energy sources ,  of which 
% women   
Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports ; 
industry 
reports  0 646.000 
househo
lds,  
3.32 
million 
benefici
aries, of 
which 
50% 
women  1.18 
million 
house
holds, 
5.9 
million  
benefi
ciaries
, of 
which Demand for 
renewable 
energy is 
increasing.


---
*Page 46*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 43 OF 5 5 
 
  50% 
wome
n 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems  M5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
low-emission planning 
and development and 
their effective 
implementation ( Number 
of countries that have 
updated regulations, 
systems or framewor ks at 
(sub- )national level  
supporting DRE 
development)  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports , 
publication,  
Policy 
documents, 
national 
regulations, 
fiscal 
instruments  0 3 6 Governments 
are encouraging 
greener energy 
solutions to 
diversify the 
energy mix  and 
looking to 
develop 
enabling policies 
to support the 
DRE  sector .  
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing conditions, progress 
and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 1.1. Deployment of 
SHS systems, C&I Systems 
and mini -grid connections   Amount of local debt 
financing deployed through 
the Framework  (US$ 
equivalent )  
Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports  0 45 million  100 million  DRE 
companies 
require local 
currency 
financing.  
 
DREs having 
sufficient 
technical 
capacity to 
develop 
bankable 
projects 
rapidly . 
# of DRE companies with 
increased access to 
finance through the 
Framework  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports  0 10 20  
# of (asset -backed) 
facilities reaching financial 
close  through the 
Framewor k Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports, 
Bank 
reporting  0 10 15-20  Although more 
complex and 
still novel, DRE 
companies are 
looking at 
securitization 
structures to 
leverage 
receivables 
and obtain off -
balance sheet 
financing.  
# of new SHS, mini -grid 
and captive power 
contracts entered into with 
customers , of which % 
women  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports , 
Industry 
reports 
(GOGLA off-
grid solar 
market 
reports)  0 SHS: 
606,400  
MG: 
39,638  
CP: 78 SHS: 
936,000  
MG:                                
243.556  
CP:395 Demand for 
renewable 
energy is 
increasing.


---
*Page 47*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 44 OF 5 5 
 
  # of jobs created  in DRE 
companies , of which % 
women  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports  0 16,600, 
of which 
30% 
women  52.000 , of 
which 
30% 
women  Additional 
financing will 
expand 
business 
operations.  
 
Profits will be 
invested into 
operations 
scale -up. 
Output 2.1 DRE companies 
benefiting from C -19 
recovery finance  Amount of C-19 recovery 
finance provided through 
the Framework (US$ 
equivalent)  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
 0 70 70 
 
# of DRE companies 
accessing C -19 recovery 
finance  Bank 
supervision 
reports  0 15 15 
Output 3.1 Increased 
capacity of local banks/FIs 
to engage and finance DRE  # FIs that received training  Bank 
supervision 
reports  
Reports  0 10 20 Banks are 
interested to 
finance to DRE 
sector 
provided they 
have increased 
capacity 
required to do 
so. 
Output 3.2 Laws, policies, 
fiscal instruments and/or 
regulations are adopted to 
facilitate DRE private sector 
development and 
investment  # of new laws, policies, 
fiscal instruments and/or 
regulations are adopted in 
target countries  National 
policy 
documents, 
fiscal 
policies/regu
lations, 
decrees, 
legal texts  0 3 6 Governments 
are 
encouraging 
greener energy 
solutions to 
diversify the 
energy mix 
and looking to 
develop 
enabling 
policies to 
support  DRE 
development.  
Output 3.3  Adaptation 
impact potential is validated  # of adaptation 
assessments conducted  Bank 
supervision 
reports, 
adaptation 
reports  0 6 6  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the 
implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
 1.  Mobilise and de-risk 
commercial investment in 
SHS, mini -grids, C&I  Derisk DRE projects by 
providing guarantees and 
subordinated debt instruments  Activity 1.1.1: provide 
concessional guarantees to 
unlock commercial investment  
  
Activity 1.1.2: provide subordinated concessional debt instruments to cover 
commercial investor s risk and 
make concessional capital available 
 
  
Activity 1.1.3: Develop 
structured facilities and 
receivables -backed financing 7-10 transactions benefitting 
from a guarantee, and 7- 10 
transaction benef itting from 
sub-ordinated debt provided 
by the GCF and AfDB; 
including securitization structures.


---
*Page 48*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 45 OF 5 5 
 
  transactions to mitigate 
consumers default risk  
  
Activity 1.1.4: Deploy 
concessional sub -debt and 
guarantees to finance a 
portfolio of DRE businesses 
through Financial 
Intermediaries (holding 
company, Fund, multi DRE 
companies SPV –  
aggregators)  
  
Activity 1.1.5: Deploy tenor extension guarantees to LFIs 
 
 
 2 Deploy and mobilise 
COVID -19 recovery funding 
for DRE companies in mini -
grid, C&I, SHS Provide concessional 
financing to unlock additional 
commercial funding to support 
COVID -19 recovery plans of 
DRE companies   Activity 2.1.1: Provide 
concessional debt to DRE companies through a co-financing Platform with debt 
funds (Covid-19 Off -grid 
Recovery Platform) or the 
Energy for Healthcare 
Programme to scale-up 
electrification of health 
infrastructure.   USD 50 million c ommercial 
capital leveraged  
 
1 transaction benefitting from 
concessional debt to support DRE recovery plans  
3.1.1 Provide TA support to 
LFIs to increase their investment in the DRE space  
 
3.1.2 Support structuring of 
financially sound and strong 
receivabl es backed and other 
financing facilities  
 
3.2 Support governments in 
enabling policies for private 
investment in SHS, Mini -grid, 
C&I 
 3.3 Conduct  country -level 
adaptation assessments  
 
3.4 Support gender 
assessment and gender 
action plans, indicators and 
monitoring & evaluation 
activities  The capacity building effort will support LFIs in engaging 
the DRE sector and the development of enabling 
environments in the target 
countries to increase access 
to finance to DRE.  
 Assess adaptation impact 
potential  DRE  
 
Development of a gender 
action plan at project level –  
monitoring & evaluation of the implementation of the plan  Activity 3.1.1: Capacity 
building of  FIs to increase 
their understanding of the 
market and identify, assess 
and finance DRE companies  
  
Activity 3.1.2: Support the structuring of strong and 
viable innovative financing 
structure
 
 Activity: 3.2.1: TA to focus countries to support the 
development of enabling 
policies and frameworks  
 
Activity 3.3.1: Conduct country level adaptation assessment 
for each country  
 
Activity 3.4.1:  Conduct 
national gender assessments 
and refine gender action plans 
for each country  
 
Activity 3. 4.1:  Support the 
development of strategies and 
marketing campaig ns for DRE 
companies to increase share of female customers  
 Activity 3.4.3: Develop gender inclusive recruitment and HR 
policies to increase women at 
the workforce of DRE 
companies  
 TA provided to 20 FIs  
 
TA support to 10- 15 
transactions  
 
TA support to 6 country 
governments/REA/related 
agencies  and to strengthen 
systems and frameworks, 
including digitalisation of 
licensing, data collection and 
real time monitoring of 
electrification progress  
 6 adaptation assessments 
conducted  
 
6 national gender 
assessments and refined 
action plans developed  
5-10 strategies and marketing  
campaigns developed for 
DRE companies to increase 
share of female customers  
 5-10
 gender inclusive 
recruitment and HR policies 
developed to increase women 
at the workforce of DRE 
companies  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 49*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 46 OF 5 5 
 
 Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the project/programme 
specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final evaluations. Describe Accr edited 
Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as 
relevant, identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on projec t 
indicators, implementation challenges and financial status.  
 
Monitoring and Reporting  
AfDB – as the accredited executing agency – will be responsible for the overall monitoring of the Framework and reporting 
periodically to the GCF under the terms to be agreed between the AfDB and GCF.  
 
Monitoring and reporting of the Framework wi ll be guided and managed by the AfDB project lifecycle management Framework and 
relevant internal policies and procedures . The monitoring and reporting will comprise of two segments: operational and financial. 
The operational monitoring will be based on the Framework level performance indicators , including sex -disaggregated indicators 
where appropriate and possible, and the period reporting will consist of:  
(a) Progress towards results reports;  
(b) Monitoring reports;  
(c) Mid-term review; and  
(d) Implementation completio n report.  
 
Operational monitoring will be done by the Renewable Energy Department whereas he financial monitoring of underlying 
transactions will be the responsibility of the Portfolio Management department of the AfDB. The Bank will carry out country l evel 
annual supervision missions to assess the performance of the sub-projects  including gender and inclusion targets  and progress 
towards results. The reporting requirements will be built into the financing agreements for the sub- projects. For lending done by local 
FIs/ Banks, each financial intermediary will be responsible for collecting and reporting the operational and financial monitoring data.  
 
The Framework level targets are indicative; the eventual targets will depend on the sub- projects approved under the Framework. 
The targets will be updated based on the actual portfolio and reporting to GCF in the annual reporting cycle.  
 
Evaluation  
The end of Framework evaluation of the LEAF Framework will comply with the AfDB and GCF evaluation policy. An independent 
evaluation of the projects will  track key performance indicators and results, as well as gender and other inclusion targets  will be 
carried out after the completion of implementation period of the Framework. In addition, the Bank will consider deploying qualitative 
evaluations through surveys, for example, during implementation to collect stakeholder and beneficiary feedback on the outcomes 
of the facility.


---
*Page 50*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 47 OF 5 5 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
Please describe financial, technical,  operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as 
well as fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1: Framework delivery risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
The Framework  needs to generate a sufficient pipeline of viable transactions to fully consume the GCF funding. Due 
to the nascent aspect of the DRE / energy access market, the projects may take time to develop.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigat ion measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
A pipeline of projects amounting to approximately one- third of the total Framework  (~ US$ 259 million) is already 
identified prior to inception. The Framework  can start deploying funds from inception while further developing the 
pipeline. It is expected that the facility will have a ramp- up period to catalyze additional projects. This r isk will be further 
mitigated via heightened Framework  visibility and pro -active engagement with the sector to identify and nurture 
transaction opportunities. Despite uncertainty in the sector, the rapid development of solar technology highlights that 
there is a high potential for renewable energy solutions, not only for off -grid areas but also for ‘unreliable -grid’ areas.  
Selected Risk Factor 2: Repayment Risk   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium/  (very) High risk  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
The expected losses for each layer will be determined at project level. First loss and sub- tranche layer will potentially 
be between the high-risk category  and very high risk category , depending on the underlying project dynamics.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The selection of beneficiaries will be done through detailed assessment criteria. Each financin g will be approved after 
comprehensive due diligence and through the internal credit approval process of AfDB. The Bank will evaluate each 
sponsor’s and FIs ’ execution capability to service loans . Transactions benefit from a specialist in financial transaction 
advisory  to ensure included transactions meet eligibility criteria, financing structures are solid and financially sound and 
assess risks and proactive mitigation strategies . Further, the blended finance products offered by the Framew ork will 
be priced to keep the loans affordable and sustainable for borrowers. Lastly, the financing in local currency will shield 
the projects from forex risks.  
Selected Risk Factor 3: Financing Risk   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description


---
*Page 51*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 48 OF 5 5 
 
 Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Inability to mobilize sufficient local currency financing, as local banks and FIs face high cost of borrowing, high collateral  
requirements, tenor mismatches or limited willingness or ability to take risk exposure. The deteriorating credit conditions 
of Banks due to the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic has made local FIs  even more risk averse.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The local currency financing is the critical for the success of the Framework . The revenue stream of the projects is 
specified in local currencies of their country. The local Banks / FIs face interest rate and macroeconomic risks in the 
markets. To ensure risk coverage, they have high collateral requirements. The credit enhancement products in the 
Framework  are specifically designed to alleviate the constraints of local banks and FIs.  
Selected Risk Factor 4: Implementation risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Weak government commitment and regulatory changes/ challenges may impede the delivery of the Framework . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Successful Framework  implementation depends on the technical & operational capacity of the local FIs and regulators. 
The Framework  includes TA t o develop the capacity of local FIs and developers. Moreover, the TA will also support 
development standardized PPAs, concession agreements, receivable backed financing documents, and sound 
underwriting Framework s for DRE businesses.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 : Regulatory risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Poor  regulatory framework to deploy DRE at scale and support private investments may impede the delivery of the 
Framework . Mini-grid, C&I and SHS projects are exposed to regulatory risk. For example, if the government decides to 
increase the import duty of solar systems or to reduce the net billing tariff for C&I.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Successful Framework  implementation depends on the capacity of r egulators. The Framework  includes TA to develop 
the capacity of sector regulators and support them in develop ing an enabling environment for private sector 
investments .  
Selected Risk Factor 6: FX risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Low Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
GCF and AfDB provide guarantees and sub debt in USD, while the underlying loan might be in local currency.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
To the extent possible LEAF will seek to avoid currency mismatches in the operation.  While the GCF instruments are 
always provided in USD, t he Bank can provide local currency debt or PCG where appropriate. Currency hedging 
strategies to mitigate against foreign exchange risk will be elaborated on a project -by-project basis by the AfDB 
transaction team for transactions where the instruments are provided in USD, and the underlying loans are


---
*Page 52*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 49 OF 5 5 
 
 denominated in another, local currency . For debt provided in USD, the currency risk is to be borne by the borrower , 
and the borrower will develop a hedgi ng strategy, which could include a hedging counterparty with FX forwards, swaps 
etc. The exposure for PGCs will be capped to the maximum guarantee amount in USD (spot the guarantee at the FX 
rate).  
Selected Risk Factor 7 : Environmental and Social  Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low 
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Environmental and Social r isks relate to the failure to identify and assess potential impacts and implement and monitor 
plans and systems intended to avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts. Not all underlying projects are known at 
inception. The beneficiaries may fail to comply with AfDB or GCF E&S requirements.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
As an integral part of the Bank’s due diligence process, potential Framework  beneficiaries , including  DRE companies , 
and FIs, will be assessed based on their commitment and capacity to manage and/or improve their E&S management 
and performance. The ESS category of the projects will be confirmed based on the outcome of the E&S assessment . 
The financing will be extended to projec ts limited to ESS Category B. The projects will also be required to obtain local 
ESIA approval and provide an ESMP plan to maintain compliance with AfDB, GCF and local E&S requirements prior 
to approval. E&S monitoring and reporting from the beneficiaries and intermediary FIs/Banks will be included as 
covenant to the financing agreements.


---
*Page 53*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 50 OF 5 5 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale 
for assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments 
developed for the proposal ( for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc .). Provide 
a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. P resent the key environmental and social risks and impacts 
and the measures on how the project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage 
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards . If the proposed project or 
programme i nvolve s investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management 
plans by the E xecuting Entities  (EEs)  and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe t he capacity of the 
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. 
Include a description of the project/programme- level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi -
stakeholder consultations undertaken f or the project/programme, the plan of the A ccredited Entity (AE) and EEs to 
continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of 
the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of th e GCF Information Disclosure Policy  and 
Environmental and Social Policy.  
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the 
development of  an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy .  
 Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the 
environmental and social risk category as annex  6.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework  (ESM F) is being developed for the LEAF  Framework . All 
underlying projects are expected to comply with the do-no-harm principles such as adherence to applied Environmental 
and Social safeguard practices (E&S) to be managed through the implementation of the ESMF . Potential projects and 
sponsors  will be assessed on the compliance with the  ESM F and requirements of  the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards 
Systems to ensure they meet the requirements in terms of polic ies, procedures and organizational structure for the 
implementation and monitoring of the projects . The ESMF will outline eligibility criteria and ensure that underlying 
projects are all limited to Cat egory  B.  
 
Underlying projects will be  assessed by the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards team. Specifically, the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework s of each sponsor will be evaluated and assessed to meet the 
lending requirements of the AfDB  and Framework  ESMF . The Bank’s  requirements are contained within the Integrated 
Safeguards System (ISS)  (AfDB, 2013) .  
 A summary of the potential negative E&S impacts for each type of technology (i.e. SHS, GMG and C&I solutions) has 
been included in ESMF . In summary, negative impacts relate to:  
 Social:  Physical presence of workers, equipment and materials on site; health and safety issues; and social 
conflicts. Mitigation: Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) will be required for all underlyi ng 
projects ; detailed and step by step E&S responsibilities for key players for each project component  
 Land acquisition, resettlement, livelihood restoration . Physical and economic displacement of people, 
property, assets and resources; waste handling and disposal, wastewater effluent management and disposal; air emissions (from vehicles/machinery and dust), water and soil contamination, accidents, noise and vibration, impacts on resources, degradation on items of cultural heritage significance etc. Mitigation: DRE companies 
will be required to prepare resettlement, livelihood restoration measures where applicable in line with the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) . 
 Lack of awareness on E&S risks and impacts . Mitigation: Sensitization and dialogue via various methods of 
stakeholder engagement  
 Battery disposal and recycling  (lead- acid and lithium ion ). Mitigation: Require SHS, GMG, Captive Power 
companies and other Private companies to put in place policies and procedures with regard to battery s torage, 
collection, recycling, and disposal practices . 
 
The s takeholder Engagement Plan & Grievance Mechanism  confirmed in the ESMF  provides the process to be 
followed for stakeholder engagement and disclosure for each underlying project ; the categorisation of the subproject 
will determine the nature and level of environmental and social investigations, information disclosure and stak eholder 
engagement required.  Through st akeholder identification and engagement,  the project will  establish which


---
*Page 54*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 51 OF 5 5 
 
 organizations and individuals may be directly or indirectly affected (positively and negatively ) or have an interest in the 
project s. An example for stakeholder groups is  confirmed in the ESMF, however this list should be adapted to fit the 
specific project and updated and modified over the course of the project.  
 
DRE companies will be required to set up a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to ensure that all complaints from 
local communities are dealt with appropriately, with corrective actions being implemented, and the grievant being 
informed of the outcome.  The objective of the GRM is to provide a platform for project affected persons to voice their 
concerns and opinions related to the project, in particular with regard to land acquisition and resettlement, as well as 
to address and resolve grievances promptly, fairly and transparently . 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme -level gender action plan that is aligned with 
the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy . Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process 
used to develop both documents . Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key 
recommendations (how to address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment . Indicate if stakeholder 
consultations have taken  place and describe the key inputs integrat ed into  the action plan , including : how addressing 
the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from funds investment ; key gender -related results to be 
expected from the project /programme with targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to 
ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.  
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan as annex 8 .  
 
The gender aspects of the LEAF  aim to address and reduce gender inequality, strengthen stakeholder commitment 
and deliver better accountability to both men and women. The Framework will especially contribute at the sector level 
to high- quality, more comprehensive, systematic and participatory sex -disaggregated data collection, as well as to 
qualitative and quantifiable gender analysis and action plans prior to the implementation of its activities. Therefore, the 
gender assessment and gender action plans are aligned with the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy.  
 
The gender focus and activities of the LEAF  are based on the Bank's previous work in the renewable energy access 
sector and gender asessments conducted for  the countries targeted. As we are at the earl y stage of the Framework , 
local consultations with national stakeholders involved in the gender and renewable energy thematic  will be further 
conducted by a dedicated gender expert recruited for LEAF . Meanwhile, the country strategic papers, country gender 
profiles, and the database of the countries, of the Multilateral Development Banks and UN agencies were consulted to 
compile current gender gaps in each of the 6 countries selected for the LEAF . The  LEAF  will strive for equal participation 
and benefits from funds investment for women and men by supporting the collection of sex -disaggregated data, by 
including sex -disaggregated indicators and targets as well as sub- categories of women in the gender ac tion plans.  
 Key findings of the gender assessments reveal that although the LEAF  countries have different national electrification 
rates , there are sim ilar remaining gender gaps  in access to and control over energy . For the many women living in non-
central areas of the countries targeted by LEAF , promoting decentralized affordable, and reliable renewable energy is 
crucial to improving girls' and women's living conditions.  The gender action plan includes specific int erventions to 
increase women as customers and women in the DRE workforce.  
 
According to the gender assessment, women from the countries selected for the LEAF  are suffering from the indoor air 
pollution, the lack of data, and from the lack of economic empow erment due to difficult access to finance and absence 
of appropriate education on business expansion management. Women are little involved in the energy sector as 
consumers , as well  as producers and agents of change.  
 The gender action plan includes specif ic activities focused on increasing access to renewable energy for women and 
girls, including FHHs and poor households, benefiting their health, safety and productive activity. This impact will be 
achieved by targeting gender specific activities dedicated to: (i) increasing access to DRE solutions, (ii) fostering job 
creation; (i ii) generating data, and ( iv) building or reinforcing the gender -responsive capacities of DRE companies.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including  the financial monitoring systems,  financial 
accounting,  auditing , and disbursement structure and methods . Refer to  section  B.4 on implementation arrangements 
as necessary.


---
*Page 55*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 52 OF 5 5 
 
 Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g . procurement implementation arrangements and the 
role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that 
will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. P rovide a detailed procurement plan as annex  10.   
 
Due Diligence. Each sub -project under the Framework  will be processed individually by the Bank. Any funding 
commitment to an underlying transaction will be subject to AfDB’s credit evaluation, due diligence and approval 
procedures. Findings and recommendations undergo a rigorous internal review process bef ore they are cleared by 
Senior Management to be presented to the Bank’s Board of Directors for approval, including various interdepartmental 
committee reviews.  
  
AfDB will apply its diligence policies including Know -Your -Customer (KYC), Anti -Money Launderi ng (AML) and 
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) procedures and operational safeguards,  and other evaluations to 
sponsors. The Integrity Due Diligence (IDD) analysis will be carried out on underlying projects to identify, assess, 
mitigate, manage and monitor potential loss from integrity risks and to ensure that funds are used for their intended 
purposes. The analysis includes identification of beneficial ownership, assessment of civil and regulatory backgrounds, 
identification of sanctioned persons and entities, and identification of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) and other 
high-risk relationships. Furthermore, through the bank’s established guidelines on anti -fraud, anti -corruption and anti -
money laundering policies, the AfDB ensures that its fi nancing operations and investments are not used for illegal or 
tax evasion purposes.  
  
Financial Management. Financial management will follow the AfDB’s Guidelines for Financial Management and 
Financial Analysis of Projects, which describes the Banks’ poli cies and procedures with regard to financial management 
and analysis of projects and programs. The implementation of the grants will follow the AfDB’s financial management 
system, which covers budget planning and implementation, procurement, financial stat ement preparation and reporting, 
as well as audit. The AfDB will conduct an assessment of financial management of the executing agencies during the 
final appraisal. The purpose of this assessment is to evaluate the executing agencies’ accounting systems and internal 
control systems and verify that their standards are adequate for effective implementation of the transactions.  
  
Supervision and Portfolio Management. All funding commitments will be monitored for compliance and eligibility by 
the Bank. AfDB is responsible for and will undertake monitoring and reporting activities of the underlying transactions 
following Bank policies and procedures, and ensuring that it monitors and reports on development, climate change, 
and other relevant indicators/outcomes. The AfDB will ensure that the project portfolio are diligently managed, through 
close dialogue with clients and periodic monitoring and evaluation to enhance the prospects of: i) delivering expected 
development outcomes; ii) minimizing harmful environmental and social impacts over the course of projects’ economic 
life; iii) meeting debt repayment obligations for the loans and iv) successful implementation of the Framework . At least, 
annual supervision missions will be organized to review implementation progress and performance of the activities 
under the Framework . 
 
Procurement . The selection and engagement of consultants and the procurement of services for the Technical 
Assistance component will be carried out according to AfDB’s “Procurement Policy for AfDB Funded Operations” (dated 
August 2015). The objective of the AfDB procurement policy is to maximize development effectiveness while ensuring 
fair, transparent, competitive, and value for money in the use of funds. The policy sets out principles that apply to 
procurement of goods, works, and services by the recipient of the funds f rom the Bank.  
 
A procurement plan has been developed for the services to be delivered under the TA component of  the LEAF  
Framework  in accordance with its specific context and requirements. The procurement plan will be approved along with 
project appraisal  document. The beneficiary of Framework  funding will be required to follow the approved procurement 
plan. Any deviations from the procurement policy will be dealt according to Bank policies and procedures. The AfDB 
will sign the contract with the services providers for the TA.  
 
Audit 
The underlying TA projects which benefit government institutions will be subject to AfDB’s audit policies and will be 
audited annually by external auditors acceptable to the Bank and at the completion of projects for which TA support 
has been provided.  
   
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in


---
*Page 56*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 53 OF 5 5 
 
 confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclos ure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 57*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 54 OF 5 5 
 
  
References  
AEP, 2020, Africa Energy Portal , Accessed in 2020 at: https://africa -energy -portal.org  
AfDB, 2013, ‘AfDB Integrated Safeguard System’, Accessed in 2020 at:  
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Policy -Documents/December_2013_ -
_AfDB%E2%80%99S_Integrated_Safeguards_System__ -_Policy_Statement_and_Operational_Safeguards.pdf  
AfDB GMG, 2017, ‘Mini Grid Market Opportunity Assessment: Ethiopia’, AfDB Green Minigrid, Accessed in 
2020 at:  
https://greenminigrid.afdb.org/sites/default/files/GMG%20MDP%20Document%20Series%20Market%20Asses
sment%20Ethiopia%2003 -05-17.pdf  
 
AfDB GMG, 2020, ‘Mini Grid Market Opportunity Assessment: Guinea Conakry, AfDB Green Minigrid, Accessed 
in 2020 at:  
https://greenminigrid.afdb.org/sites/default/files/GMG%20MDP%20Document%20Series%20Market%20Asses
sment%20Ethiopia%2003 -05-17.pdf  
 
BNEF, 2019, ‘Solar for Businesses in Sub -Saharan Africa’, Responsibility, Accessed in 2020 at:  
https://www.responsability.com/sites/default/files/2019 -01/Solar -for-Businesses- in-Sub-Saharan -Africa.pdf  
CEPA, 2019, ‘Country Diagnosti c Study for the African Credit Enhancement Platform Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya and 
Tunisia’, AfDB , by Cambridge Economic Policy Associates LLP (CEPA)  
 
Cities Alliance, 2017, ‘The Climate Change and Energy Debate in Ethiopia’, Cities Alliance, Accessed in 2020 a t: 
https://www.citiesalliance.org/sites/default/files/Climate%20Change%20and%20Energy%20Ethiopia.pdf  
DFID (2015). https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a0896b40f0b652dd0001fe/LitRev-
EnergyAccessandAdaptation -Final -2.pdf.  
 
Ethiopian Energy Authority, 2020, ‘National Off -Grid Electrification Forum: Mini - Grid Action: Regulatory 
Framework - Perspectives On Min i-Grid’, ESMAP, Accessed in 2020 at: 
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/Presentations/2.3%20EEA%20Mini -Grids%20Action%20Forum -
conve rted.pdf  
 
GOGLA (2020). Standardised Impact Metrics for the Off -Grid Solar Energy Sector  
 
GOGLA (2018). Powering Opportunity The Economic Impact of Off -Grid Solar  
 
Guinea, 2015, ‘Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) Under The United Nations Framework 
Convention On Climate Change’, UNFCCC, Accessed in 2020 at: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Guinea%20First/INDC_Guinea_english_versio
n%20UNFCCC.pdf  
IEA, 2017, ‘World Energy Outlook’, IEA , https://www.iea.org/reports/world -energy -outlook- 2017  
IEA, 2020, IEA Electricity Information https://www.iea.org/subscribe -to-data -services/electricity -statistics  
Indexmundi, 2020, ‘Guine a Energy Profile’, Indexmundi , Accessed in 2020 at:  
https://www.indexmundi.com/guinea/energy_profile.html  
IRENA, 2015, ‘Africa 2030, Roadmap for a renewable energy future’, IRENA , available at (2020), 
https://www.irena.org/ -/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2015/IRENA_Africa_2030_REmap_2015_low -
res.pdf  
Johnson, F.X., Mayaka, E.K., Ogeya, M., Wanjiru, H., Ngare, I, (2017), ‘Transitions Pathways and Risk Analysis 
for Climate Change Mitigation And Adaptation Strategies - Energy Access And C limate Change In Sub- Saharan


---
*Page 58*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 55 OF 5 5 
 
 Africa: Linkages, Synergies And Conflicts’.  Transrisk .   available at (2020) http://transrisk -
project.eu/sites/default/files/Documents/4.4.3_Energy%20Access%20and%20Climate%20Change%20in%20Su
b-Saharan%20Africa%20 -%20linkages%2C%20synergies%20and%20conflicts.pdf  
Kenya, 2015, ‘Kenya ’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)’, UNFCCC, Accessed in 2020 at: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocument s/Kenya%20First/Kenya_NDC_20150723.pdf  
Kenya, 2018, ‘Kenya National Electrification Strategy: Key Highlights’, World Bank Group, Accessed in 2020 at: 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/413001554284496731/Kenya -National -Electrification -Strategy -KNES- Key-
Highlights -2018.pdf  
Kumi, E. N., 2017, ‘The Electricity situation in Ghana: Challenges and Opportunities’, Center for Global 
Development , Accessed in 2020 at: https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/electricity -situation -ghana -
challenges -and-opportunities.pdf  
Multi -Tier Framework, 2020, ‘Tracking progress toward sustainable energy goals’, Multi -Tier Framework , 
Accessed in 2020 at: https://mtfenergyaccess.esmap.org/methodology  
Trading economics, 2020,  ‘Ghana average precipitation’, Trading economics , accessed in 2020 at: 
https://tradingeconomics.com/ghana/precipitation  
Trading economics, 2020b, ‘Nigeria Temperature’, Trading economics , accessed in 2020 at: 
https://tradingeconomics.com/nigeria/temperature  
UN, 2019, ‘Accelerating SGD 7 Achievement SDG 7 Policy Briefs In Support Of The High -Level Political Forum 
2019’, Accessed  in 2020 at:  
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/22877un_final_online_webview.pdf  
USAID, 2018, ‘Climate Risk Profile, Guinea’, USAI D, Accessed in 2020 at: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/Guinea_CRP_Final_0.pdf  
Verner, D., Tréguer, D., Redwood, J., Christensen, J., Mcdonnell, R., Elbert, C., and Konishi Y., 2017, ‘Climate 
Variability, Drought, And Drought Management In Tunisia’s Agricultural Sector’, World Bank Group, Accessed in 2020 at: 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/318211538415630621/pdf/130406- WP-P159856-
Tunisia -WEB2.pdf  
World Bank, 2020, World Bank data, Accessed in 2020 at: https://data.worldbank.org/


---
*Page 59*
---

Page 56


---
*Page 60*
---

Page 57


---
*Page 61*
---

Page 58


---
*Page 62*
---

Page 59


---
*Page 63*
---

Page 60


---
*Page 64*
---

Page 61


---
*Page 65*
---

Page 62


---
*Page 66*
---

Page 63


---
*Page 67*
---

Page 64


---
*Page 68*
---

Page 65 
Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Leveraging Energy Access Finance (LEAF)  Framework  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  African Development Bank  (AfDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Nigeria, and Tunisia 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, May 26, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  English is the working language of Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana , 
and Ethiopia . French is the working language for Tunisia 
and Guinea . 
Link to disclosure  Ethiopia  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Ghana  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report


---
*Page 69*
---

Page 66 
Guinea  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -
programme-de- financement -de- lacces -lenergie- leaf-p-z1-
ff0-020 -rapport -cges  
Kenya  
English: 
https://www.afdb.or g/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Nigeria  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Tunisia  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -
programme-de- financement -de- lacces -lenergie- leaf-p-z1-
ff0-020 -rapport -cges  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) provides in Appendix J guidance on the preparation 
of an ESMS in accordance with the requirements for 
Category I-2 programme  (equivalent to AfDB category 2) *. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, May 26, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  English is the working language of Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana , 
and Ethiopia . French is the working language for Tunisia 
and Guinea . 
Link to disclosure  Ethiopia  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report


---
*Page 70*
---

Page 67 
Ghana  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Guinea  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -
programme-de- financement -de- lacces -lenergie- leaf-p-z1-
ff0-020 -rapport -cges  
Kenya  
English: 
https://www.afdb.or g/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Nigeria  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Tunisia  
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational -
leveraging- energy -access- finance -framework -leaf-
programme-p- z1-ff0-020 -esmf -report  
Fr
ench:  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/multinational -
programme-de- financement -de- lacces -lenergie- leaf-p-z1-
ff0-020 -rapport -cges  
Other link(s)  AfDB Involuntary Resettlement Policy:  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/bank-
group -involuntary -resettlement -policy -11342  
Remarks  The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) provides in Appendix B guidance on the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), in accordance with 
the requirements for Category I-2 programme  (equivalent 
to AfDB category 2) *. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, May 26, 2021  
Place  African Development Bank  
Ethiopia Country Office  Get House Building, Bole Road 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia


---
*Page 71*
---

Page 68 
African Development Bank   
Ghana Country Office  
No. 2 A2 Rangoon Lane  
Rangoon House, (3rd Floor), Cantonments, Accra  
P.M.B. MB 59, Ministries
Accra, Ghana
A
frican Development Bank  
Guinea  Country Office  
2emeAvenue, Villas n° 3 & 4, Cités des Nations, Boulbinet, 
Commune de Kaloum  
BP 6347, Conakry,  
République de Guinée  
A
frican Development Bank  
East Africa Regional Hub  
Khushee Tower  
Longonot   Road, Upper Hill  
Nairobi, Kenya  
A
frican Development Bank  
Nigeria  Country Office  
1521 Cadastral Zone A0  
Off Memorial Close  
Central Business District  
Abuja, Nigeria  
A
frican Development Bank  
Tunisia Country Office  
Immeuble Zahrabed  
Avenue du Dollar, Les Berges Du Lac II  
Tunis 1053, Tunisia  
Due to the COVID -19 pandemic and measures to contain the 
virus, AfDB offices are temporary closed.  The documents are 
available at the given locations as soon as the situation 
allows.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Wednesday, October 20, 2021  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, June 28, 2021  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
*Subsequent to  the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on Friday, 28 May 2021 , the
following text has been added: “(equivalent to AfDB category 2)” .
__
______


---
*Page 72*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 69
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP168 
Proposal name:  Leveraging Energy Access Finance (LEAF) Framework 
Accredited entity:  African Development Bank  (AfDB)  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential      Scale : High  
1. Access to energy is a critical challenge in much of Africa, and access to clean energy  even
mo
re so . While considerable progress has been made over the last decade, lack of energy  acce ss
co
ntinues to hold back the economic and social development of the continent, while also
contributing to continuing environmental degradation. In the commercial and indus trial sector,
where grid -power is available, it is often unreliable and expensive.
2. Systematically addressing these challenges needs to involve the private financial sector ,
as
 they  is of a scale that goes beyond what development finance institutions and g overnments
can achieve on their own . Nevertheless, there are considerable barriers to delivering th e
r
equired finance through commercial financial institutions, related to actual and perceived risk ,
l
ack of familiarity  with the sector and clients, lack  access to dedicated wholesale finance ,
cu
rrency mismatch lack of capacity in the financial institutions and a lack of demonstrated
scaleable business models.
3. The LEAF programme  will address these challenges in six African countries,  Ethiopi a,
G
hana, Guinea, Kenya, Nigeria and Tunisia, through investments in  distributed renewable
energy (DRE) installations, including  minigrids, solar home systems (SHS) and renewables for
commercial and industrial (C&I) sites . It takes advantage of rec ent cost reductions in solar
energy which have created the possibility for DRE installations to compete on a favourable basis
with grid -delivered electricity  as well as diesel gensets .
4. The programme  is expected to  directly deliver close to USD 1 billion in total financing,
financing 386 MW of much- needed new capacity, leading to almost 29 MtCO 2eq of emissions
reductions over its lifetime, compared to the business -as-usual delivery of power. It is expected
that financial institutions will continu e to invest in the new DRE business lines created by the
programme even after its end, and the total impact should therefore be considerably higher.
5. Following discussions with the independent TAP, the AE revisited cost assumption s
a
bout the average capital requirements for all three forms of DRE proposed to be supported
under the program me, and decreased these assumptions, leading to a substantial increase in
expected generation capacity added . The TAP welcomes this engagement from the accredited
entity ( AE), which has increased the ambition level of the programme, and thereby also allowed
the TAP to increase the impact rating.
Operations and  maintenance  
6. The TAP is concerned about the assumptions being made regarding operations and
maintenance (O&M) funding, which is presumed to be a given, with no further involvement
from the programme . While it is correct that operators and service providers will normall y
en
sure the upkeep of their operation s, which is required to be able to continue to service th e
lo
ans they have received, experience from the target countries indicates that this may not
always be the case, in particular in mini- grid applications .
7. The TAP therefore requests that, as part of the operations manual of the program me,
an
d to support the knowledge transfer to local financial institutions and final beneficiaries, a set


---
*Page 73*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 70 
 
of principles for sustainable O&M for DRE operations is developed as part of a 
knowledge/ technical assistance (TA)  package, to be utili zed, for example, by local financial 
institutions during their credit assessment process.   
8. Overall, notwithstanding the observations on O&M, the independent TAP considers the 
mitigation impact of the programme  to be HIGH . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential             Scale:  High  
9. The paradigm shift of the programme  derives from two key sources:  
(a) the intervention through local financial institutions, which is expected to  deliver lasting 
changes to the business models of these financing institutions which  in turn should lead to 
sustainability of DRE  financing even after the end of the GCF intervention;  and 
(b) the substantial scaling up of DRE investment activity in the target countries  which will in 
itself ensure that a vibrant and sustainable DRE market is being created, barriers to entry are 
lowered and a thriving DRE eco -system can evolve . 
10. In combination, these two elements should be a powerful driver for lasting chan ge in the 
target markets, delivering long -term benefits to the communities and clients of the local 
financial institutions who are investing in DRE. At present, in a range of markets in Africa , DRE 
is on the cusp of entering the markets , but has not achiev ed the scale that is required, while 
investment plans for the continent are lacking the required funds to truly make a difference.  
11. This program me therefore has the potential to deliver a substantial lift to the DRE 
market in the target countries, encouragi ng investments from local financial institutions rather 
than relying on development finance and foreign  investors, who are unlikely to be as familiar 
with the markets, and therefore will consider them more risky  and require higher returns .  
12. This is therefore a well -targeted program me, combining deftly the strength of the AE in 
understanding the local markets with the concessional financial instruments of GCF. The focus 
on the private sector and financial intermediation has to be applauded, as it will lead to further, 
systemic impacts that will generate paradigm shift, such as reducing the exposure of these local financial institutions to transition risk , by providing them with clean tech investment 
opportunities, and allowing them to build new lines o f DRE business made possible by  this 
program me. 
Risks to paradigm shift 
13. The key risks relate to the overall economic cycle and the impact of the COVID -19 
pandemic on the target markets . They will need to be  closely  managed throughout the 
implementation by the AE , as they can be both, country -specific but also regional . 
14. Further risk relates to the potential of failure by the local financial institutions to fully 
integrate DRE finance into their business models. This will need to be addressed through the 
provision of high -quality technical assistance  to the participating financial institutions.  
Replicability  and monitoring, reporting and verification for knowledge creation  
15. The project is highly replicable, and capacity -building activities are integrated that will 
ensure knowledge and learning are achieved.  
16. To further enhance these replicability aspects, the TAP is requiring the AE to report 
annually on clean power production from the program me and to provide publicly available 
assessments on the impact of:  
(a) Local currency finance;  
(b) Adaptation co -benefits;  
(c) Costs and barriers of minigrid projects at country level; and  
(d) Stakeholder engagement .


---
*Page 74*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 71 
 
17. The AE has proposed a target of 386  MW of newly installed renewable energy capacity. 
While not separately identified as a target, the program me also provides the opportunity to 
track closely the actual energy production from the financed installations. The TAP is therefore 
requiring energy production  to be measured during the loan operation life span , and reported to 
GCF for publication, to provide valu able data to other developers and policymakers. This data 
should be grouped by country and generation technology/project type.  
18. Local currency finance is a critical element in the de-risking  of the energy transition in 
the poorest countries, where hedging i nstruments, for example, are either unavailable or 
unaffordable. The AE is congratulated for recognising this and integrating a local currency 
element into the program me. The TAP is requesting that a special report on its impact is 
developed and provided f or publication at the time of the mid -term evaluation. 
19. The program me will include  a component to allow the systematic assessment of 
adaptation co -benefits in a systemic manner in each project, enabling the validation and 
estimation of these benefits. This will materially add to develop a specific understanding of 
these benefits in the context of each country, region and sector. The TAP welcomes the inclusion 
of these assessments.  
20. Stakeholder engagement is a critical element in development finance. The AE is 
requested by the TAP to provide continuous updates on its stakeholder engagemen t and the 
results thereof  to GCF, to enable intervention by GCF should risks to communities emanat e from 
the project.  
21. It is also expected that the requested waste management plan for battery waste, and the 
requested tool kit for  assurance of good quality  O&M will have market -level benefits.  
22. In view of the above -mentioned discussion , and balancing the overall impact potential 
and the risks , the TAP finds paradigm shift potential to be HIGH.  
1.3 Sust ainable development potential            Scale:  High  
23. The sustainable development potential of the programme  is substantial, even though it 
is also considered high risk and will need to be carefully managed during implementation to 
ensure the achievement of the potential outcomes .  
Economic co -benefits : 
24. The program me will deliver secure, clean and often cheaper power to people and 
businesses or institutions that currently lack access to power  or are exposed to high power 
prices for  often low -quality and highly  polluting power delivered over centralised ne tworks . 
Providing access to low -cost clean power  will enable additional productive activities, new 
business opportunities and will support additional economic growth.  
25. The program me will also provide local financial institutions  with an entry point into a 
new market, financing DRE, which is fully aligned with the climate and energy transition. It will 
therefore de -risk the portfolio of these financial institutions, while providing them with new 
capabilities and a new line of busi ness.  
26. The program me also has a substantial net present value ( NPV ), leaving the direct 
beneficiaries considerably better off compared to the counterfactual  situation .  
Social co -benefits : 
27. In social terms, the ability to p rovide power to non -connected areas and people, and to 
reduce the cost of this power, has important benefits for communities . New  businesses raise 
economic activity and provide employment and income opportunities, while lighting enables children to study  for longer periods . The ability to provide power  however does  not only 
expands the range and scale of productive activities that can be undertaken, it also provides the 
beneficiaries with more time to spend with their families and in their communitie s, by providing 
relief from basic tasks such as collecting fuel.


---
*Page 75*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 72 
 
Environmental co -benefits :  
28. Providing clean and affordable energy to communities will reduce environmental 
pressures leading to deforestation, and it will also reduce noise and air pollution from diesel, 
while reducing health risks from unsafe indoor air pollution .  
29. While there is a risk associated with the disposal of end -of-life batteries, the TAP has 
raised this with the AE and requires mitigating measures to be put in place through the 
environmental and social management framework of the program me. 
Gender -related co -benefits : 
30. The programme is expected to have considerable gender benefits, by p roviding access to 
clean and affordable power to households, thereby relieving pressure on women and girls. It is 
also expected that the social and environmental benefits will predominantly benefit women and 
girls, while there will be large -scale new emplo yment opportunities based in communities. A 
dedicated gender expert will help to reinforce these benefits by intervening along the supply and fina nce chain . 
31. Considering the important sustainable development benefits and the close attention to 
stakeholder i nvolvement in the development of the project, the TAP finds the sustainable 
development potential to be HIGH.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient              Scale:  High  
32. African countries continue to suffer from lack of access to energy, which is holding back 
economic and social  development and exposing energy users to health and safety risks . Over 1 
billion people in Africa do not have energy access, and without investments in DRE many of them will not be able to gain energy  access. Commercial and industrial power consumers are 
often exposed to very high cost s for grid -delivered power, making them less competitive and 
encouraging high -value activities related to agricultural produc ts to be undertaken outside the 
zone where th ey are grown, or even outside Africa. The provision of low -cost DRE can change 
this.  
33. Local financial institutions in Africa often lack the knowledge and capacity to assess the 
risks of investing in the nascent DRE sector, which lacks a track record  and pos es highly 
technical risks that , for example,  credit officers are often unfamiliar with . Furthermore, the 
currency mismatch, of having to pay hard currency for DRE equipment while receiving income 
in local currency, substantially increases the risk and/or of borrowing for  these projects  for the 
final beneficiary . 
34. Providing the local financial institutions with finance dedicated to investment in DRE, 
including loans, guarantees , local  currency lines, and technical assistance, is a critical element of 
the para digm shift potential of the program me. 
35. This program me will address the se urgent needs through the delivery of a high volume 
of DRE , dedicated finance and technical assistance, in a manner that is appropriate to local 
needs, working with local financial institutions who know the markets best.  
36. Considering the above, t he independent TAP rates the needs of the recipient as HIGH.  
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  High  
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
37.  The project is fully aligned with the nationally determined contributions ( NDC s) of the 
participating countries, as well as global  policy directions relating to energy access.  It thus  
supports the achievement of global mitigation as well as of  national energy policy objectives.  
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
38. The AE for the project is the African Development Bank  (AfDB ). AfDB has substantial 
experience in implementing DRE projects in Africa, as well as a long history of sup porting local


---
*Page 76*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 73 
 
financial institutions. The combination of these two lines of investment  in this programme  is not 
expected to pose a major challenge to the AE.  
39. The structure of the programme  requires AfDB to  also be the executing entity (EE) for 
the major part of the programme . This means that AfDB  will be responsible for p roject 
execution, management of loan operations , reporting to GCF , and entering into a variety of 
agreements (including sub -grant agreements, services agreements, and memoranda of 
understanding ) for this programme . 
40. AfDB  has relevant experience and expertise in the sector as well as in the region in the 
implementation of project s related to renewable energy . AfDB  has already implemented similar 
GCF projec ts, on which this programme  is building.  There are therefore no concerns in this 
regard.  
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
41. AfDB has built this programme  on continuing engagement with its clients and 
stakeholders  and its understanding of the markets it will invest in . Given the nature of the 
programme , downstream stakeholder engagement is forward -looking and based on a robust 
plan and assessment of the interest and ways to engage the stakeholders. AfDB has a stron g 
network through which it will carry out this stakeholder engagement.  
42. The TAP acknowledges that the timing of the stakeholder engagement  is not ideal, but 
given the structure of the program me it is an unavoidable shortcoming, which will need to be 
addres sed through close stakeholder engagement at the point of develop ing the  subprojects. 
Recognising this, a  covenant is being imposed to ensure continuous reporting on this 
stakeholder engagement by the AE, thus ensuring that even though the program me is fina ncially 
intermediated, best practice is being applied with regard to this important safeguard.  
43. The above considerations  lead ITAP to assess  that the country ownership for the 
programme  is HIGH .


---
*Page 77*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 74 
 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness             Scale:  High  
Overview  
44. The program me expects to generate investments of USD 960  million of which  USD 171 
million (i.e. just under 18 per cent of the total) is requested from  GCF in the form of  grants , loans 
and guarantees . The accredited entity is providing USD 164  million of cofinance in the form of 
grants, loans and guarantees. The balance of investments of USD 62 5 million is expected from 
the private sector in the form of bank lending and investor equity and additional grant support 
from other donors. This  gives a ratio of 1: 4.6. 
45. The climate objective of the project is to achieve mitigation outcomes through 
investments in renewable energy at household, community and business level in six countries, 
namely  Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Nigeria and Tunisia. This r equires the participation and 
active support of GCF,  as the conditions  to make the investments feasible for the private 
financial institutions in the participating countries can not be met in the absence of GCF  support.  
46. Instead, absent the requested GCF fi nancing, the available financing would continue to 
be constrained to a sub -optimal level not adequate to the needs of the participating countries by 
the limited ability of development finance institutions and governments  to provide it , together 
with some small -scale developers . This  would lead to a more disjointed effort  that would not 
address the urgent energy access needs, and would continue to delay the urgently needed 
energy transition away from diesel gen erators  and traditional fu els. 
Cost of CO 2 abatement  
47. The average cost per MW  installed  is USD2,111/MW for 386 MW of new DRE capacity 
expected to be financed by the project, once guarantees  and technical assistance  are accounted 
for. This is reasonable  given the mix of generation technologies and in line with  current market 
expectations.  
48. The funding proposal will reduce CO 2 emissions by almost 29 MtCO 2eq over the lifetime 
of the project. Given the GCF investment of USD 17 1 million this equates to a cost of USD 5. 9 per 
tCO2 for the GCF alone  and USD 33.1 per tCO 2 for the funding proposal investment volume of 
USD961 million as a whole.  This is well within the expected range  of a large- scale climate 
finance program me, and in fact at the low range of estimations for the social cost of CO 2 
emissions, and therefore indicates that the programme will add value  globally.  
Economic analysis  
49. The funding proposal identifies the following streams of potential benefits from the 
program me:  
(a) Access to clean energy  leading to healthier environments at home, educ ation  and 
business opportunities  and increased safety during dark hours, in particular fo r women  and 
children;  
(b) Environmental benefits through reduced pollution ; and  
(c) Economic benefits by providing income opportunities for up to 70,000 people . 
50. The project is highly beneficial in terms of its economic impact and has a very high rate 
of return , justifying the choice of loan/guarantee as GCF financial instruments and the high 
leverage  on GCF funds . It is expected that this will lead to higher replicability than would 
otherwise be the case, by enabling participating financial institutions t o continue supporting 
DRE investments in the future also in the absence of GCF support.  
51. Of particular value is the offer of local currency finance, which will prevent exposure of 
the final beneficiaries to the risk of currency fluctuations, which they are least capable of bearing . 
52. In view of the above considerations, the effectiveness and efficiency of the project is 
rated as HIGH .


---
*Page 78*
---

GCF/B.29/02/Add.04  
Page 75 
 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
53. The development of a program me providing scaled -up finance for DRE in Africa is highly 
welcome, and fully aligned with the objectives of the Fund and the needs of the countries 
participating in the program me.  
54. The initial assessment of the independent TAP critically considered the quest ion of 
whether the project would generate adaptation impacts  instead of co -benefits , the very 
conservative approach to estimating installed cost, environmental considerations related to 
battery disposal, provisioning of operations and maintenance, and the potential overlap with 
auction PPAs in Tunisia and another AfDB project in Ethiopia and Guinea .  
55. The AE addressed these matters to the full satisfaction of the TAP and the  TAP  therefore 
recommends this funding proposal for approval with the following condi tions and covenants:  
Conditions to be met prior to the first d isbursement:  
56. Delivery of a comprehensive waste management plan  to the satisfaction of the 
Secretariat  to ensure appropriate, best practice disposal of end -of-life items , in particular 
batteries . 
Conditions to be met prior to the second disbursement:  
57. Development  of a comprehensive tool kit , to the satisfaction of the Secretariat , to ensure 
that the princip les of O&M  requirements in subprojects, in particular in mini- grids , are well 
understood by participating local financial institutions.  
 Interim independent evaluation report shall include :  
58. A dedicat ed section on  the adaptation co -benefits from the investments  made with a 
particular focus on mini -grids and solar home systems;  
59. A dedicated section providing an o verview of the installed cost and barriers 
encountered in each country to the delivery of new minigrid ca pacity; and 
60. A dedicated section on the impact of local currency finance.  
Throughout  the term of the funded activity agreement : 
61. A report summarizing the stakeholder engagement (at sub-project level) to be 
submitted alongside the annual performance report (APR) . 
62. Consolidated r eport on MWh produced by projects financed through the program me 
through the lifetime of the operation to be included  as part of the annual performance report 
(APR) .


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B. 29/02/Add .04  
Page 76 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  assessment 
findings  (FP168 ) 
Proposal  name : Lever aging Energy Access Finance ( LEAF) Framework  
Accredited entity : African Development Bank  
 
Impact Potential  
The AfDB  notes the iTAP’ s positive review that the overall impact potential is high  and confirms that it 
accurately reflects the Programme, including  the context and barriers addressed . 
The AfDB notes that operation  and maintenance  of the technology deployed under the sub -projects is an 
integrated part  of the due diligence proce ss. AfDB review s O&M processes of sub -proje cts to ensure 
quality and consistency in the  planning and delivery  by the company, including  monitoring of system 
performance, repair and replacement , and contract compliance . The technic al assistance component of 
the LEAF Programme will produce a knowledge  package that can be  utiliz ed, for example, by local 
financial institutions during their credit assessment process  to ensure  product quality and maintenance .  
 
Paradigm shift potential  
The AfDB  notes the iTAP’s  positive assessment that the Programme’s paradigm shift potent ial is high  and 
appreciates the recognition  for the  required  involvement of local financial inst itutions for local currency 
financing . 
The AfDB notes that in order to  increase  understanding of  adaptation  benefits  of DRE projects, the 
Programme will  conduct  comprehensive  country -level studies /assessment s, focused on the relevant 
technologies targeted in the countries  confirming the impact  of energy access  on the adaptive  capacity  of 
communities  to cl imate vulnerabilities .  
Sustainable Development potential  
The AfDB  notes iTAP’s positive assessment of the Programme’ s sustainable development potential as high  
by deliver ing secure, clean and affordable power to people and b usinesses that currently lack ac cess to 
clean , affordable  and/or reliable power , fosteri ng economic growth . 
Needs of the Recipient  
The AfDB  notes iTAP’s positive assessment of the needs of the  recipient as high, considering  the need for  
energy access , the need  of DRE companies to scale the deployment of DRE  technology and that of FIs to 
finance the sector.   
The AfDB notes that the currency mismatch  is largely  driven by DRE companies  being financed in hard 
currency to date , while receiving rev enue s in loc al currency,  typically creating si gnificant exchange rate 
risks . 
Country Ownership  
The AfDB  notes iTAP’s positi ve assessment of country ownership as high  and notes that it accurately 
reflects the status of the national climate strategies of participatin g countries, and the AfDB ’s capacit y and 
track record to deliver the Programme . 
Effic iency and Effectiveness 
The AfDB  notes iTAP’s positive assessment of the Programme’s efficiency and effectiveness.   
In addition to the economic benefits men tioned, the Af DB notes that increasing the access of a population 
to clean and reliable energy and sol ar-powered productive assets is expected to unlock additional 
income -generating activities, new businesses and foster economic growth .


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B. 29/02/Add .04  
Page 77 
 
Overall remarks from the indepen dent Technical Advisory Panel : 
The AfDB  notes the overall positive remarks from the iTAP  and also note s with thanks the positive 
recommendation from iTAP to the GCF Board, in particular that the Board support the Programme.  
Finally, the AfDB  notes the con dition s that include a waste man agement plan , tool kit  on O&M  in 
subprojects , dedicated sections in the inter im evaluation on adaptation  co-benefits , installed cost and 
barriers for the delivery of new mini- grid capacity  and local currency financing, and reporting on 
stakeholder engagement and MWh produc ed by the project s.


---
*Page 81*
---

Page 78 
 
 
 
  
Annex 8  
Gender Assessment and 
Programme -Level Action 
Plan  LEAF Framework  
28 April 2021  
African Development Bank


---
*Page 82*
---

Page 79 
 
79 
 Contents  
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................... 80 
Impact of access to energy on women................................................................................ 80 
Energy and gender inequality ............................................................................................. 81 
Important gender aspects for LEAF  ................................................................................... 81 
COVID- 19 and gender equality ......................................................................................... 82 
Gender assessment methodology ....................................................................................... 83 
2. Country- level Assessments ............................................................................................ 84 
Nigeria Gender Assessment  ............................................................................................... 84 
Kenya Gender Assessment  ................................................................................................. 88 
Ghana Gender Assessment  ................................................................................................. 94 
Tunisia Gender Assessment  ............................................................................................... 99 
Ethiopia Gender Assessment  ............................................................................................ 102 
Guinea Gender Assessment  .............................................................................................. 107 
3. Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 112 
Increasing access to clean energy for women  .................................................................. 112 
Enhancing access to finance and fostering job creation for women  ................................ 113 
Gender mainstreaming  ..................................................................................................... 113 
Implementation of the gender action plan  ........................................................................ 114 
4. Gender Action Plan LEAF - Programme -level Framework  .......................................... 115


---
*Page 83*
---

Page 80 
 
80 
  
1. Introduction  
 
The Leveraging Energy Access Finance (LEAF) Framework offers an important opportunity to apply a gender lens and amplif y the impact of energy access  for women . The  positive impact  
of the energy access sector on women is experienced in their multiple roles as customers, 
entrepreneurs, and agents of change.  
Impact of access to energy on women  
The countries targeted by LEAF – Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, Guinea, Ethiopia and Tunisia  
– count approximately 90  million women and girls that currently have no access to clean and 
reliable energy.  Many of these women live in rural  areas . Promoting access to decentralized 
affordable and reliable renewable energy and contributing to women’s social and economic empower ment  are ess ential for the overall improvement of people's living conditions. The 
social, economic  and health  benefits of access to renewable energy include:   
• 
Increased opportunities for income generating activities : Access to energy increases 
opportunities for women to start small businesses or support new income generating activities. Small businesses are able to stay open later at night.  In addition, saved 
time by replacing manual labor and reducing the drudgery of fetching fuel wood and water, tasks that usually fall to women, increases their engagement in income -
generating activities. Furthermore, access to energy offers greater flexibility in the organization of everyday chores. Finally, women are more likely to become wage earning workers outside the home when they have access to electricity.  
• Financial independence: additional income generated as a result from access to clean 
energy or employment within the DRE sector, allows women to contribute to household ear nings and gain financial independence.  
• Tackling gender stereotypes : businesswomen benefit from increased status at home 
and in their communities . 
• Strengthening household economic resilience : Income generated as a result of access 
to clean energy (and mone y saved that would previously have been spent on expensive 
fuel, such as kerosene) increases household economic stability . 
• Creating safer communities : access to lighting creates safer communities: households 
avoid dangerous kerosene lighting that can cause  damage to property and, in some 
cases, even death; and community members experience enhanced safety as they are able to move freely at night . 
• Creating a ripple effect : putting income and energy in women’s hands can have 
powerful economic and social benefi ts for their families and communities.  
• Increased study hours : Solar lighting allows students to reliably study during evenings . 
• Improved health: access to clean energy  improv ed women’s health through reduction 
of indoor air pollution levels . 
• Reduced violence: the  energy sector contribute s to efforts to combat Gender -Based 
Violence. Evidence demonstrates that women in electrified households report significantly lower acceptance of domestic violence
1.  
 
1 This came to light during a live discussion on linkages between GBV and energy, entitled: “GBV  and Electricity: What’s Light Got 
To Do With It?” This broadcast forms part of the Africa Energy Forum’s Energy&Her series during the current  Digital Energy 
Fest ival for Africa, November 4, 2020


---
*Page 84*
---

Page 81 
 
81 
 By unlocking local currency debt capital to scale up decentralized and distributed renewable 
energy in Africa,  the LEAF Framework contributes to empowering women and reducing 
gender gaps in the selected countries.  
 
Energy and gender inequality  
The countries selected by LEAF have different national electrification rates, however they 
share similarities in terms of access to and control over energy, as well as persistent gender 
gaps.  
Women in the selected countries for LEAF , especially those l iving in rural areas, are 
disadvantaged with respect to energy as compared to their male counterparts. Overall, women 
tend to have less influence than men at the household level during energy purchase and use 
decisions, despite having different preferences. Agricultural yields of female farmers often are 
adversely  impacted by the  inability to mobilize sufficient labour and energy efficient 
equipment when  needed.  
 On average, f emale- headed businesses  have a reduced ability to invest in pr oductivity 
enhancing energy assets. In addition, women energy entrepreneurs have been shown to have 
more limited information about distant markets and opportunities, constrained business networks, and consequently smaller businesses. Conditions of energy poverty foster a 
distinctly gendered experience with regards to energy needs, access and use that is not present 
at higher income levels. Addressing the se differences, as well as women’s overall lagging 
levels in access to clean energy, is critical to advan cing development objectives.  
 Gender inequalities and underlying issues are further addressed in the country- level 
assessments. This information feeds into the gender action plan for LEAF to support gender equality and addressing some of the remaining gender caps that can be addressed by LEAF.  
 
Important gender aspects for LEAF  
• Energy access preferences : Both w omen and men desire improved access to energy. 
There are minor differences related to their respective preferences for particular types of lighting products and appliances.  
• Entre preneurship:  Access to renewable energy provides a range of options and 
economic opportunities for  both women and men. In the small business sector, there 
are indications that women who use off -grid energy solutions have slightly different 
preferences than  men; the types of businesses women tend to operate drive these 
preferences.  
• Key buyers : Women have significant weight  in household decisions related to the 
purchase of off -grid energy technologies  (~35% of energy access customers is 
women), which undersc ores the importance of reaching women with marketing and 
educational messages.  
• Health concerns : Increased awareness of the indoor air pollution health risks caused 
by fuel -based  lighting is stimulating demand for clean alternatives in many countries. 
Women are most affected by this phenomenon as they typically spend more time at home.


---
*Page 85*
---

Page 82 
 
82 
 • Financing gap:  Access to finance, particularly for women , is critical to the 
development of the DRE market. Financing opportunities and frameworks are often 
different for women and  men, with women’s opportunities often relying more on 
informal networks and lending groups.  
• Workforce : Increasingly, women are skilled workers a nd decision- makers in the 
energy sector, where companies with a more gender -balanced leadership team have 
demonstrated stronger performance. Despite this, the proportion of women working in the DRE sector remains relatively low at around 30%.
 
• Manufacturers  and distributors:   Women represent a significant portion of the market 
and have decision -making power in buying this technology. However selling to 
women requires sometimes a different approach.    
• Governments and development institutions : It is important to effectively track gender 
data as part of day -to-day operations, including market surveys, consumer outreach, 
and program monitoring and evaluation. At the policy level, governments can identify practical solutions to women’s constraints in accessing  off-grid solutions, and in 
parallel access to the grid. Policies may help support women’s access to electricity (grid and off -grid).  
• Financial institutions : Financial institutions play an important role in reaching the 
women’s market through targeted products and services, specific outreach strategies , 
and possibly financial and management skills courses. Mobile banking and the potential added value of linking mobile technology with off -grid products that can 
charge mobile phones support access to finance for off -grid purchases.  
• Female -headed households : The feminization of poverty – a phenomenon that is said 
to exist if poverty is more prevalent among female -headed households than among 
male -headed households – has been the focus of many recent studies. Reasons 
advanced for the existence of feminized poverty (ie lower salaries for women) include discrimination against women in the labor market; women’s lower l evels of education 
compared to men. However, the markets and states are affected by the current disruptions which present risks of heightened gender inequalities and greater feminized poverty. An understanding of gendered poverty is a precondition for effective pro -poor development strategies. The determinants of gendered poverty are 
not only complex but also multidimensional, including but not limited to, age, location, education, and occupation. To reduce poverty among women, it is important for  LEAF 
to target  women, girls, and particularly female -headed households in each country.  
 
COVID- 19 and gender equality  
The gender lens is in particular relevant in light of the Covid- 19 pandemic. The crisis  is 
creating a significant  setback to gender equality. As a result of the pandemic, women’s share 
in unpaid care and domestic work has increased, due to heightened care needs of older and sick people, school closures/home schooling and cooking more meals at home. The lockdown has also resulted in an increase of gender -based violence
2.  Women’s jobs are 1.8 times more 
vulnerable to this crisis than men’s jobs .  In addition to increased uncertainty in the  labor -
market, women are having to drop out of the workforce as a result of incr eased unpaid care 
responsibilities at the home.3  Access to energy for women and gender inclusive policies at 
DRE companies  are instrumental to mitigate the disproportionate negative impact of C ovid-
19 on women. 
 
2 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/07/gender -equality -women -employment -covid19/  
3 https://www.mckinsey.com/featured -insigh ts/future- of-work/covid -19-and-gender -equality -counteringthe- regressive -effects#


---
*Page 86*
---

Page 83 
 
83 
 Gender assessment methodology  
The gender fo cus and activities incorporated under LEAF are based on the country -level 
assessments and the Bank's previous work in the renewable energy access area in the countries 
targeted by this program. Country strategic papers, country gender profiles, the databas e of 
the main Multilateral Development Banks and UN agencies are assessed to compile the current gender gaps in each of the 6 countries selected for the LEAF Framework.  
 The country level gender assessments form the basis for the gender action plan. Each country of LEAF has unique features as well as similar characteristics. The analysis reveals common persistent gender gaps that can be addressed in similar ways by the LEAF program, highlighted in the programme -level gender action plan. Country specific ac tivities / action 
plan will be  developed for unique issues in the countries. 
 The gender gaps identified are directly linked to the energy, agriculture, health, education, and employment sectors. These development areas are intrinsically linked with the energy sector and energy access is a catalyst to advance gender equality. LEAF i s largely focused on rural 
areas in the selected countries where the interdependence of the development goals  benefit 
from a systemic approach to achieve SGD5 on gender equality and women’s empowerment.


---
*Page 87*
---

Page 84 
 
84 
 2. Country -level Assessments  
Nigeria Gender Assessmen t 
Gender and  Energy  
 
Despite Nigeria’s abundance of fossil and renewable energy resources, Nigerians still experience acute energy poverty; they either lack access to modern energy sources or have to cope with inadequate supply and poor quality. About 80.6% of Nigerians use solid fuel for cooking made up of 69.2% wood, 12.7% kerosene and 6.0% of charcoal, among others. In Nigeria, electricity access stands at 54%,  with 8 7% of urban areas and 23 % of rural areas with 
access
4. 
 As a member of ECOWAS, Nigeria adopted a concerted approach to the implementation of the Sustainable Energy For All (SEforAL) Action Agenda.  This included the development of the Action Agenda alongside the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Action Pla ns, and 
their formal adoption. In this process, the country set the following targets: to increase electricity access to 75% (urban up to 90%, and rural up to 60%) by 2020 and to 90% by 2030. The installed electricity generation capacity is expected to increase from  7500 MW in 2015 
to 115,000 MW by 2030 and energy efficiency will increase by at least 20% by 2020 and 50% by 2030.  Women and girls are disproportionately and more severely affected by the lack of access to energy. Nigeria’s 2013 National Energy  Policy includes as one of its primary objectives, the 
promotion of  gender sensitivity and a special attention to rural needs, although women’s needs are defined as primarily related to their care economy tasks in the household (Energy Commission of Niger ia, 2013). 
 The use of traditional woodstoves for cooking at more than 69% has an impact on women, who are mostly involved in collecting woods and domestic work. Increasing degradation of 
these natural resources causes them to spend more time and physical effort finding and bringing home the wood they need.  
 There are also serious health impacts associated with burni ng traditional biomass fuels. Open 
fires in the home produce unventilated smoke as well as a high concentration of carbon monoxide and other pollutants, which women and children, who are most often inside the 
house, are exposed to. The exposure increases t he risk of diseases, burns to children and 
injuries to women from carrying wood.  
 Limited access to energy has consequences to the agricultural sector and living conditions of households, especially those headed by women.  For instance, rice production and processing in Nigeria, is typified by small local farmers operating primitive basic processing technology. Typical issues limiting economies of large- scale rice production include:  lack of access to 
improved technologies, high costs of energy for parboil ing and lower output quality (post 
processing). Most women especially in the western part of the country are into rice farming, but they have major issues regarding processing since the machinery for processing is not always available.  
 
 
4 https://www.get- invest.eu/market -information/nigeria/energy -sector/#energy_statistics


---
*Page 88*
---

Page 85 
 
85 
 Although women benefit directly from clean energy connections at household level, r eaching 
women as customers is important . To increase women share of customers, gender responsive 
credit procedures and  loan products (e.g. with flexible payment terms) are critical, as well a s 
outreach to women to share of information and knowledge and t raining for them to understand 
the payment plans and options5. Most DRE companies in Nigeria offer pay -as-you-go models, 
that allow customers to pay off the system or products over a period of  time. This allows 
access to clean energy products for low income households that are not able to purchase a 
system upfront.  
 Additionally, women are severely underrepresented in upper management and decision-
making and technical positions in both the public and private energy sectors despite official 
calls and commitments to a more balanced participation to ensure women’s voices  and needs 
are reflected in national policies. There are only few female mentors, sponsors, and role 
models in the sector . Factors contributing to unequal participation in the energy sector as 
employees include lack of interest  of women  in technical subjec ts, lack of technical knowhow 
and poor academic foundations , societal influence, as well as religious and cultural 
backgrounds. At the level of junior and senior secondary schools, efforts are underway by the 
Federal and State Governments to improve the quality of technical education and  increased 
admission of women
6. Labor conditions, such as long working days and site visits to distant 
locations put a strain on personal and family relations, particularly for those –whether women 
or men –who are also household caregivers. In addition, gender -based discriminatory practices 
(e.g. related to salary, benefits) persist in the workplace. Gender -disaggregated employment 
data is not typically tracked by companies, utilities, developers, or energy regulators. This 
lack of data limits the types of interventions (e.g. improving gender diversity among 
employees or measuring productivity and women’s impact as employees) within the sector7. 
Further assessments to understand the gender inequality and a ffirmative  action polic ies to 
encourage the recruitment of women in the energy sector  would support the increase of 
women as employees in the DRE sector8. 
 
Key data on gender equality 
 Nigeria was ranked 100 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions Gender Index ( SIGI) and 
Africa Gender Index (AGI) with a score of 0.460, and 128 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.635. All indices are on a 0- 1 scale. For the AGI and the 
Global Gender Gap Index, 0 points to complete inequality and 1 to c omplete equality, for the 
SIGI, the opposite holds true.  
Indicator  Result  Source  
Maternal mortality rate 
(2017)  917 per 100,000 live birth 
(2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  75.7‰ (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  
 52.7% female, 71.3% male  
(2018)  World Bank  
 
Employment to Population  
Ratio, age 15+  43.6% female, 53.6% male  
(2019)  World Bank  
 
Unemployment Rate (% of  8.9% female, 7.4% male  World Bank  
 
5 https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00WQSC.pdf  
6 http://www.ecreee.org/sites/default/files/documents/news/nigeria_country_presentation.pdf  
7 https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00WQSC.pdf  
8 http://www.ecreee.org/sites/default/files/documents/news/nigeria_country _presentation.pdf


---
*Page 89*
---

Page 86 
 
86 
 respective labor force)  (2019)   
Life Expectancy  55.2 years (female), 53.5 
years (male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
 
Categories  Female (%)  Male (%)  
Labor Force Participation 
(ILO, 2016)  48.8  56.4  
Unemployment (ILO, 2016)  6.5  6.0  
Bank Accounts (WEF -
GGGI, 2018)  33.6  54.3  
Literacy Rate (UNESCO, 
2008)  41.39  61.25  
Entrepreneurship 
(Infomineo, 2017)  41  59  
 
Female -headed households (% of households with a female head) in Nigeria were 14.6% as 
of 2015. In 2019, 46.4% of the Nigerian population suffered from multidimensional poverty. 
Among them, we can estimate that over 51% of them are women and girls.  
 
Political participation  
Women and men have the same rights to vote and run  for election, and the Constitution 
guarantees equal participation in politic s. Despite this, the participation of women at the 
national level  remains very low : 7.3% of senators (8 out of 109) are women, 3.6% of members 
of the House or Representatives (13 out of 358) are female , and 7 out of 43 ministers in the 
national cabinet are women. Nigerian women have been perpetually marginalized in the political sphere due to a combination of social, cultural, and economic forces  (Uwa et al. , 
2018) . In 2019, 77% of  the population believed that men make better political leaders.  
 
Education  
One in every five of the world’s out -of-school children is in Nigeria. Even though primary 
education is officially free and compulsory, about 10.5 million of the country’s childre n aged 
5-14 years are not in school. Only 61 percent of 6- 11 year -olds regularly attend primary school 
and only 35.6 percent of children aged 36- 59 months receive early childhood education. In 
the north of the country, the picture is even bleaker, with a net attendance rate of 53 percent. Getting out -of-school children back into education poses a massive challenge.  
 
Gender, like geography and poverty, is an important factor in the pattern of educational 
marginalization. States in the north -east and north- west have female primary net attendance 
rates of 47.7 percent and 47.3 percent, respectively, meaning that more than half of the girls 
are not in school. The education deprivation in northern Nigeria is driven by various factors, 
including economic barriers and socio -cultural norms and practices that discourage attendance 
in formal education, especially for girls.  
 
Health  
Women’s estimated life expectancy for 2015 -2020 is 55 compared to men’s at 54.  A 34% 
decrease was observed in the maternal mortality rate between 2000 and 2015 from 1,170 
deaths per 100,000 live births to 814 deaths in 2015. The total fertility rate per woman in 2018 stood at 5.4 children, and the adolescent birth rate for women aged 15- 19 years over the same 
period was 145 births per 1,000 women.


---
*Page 90*
---

Page 87 
 
87 
  
The proportion of women who received antenatal care at least once from trained medical providers is es timated at 43% between 2006- 2017. Nigeria’s HIV epidemic affects all 
population groups, and it is the second largest epidemic globally. In total , Nigeria had 
3,200,000 people living with HIV in 2016, and 32% of pregnant women living with HIV were on antiretroviral to contain transmission from mother -to -child. Nigeria is a Fast - Track 
country, and its response is guided by the National Strategic F ramework 2017- 2021, which 
aims at ending AIDS by achieving, zero new infections, zero AIDS -related deaths, and zero 
discrimination. Elimination of mother to child -transmission is a priority . 
 
Gender- based violence (GBV)  
Referred to as the Shadow Pandemic , the rise of GBV in Nigeria during the COVID -19 crisis 
will have life threatening consequences for women and girls and a profound impact on their opportunities and life trajectory. These impacts will have consequences tha t will ripple across 
communities and the whole country as Nigeria begins to recover from the detrimental economic and health impacts of the crisis.  
 Globally, it is estimated that one in three women experience either physical or sexual intimate partner violence or non- partner sexual violence in their lifetime. These figures are mirrored in 
Nigeria, with 30 per cent of girls and women aged between 15 and 49 reported to have experienced sexual abuse. Insurgency and protracted conflict have only served to exac erbate 
the occurrence of GBV in the North East. Harmful practices such as child marriage are prevalent in Nigeria, with 43 per cent of girls married before the age of 18,5 while 20 per cent of women aged 15 to 49 have undergone. Once girls in Nigeria are m arried, only 1.2 per cent 
of those aged 15 to 19 have their contraception needs met, leading to high levels of early and teenage pregnancy.  
 
Division of labour and women’s Economic participation  
According to the World Bank, 44.9% of the labor force is female. Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa, and the 24th largest economy in the world by GDP. It has a middle -income, 
mixed economy, with high export earnings from oil and gas, but also a  large, subsistence 
agricultural sector. 48% of adult women are employed (57th out of the 98 middle income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 44.9% of the overall labor force. They are most likely to work in low -income, informal occupations. 24% of employed women work 
in agriculture, compared to 44% of all men. One in six women work in public administration, community, social, or other services jobs. Only 0.3% of women hold management positions. Nigeria’s statutes generally grant women full legal rights before the law, however parallel customary and religious legal regimes do not always recognize the rights of women to own or inherit land and other assets. According to the National Employment Policy 2017, the rising unemployed in the countr y revealed the high representation of women in precarious, informal, 
and less remunerated employment.   Employment and Economic Activities  
Categories  Female (%)  Male (%)  
Unemployed  6.5  6.0  
Part time  14.1  8.9  
Employment  49.1  52.9  
Mean Monthly Earns  391.0  453.4  
Labor force participation rate  48.8  56.3


---
*Page 91*
---

Page 88 
 
88 
 Entrepreneurship  
Female entrepreneurs account for 41% of the total number of entrepreneurs in Nigeria. They 
are 20% less likely to have a bank account and 17% not likely to have borrowed formally. As per a 2016 World Bank report on female entrepreneurship, it was stated that Nigerian women entrepreneurs opened 162,372 new limited liability companies compared to 332,884 opened by men. In addition, women owned 33.6% (37,188) of new sole propri etorship enterprises 
compared to male ownership of 66.39% (73,478). Micro, small medium enterprises (MSMEs) employ 84% of Nigeria’s labor force and contribute 48.47% to the country’s GDP. Furthermore, 54% fewer MSMEs have female ownership t han the entire sub- Saharan Africa 
(SSA). In comparison to SSA, Nigerian women owned 16.8% small enterprises and 12.2% of medium enterprises compared to the SSA average of 35% and 29% respec tively. Additionally, 
while women own almost half of the existing microenterprises, their ownership of SMEs is far less.  
 In 2003, FMWSAD in collaboration with the Bank of Industry and the Bank of Agriculture established two women- only microcredit funds: the Business Development Fund (BUDFOW) 
and the Women Fund for Economic Empowerment (WOFEE). As of 2012, these initiatives have provided funding support to an estimated 6,200 women business cooperative groups. In 2012, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) set up a N200 billion MSMEs Development Fund to provide cheap and long- term financial resources for the development of the sector. The 
CBN pro posed that 60% of this fund will target women entrepreneurs. The Small Holders 
Women Farmers’ Organization of Nigeria (SWOFON) was established by ActionAid in response to the dem and for women to participate in emerging reforms and opportunities. 
SWOFON has enabled over 300,000 women to access agricultural inputs.  
Summary  
Many women, especially in rural and poor environments, lack access to clean energy 
solutions. Decentralized en ergy solutions  provide affordable , clean and  simple technology that 
can be easily installed at rural households . By providing financing, LEAF supports the 
expansion of DRE companies to reach the many underserved communities and increase access to clean energy for women.  Key issues identified related to gender and energy include: 1) gender responsive credit procedures and loan products to increase women as customers and 2) addressing gender inequality at the workforce and support a ffirmative action polic ies to encourage the 
recruitment and carreer of women in the energy sector  to support the increase of women as 
employees.  
  
Kenya Gender Assessment  
Gender and energy   
 
With only 75% of the population having access to electricity, at least 55% is dependent on 
wood  as their main source of cooking fuel – access to clean energy services is still a major 
issue in Kenya. In rural areas, 84% of households use wood as the sourc e of energy for cooking 
and 11,6% use charcoal.


---
*Page 92*
---

Page 89 
 
89 
 The recent 13.7% increase in power production capacity to 2712MW in 2018 has reduced the 
shortfall and allowed more households to be connected. Renewable energy sources currently 
provide 78% of the total e lectricity generated in Kenya. The recent increase in installed 
capacity, with 310MW from Lake Turkana wind power plant and 50MW solar capacity from 
the Garissa solar power plant, has provided a pivotal contribution to the increase in electricity 
generatio n (NBS ES, 2019, Africa Energy Portal). Off -grid systems such as mini -grids and 
stand -alone solar systems are an essential element in the country’s plans to achieve access to 
clean energy sources for all citizens by 2022 (Kenya National Electrification Str ategy 2018).  
 
In Kenya, as of 2018 access to electricity was available to 75% of the population with 72% 
energy access rate in rural  areas and 84% in urban areas9,  Over  80% of Kenyans relied on the 
traditional use of biomass as the primary source of ene rgy for cooking and heating. Kenya set 
a 100% access target to be reached by 2022 for both electricity and clean cooking solutions, 
while further improving the share of renewable energy sources up to 80%.  
 
There is general progress in adopting clean energy for cooking in Kenya. A growth in the 
uptake of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and a simultaneous drop in the use of charcoal stoves 
is evident. Likely contributing factors to these trends are the pricing levels and availability of 
LPG cylinders in variou s sizes, and regulations that have largely restricted, and in some 
counties even banned, charcoal production. The remaining challenges to the adoption of clean 
cooking solutions include cultural mind sets, the high cost of available technologies and 
limite d distribution networks. 
 
Kenya has one of the most developed SHS markets on the continent and is the birthplace of 
the PAYGO business models that are being rolled out across Africa . The high mobile 
penetration and use of mobile money contributes to the success of the PAYGO model in 
Kenya. The Kenya Government’s Communications Authority confirmed a 119.9% mobile 
penetration as of June 202010. Kenya leads the world in the use of mobile money services, 
which enable s sending and receiving money through mobile -based accounts . 79% of all 
Kenyan adults have registered a m obile money account11, with 96% of households having at 
least one account.  
 
Some of the more established market players inc lude d.light, Sunking, Mkopa and BBOXX. 
These companies target off the grid households, of which the majority is in rural areas. Their 
targeted customers earn on average USD150 per month12 and typically spend around USD 10 
per month on energy for  lighting and phone charging13. This is similar compared to the 
monthly cost of USD 8- 15/month for basic solar home systems. Purchasing a SHS furthermore 
may eliminate other expenses such as transportation to buy energy sources or to charge 
phones.  Access to electri city also offers an opportunity to diversify and increase income 
generating activities. An estimated 20% of customers that purchase a SHS increase their 
income by an average USD 475 per year14.  
 
 
9 https://africa -energy -portal.org/country/kenya  
10 https://ca.go.ke/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/Sector -Statistics -Report -Q4-2019- 2020.pdf  
11 http://www.fsdkenya.org/wp- content/uploads/2019/07/Inclusive_Finance_headline -findings -
from_FinAcce ss.pdf  
12 GDP per capita Kenya: $1,455 (World Bank Data, 2018)  
13 https://www .gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_powering_opportunity_report.pdf  
14 https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_impact_metricsv4.pdf.pdf


---
*Page 93*
---

Page 90 
 
90 
 Kenya recognizes that women and men experience energy poverty differently. Women and 
girls are forced to travel long distances to collect fuelwood. Additionally, the cooking takes 
place in poorly ventilated rooms. In rural and peri -urban areas, women and girls are mainly 
responsible for procuring and using cooking fuels; they are disproportionately affected by the 
negative effects of limited access to clean and modern forms of energy. Some of the challenges 
faced by women and girls include: (i)  time poverty  – time that could be used for educational 
or producti ve ventures; (ii)  adverse health effects  – exposure to respiratory diseases (as a 
result of indoor air pollution from cooking with traditional biomass); and (iii)  safety issues 
encountered while gathering fuelwood. Rural women and girls are especially affe cted as the 
majority of energy is derived from traditional biomass fuels such as wood, charcoal and 
agricultural waste.  
 
Gender matters are strongly recognized in Kenya’s energy sector . The Kenyan Ministry of 
Energy launche d a national gender policy for the energy sector in 2019. The document 
provides a framework for mainstreaming gender  in policies, programmes and projects in the 
energy sector and commits to:  
• Strengthening institutional frameworks for the employment of women in energy  
• Ensuring compli ance with the Constitution of Kenya on gender: such as by 
engendering all energy policies, plans, budgets, strategies and programme  
• Increasing awareness on gender in the energy sector  
• Integrating gender in programmes, and in monitoring and evaluate  
• Promoti ng clean cooking solutions and environmental sustainability  
 
For each of the outcome areas, measures have been identified to address gender imbalances 
and questions related to access, participation and benefits by both men and women, thereby 
enhancing incl usivity in access to energy services. Key issues to further increasing access to 
energy includes affordability, reliability, and capacity of energy services and clean cooking 
solutions . Cultural norms influence and shape the participation of women, youth a nd 
marginalized groups in the supply energy chain, particularly in remote areas. Examples of 
measures  include  increas ing the gender balance in senior positions, promot ing women and 
girls’ participation in s cience and t echnol ical education and gender -responsive planning, 
budgeting and policy.  
 
Gender is furthmore included in Kenya’s  Public Procurement Act of 2015 that reserves 30% 
of public procurement opportunities for women, youth and persons with disabilities (PWD). 
As at September 2016, the category attracted USD 436m worth of public procurements 
distributed between 54% women, 44% youth and 2% PWDs.  
 
Gender -disaggregated data on the energy sector in Kenya is  very limited. There is a need for 
data that estimates e.g. the differ entiated energy needs of both rural and urban males and 
females at individual and household level, as well as  income generation and sustainable 
impacts  as a result of energy access . Furthermore, data on representation, employment and 
decision -making in th e sector  is limited15. Ministry of energy confirmed that  35% of the total 
staff and 15% of the technical leadership positions in the Ministry of Energy’s headquarters 
are filled by women . A study by ESMAP confirms women to make up 21% of the workforce 
 
15 https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge -
documents/gender_and_energy_country_brief_ -_kenya.pdf


---
*Page 94*
---

Page 91 
 
91 
 in the companies it surveyed16. This share falls below that of the economy at large  whereby  
49% of the labor force is female.  The study furthermore confirmed that  the  energy companies 
surveyed had non- discrimination a nd anti-harassment policies with grievance mechanisms in 
place , flexible work options were generally not available , the energy companies had gender 
committees established with focal points, however  not all staff were aware of them , and 
mentoring programs w ere limited or non -existent (for men and women) . 
 
Kenya Key Data on Gender Equality  
Kenya  terms of the Africa Gender Index (AGI), Kenya scores 0.522 (1.00 is gender parity). 
This is above the 0.484 average of African countries. Within this overarching AGI score, 
Kenya performs very well on the social and economic dimensions of the index (1.001 and 
0.703 respectively), compared to the average in Africa (0.949 and 0.608 respectively), but scores poorly on the empowerment and representation dimension (0.203) compared to the average of 0.224 across the continent. Female -headed households (% of hous eholds with a 
female head) in Kenya were 32.4 % in 2015
17.    
 
Political Participation  
Women and men have  the same rights to vote and run for election in Kenya . However, women 
often face resistance and hostility. Despite the same rights, only 21.8% of the members of the 
National Assembly of Kenya  (76 out of 349)  and 30.9% of Senators (21 out of 68) are women.  
To increase these numbers and encourage women’s polit ical participation, q uotas have been 
legislated at the national and sub- national levels, and several of the main political parties have 
enacted voluntary quotas that reserve one -third of the seats for women. Despite this, 
implementation of these policies is inadequate and women’s participation in political life remains poor. P ublic surveys  confirm that  the majority of Kenyans believe that men and 
women are equally capable as political leaders.  
 
Education  
According to the Status of Women in Kenya Report (2016), gender equality in education has been effected mainly through the free primary education and affirmative action policies for university admissions. Other targeted interventions to increase enrolment and retention of girls in school include: the creation of boarding schools for nomadic communities, free day secondary education, provision of sanitary towels and activities aimed at preventing early child marriage.  
 While there is near gender parity in primary school enrolment, disparities still remain in education. Boys out number girls in enrolment at all levels of education, with gender disparity in-creasing as the level of education increases especially for Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) courses. The tertiary level has  the highest level of 
inequality regarding the ratio of girls to boys, and in national examinations performance, boys overall perform better than girls . 
 Kenya has achieved gender parity in primary education with the gross enrolment rates for primary schools increasing to 86.6% for boy and 82.3% for girls. More than half enrolment for secondary school 55% of female and 57.4% of male. However, there is a huge disparity 
 
16 
file:///Users/LZ/Downloads/ESMAP_Closing%2 0Gaps%20in%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Employment%20
in%20the%20energy%20sector.pdf  
17 https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge -
documents/gender_and_energy_country_brief_ -_kenya.pdf


---
*Page 95*
---

Page 92 
 
92 
 female and male pursuing college and university education with female comprising of only 
41% of those in private and public universities.  
Health  
Health indicators highlight gender disparities in Kenya with statistics on access to health showing mixed results. While males do better than females in infant mortality and HIV/AIDS, women do better  than men in the other indicators. More female than male children below one 
year are likely to die before their first birthday, but for the under -five mortality rates, more 
male than female children are likely to die before their fifth birthday. Life expec tancy has also 
improved since 2008 for both sexes: women are likely to live longer than men. The maternal mortality rates have reduced from 488 per 100,000 live birth in 2008 to 362 in 2014. Also, antenatal care, modern contraceptive prevalence rate, birth  attendance by skilled provider, and 
overall numbers of births occurring in a health facility have improved over the period 2003 to 2014. With respect to HIV/AIDS, the prevalence is higher among females compared to males. Teenage pregnancy has remained un -changed over the period 2008 and 2014, with 18% of 
adolescents aged 15 -19 years having begun child bearing. The national averages on the health 
of women however tend to mask huge regional disparities in statistics between women in different geographical lo calities.  
 
Gender- Based Violence  
High levels of sexual and gender -based violence persist in Kenya. According to the Status of 
Women in Kenya Report, 2016, the Government has made major achievement in its efforts to eliminate Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) , which has resulted in declining prevalence rates. 
The 1998 KDHS reported 38 percent of women were circumcised, which fell to 32 percent in 2003, 27 percent in 2008- 09, and was reported at 21 percent in 2014. Illustrating the declining 
prevalence rates, o nly 11% of women aged 15- 19 years have been subjected to FGM, whereas 
these figures increase to 22.9% among those aged 30- 34 years and to 40.9% among those 
women aged 45 -49 years.  
 In 2020, a  study by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics showed that 23.6 per cent of 
Kenyans have witnessed or heard cases of domestic violence in their communities since the introduction of COVID -19 containment measures. According to UNOCHA, the national GBV 
Hotline 1195 received 810 cases in September (as of 29 September 2020) compared to 646 cases in August, an increase of 25 per cent. All cases received psychosocial first aid (PFA) and referral services.  A study undertaken by the Ministry of Health and Population Council 
(April 2020) on COVID -19 Knowledge, Attitudes, Prac tices and Needs which showed that 39 
per cent of women and 32 per cent of men were experiencing tensions in their homes. About 
12,000 women and girls displaced and affected by floods need GBV -related services and 
psychosocial first aid, according to GBV pa rtners.  About 650,000 women and girls in urban 
informal settlements need access to basic household supplies and dignity kits to reduce the risk of GBV.   
 
Division of labour and women economic participation  
According to the World Bank, 49% of the labor forc e is female. Kenya is Africa’s 9th largest 
economy, with a GDP of over US$ 200 billion (PPP). It is a lower middle -income country 
with an economy dominated by agriculture, including the export of tea, coffee, flowers and vegetables. The country also has a sizable services sector (35.1%), notably tourism and financial services, amongst others. 72.51% of adult women are employed (20th out of the 118 low and middle -income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 49% of the 
overall labor force. They  are most likely to work in informal occupations. 60% of employed


---
*Page 96*
---

Page 93 
 
93 
 women work in agriculture, compared to 48% of all men. Around 19% women and 14% men 
work in wholesale or retail trade and the female share of management positions is around one -
fourth.  Whil e formal inclusion for men has risen steadily since 2006, for women, formal inclusion 
leapt between 2009 and 2013 driven by the spread of mobile financial services (MFSs). This has lessened women’s exclusion reliance on the use of informal services. Compar ed to men, 
however, women still have lower access to formal prudentially regulated services such as banks (35% for women compared to 50% for men).  Although women are major actors in Kenya’s economy, particularly in agriculture and the informal business se ctor, men tend to dominate in the formal sector. Most women (58%) in 
the formal sector are employed in service industries, mainly education, and they typically occupy the lower -paid jobs. But the labor market is changing: higher -skilled women are 
increasin gly being employed—including at senior levels —in high- growth sectors such as 
telecoms and mobile phones.  
Entrepreneurship  
Kenyan women constitute almost half of micro and small business owners, according to KNBS 2016 MSME survey (micro- enterprises less th an 10 employees; small enterprises , 10 
to 49 employees; medium -sized enterprises, 50 to 99 employees). The survey established that:  
• There were about 1.56 million licensed MSMEs and 5.85 million unlicensed businesses;  
• Most of the unlicensed establishments were being operated at the household level;  
• MSMEs engaged about 14.9 million persons;  
• MSME contribute 28.5% of the total economy;  
• Key issue: data are not sex -disaggregated except the distribution of MSMEs by 
Owners.  
 MSME: Ownership of Establishments by Licensing Status: KNBS 2016 MSME survey 
 
 
Summary  
A significant number of households and women, especially in rural areas, lack access to clean, affordable and reliable energy.  PAYGO businesses models offer an affordable and clean


---
*Page 97*
---

Page 94 
 
94 
 solution to providing energy access. High mobile penetration and use of mobile money 
support the offerings of payment plans to low income customers.  
 Gender -disaggregated data on the energy sector in Kenya is  limited . Additional and improved 
data collection will support closing gender relates inequalities and may support the need and inclusion of women.   Women are underrepresented at the workforce i n the DRE sector. Whereby cultural influence 
and shape the participation of women in the supply energy chain, particularly in remote 
areas.  Gender responsive hiring and HR policies are needed to increasing the gender balance 
in senior and technical positions.  
  
Ghana Gender Assessment  
Gender and energy  
Ghana’s electricity  access rate is 82% , with rates of  94% and 67 % in urban  and rural  areas 
respectively . The country’s targets for electricity access are to provide universal access to 
electricity for Ghana’s island and riverside communities, to increase the productive use of 
electricity in both on and off -grid electrified communities through targeted interventions, and 
to provide universal access to clean cooking solutions. Renewable energy is currentl y 
contributing 0.3% to the electricity generation mix, but the National Energy Policy (2010) has a goal of reaching a 10% contribution of renewable energy in the electricity generation mix by 2020.  Ghana has made major strides over the years in increasing access to grid electricity in the country. This has however not been achieved without challenges, and the remaining communities that are yet to be electrified pose increasing challenges of cost -effectiveness. The 
country is an ECOWAS member and, with the rest of the region, adopted a concerted approach to the implementation of the SEforALL  Country Action, with the development of the Action 
Agenda alongside the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency A ction Plans, and their 
formal adoption.  
 As of today, a large number of women and men – particularly those with low incomes or those 
living in rural areas – are even more disadvantaged in terms of their ability to access modern 
energy, which depresses the overall economy and, more importantly, deprives them of their right to enjoy a better standard of living. Energy poverty, defined as the lack of adequate modern energy for the basic needs of cooking, heating and lighting as well as the provision of basic energy services for schools, health centres and income generation, is limiting human development and women are the most affected.  
 
Women are the most important actors in the renewable energy sector due to their reliance on energy in the households and comm unities. Biomass, primarily wood fuel and charcoal, 
constitutes 67% of the total energy consumed in Ghana, which women rely on for cooking and heating. Without access to modern energy services, rural women spend hours performing basic subsistence tasks, wh ich constrains them from accessing decent wage employment, 
educational opportunities and livelihood enhancing options, and also may lead to illnesses from indoor air pollution caused by the biomass fuels.


---
*Page 98*
---

Page 95 
 
95 
 As for gainful employment in the energy sector, w omen are primarily active in the lower -paid, 
non-technical fields such as administration, finance, marketing and public relations. Women’s 
economic contribution (ex. woodfuel collection) to the energy sector is usually unaccounted 
for as it is unpaid, unre cognized and undervalued. Therefore, women’s production and 
consumption patterns of energy are often not accurately reflected in national statistics.  However,  companies in Ghana are realizing the benefits of workforce diversity and 
efficiencies in performance and management resulting from having more women on staff and at higher levels in management. Nevertheless, last -mile connections remain challenging in 
some  remote and rural communities, thus compromising the efficient provision of electricity 
services to customers. Expanding access to solar home systems, could address the energy shortcoming.  
ENERGIA study highlights that involving women in the renewable ene rgy-system supply 
chains is a win -win situation. Despite the key barriers for greater women participation in the 
renewable energy sector and the means to overcome them, women engaging in renewable 
energy businesses is not only  good for women, their famili es but also  communities, and the 
business itself.  
Key data on gender equality 
The Gender Africa Index 2019 ranked Ghana 20th out of 51 countries, reflecting gender disparities in the economic, political, education, and social dimensions. The majority of women’s economic participation is in self -employment and the informal sector, where they 
engage primarily in catering and lodging, food services, textile, garment and beauty industries. The self -employed women lack adequate finance and assets to expand the ir working capital. 
In addition, they have less education and inadequate skills in entrepreneurship and business management to grow their businesses, which lands them into vulnerable employment. Of the 
Ghanaian active female population, 84 percent are enga ged in vulnerable employment 
including unpaid family work or self -employment (MoGCSP, 2018). For wageworkers, only 
3.4 percent of females compared to 6.6 percent of men are professionals. Whether as self -
employed or wage workers, women tend to work in less  productive activities and earn less 
than men across different levels of education. 
 
Female -headed households (% of households with a female head) in Ghana were 31.4% as of 
2016. In 2019, 30.1% of the Ghanaian population suffered of multidimensional povert y. 
Among them, we can estimate that more 51% of them are women and girls.  
 
Political participation  
In politics, the 1992 Constitution guarantees universal adult suffrage including women, but few women actively participate in and hold political positions compared to men. As such, Ghana is currently ranked 72nd on the most recent Global Gender Gap Index (2017), but 112th when it comes to political empowerment. The proportion of women’s seats in parliament is currently 12.7% (35 seats out of 275) as of 2018, s howing a very modest progress in the last 
30 years (as in 1996 the proportion was 9%). The Affirmative Action policy that was formulated by Government in 1998 set a target of 40% representation of women at all levels of governance, but it is yet to be pass ed into law.  
 
Education  
The MOE consists of four headquarter divisions and 20 agencies in charge of implementing policies and delivering education. To achieve efficiency in service delivery in education, the


---
*Page 99*
---

Page 96 
 
96 
 Government of Ghana (GoG) has initiated a series of policies. The Education Strategic Plan 
(ESP) 2018–2030 is Ghana’s third long- term education -sector development plan, developed 
alongside the Education Sector Analysis 2018 and the Education Medium -Term Expenditure 
Framework 2018–2021.  Reforms focusing on primary education and increasing teacher 
training have led to improvements. Currently, there are two other policies in final drafts (the Gender in Education Policy and the Girls’ Education Strategy) that are awaiting MOE and GES valida tion. 
 The GoG has achieved gender parity in primary education and junior high school (JHS), and much progress has been made in closing education gaps between girls and boys and increasing enrollment and completion rates. In 2017–2018, the gender -parity in dex at the primary level 
and JHS level was 1.0. Ghana had close to a 100 percent primary- school completion rate (99.2 
percent for boys and 100 percent for girls), meaning the country is on track to achieve universal primary enrollment. Parity in school par ticipation at basic levels, however, has not 
been achieved in all regions and many districts. In addition, the gender -parity index in 
deprived districts declined from 0.93 in 2016– 2017 to 0.89 in 2017– 2018. In tertiary 
education, the ratio of female to mal e enrollment is only 0.77. There are also higher 
completion rates among boys compared to girls at the secondary and tertiary levels. While basic education is free in Ghana, access to higher learning can be challenging, especially for girls. Girls have grea ter dropout rates in higher levels of education as a result of teenage 
pregnancy and child marriage. In addition, menstruation can impact girls’ school attendance, due to a lack of adequate WASH facilities at school, fear of staining their clothes due to inadequate menstrual materials, or not having pain relief medicine to soothe cramps.  
 
Moreover, access to education and secondary school enrollment rates remain low among the poor, with large regional and gender disparities. Tuition fees and other costs (such as uniforms and school supplies) continue to pose a challenge for poor families. Women’s financial constraints and workload burdens influence decisions to enroll children in school. Children whose parents have migrated in search of work sometim es are sent to live with grandparents 
or another caretaker, many of whom are unable to provide adequate support or structure.  
 
Health  
The GoG has passed a wide range of sector -specific policies aimed at improving the health of 
men, women, boys, and girls. In 2009, the Health Sector Gender Policy and corresponding 
strategic plan and guidelines for operationalizing gender mainstreaming in the GHS were developed. The policy’s objective is to promote healthcare delivery, particularly for maternal and reproduct ive health. The recent Newborn Care Policy (2019 –2023) aims to guide the 
delivery of neonatal and child health services in Ghana by offering timely and quality health services and preventing neonatal and child mortality. The GoG also has instituted treat -all 
guidelines that call for treatment for all persons living with HIV regardless of CD4 count or stage. And the government enacted a robust 2016–2020 National HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan that includes specific interventions for key populations. These effor ts have been bolstered 
by the 2016 Ghana AIDS Commission Act and the 2016 National Antiretroviral Guidelines, which reflect the national commitment to providing quality HIV services.  
 
Gender- based violence 
Despite supportive legal and policy frameworks, ge nder inequalities in Ghana persist due to 
economic and social problems where gender norms and expectations have wide -reaching 
implications for community and public life across sectors and populations. Restrictive social norms and stereotypes make women mor e vulnerable to discrimination and sexual violence.


---
*Page 100*
---

Page 97 
 
97 
 Cultural norms in Ghana make it acceptable for men, but not women, to have multiple 
partners: 14 percent of men reported having multiple sexual partners in the past 12 months compared to 1 percent of wome n. Women often are blamed for HIV acquisition, even though 
their male partners more often put them at risk. Women also face exploitation and sexual harassment, especially in search of employment opportunities and accessing public services. In general, whil e no structural discrimination on the basis of ethnicity exists, northern Muslims 
are regarded as less capable of skilled employment. Even well -qualified individuals from the 
north face discriminatory practices in government institutions, and the majority of people migrating to the south are limited to menial jobs with low incomes.   Women and men report experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV), although women and girls are more often victims. Tolerance for and attitudes toward violence, however, are changing. For example, the proportion of women who agreed that wife beating is justified for 
at least one of the reasons specified in the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) decreased from 37 percent in 2008 to 28 percent in 2014, with women who are married or living together, 
rural women, and women in the Northern region more likely than their counterparts to agree. This positive trend also can be seen in men: only 13 percent of men in 2014 agreed that wife beating is justified for at least one specified reason, down from 22 percent in 2008. Nevertheless, women sometimes are discouraged from reporting cases of GBV due to physical and cultural barriers and attitudes, administrative and legal delays, and a lack of legal and technical knowledge about the justice  system.  
 
Division of labour and women economic participation  
Labour -force participation is 74.1 and 65.5 percent respectively for men and women aged 15 
years and older (2018). A large percentage (86.1 percent) of this employment is in the informal economy, characterized by engagement in low -skilled work and self -employment with low 
productivity and high vulnerability. Vulnerable employment is highest among women (68.2 percent or 3.4 million women). In addition, more than one -quarter of youth (25.9 percent)  are 
unemployed or underemployed, more than double the national average (11.9 percent).  
 Most women earn less than men, regardless of education and occupation. There are also major disparities in wage employment and in the formal sector. Women are much le ss likely than 
men to be engaged in professional, technical, and managerial fields: only 3.4 percent of females are professionals, compared to 6.6 percent of males. The under -representation of 
women and girls in tertiary education and in STEM subjects (for  example, only 22.5 percent 
of graduates from science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs in tertiary education are female) affect their ability to secure employment in the formal sector, especially in traditionally male -dominated fiel ds. 
 
Entrepreneurship  
A few large businesses combined with many MSMEs characterizes Ghana’s private sector. The MSME segment comprises about 85 percent of businesses and is pivotal to employment creation in the formal and informal sectors. Women are more l ikely to operate in the informal 
economy. In 2019, Ghana ranked second in the world for the highest percentage of women’s business ownership, with women owning nearly four in every ten businesses (37.9 percent). While this prevalence is laudable, it also s uggests women tend to face greater constraints than 
men in securing other types of jobs and formal employment opportunities.  Women entrepreneurs in Ghana face constraints contributing to large gender gaps in profits, ranging from 23 to 73 percent. Recent evidence suggests self -employed women tend to


---
*Page 101*
---

Page 98 
 
98 
 operate in more -crowded markets with reduced opportunities for growth when compared with 
self-employed men. They also are less willing to compete (especially in stereotypically male -
dominated domains) or adopt advanced business practices. And they tend to express a lack of 
confidence in their abilities and leadership. In addition, self -employed women often lack 
access to capital, credit, and long- term assets, which are necessary to grow their businesses. 
Informa nts note women tend to be risk averse and are reluctant to seek financing from banks 
or credit unions, which may require their husbands to cosign the loans. Women also struggle with an unequal care burden that reduces available time and opportunities for building their businesses and skills. Women in Ghana spend more than triple the amount of time on unpaid work as men.  
 In Ghana, women’s business income can be a critical source of household earnings, accounting for as much as 33 percent of household expenditures. More than three -quarters of 
women micro -entrepreneurs in urban Ghana agree their household would have a hard time 
paying for food or school -related expenses without income earned from their business. This 
finding counters the popular narrative that  men are the primary breadwinners and responsible 
for the payment of housing, school fees, food, and medical expenses.  
 Income transparency tends to not be expected nor practiced between marital partners. Ghanaian women entrepreneurs manage their income t o meet both household and enterprise 
needs, with household expenses prioritized. Recent research provides evidence that gendered intrahousehold relationships and marital insecurity constrain business decisions and capital investments. Rather than investing in their enterprises, women hide income to reinforce the 
husband’s responsibilities as a primary provider and to cover shortfalls in this financial 
support to meet daily household needs and provide for other expenses or longer -term 
investments (for exampl e, property and children’s education). They do so out of fear their 
husbands would reduce contributions to the household or end the relationship if their income was known. While this research focused on urban women, rural women entrepreneurs expressed simi lar considerations.  
 Policies and approaches that create openings for greater security in land use or property rights can incentivize women to increase their core skills and personal initiative. In addition, policies encouraging marital partners to share financial and care responsibilities would help women prioritize investments to expand employment and business opportunities. Research suggests women lack confidence and find accessing business -development services difficult given their 
household responsibi lities as well as distance and time constraints. Government agencies and 
business associations should support women and women’s impact businesses to improve access to credit; expand business networks and market links; and increase participation in training  on business -development services, financial management, public speaking, personal 
initiative or confidence, and leadership.  
 
Summary  
Ghana is making noticeable progress towards the achievement of  electricity access 
nationwide. Despite this progress, to date, 6 million people , including 3 million women and 
girls, live without access to clean energy . Decentralized renewable energy technologies offer 
an solutions to increase access and reach these rural communities. Increasing access to clean 
and affordable energy, directly contributes to inclusion, sustainable economic growth and 
improved living conditions  The LEAF project can also make an impact for wo men in the 
workforce to ensure that women are considered in the recruitment, training and business -
development opportunities, especially in rural areas. Most women in Ghana  earn less than


---
*Page 102*
---

Page 99 
 
99 
 men, regardless of education and occupation and are much less likely  to be engaged in 
professional, technical, and managerial fields . 
 
Tunisia Gender Assessment  
Gender and energy  
Tunisia's electrification rate is 99% , some remote areas remain with lack of energy access. 
Nevertheless, the energy deficit (gap between energy needs and resources) is widening, with 
a marked dependence on imports of fossil fuels and direct energy subsidies that weigh heavily on the state budget (about 10%). From 2001, Tunisia became a net importer of primary energy. Over the past nine years, the trade energy deficit has increased 11 -fold. 
• 32% of the overall trade deficit is due to energy  
• 49% energy independence rate in 2019 (vs 93% in 2010)  
• 30% of renewable energy in electricity generation targeted by 2030  
 Tunisia’s national energy control policy focuses on: (i) reducing the country's energy dependence on fossil fuels through demand control and supply diversification and the use of other resources such as renewable energy; (ii) improve energy security by reducing the energy dependency rate currently estimated at close to 10%, but which remains on an upward trend; and (iii) improve the competitiveness of the economy and economic operators by reducing their energy bills. Renewable energy accounted for 4% of all energy used in 2019. Tunisia could reach 22% by 2030 compared to an expected target of 30% thanks to the installation of 
photovoltaic panels, despite political instability. Tunisia is on the right track with great untapped potential.  
 As part of the development of the Energy Sector Suppor t by the World Bank, in 2019, the 
Bank has carried gender -sensitive surveys on: (i) the public perception of the energy sector 
and subsidy reform; and (ii) Société tunisienne de l'électricité et du gaz (STEG)quality of service among its customers.  
 The res ults indicate that: (i) men seem to have more control than women over how energy is 
used and how the costs of energy are met within the household (only 26 percent of respondents declaring to be responsible for energy use and expenditure within the househol d are women); 
(ii) women seem to suffer from restrained access to information on energy services as they encounter more difficulties in understanding electricity bills (63 percent of men declare that they understand the bills, compared with 57 percent of w omen) and billing methods (52 
percent of men, 48 of women); and (iii) women tend to be less informed on on- going energy 
sector reforms and their consequences (85 percent of women declare that they are unaware of the reforms, compared to 80 percent of men). As a result, women tend to have a worse overall 
perception of the energy sector compared to men (only 21 percent of women declare that they have a good perception of the energy sector, compared to 27 percent in the case of men), which may hinder their dem and for, and access to, energy services.  
 Building on the actions by the World Bank in closing the information gaps between women and men in the energy related services and promoting equal participation of women in the decision making at public and households levels, will serve as platform which can be used by the LEAF in Tunisia.


---
*Page 103*
---

Page 100 
 
100 
 Key data on gender equality 
Tunisia’s Human Development Index (HDI) value for 2019 is 0.740—  which put the country 
in the high human development category— positioning it at 95 out of 189 countries and 
territories. The 2019 female HDI value for Tunisia is 0.689 in contrast with 0.766 for males, 
resulting in a GDI value of 0.900.  This reflect steady progress in reducing gender equality.   
Political participation  
Following electoral changes in 2017 that mandated vertical and horizontal parity for municipal elections, 2018 saw a significant spike in female political participation. Nearly 27,000 women ran in the 2018 municipal elections. Wome n-led lists comprised 30 percent of the total going 
into the election. Many of these women candidates ran as independents, as women only compose 23 percent of party membership. The elections were a major step forward for women’s political representation: 4 7 percent of the winners were female. However, those who 
ran as independents faced special challenges once in power:  
 Without party support, many of the newly elected female councilors have struggled to gain access to political support and resources neede d to realize their full potential and achieve 
tangible results in office. Overall, while the quotas have succeeded in electing more female 
officials, more needs to be done to empower women once in office. This new generation of 
female elected officials, wh o are overwhelmingly young, are at a disadvantage in terms of 
political experience, resources, and standing compared to their male counterparts. The mean age for female candidates was 36, compared to 45 for men, and only a small minority of female candidat es had previous political or governing experience. Once in office, women continue to 
experience high levels of discrimination within the political establishment and receive more pushback from members of the public than their male counterparts.  
 
Education  
Primary education is universal in Tunisia for both boys and girls, as its net enrolment in primary education is 100% for both boys and girls, and the completion rate of primary education is 97% for boys and 98% for girls. Girls’ completion rate of lower se condary 
education is 78% and is higher than that of boys (61%). According to the EU Gender Profile report in 2014, it is known that there are more dropouts among boys than girls while there is no sufficient data on the factors causing dropouts. While youth literacy rate (15 -24 years old) 
is 98% for both young men and women, women’s adult literacy rate (75%) is 15% lower than that of men (90%), which implicates that older women faced more difficulty in receiving sufficient education.   The EU Gender Profile report states that women’s share in tertiary education is high in areas such as social science, human science, language studies, economics, journalism, law and agriculture. Women are less represented in areas such as engineering (29%), architecture (34%), and veterinary (36%), while their share is not very small as it is at least about 30% in 
these traditionally masculine areas.  
 
Health  
According to the MDG monitoring report, Tunisia introduced the National Perinatal Programme in 1990, which aims at the r eduction of maternal mortality ratio through the 
improvement of the key activities such as review of maternal death cases in the public health facilities, coordination between universities and local health facilities, pre -and post -natal care, 
family planni ng, and prevention of infant deaths. In 2014, 98% of pregnant women took 
prenatal care at least once, and 85% took it at least four times. Family planning was introduced


---
*Page 104*
---

Page 101 
 
101 
 in Tunisia in the 1960s in collaboration with health facilities and midwives. Contrace ptives 
are widely used even in the religious and cultural constraints, and contraceptive prevalence 
among married women was as high as 63% in 2014. The percentage of delivery not attended by skilled health workers largely declined throughout the country.   
Gender- based violence 
The Personal Status Code (Code du Statut Personnel: CSP) and the Penal Code were revised in 1993, which value human rights including women’s rights. Spouses are required to respect each other, and domestic violence is considered a cr ime. However, many cases of domestic 
violence are invisible, and it is reported that 48% of women between 18 and 64 years old have experienced domestic violence according to the EU Gender Profile report. The Ministry of Women, Family and Children developed a national strategy to fight against violence on 
women, during their life cycles in 2013, which prioritizes four actions: data collection and analysis about gender -based violence, provision of adequate and diverse services for the 
victims, awareness -raising in the society, and enforcement of related laws.  
.  
Division of labour and women economic participation  
According to the EU Gender Profile report, two thirds of women workers are in service, industrial and agricultural sectors (sectors in narrow sense). There are about 15,000 women 
top executives of enterprises, which account for 6.5% of the total.  
 It is estimated that informal sector employs about 40% -50% of workers outside of the 
agricultural sector. While there are no specific statistics on the info rmal sector, it is considered 
that there is a high participation of women in the sector.  
 
Indicator  Men  Women  Data year  
Labour force participation rate 
(15-64 years)  77%  65%  2013 (*1)  
Unemployment rate (total)  12.5%  21.6%  2015 1st quarter (*2)  
Unemployment rate 
(university graduates)  20.8%  39.0%  2015 1st quarter (*2)  
 The objectives of the “National Employment Strategy 2013- 2017” are to create employment, 
to reduce the unemployment rate, and to develop competitive and productive labour force. It lists up actions to achieve these goals: to improve employment policies, to  develop sectors 
which would create many employments, to develop private sector including small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs) and self -employment, to improve vocational trainings and 
the function of the labour market. According to the EU Gender Profi le report, the Tunisia 
General Labour Union created the women committee in 2000, but there were only 13 women among 511 participants in its central committee in 2011. There are no women among 13 board members of UGTT central bureau. Women account for only 8% in UGTT governorate office staff. The women committee has proposed that all sections of UGTT should have at least two women.  
Entrepreneurship  
According to JICA’s report titled “Study of gender mainstreaming in private sector development: Final report” (2015), women entrepreneurs are found in service (41%), manufacturing and sales of consumables (food and garments) (25%), and retail/wholesale (22%) among others. Their businesses are concentrated in the large cities such as Tunis and 
Sousse. Sixty- two percent of women entrepreneurs either import or export, and their major


---
*Page 105*
---

Page 102 
 
102 
 clients of export are in the countries such as France, Italy, Gulf States, Un ited States and 
Malaysia. More women entrepreneurs than men work from home. Their annual sales in 
average is about 50,000 dinars (approximately US$24,000 or JPY2.9million), which is about the same as male entrepreneurs in the similar businesses. Eighty per cent of women 
entrepreneurs are graduates of upper secondary education or above, and more women than men start business for self -realization rather than economic reasons. Fifty -five percent of 
women entrepreneurs have work experience in other companies bef ore they start their own 
businesses.   Women entrepreneurs face difficulties in various aspects such as access to finance, building networks, knowledge in management and business (about sector and products), access to the market, and work- life balance. The re are no women specific policies or schemes of SME 
development.  
 
Summary  
The increase in renewable energy will provide households with affordable access to energy.  The LEAF programme will build ongoing efforts by other development partners i.e. World Bank in reducing information gap, in increasing women participation in decision making, and 
in promoting women enterprises.  The detailed national action plan activity will build as well on the feasibility study conducted by the African Development Bank in 2018
18  
  
Ethiopia Gender Assessment  
Gender and energy  
Ethiopia has a strong urban and rural divide in terms of energy access. 45% of the Ethiopian population is connected to energy sources, with 92% in urban areas and only 32.7% in rural 
places.  
 
• 65% of E thiopia’s population lives within 1.5 miles (2.5 kilometers) of medium -
voltage transmission lines, but only about one -third of households, one -quarter of 
primary schools, and only one -third of health clinics have access to grid electricity.  
• Ethiopia has se t a 2025 target of universal electricity access, as well as 100% access 
for primary and secondary schools, hospitals, and primary health centers.  
 The Alternative Energy Directorate of the Water, Irrigation and Sanitation Ministry, is undertaking activiti es in order to improve access to alternative sources of energy. Under the 
Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) action, efforts are underway to mainstream gender through the preparation of a National Gender Action Plan for the Energy Sector. This is expected to bring gender into the forefront of climate and green initiatives, and to enhance the collection of sex -disaggregated data.  
 The quality of women and men’s life is affected by the availability of energy and distance to a source of energy for lighting and cooking in the households. The distance to source of energy 
for cooking specifically impacts women’s life quality, since women are usually the ones 
 
18 Feasibility study for a Centre of Excellence for the Promotion of Entrepreneurship in Support 
of Employability in North Africa  to promote women entrepreneurship in the renewable energy 
sector.


---
*Page 106*
---

Page 103 
 
103 
 responsible for collecting firewood. According to the 2011 Welfare Monitoring Survey, 
nationally, 23 pe rcent of the households used electricity as a source of lighting, while 52 
percent used kerosene, 13 percent electricity from battery and 11 percent firewood. More households in the urban areas (88 percent) used electricity as a source in comparison to the  5 
percent of households in the rural areas. Ethiopia recognizes that  
 
• Lack of access to electricity affects women and girls most; electrification can facilitate 
labor participation as well as economic productivity at home. 
• Ethiopia is pioneering a first-of-a-kind model to achieve gender equality across the 
energy sector, shifting from ad- hoc interventions to a transformational, programmatic 
approach.  
• Gaps between men and women are especially prevalent in infrastructure sectors such 
as energy, where the roles and responsibilities of women and girls in the household, 
market, and community can affect their access, control, and use of electricity services.  
 
The DRE sector is a male dominated space. Women share of the DRE workforce is 
approximately 20%. T his is lower than the average participation of women in the DRE sector 
in Africa (30%) and Ethiopian’s workforce. A wareness needs to be created among 
management  and technical teams , of the benefits of having a conducive environment for all . 
Furthermore inc lusive HR policies need to be developed including the recruitment and carreer 
development of women, and prevention of, and response to, GBV in the work place . 
 
With the help of the World Bank Group, the country is pioneering a new model to promote 
equality  between men and women while it works toward universal electricity access. This 
involves shifting from ad- hoc and disconnected interventions to a programmatic approach 
with investments in technical staff, and an earmarked budget to support gender equality across 
the entire energy sector.  
 
Key Data on Gender Equality  
• Women make up 43,128,000 (49.74 percent) of the Ethiopian population in 2014, 
among the estimated population of 86,707,000. 
• 27 percent of women aged 15- 49 have never been married, while 58 percent are 
married, 4 percent are living with a man, and 11 percent are divorced, separated or widowed. A very small proportion of women aged 45- 49 (1 percent) have never been 
married  
• As compared to men aged 15- 49, the proportion of women who have never m arried is 
lower at 44 and 27 percent respectively  
• 5 percent of men aged 15 -49 have two or more wives. The highest proportion of men 
with more than one wife was found in Somali and Benishangul -Gumuz  Regions, at 14 
percent in both of the regions. 
• A large proportion of women marry when they are age 25 or younger, in contrast to the majority of men who marry at or after 25. In 2011, the median age at first marriage among women aged 25- 49 was found to be  16.5 years. In comparison to the 2005 
national statistics, very little difference was observed in the marital status of women and men.  
 
Female -headed households (% of households with a female head) in Ethiopia were 25.4% as 
of 2016. In 2019, 83.5% of the Ethiopian population suffered of multidimensional poverty. 
Among them, we can estimate than 51% of them are women and girls.


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 104 
 
104 
 Political participation  
Ethiopia achieved significant gains in advancing gender equality and women’s 
empowerment in various fronts . Significant achievement has also been made in promoting 
women’s political participation -  women occupy 50% of the cabinet of ministers and 
38.8% of seats of the House of Peoples’ Representatives. However, significant gender 
inequalities persist in Ethiop ia depriving women of rights and opportunities and 
hampering their participation in development endeavors  
 
Sahle- Work Zewde is Ethiopia's first female president. Since coming to power in 2018, Prime 
Minister Abiy Ahmed has reorganised the cabinet to ensure  that 50 percent of the 
government’s top ministerial positions have been given to women. Never before in Ethiopia 
have so many high- ranking government positions been held by women.  
 
Education  
The government of Ethiopia (GoE) has progressed in the provision of primary education. 
Primary education is measured in various ways by the GoE, the Net Enrollment Rate, the 
Gross Enrollment Rate, and the Primary Completion Rates at Grades 5 and 8. The Net Enrollment Rate (NER) measures students’ enrolment in respectiv e grade levels at the 
appropriate school age. The net enrollment rate for primary education (Grade 1 -8) has 
increased from 77.5 percent in 2005/06 to 85.4 percent in 2011/12. NER in the lower primary school cycle (Grades 1 to 4) has increased from 77.5 per cent in 2004/05 to 92.2 percent in 
2011/12. In the upper cycle of primary education (Grades 5 to 8), growth over the same period was achieved from 37.6 percent to 48.1 percent. As noted previously, the GPI at Primary Cycle 1 has reached 0.92, and at Primar y Cycle 2, 0.98 indicating greater parity between boys 
and girls over the past five years Secondary education in Ethiopia is divided into a First Cycle (Grades 9 -10), a Second Cycle (Grades 11- 12) and additionally may be supplemented by 
Preparatory Secondary Education, which covers Grades 11 and 12. Two main forms of assessment of secondary are analyzed for the Preliminary Gender Profile, namely, enrollment rates and national examination results.  
 At grades 9 to 10 the gross enrollment rate reaches 38.4 per cent of the age cohort, of which 
39.9 percent are male and 36.9 percent female. In Preparatory Secondary Education, Ministry of Education data for the 2012/13 school year shows that 358,493 students were admitted to these schools, of which 44.4 percent are  females and 55.6 percent males. Nevertheless, the 
gross enrollment ratio in this sector is still low for both, girls and boys, with little improvement from the 7 percent in 2009/10 to 9.5 percent in 2012/13.  The MoE indicates the following as the major r easons for lower enrolment rates of girls in 
secondary education:  
• Gender roles and related household tasks which results in time poverty for girls  
• Unfavorable cultural environment which include negative parental or community attitudes towards girl’s educat ion 
• Harmful traditional practices, including early and child Marriage, and physical and psychological harm during marriagei  
• Migration and trafficking 
• Infrastructure, the distance between homes and secondary schools, placing girls at risk of violence or unaffordable expense for transport or housing.


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 105 
 
105 
 Health  
The National Health Account (NHA IV) shows a significant improvement in financing health 
in Ethiopia. Total per capita health spending grew almost four -fold between NHA I and NHA 
IV to 16.10 USD in 2007. The World Bank reports that per capita health expenditure had risen again to USD 18 in 2012. The health sector in Ethiopia operates in line with the National Health Policy (1993) and the subsequent Health Care and Financing Strategy (1998) which gave direction to the national five year Health Sector Development Strategies leading from HSDP I to the current HSDP IV. The major aim of the HSDP is to reduce maternal, newborn and child morbidity and mortality, and malnutrition as well as to control infections with TB, malaria, and HIV. In addition to this, the country developed an innovative approach to address basic health service needs of communities, the Health Extension Program (HEP) starting from 2002/03.  For the three years preceding the 2014 MEDHS, the national total fertility rate was 4.1 children per wom an, a reduction from the 5.4 children per woman recorded in 2005. Same of 
the reasons for high fertility rates include early age sexual intercourse and low rates of contraceptive use by men and women. In Ethiopia, as of 2011, the median age at first interc ourse among urban women aged 25- 49 was 17.8 years, and 16.4 years among for rural 
women. This indicates that half the rural girl’s experience first intercourse before the age of 16 years and 3 months. The median age at first sex for men age 25- 49 is 21.2 years. Central 
Statistical Agency (2014), Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey (EMDHS) shows that women’s self -image and sense of empowerment as well as resulting intra -household 
dynamics have a strong effect on their ability to use and negotiate the  use of contraceptives as 
well as the method contraceptive used and the number of children. For example, in 2011, more women who participate in some decision- making in their households used contraceptives than 
those women who did not participate in any household decision- making.  
 EDHS (2011) The Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) in Ethiopia has decreased from 673 deaths per 100,000 births in 2000- 2005 to 420 deaths per 100,000 in 2013. Even though 
numbers show progress, the country still has one of the highes t maternal mortalities on the 
continent and is very unlikely not reach the MDG target of 267 per 100,000 by 2015. Analysis of the 2000- 2011 EDHS shows that there are regional variations in MMR, ranging from a high 
in Somali Region at 747 per 100,000 births  to a low in Addis Ababa at 234 per 100,000. 
Various factors contribute to higher levels of MMR in rural areas, including mothers’ delays in seeking skilled emergency obstetric care, reaching health facilities, receiving timely care, and the presence of un met family planning needs among girls of child- bearing age. Other 
contributing factors include high- risk pregnancies, closely spaced births and older maternal 
age, especially in rural, uneducated and poor households.  
Division of labour and women economic participation  
According to the 2016 Labor Force Survey of CSA, of the estimated 80,444,148 population of Ethiopia, 55,629,497 individuals (69.2 percent) were aged 10 years and above, and therefore fall into the potentially economically active part of the p opulation. From this group, 
42,403,876 persons or 76 percent were employed in 2016. The employment to population ratio in the study shows that the proportion of employed males from the economically active male group is 82.7 percent and higher than that of employed females, which is at 69.8 percent. Nonetheless, the disparity by sex is still visible across the data from 2005 to 2016, where male employment has always been significantly higher and the gap has essentially remained unchanged. Male employment dec lined slightly from 84.7 percent in 2005 to 82.7 percent in


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 106 
 
106 
 2016 while female employment increased very slightly, from 69.0 percent in 2005 to 69.8 
percent in 2016.  
 Overall, national figures show that agriculture is one of the most important sectors in Et hiopia, 
which engages the majority of women and men. The level of education is closely linked to occupation and women with secondary or higher education qualifications are more likely to be in sales or services, and in professional, technical, and manageri al occupations 96 with 
women in agriculture tending to have less education. The Demographic Health Survey of 2017 further shows that the proportion of women engaged in sales and services is lower among higher age groups, and increases among those women who were never married, have no living 
children, live in urban areas, and those in the higher education and wealth quintiles. The smallest portion of the population is engaged in trade in both study periods (2005 and 2016).  
 Despite the fact that the majority  of women are engaged in agriculture work, they are more 
likely to get paid when employed in the nonagricultural sector which resulted in 56 percent of women engaged in agricultural work unpaid workers in 2017. A determinant in this case could be the presence of large number of women in the agriculture sector (65 percent) who engage in subsistence farming and work for a family member. Studies show that 30 percent of women were not paid at all for their work in 2017, and only 39 percent were paid in cash. This indicates that a large number of women are denied their rights to their wages, which can be attributed to different factors including assumptions about what women. It is recommended that reasons behind women’s low representation in the economy and in wa ged employment 
should be further explored in order to address the root causes of the problem.  
Only 36 percent of the women said they have decision-  making power over the use of their 
own cash earnings while 55 percent jointly decide over the use of their income with their spouses. For 8 percent of the women, the decision is being made by their husbands. With regards to the relative amounts paid to women and men, while 2 percent of the women’s husbands have no earnings, 10 percent of the women said they ear ned more than their 
husbands, 67 percent earn than their husbands and 20 percent earn the same amount. The study also suggested that women who have more children, who are in the highest wealth quintile, who live in the urban areas and who are older have more decision -making power over the use 
of their cash earnings than women in the other circumstances.  
 
Entrepreneurship  
Bridging gender gaps through empowerment programs promoted by both governmental and non-governmental actors at the national level have started showing results. According to a 
MoFED and United Nations Country Team (UNCT) report of 2016 on the MDGs, such government actions focused on promoting women’s entrepreneurship development by providing various trainings to women involved in micro and sm all businesses, and also 
creating access to credit and markets for this group. As a result of such interventions, many micro and small- scale businesses owned and operated by women were able to grow into 
medium -scale enterprises in 2015/16. 
 
Women entrepren eurs in Ethiopia are disadvantaged from the start. They have less access to 
the finance, networks, and education which help their male counterparts advance. They face 
regular discrimination and harassment from society–sometimes even from their own families  
and communities. The challenges a woman entrepreneur in Ethiopia faces in growing her 
business are overwhelming. Women in Ethiopia are less likely to own assets which can serve


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 107 
 
107 
 as collateral and are more likely to be excluded because of unequal property r ights or 
discriminatory regulations, laws and customs. 
 
Summary  
Only 32% of households in rural areas have access to electricity. By supporting the 
deployment of SHS, mini -grid and C&I solutions, LEAF will directly benefit these rural 
communicates and women by increasing access to clean, reliable and affordable energy.  
 
Participation of women in the workforce of energy access busine sses is very low compared to 
the average in Africa and women’s participation in Ethiopia’s overall economy.   
Guinea Gender Assessment  
Gender and energy  
Guinea's hydroelectric potential is estimated at 6000 MW, of which less than 3% is exploited. This pote ntial could power the entire West African sub- region if it were actually exploited. 
Current projects, some of which are funded by the African Development Bank, will enable Guinea to play a major role in the regional energy market in West Africa. The GoG ha s several 
room for manoeuvre to undertake in- depth institutional and regulatory reforms in order to 
attract the private sector to finance the development of this sector and to reduce the share of biomass as the main source of energy.  Already, the private sector's share of energy production 
has increased from 16% in 2000 to 31% in 2016.   The rate of access to electricity is 44% (including many illegal connections). The access rate is 20% in rural areas compared to 87% in urban areas. T he country fell in terms of electricity 
connection from 119th in 2012 to 159th in 2018 according to Doing Business with a score of zero in terms of reliability of supply and transparency of tariffs. The electricity tariff does not cover operating expenses. Electricity is sold at a maximum price of 800 GNF (less than $0.1) 
per kWh, while the average cost is 2,700 GNF per kWh ($0.3).  
 Guinea is developing both the SEforALL  Action Agenda and the Investment Prospectus in 
the framework of the SEforALL  implementation in the ECOWAS region, coordinated by 
ECREEE. Before that, the main objectives of the government in terms of access were fixed by a 2012 Energy Policy document that envisaged an increase of the access rate to 50% in 2020, as well as improvements in energy efficiency, an increase in the share of renewables and a reduction in the local electricity tariffs. A 50% access to clean cooking to 2025 was also foreseen. These objectives are being revised in the Action Agenda.  
 Guinea has considerable renewable e nergy resources, particularly for hydroelectricity for 
which around 4740 MW of potential has been detected. The energy demand in Guinea is projected to raise considerably and – according to government forecast –  additional capacity 
between 535 and 1838 MW would be necessary by 2025.  Overall, there is a low level of per capita energy consumption by any gender, about 500 kep (kilo oil equivalent). The specific situation of women is characterized by a decline in the connection to electricity, low access to el ectricity, and a quasi -dominant use of coal as an 
energy source. In rural areas, women and men are affected differently by the challenges of accessing modern energy sources. Indeed, in the absence of accessible alternative energy


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 108 
 
108 
 sources and innovative pra ctices, firewood and charcoal remain predominant, which affects 
women more in their cooking meals (as mothers or caregivers) exposing them to the harmful 
smoke of burning wood. Similarly, the search for firewood that is increasingly far from collection sites, and is costly in terms of time, increases women's exposure to the risk of gender -based violence in rural areas. This has a socio -economic impact on gender inequalities 
because, apart from energy, women are involved in the execution of heavy and repetit ive tasks 
through their muscular strength alone.  
 Women and girls major responsibilities  are to collect firewood, grind cereals, drudgery, work 
in the fields, prepare meals, etc. These tasks are unpaid and contribute to the lack of economic balance between  the activities of men and women in society. The plight of women's activities 
leads to health problems in a context where the satisfaction of the health needs of populations is still very poorly managed. The lack of time and services to facilitate women's activities leads to her exclusion from local decision- making spheres and undermines the development 
of productive income -generating activities.  
 
Key data on gender equality 
The issue of gender equality and equity is still a concern in Guinea, although encouraging measures are being implemented. The National Gender Policy has been updated, validated and disseminated in 2017.  
Guinea’s HDI value for 2019 is 0.477— which put the country in the low human development 
category — positioning it at 178 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 1990 and 2019, 
Guinea’s HDI value increased from 0.282 to 0.477, an increase of 69.1 percent. Between 1990 
and 2019, Guinea’s life expectancy at birth increased by 11.6 years, mean years of schooling 
increased by 1.6 year s and expected years of schooling increased by 6.5 years. Guinea’s GNI 
per capita increased by about 71.2 percent between 1990 and 2019. 
 
With a gender index of 0.439 (OECD SIGI Index), Guinea is among the 8 countries (78 out of 86) with the greatest dispa rities between women and men in the non- OECD area. Guinea 
is also considered one of the ten African countries with the greatest gender disparities. The national gender context in Guinea is still characterized by too strong an influence of socio-cultural burdens and social norms, making it difficult to apply the legal framework and measures taken to promote gender equality. Indeed, the country has a valuable legal arsenal for the protection and promotion of women's rights, such as the Penal Code, the Code of  
Criminal Procedure, the Child Code, the Reproductive Health Act prohibiting female genital mutilation (or excision) and its implementing texts, the Joint Order to Ban Female Genital Mutilation in Guinea.  
 
Female -headed households (% of households with a f emale head) in Guinea were 18.7% as 
of 2018. In 2019, 66.2% of the Guinean population suffered of multidimensional poverty. 
Among them, we can estimate than 51% of them are women and girls. 
 
Political participation  
There are no legal restrictions on women's access to the labour market, education and health. However, in March 2018, women represented only 22% in parliament, 18% of Supreme Court judges (3 women out of a total of 17 judges), 24% of councillors of the Eco nomic and Social 
Council, 14% of heads of ministerial departments in 2017, 2% of mayors and 18% of heads of households. Only 26% of state employees are women, most with limited responsibilities.


---
*Page 112*
---

Page 109 
 
109 
 The results of the 2014 RPGH indicate that early marriage (12  to 14 years) significantly affects 
girls regardless of their background of residence, with a prevalence of 5.5%. 
 Women have little presence in public administration, both centrally and locally. Despite a law establishing a 30% quota for women on all elec toral lists, in 2015 women held 22% of 
parliamentary seats and 15% of ministerial positions (GGGR 2015).  
 The overall rate of women's representation in decision- making positions remains low. Women 
make up only 23% in municipal councils compared to 77% of men. With 18% women members of the government, 13% Governor of regions and 6% prefect, Guinea still seems far removed from the quota of 30% female representation.  
Education  
Guinea has the lowest literacy rate in the region, with percentages of 23% for wom en and 38% 
for men. Although significant progress has been made in education, especially in primary school and in technical and vocational education, much remains to be done. In Guinea, education is compulsory only at primary school level, with primary school enrolment in 2015 
being 81% for boys and 69% for girls. Secondary and higher school enrolment is much lower, 
especially for women with percentages of 23% in secondary and 6% in higher secondary 
schools compared to 37% and 14% respectively for men.  
 Girls account for 46.21c/o of the total number of learners in technical education and public 
and private vocational training. However, there is a strong segregation by sector of activity: men are the majority in secondary sector training and women in tertiar y sector training. 
Women account for 67% of learners in tertiary sector training and men account for 80% of learners in secondary education. Moreover, in 2012, public IES had only 22.11% female students compared to 37.09% in private IES.  
 Much remains to be done in education to develop skills for the socio- economic transformation 
of the country. The gross primary school enrolment rate rose from 81% in 2012 to 88.6% in 2017. However, this rate fell significantly in 2015 (79.8%) due to the Ebola epidemic, be fore 
gradually improving to 88.6% in 2017.The primary completion rate fell from 59.4% in 2016 to 52.2% in 2017. As for secondary school, the enrolment rate is increasing from 38% in 2016 to 42.5% in 2017.  With a Gross Primary Education Rate (GST) of 75.6%  for girls and a still worrying dropout 
rate (9.0% for the whole, 10.1% for girls and 8.2% for boys), Guinea is facing low enrolment among women/girls. As the training curriculum progresses, there has been a decrease in the 
number of girls. In secondary sc hool, women's GER is 28% compared to 49% for boys. The 
proportion of female female researchers in the 2014 -2015 academic year was 6.2%, with an 
even lower proportion in the scientific and technical streams (2.36%).  
 
Health  
Guinean women, especially in rural areas, are struggling to access adequate health services, particularly obstetric care and family planning. In 2015, only 45% of births were attended by qualified health workers and only 6% of married or unioned women used any contraceptive 
method. While the maternal mortality rate has fallen by almost 34.7% over the past 20 years, from 1,040 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 679 in 2015, Guinea's maternal mortality rate is one of the highest in sub- Saharan  Africa (546/100,000 regional average). In 
addition, one in 26 women is at risk of dying in childbirth in her lifetime. The fertility rate is


---
*Page 113*
---

Page 110 
 
110 
 4.9 children per woman. Early fertility varies depending on the level of education; 48% of 
girls aged 15- 19 without education have already started their fertile lives, compared to 17% 
of those with a secondary education or higher.  
 Ebola: Guinea has been heavily affected by the Ebola outbreak. Because of the special role of women as a caregiver for the sick, both at home and in health centres, the epidemic affects women more (53%) men (47%). All deaths related to the Ebola outbreak increase the vulnerability of women and girls (following widowhood caused by the virus). In addition, the deaths of registered active women have exacerbated the vulnerability of girls and adolescents, who systematically become the successor to their deceased mothers, in the management of domestic work, including care for the sick, exposing them more to Ebola, precariousness and other forms o f violence.  
 HIV/AIDS: Women remain the most affected by the AIDS virus in Guinea. According to a report by the National AIDS Committee (CNLS), the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate among women is 1.9%, compared to 0.9% for men. While in 2015 the prevalence rate w as estimated 
at 1.7 among adults.  
Gender- based violence 
The status of women is a source of unequal social treatment. To this end, women experience various types of violence, including female genital mutilation, physical violence and psychological violence . Of all the violence, domestic violence is the most common. Almost 
two out of three women (63%) are the victims, with varying proportions depending on the region. Paradoxically, overall, only 6.6% of men and 5.1% of women complained after having a GBV and  less than 5% of men, and 3% of women who complained received responses.  
 There is very little application of legal texts protecting and promoting women's rights. This is linked, among other things, to the juxtaposition of legal orders (religious, customar y and 
modern) and to the difficult accessibility of courts in rural areas. What fosters sexist attitudes and practices, reinforces practices harmful to women/girls, hinders initiatives to accelerate the achievement of effective gender equality, and maintai ns the acceptance of gender inequalities 
by women themselves.  
 
Division of labour and women economic participation  
According to the National Gender Policy Document 2017, the working -age population in 
Guinea is 2,306,244, of whom 54% are men and 46% are wom en. In this workforce, 49% of 
men and 72% of women work for themselves. Despite their demographic weight (51.7%), Guinean women make up only 9.7% of the formal labour force (public and private). Overall, women make up less than 30% of the public service workforce. However, Guinean women are economically very active, even though the majority of them work in the informal sector.  
 
Entrepreneurship  
The private sector is characterized by a strong predominance of the informal sector, which accounts for about 95.2% of jobs in the economy, the majority of which are in the agricultural sector. The formal sector employs 4.8% of the labour force, mainly in public administration. Credit to the private sector remains modest, due to the tight liquidity conditions of banks  and 
the predatory effect created by strong demand for public/private investment. In 2017, appropriations to the private sector reached US$912.7 million, compared to US$1.2 billion for the public sector. The World Bank's Doing Business 2018 report shows that Guinea has increased by 26 places in the rankings compared to the 2012 edition. The country occupies


---
*Page 114*
---

Page 111 
 
111 
 the 153rd/ 190th. This is mainly the result of reforms in the obtaining of building permits and 
the facilitation of business creation. However, the busi ness climate is still suffering from the 
decline in tax payments, electricity connection and cross -border trade. Transparency 
International's Corruption Perceptions Index is 27 in 2017 compared to 24 in 2012 and ranks Guinea 148th out of 180 countries.  
 
Summary  
Women, especially in the rural areas are facing tremendous challenges due to low energy access rate. They are primary actors and beneficiaries of energy projects given their traditional roles as managers of wood and biomass fuel suppliers and other  environmental resources. 
Increased access to energy through renewable energy will provide a sustainable, affordable, 
and reliable supply. This will help in improving health system, providing secure environment, and increase women’s economic opportunity.


---
*Page 115*
---

Page 112 
 
112 
 3. Conclusion  
The gender assessment highlights the main gender gaps in the respective countries targeted 
by the LEAF programme , as well as important aspects and the impact related to increasing  
access to energy and  women . While gender gaps are present in many areas, the LEAF 
programme will focus o n addressing the disparities  in the decentralized renewable energy 
sector.  
 
There are some differences between the  countries covered by LEAF , in terms of the mix of 
energy sources and l evel of women’s participation. However, many of the core challenges 
linked to rural energy poverty and gender inequality are similar . Given the scope and 
interventions of the programme, w e have identified two key areas where we can apply a 
gender -lens and develop specific activities to reducing some of the remaining gender gaps  in 
the countries . Specific activities will be developed to promoting women's (economic) 
empowerment by 1) increasing  women as consumers of energy access solutions, as well as  2) 
increasing their participation in the workforce and as leaders of energy access businesses.  
Increasing access to clean energy for women  
Over  90 million women and girls currently lack  access to clean and reliable energy  in the 
countries targeted by LEAF . By providing finance to DRE companies, LEAF enables 
expansion of their operation and increasing outreach to underserved and mainly rural areas , 
where energy poverty is most severe .  
 
Country  Electrification rate 
(%) Rural population with 
access to electricity   (%) Nr of women without 
access to clean energy   
Nigeria  54% 23%  46.2 million  
Kenya  75% 71%  6.6 million  
Ghana  82% 67%  2.7 million  
Guinea  44% 20% 3.6 million  
Ethiopia  44% 32% 32.4 million  
Tunisia  99% 99% 58,500  
 Although solar solutions provided to households benefit women directly, current customer base of DRE companies confirm a higher share of men versus women customers . Issues 
related to this  inequality  include lack of i nformation about products , lack of decision making 
power  and l ack of access to finance.  
 As part of LEAF’s investment strategy, the programme can influence corporate cultures and operations of the DRE companies supported, to increase outreach to women  as customers . 
Although w omen represent an equal portion of the market and may have decision- making 
power in buying this technology, selling to women require s a different approach. Credit 
schemes  and assessments require  a different approach for women and m en, in order to increase 
finance for women to purchase solar  equipment. LEAF will r equire DRE businesses to 
confirm commitment and plan s to increase outreach to women as customers . The programme 
will support  businesses to develop gender  responsive policies and campaigns to increase 
outreach to women.  This could include gender responsive appraisal toolkits  to increase access 
to finance for women, campaigns  to share knowledge and information about products and 
financing plans etc. Based on  the specifics related to the country and region, technology, 
financing options and targeted customers  – further assessed in the country level assessments


---
*Page 116*
---

Page 113 
 
113 
 and during the due dilligence stage of the underlying transactions to understand the DRE 
company outr each and specifics –, LEAF will design tailored support to the  DRE compan ies 
to develop and implement strateg ies and plans  to increase women as customers.  
 Through LEAF and the gender action plan, the programme aims to increase access to clean energy for households and productive use benefitting women and girls in all countries selected under the program. LEAF aims to provide access to clean and reliable energy for 1.18 million households. Based on an average household size of 5, of which on average 50% is women, LEAF will directly benefit  2.95 million women  by unlocking financing for DRE companies 
to deploy SHS, GMG and C&I solutions . 413,000 female customers (35% of the total number 
of customers) are estimated to sign customer contracts for new energy access connections.  
Enhancing access to finance and fostering job creation for women  
Female participation in the labor force in the six countries lies between 40- 50%, with the 
exception of Tunisia which is lower. The energy sector has still some steps to take, with only 30%, in some countries even lower, share of women in the renewable energy workforce
19.  
 According to the IRENA and the gender analysis, four categories of barriers exist with regards to employment of women in the DRE sector: 1) perceptions of gender roles and the nature of work in the sector; 2) participation of women in STEM ( science, technology, engineerin g, 
math ); 3) the lack of adequate information, and thus awareness, about career opportunities in 
renewable energy; and 4) prevalent hiring practices, as well as unequal access to employment entry points, such as apprenticeships.   By requiring DRE companies to demonstrate its commitment and approach to increasing their 
share of female employees,  and providing support to DRE companies to develop gender 
inclusive recruitment and HR policies , and career plans , LEAF aims to enhance job creation 
for women and effectively address those barriers to reducing existing gender gaps.  
 Furthermore, LEAF aims to enhan ce access to finance and payme nt plans  for women  to 
purchase solar technology. The Framework will encourage DRE companies to provide financing schemes benefitting female customers.  
 In TA support provided to financial institutions, gender will be included in the training to enhance their ability to create gender -responsive appraisal toolkits or standardized gender -
responsive loan documen t templates.  
 The Program aims to facilitate access to credit to women for SHS, green mini -grid and captive 
power solutions, and is estimated to create 15,600 jobs for women during the scale -up of DRE 
companies.  
Gender mainstreaming  
A gender lens will be part of the TA activities provided under the Framework where possible. 
This includes TA support provided to governments to make them aware of and stipulate activities supporting gender equality. The gender component of the TA activities to 
government will be developed and specified by the gender expert tailored  to the needs , gender 
 
19 IRENA (2019). Renewable Energy: a Gender Perspective.


---
*Page 117*
---

Page 114 
 
114 
 gaps, and objectives of the assignment. Support to governments on policies and frameworks 
may include gender to ensure the needs of women as consumers or customers are addressed. 
Given these TA assignments wi ll be further developed with governments based on country 
specific gaps in enabling policies or frameworks, the gender expert will support the 
development of the assignment to address specific gender issues. The consulting firm 
contracted to implement the TA activities, will have to demonstrate gender expertise  and the 
gender component will be part of the contract. 
 To address lack of sex -disaggregates data confirmed in the gender assessment and to measure 
LEAF impact on gender, all beneficiaries and sponsors of interventions under LEAF will be  
require d to record and report on sex -disaggregated data . 
Implementation of th e gender action plan 
The gender activities planned in the gender action plan will coordinated, implemented  and 
monitored by a gender expert recruited by the AE through consulting services and funded by 
the TA budget. The gender expert will be in charge of : (i) conducting country- level gender 
assessments; (ii)  developing and refining national gender action plans  and activities ; (iii) 
responsible for the implementation of gender related activities under the programme; (iv ) 
supporting DRE companies and sponsors in reporting to the AE while respecting the gender indicators and targets of the national gender action plan approved by the AE;  (v) monitoring 
and evaluating the gender activities implemented by the DRE companies; and (vi ) preparing 
the annual LEAF gender reports. Most of the gender activities will be implemented by 
consultants or consulting firm s – in some cases as part of a larg er assignment. Consultants  are 
required to demonstrate gender expertise and capacity to implement the gender component  
and activities . This will be an integrated part of the procurement process when selecting 
implementing partners.  
 The budget of the gende r action plan is included in the overall technical assistance budget of 
the LEAF programme.


---
*Page 118*
---

Page 115 
 
115 
 4. Gender Action Plan LEAF- Programme -level Framework  
The gender action plan below is a framework plan at the programme level which will be detailed during the programme implement ation phase into 
national gender action plans at the country level. National ge nder assessments will be conducted in year 1 of the programme to refine national 
gender action plans by the gender expert coordinating this programme , funded with the TA budget of the LEAF.  
 
Activities  Indicators  Baseline  Target after 
completion  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget 
estimation in 
USD ($) 
Impact statement:  Unlock local currency financing to scale DRE, increasing access to renewable energy for women and girls, including poor house holds, 
benefitting their health, safety, productive activity and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  
Outcome statements:  
I. Increased access to renewable energy to 2, 95 million women and girls beneficiaries (50% of total beneficiaries), including 16 0,000 poor 
households;  
II. Reduction in green house gas emissions of 22.9 million tCO2eq within households to preserve and improve health of women and girls, and poor 
households;  
III. Additional jobs created in the DRE sector for 15,600 women (30% of total jobs created).  
Output Statements:  
I. New SHS, mini -grid and captive power contracts entered into with 1.18 million customers, including 413,000 (35%)  women and 48,000 poor 
and female- headed households;  
II. 20 Local banks/FIs capacitated.  
Activity 3.4.1:  Conduct national gender assessments and refine gender action plans for each country  
Recruitment of one full 
time gender expert 
responsible of the 
following tasks  
 
3.4.1.1 Conduct gender 
assessment at country 
level  
 
3.4.1.2 Refine national gender action plans for 
each country, based on  
  
 
 
Number of country level 
gender assessments  
  
Number of country level 
gender action plans 
developed   
  
 
 
0 
 
 
 
0 
 
  
 
 
 
 
6 (1 per 
country)  
  
6 (1 per 
country)  
  
 
 
 
 
Year 1  
  
 
Year 1  
 
 Implementation, 
coordination and supervision by the 
gender expert recruited 
by the Accredited 
Entity AfDB  
 $500,000  
 
(unit: 
$7000/month)


---
*Page 119*
---

Page 116 
 
116 
 the programme -level 
gender action plan, 
including  timeline and 
budget   
 
3.4.1.3 Monitor and 
evaluate the gender 
activities implemented by 
the DRE companies and 
consultants  
 3.4.1.4 Pr epare annual 
LEAF gender reports.   
  
 
 
Number of gender 
logical frameworks and GAPs supervised  
  
 
Number of annual 
LEAF gender report to 
the AE   
  
 
 
0 
  
 
 
 
0  
  
 
 
6 (1 per 
country)  
 
 
 
 
6   
  
 
 
Year 1 -6 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 1 -6 
 
 
Activity 3. 4.2:  Support the development of strategies and marketing campaigns for DRE companies to increase share of female customers  
3.4.2.1 Support the 
development of strategies, (credit) policies and 
marketing  campaigns for DRE companies to 
increase their share of 
female customers 
 Number of 
strategy/policy 
documents/ campaigns 
developed  0 +5-10 
additional 
plans  Year 1 -6 (based on 
pipeline development of DRE companies 
supported by LEAF)  Coordination and 
supervision by the 
gender expert recruited 
by the Accredited 
Entity AfDB  
 
Imple mentation by 
gender consultant.  $150,000  
Number of contracts 
entered into with female customers for new DRE 
connections (including 
25% of FHHs and number of low -income 
women)  0  
 
 413,000 
  Year 1 -6 
(deployment by DRE companies)  Programme -
related  
3.4.2.2 Require DRE 
companies to collect and report customer data 
disaggregated by sex to 
ensure gender impact and 
reporting and to 
communicate it to the 
programme gender expert  Nr of DRE companies 
collecting disaggregated by sex and female -
heade d households 
(FHHs)  
  
 Tbc at 
project level  
 
 
 
 
 15-20 (all 
supported 
DRE 
companies)  Year 1 -6  Implementation, 
coordination and 
supervision by the 
gender expert recruited 
by the Accredited 
Entity AfDB  Programme -
related


---
*Page 120*
---

Page 117 
 
117 
  
3.4.2.3  Increase financial 
access through credit/Pay -
as-you-go (PAYG) 
solutions to women 
customers/or FHH for 
SHS, green mini -grid and 
captive power solutions  N° of women who 
benefitted from PAYG 
or other financial 
solutions  
 
 
 
 Tbc at 
project level  
 
 
 
 
 
 +5% of 
women customers at 
completion
20 
 
 
 
 
 Year 1 -6 Implementation, 
coordination and 
supervision by the 
gender expert recruited 
by the Accredited 
Entity AfDB  Programme  
activity, gender 
component 
already included 
in the TA 
activity in the 
general LEAF 
Framework 
budget  
3.4.2.4 Provide gender -
responsive trainings  to 
women and men staff of 
local banks and financial 
institutions by enhancing 
their ability to i) appraise 
and lend to DRE 
businesses (ii) creation of 
gender -responsive 
appraisal toolkits; (iii) 
standardized gender -
responsive loan document templates  Numbe r of trainings 
provided  
 
 
 0 
 
 15-20 Year 1 -6 Coordination and 
supervision by the gender expert  
 Consulting firm will be 
contracted by AfDB for 
implementation of 
capacity building of FIs 
– gender component 
will be included in the 
contract.  
 The gender 
component is included in the 
TA budget 
activity for 
support to FIs  
 
Number of staff that 
participa ted in trainings, 
of which % women  
 0 75, of which 
30% women  
Activity 3.4.3: Develop gender inclusive recruitment and HR policies to increase women at the workforce of DRE companies  
3.4.3.1 Support the 
development of gender 
sensitive and inclusive 
recruitment and HR 
policies to increase DRE Number of companies 
that include an internal 
gender -responsive 
policy  Tbc at 
project level  
 +5-10 
companies equipped with 
improved 
gender -Year 1 -6 (based on 
pipeline development 
of DRE companies 
supported by LEAF)  Coordination and 
supervision by the 
gender expert recruited 
by the Accredited 
Entity AfDB  $150,000  
 
 
20 The 5% target is the minimum increase of access to finance for women  to be achieved . There are certain barriers to access credit (such as e.g. a stable income to be 
demonstrated, which has been challenging for women) that might continue limiting this objective, and out of influence/ diffic ult to be removed by the programme. The 
target therefor is conscious of the need, as well as the credi t risk of private sector companies.


---
*Page 121*
---

Page 118 
 
118 
 companies share of 
women at the workforce  responsive 
recruitment 
and HR 
policies   
Implementa tion by 
gender consultant.  
Number of jobs created 
for women  
 
 Tbc at 
project level 
or % 
women working in 
DRE sector 
in the 
countries  15,600 (at 
least 30% of the new jobs 
created)  Year 1 -6 Programme -
related, gender 
component 
already included 
in the TA 
activity in the 
general LEAF 
Framework 
budget  
 
Activity 3.4.4 Support the development of a gender inclusive and enabling DRE environment  
3.4.4.1 Support 
governments and related 
entities (e.g. REA) to 
develop and/or improve 
gender -responsive 
(digital)  systems and 
frameworks for licensing, 
data collection and real 
time monitoring of 
electrification progress 
and simulations, and 
energy audits for auto -
production taking into account the WMSMEs and women consumers 
needs.  Improved gender -
responsive systems and frameworks for 
licensing, data collection 
and real time monitoring 
of electrification 
progress and 
simulations, and energy 
audits for auto-
production taking into 
account the WMSMEs 
and women consumers 
needs through TA  
 0 
 6 systems and 
frameworks 
improved 
enhancing 
gender 
equality on 
the DRE 
access (1 per 
country)  
 Tbc by the gender 
expert coordinating 
the programme  and 
based on engagement with Governments in 
the countries during 
the implementation 
phase and adapted to 
each country  
 Coordination and 
supervision by the 
gender expert  
 Consulting firm will be 
contracted by AfDB for 
implementation of 
capacity building o f 
Government and agencies – gender 
component will be 
included in the 
contract.  
 
 The gender 
component is 
included in the 
TA budget 
activity for 
support to 
governments  
 
TOTAL cost estimation of the Gender Action Plan  $ 800,000