=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210302140111+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20138
/ModDate: D:20210303184002+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20138
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board 
16 – 19 March 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B.28/02 /Add.07/Rev.01 
4 March 2021  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 160  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project";
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.
  It is noted that the following parts have been slightly modified: a) funding proposal; and d)
 Secretariat’s assessment.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.28/02 /Add.07/Rev.01  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 100  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  102 
Secretariat’s assessment  104 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   122 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  135 
Gender documentation  137


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project  
Country(ies):  Liberia 
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Programme  
Date of first submission:  20 December 2019  
Date of current submission  March 1, 2021  
Version number  [V.001]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE b OF 97 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 3 OF 97 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
 
 
53.7%  
Enter number % 
46.3%  
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  N/A A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Direct: 250,000 people  
Indirect: 1 million people 
(population of Monrovia)  
25 % of country population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  25,638,905____  USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  17,255,755 _____ USD  
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant    
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years  A.12. Total lifespan  30 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  12/20/2019  A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 4 OF 97 
 A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Government of Liberia (GoL) represented by the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)  will serve as Executing Entity (EE) for the project.  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
1. Liberia’s capital city, Monrovia1, is extremely vulnerable to the climate change impacts of sea -level rise (SLR) and 
the increasing frequency of high- intensity storms, both of which contribute to coastal erosion and shoreline retreat. 
SLR is a significant contributor to accelerated coastal erosion, and along with the increasing intensity of offshore 
storms and waves, exacerbates coastal erosion, the impacts of which result in significant damage to buildings and 
infrastructure in Monrovia’s coastal zone. Additionally, SLR is threatening the sustainability of ecosystem services 
provided by mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland2 at the centre of the Monrovia Metropolitan Area  (MMA ), which 
is further exacerbated by urban encroachment into, and over -exploitation of the mangroves. These changes 
negatively impact the habitat for economically important fish species and the loss of these nursery areas will have 
a considerable impact on the fishery -based livelihoods of approximately 55,000 Monrovians, 46% of whom are 
women.  
 
2. The most vulnerab le part  of the MMA coast is West Point, an impoverished and densely -populated informal 
settlement situated on a narrow spit between the coast and the Mesurado Wetland, with dwellings built up to the 
shoreline. In the last decade3, coastal erosion has caused the shoreline to regress by 30 m, leading to the loss of 
670 dwellings and threatening public spaces and boat launching sites that are critical to fishery -based livelihoods. 
Without intervention — and with the added impact of climate change — coastal ero sion is expected to cause further 
shoreline regression of  190 m by 2100. This is equivalent to an additional 110% more than the coastal retreat 
expected under a non- climate change or baseline scenario4.  
 
3. To adapt to the severe impacts of climate change on Monrovia’s coast, it is necessary to change the current 
approach to addressing the impacts of climate change from a focus on short -term solutions to long- term integrated 
and participatory planning that involves the public sector, private sector and commun ities at all levels of 
governance. The proposed project is requesting GCF support to address barriers to effective climate change 
adaptation in the coastal zone of Monrovia, and Liberia more generally,  through interventions in three inter -related 
focus areas : i) coastal protection ; ii) coastal management ; and iii) diversified climate -resilient livelihoods . In this 
way, the proposed project will build the long- term climate resilience of coastal communiti es in Liberia by both 
address ing immediate adaptation priorities  and creat ing an enabling environment for upscaling coastal adaptation 
initiatives to other parts of Monrovia and Liberia.  
 
4. The project will address one of the most urgent adaptation needs in Monrovia by constructing a rock revetment to 
protect West Point against coastal erosion and storms. The revetment was selected as the preferred solution, 
because while a ‘soft solution’ in the form of beach nourishment with an associated groyne was  considered  
technically feasible, the sustainability of this option would be limited, because the regular maintenance required 
was not feasible in the local context5. From an infrastructural perspective, t he project will protect and build the 
climate resil ience of approximately 10,800 people in West Point and avoid damages of up to USD 47 million to the 
individual and communal property of West Point residents as well as securing launch sites for fishing boats which 
 
1 In this proposal, ‘Monrovia’ and the ‘Monrovian Metropolitan Area’ (MMA) are used interchangeably to refer to the jurisdictional or 
administrative entity of the MMA.  
2 the estuary of the Mesurado River  
3 2008 to 2018 
4 See Annex 2.B (Vulnerability Sub -assessment) for Economic and Financial Analysis of Monrovia Metropolitan Area, and specifically West 
Point.  
5 Stabilising or ‘fixing’ the shoreline by means of a rock revetment is the preferred solution to coastal erosion at West Point by both the 
Government of Libera and affected communities. This approach also represents the most socially sensitive design because it requires low -
to-no maintenance while still accommodating boat launching and landing. A rubble mound revetment with rock armour, which is able to 
withstand extreme wave conditions and storm events, is proposed. The Engineering Sub- assessment Report (Annex 2.C) showed that the 
northern portion of the proposed revetment is a less dynamic wave environment, and the conceptual design for this portion of the 
intervention site consequently proposes lighter rock armour. The ‘toe’ of the structure will consist of a resistant geotextil e and will be 
anchored in the existing beach sediment to a level of 5m below mean sea- level to account for future deepening of the area directly in front 
of the revetment. A six -metre wide promenade, for access to the shoreline and recreation activities, is proposed between the revetment and 
existing dwellings at West Point. Two boat launching and landing sites are proposed as part of the preferred option at the southern end and 
centre of the revetment, respectively. These launch and landing sites will be provided in addition to the open beach area to the north of the 
proposed revetment, where fishing boats are already launching and landing. Further details on the stakeholder engagement process that 
led to this decision is available in Annex 2.A Feasibility Study, Section 10.2 Analysis of coastal defence options .


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 5 OF 97 
 will have a positive impact on the fisheri es sector. Th e construction of this  coastal protection infrastructure will form 
part of a strategic, cohesive coastal adaptation strategy  using  an Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) 
approach.  
 
5. The paradigm shift necessary for adopting an evidence -based and participatory  ICZM approach across Liberia will 
be facilitated  by the proposed project through initiatives to s trengthen the t echnical and institutional capacity of the 
government and communities to adapt to the rapidly changing coastal landscape and to undertake long- term, 
climate -responsive plannin g on the coast . Based on quantitative, defensible scientific data in coastal management 
and planning,  the proposed project will develop a national -scale high- resolution multi -criteria vulnerability map and 
design a national ICZM  Plan (ICZMP ) for Liberia in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, including the private 
sector . By fostering partnerships among government institutions and between the Government of Liberia (GoL), 
private sector actors, research institutions and communities, the project will improve coordination on coastal 
management and create an enabling environment for ongoing coastal adaptation beyond the project area and after 
the project implementation period.   
 
6. The proposed project will increase local adaptive capacity by strengthening gender - and climate- sensitive 
livelihoods and protecting mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland within Monrovia. Specifically, adaptative capacity 
in Monrovia will be increased by: i) s afeguarding ecosystem services provided by mangroves and increasing the 
resilience of these ecosystems to climate change, through community co- management agreements between 
government and communities; ii) improving community knowledge on climate change impacts and adaptation 
practices; and iii) strengthening climate- sensitive livelihoods and supporting the uptake of climate- resilient 
livelihoods. This is an important element of the integrated approach because while the development of ICZM P will 
improve coas tal management at an institutional level, limited institutional capacity in Liberia means that capacitating 
communities to engage positive adaptation strategies is critical to ensure an increase in their long- term climate 
resilience. The latter two activit ies will be based at the  innovation and education centre — to be established in West 
Point . In addition to being the focal point for climate- resilient livelihood development, the  innovation and education 
centre will act as a hub for awareness -raising and other community -led actions being implemented under the 
project6. An exit strategy and O&M plan (Annex 21) will ensure that the proposed project activities will be sustained 
in the long-term7. 
 
7. These investments by the GCF and the Government of Liberia (GoL) will catalyse a paradigm shift in the 
management of Monrovia’s coastal zone towards an integrated, transformative and proactive approach that 
addresses current and anticipated c limate change risks and which mixes both infrastructure (where necessary) and 
coastal ecosystems in adaptation efforts. This will directly benefit a total of ~250,000 people in the communities of 
West Point  through coastal defence and enhanced livelihoods ; and through enhanced livelihoods and improved 
protection of mangrove ecosystems in the communities of  Topoe Village; Plonkor and Fiama h; and Nipay Town 
and Jacob ’s Town. In addition, the project will indirectly benefit approximately one million8 people through the 
adoption of a transformative,  climate risk -informed ICZM approach for Liberia, with  the first phase of  implementation 
focused on the Monrovia Metropolitan Area (MMA) . The combination of direc t and indirect beneficiaries under this 
project will  ultimately confer adaptation benefits on one quarter of the total population of Liberia.  
 
6 Recognising the risks of the COVID -19 pandemic, all project activities will operate strictly within government mandated regulations and 
best practices. All government directives, such as lockdowns and mandatory quarantine will be adhered to, as will any restric tions on travel, 
organis ation of events or sizes of meetings and workshops.  
7 Further information on the exit strategy and sustainability of the proposed project can be found in Section B.6.  
8 Direct benefits will accrue at the site- specific scale, whereas indirect benefits will accrue at the municipal scale — i.e. the population of 
MMA, which is estimated at one million people.


---
*Page 8*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 97 
 
  
9 Further information on Monrovia’s coastal communities’ socio- economic conditions is provided in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 1.  
10 Section 3.1 of Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study provides details of the two major impacts of climate change in Monrovia, flooding  and coastal 
erosion resulting in shoreline retreat.  
11 The Mesurado estuary has been declared a Ramsar wetland site.  
12 Section 4.3 of Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study provides details on the impacts of climate change on mangrove ecosystems in Liberia and the 
Monrovia area.  
13 Section 2.10 of Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study  elaborates the on biophysical factors that have resulted in coastal r etreat by summarising the 
bathymetric, tidal and wave conditions which characterise the nearshore and offshore environment of Monrovia and Section 3.1 provides 
details of the two major impacts of climate change in Monrovia, flooding and coastal erosion res ulting in shoreline retreat.  
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate rationale and con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Context  
8. Liberia’s capital, Monrovia, has a population of over a million people, with many of the city’s most vulnerable 
communities located along the highly exposed coastal zone. These communities are largely reliant on fishery -
related livelihoods, which has resulted in a proliferation of impoverished people settling in densely populated 
neighbourhoods that extend right up to the shoreline9. Although the combination of accessible natural resources 
and proximity  to central markets makes neighbourhoods in the coastal zone popular for local residents, their 
exposure to coastal hazards such as storm surges and coastal erosion makes these densely -populated settlements 
extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. With the physical characteristics of the shoreline offering 
very limited natural coastal defence, extensive erosion already causes significant damage to coastal 
infrastructure10.  In addition, the limited availability of land along the coast has also led to unplanned urban 
expansion into the mangrove forests within the Mesurado Wetland11. This urban expansion, along with the 
harvesting of natural resources — such as fuelwood —  has increased the pressure on this estuary which provides 
ecosystem services to coastal communities, including the provision of critical breeding habitats for economically -
important fish species. These problems of baseline erosion from natural, dynamic coastal processes  that already 
threaten coastal communities in risk -prone areas and the degradation of mangrove ecosystems, are expected to 
be greatly exacerbated by climate change; see below and Section 4 of Annex 2.A : Feasibility Study (FS)12. 
 
9. Over the last de cade, accelerated coastal erosion has caused shoreline retreat of ~30 m at the Monrovian 
community of West Point, leading to the loss of ~670 dwellings and threatening public spaces and boat launching 
sites that are critical to fishery -based livelihoods. T he loss of dwellings and infrastructure due to accelerated coastal 
erosion between 2008 and 2018 is clearly visible in Figure 1. A detailed assessment of the different factors (both 
climate and non- climate related) contributing to coastal erosion at West Point can be found in Sections  2.10 and 
3.1 of the FS13.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 97 
 
  
14 The significant wave height  is the average height  of the highest one- third of all  waves  measured which is equivalent to the estimate that 
would be made by a visual observer at sea. The significant wave height profile along Liberia’s coast is shifting towards an increase in the 
occurrence of all large waves. The return period of extreme storm events that historically occurred once every 100 years are projected to 
decrease to 1 in 40 years under RCP4.5 and 1 in 25 years under R CP8.5 by the year 2100.  
15 Sections 3.4.1 –3.4.3 of Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study provide details on the impacts of climate change on the forcing mechanisms of 
coastal erosion; sea- level rise, wave conditions and storm conditions, respectively.   
  
Figure 1. Position of the coastline at West Point and the mouth of the Mesurado Wetland in 2008 (left image and in red) and 2018 
(right image and in blue).  
 
Climate change impacts  
 
10. Accelerated coastal erosion , resulting from a combination of sea- level rise (SLR) and an increase in the frequency 
of high-intensity storms , poses a substantial threat to the homes, assets and livelihoods of coastal communities in 
Monrovia.  In addition, SLR is likely to negatively impact the mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland, on 
which many livelihoods depend. An analysis of these two climate change impacts, summarised below, has informed 
the design of the proposed project , which will support urgent coastal adaptation and reduce vulnerability  to these 
impacts of climate change . Modelling of additional climate variables, related to precipitation and temperature, has 
also informed aspects of  the project design . 
 
Coastal erosion and sea- level rise  
 
11. Climate projections under Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 predict SLR ( Figure 2) of 75 cm by 
2100 along Liberia’s coast  (a conservative estimate assuming no contribution from melting ice sheets) , as well as 
an increase in the frequency of high- intensity storms resulting in an increased offshore significant wave height14,15. 
The combined effect of these climate impacts will rapidly increase the rate of coastal erosion in Monrovia, 
threatening local communities  and coastal infrastructure (see FS Section 3. 2). In addition to increased coastal 
erosion, climate change will impact vulnerable coastal communities in Monrovia through: i) degradation of the


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 97 
 
  
16 Climate change degrades mangroves through inundation because of SLR and through changes in water temperature, salinity and 
sediment transport. For more information see GEF Project Document. 2016. Improve sustainability of mangrove forests and coast al 
mangrove areas in Liberia through protection, planning and livelihood creation –  building blocks towards Liberia’s marine and coastal 
protected areas. Available at : 
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gef -documents/liberia- mangroves/5712- liberia -mangroves -prodoc -
20160311.pdf?sfvrsn=20715c6e_2 . 
17 Further information on climate change impacts on Monrovia is provided in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Sections 3 and 4.  
18 West Point is a densely populated neighbourhood situated between the ocean and the Mesurado estuary, with houses extending right 
onto the shore.  
19 Further information is provided in Section 4 of  Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study  and Chapters 4 and 5 of  Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub-
assessment . 
20 based on current value, optimistic and pessimistic socio- economic scenarios, Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment, Chapter 5  
 mangrove ecosystems on which their livelihoods and food security depend16; and ii) inundation of vital infrastru cture 
such as boat -launch sites, dwellings and socio- economic spaces and amenities such as fish markets17.  
 
 
Figure 2. Projected relative s ea-level rise  for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5.  
 
12. Section 3.3.2 of the FS — through modelling the impact of SLR, waves and sediment transport under future climate 
conditions  — demonstrates that of the five most vulnerable sections of Monrovia’s coastline ( Figure 3), West Point  
(labelled Section 3)18 is the most at risk in terms of both exposure and sensitivity19. In West Point, erosion induced 
through climate change factors (SLR, increased significant wave height, as well as changes in runoff and sediment 
transport) will result in coastal retreat of an additional 190 m by 2100 ( Figure 4 and Figure 5). This is equivalent to 
an additional 110% more than the coastal retreat expected under a non- climate change , or baseline,  scenario. 
Between 2008 and 2018, observed shoreline regression was 30 m at West Point, with further losses up to 10m 
occurring in early 2019. These losses are consistent with the losses modelled under the RCP8.5 climate scenario 
(note that expected change s under RCP4.5 are also provided in the FS) over the same time period (see FS, Section 
3.6). Without intervention, an additional USD 40 –48 million20 worth of damage is anticipated to occur at West Point 
by 2100. Given its extreme exposure and vulnerability,  West Point was selected as the main target site for coastal 
protection interventions under this project. Figure 4 below highlights how West Point (Secti on 3, orange line) is 
expected to experience the highest percentage of additional climate -induced coastal  erosion between 2020 and 
2100, while Figure 5  indicates the coastal profile at West Point under storm conditions with a return period of 100 
years under RCP8.5 (see FS Section 3 for similar changes under RCP4.5) in 2100.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 97 
 
  
Figure 3. Map of Monrovia’s coastline depicting five vulnerable areas identified under the Vulnerability Sub-assessment (Annex 
2.B).  The Mesurado Wetland is shown in the centre of the map.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 97 
 
  
21 Mangrove systems around Monrovia are important breeding grounds for various commercially viable aquatic species, including fi sh, 
crabs, shrimps and water snail.  
22 For further details on the importance of the mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland to Monrovians, see Section 3.1 of Annex 
2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment  
23 The results of a comprehensive spatio- temporal al analysis of mangrove degradation in the Mesur ado Wetland are provided in Section 2 
of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment while a summary is provided in Section 5 of Annex 2.A. Feasibility Study.  
24 A first draft of this mangrove- focused annex has been included as part of this revised submission as Annex 2.D. Following the analysis of 
secondary data, proposed project activities will be revised. The revised activities will then be presented to relevant Liberi an stakeholders for 
validation and review. Relevant stakeholders to this end include various technical experts from inter alia Conservation International (having 
implemented a number of mangrove- related projects in Liberia), UNDP, and the EPA. This analysis will be used to redesign Output 3 based 
on the feedback received from GCF, as well as the validation described above.  Figure 4. Average coastal retreat between 2000 and 2100 for five coastal sections in Liberia with (continuous lines) and without 
(dashed lines) climate change under RCP 8.5 ( Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub-assessment) . West Point is shown in orange, i.e. Section 
3. 
 
 
Figure 5. Modelled coastal profile for storm with return period of 100 years for RCP 8.5 in 2100 at West Point (Section 3) . 
 
13. In addition to the damage to infrastructure, climate change will also affect the livelihoods of communities in West 
Point and beyond, of whic h fishing is the most important. This makes coastal protection measures only part of the 
solution needed to adapt to climate change in Monrovia, with enhancing climate- resilient livelihoods being important 
for medium-  and long- term climate resilience. Mang roves in the Mesurado Wetland play a critical role as the 
spawning ground for the fish stocks sustaining the local fishing industry21, as well as in supporting other livelihood 
activities, including charcoal production and fish smoking22. Development pressure and inadequate land- use 
planning have, however, resulted in people settling in and around the mangroves. This, along with other 
anthropogenic impacts such as unsustainable harvesting of fuelwood, has led to the degradation of mangrove 
ecosystems in parts of the Mesurado Wetland ( Figure 6)23.  
 
14. Annex 2.D provides more comprehensive baseline information and analysis for the mangrove components of the 
project. This analysis is based on the best available data, employing a combination of quantitative analysis and 
qualitative validation methods24, including: i) identification of degradation trends and hotspots using time-series 
spatial data; ii) problems and root causes of mangrove degradation; iii) relevant past and ongoing projects; and iv) lessons learned and best practices.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 97 
 
  
Figure 6. Map showing spatial location and graph showing loss of mangrove cover (ha)  over time in areas of the Mesurado Wetlands 
between 2002 and 2019. Data supplied by Global Mangrove Watch.  
 
15. Climate change is likely to exacerbate the threats of baseline degradation and compromise the ecosystem services 
provided by the wetlands. SLR (Fig. 2) presents a substantial threat to mangroves in the Mes urado Wetlands , as 
it is likely to increase the depth of the water beyond the threshold at which they can survive, thereby reducin g the 
area in which mangrove ecosystems are viable. In addition, the increasing number of hot days projected under 
future climate conditions  is likely to place physiological strain on the mangrove and reduce their ability to 
photosynthesise.  Further details on the impacts of climate change on mangroves in the Mesurado Wetlands are 
provided in Section 4.3 of the FS (Annex 2A). As a result of these impacts on mangroves, climate change will 
impact the sustainability of the fisher y industry, on which approximately 3,000 fisherfolk and 9,000 fishmongers in 
Monrovia depend for their livelihoods. Given that most  fishmongers in Monrovia are women, the loss of the 
mangroves will disproportionately affect women and exacerbate existing gender inequality.


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 97 
 
  
Figure 7. Proposed revetment intervention at Section 3 - West Point (Annex 2.C: Engineering Sub- assessment).  
 
Temperature  
 
16. Projections indicate that maximum temperatures are likely to increase towards the end of the century. An increase 
in the number of hot days (where the maximum temperature exceeds 30°C) is also expected under future climate 
conditions  (Figure 8). Like SLR, the temperature increase is projected to have an impact on the mangrove 
ecosystems of the Mesurado Wetland. The optimum leaf  temperature for mangrove photosynthesis is 29–32°C, 
while the threshold above which photosynthesis ceases is 38– 40°C . Therefore,  warmer temperatures may benefit 
mangrove growth below this  threshold.  Similarly, the impacts of temperature changes on fisheries and other 
livelihoods are likely to be mixed and dependent on the physiological thresholds of economically important species 
(further details are provided in Section 4 of the FS). The impacts of changing temperatures on mangrove 
ecosystems have  been considered in the design of m angrove conservation in itiatives under Output 3 of the project .


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 97 
 
 Figure 8. Annual number of hot days where maximum temperature exceeds 30°C.  
 
Precipitation  
 
17. An increase in the frequency of high- intensity storms is projected under future c limate conditions  (Figure 9). This 
is likely to increase coastal erosion, as described above. In addit ion, increased frequency of high- intensity storms 
will increase flood risk in parts of Monrovia and reduce the ability of fishers to safely operate by making landing 
sites unsafe and decreas ing the number of days where fishers are able to safely operate. The design of the coastal 
protection measures under Output 1 (Figure 7)  include drainage systems to reduce flood risk and protection of boat 
launching sites for fishers. Unlike the increases in temperature, increased precipitation will not necessarily have a 
substantial , direct  impact on the mangrove ecosystems of the Mesurado wetland  — as these mangroves are not 
wave facing and are partially  protected from storm surges. Projections for overall trends in precipitation vary 
between models and scenarios. Further details of these projections and impacts are provided in Sections 3 and 4 of the FS.  
 
 
Figure  9. Annual total precipitation divided by the number of  wet days where total precipitation exceeds  1.0 mm.  
 
 
Related Interventions


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 97 
 
 18. The proposed project is complementary to  three recent projects currently under implementation by UNDP and 
Conservation International (CI) in the MMA  under the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Similarly, a recently 
approved World Bank project with comparable and complementary  objectives  is also included as an entry point for 
collaboration with organisations working in Liberia, which will promote economies of scale and improve the 
efficiency of both projects. The table below summarises the above- mentioned related interventions by showing key 
results and outcomes, lessons learned, and complementarity of the proposed project with each of the projects.  
 
Table  1. Related projects and interventions . 
Proponent/Fund
er/Date  Project title  Key results  Key lessons 
learned  Complementarity/upscaling  
UNDP/G lobal 
Environment 
Facility 
(GEF)/2017  Enhancing 
Resilience of Liberia 
Montserrado 
County 
Vulnerable 
Coastal Areas 
to Climate 
Change Risks II
 Reduced the 
vulnerability of physical assets 
and ecosystems 
as well as 
protecting coastal 
areas from SLR 
and coastal 
erosion in Monrovia
 Robust, 
sustainable coastal protection 
measures are 
needed to 
adequately protect 
exposed 
infrastructure and 
vulnerable communities  The proposed project will 
complement the installation at New Kru Town and address the 
gap in spatial coverage by 
establishing a similar, improved 
intervention at West Point, 
drawing on the lessons learned 
and thereby extending the 
proportion of Monrovia’s coastline that is robustly defended against accelerated coa stal erosion and 
SLR. 
Conservation 
International  
(CI)/GEF/2016  Improve 
sustainability of mangrove forests and coastal mangrove areas in 
Liberia through 
protection, planning and livelihood creation – 
building blocks towards 
Liberia’s 
marine and 
coastal 
protected 
areas  Strengthen the 
conservation and 
sustainable use of mangrove forests through effective participatory land-use planning and 
the establishment 
of marine and coastal protected areas.  Community -led 
conservation initiatives are fundament al to 
measurable gains in the protection of biodiversity and 
ecosystem 
services.  While this CI -GEF Trust Fund 
project aims to establish protected areas in at least 35% of Liberia’s mangroves, neither land- use 
plans, nor community conservation agreements have been established for the 
Mesurado mangroves. Building on 
the lessons learned and successes achieved by the above -
mentioned GEF project, the proposed GCF project will: i) develop community -led co -
management agreements for the 
mangroves ecosystems in 
Monr ovia; ii) reduce the pressure 
on the Mesurado Wetland for natural resources by enhancing 
the resource-efficiency of 
livelihood activities that depend on 
the ecosystem; and iii) incorporate 
the management of mangrove 
ecosystems into the Integrated 
Coastal Z one Management Plan 
(ICZMP).  
UNDP/GEF  Cross -cutting 
Capacity 
Development  Developing the 
capacity of the GoL to meet its 
global environmental obligations. One 
component of this 
project is the 
development of an 
integrated 
environmental 
knowledge The provision of 
reliable, 
defensible information to inform decision -
making is 
fundamental to 
achieving project 
impact  The proposed GCF project will 
build on the activities relating to 
the EKMS by: i) developing the capacity of the system to serve as an information repository for Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management (ICZM); ii) 
capacitating ten government 
institutions to acces s and use the 
system, including the provision of 
technical equipment; and iii)


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 97 
 
 management 
system (EKMS) to 
collect, collate and 
disseminate 
information 
relating to 
environmental 
priorities, with an 
emphasis on 
climate change  developing knowledge products to 
raise awareness about the EKMS.  
World 
Bank/IDA/2020  Liberia First 
Inclusive 
Growth Development Policy 
Operation  This project is 
designed to 
address weather - 
and climate-related risks by 
supporting 
national 
adaptation 
policies, as well 
as supporting social protection.  Recent national 
commitments emphasize the socio -economic 
importance of 
improved 
planning, 
adaptation, 
resilience, and 
enhanced disaster-risk 
management.  The proposed GCF project will 
align with the World Bank project by including key project personnel from the World Bank team in the cross -sectoral working groups 
(CSWGs) developed under Output 2. This arrangement will enable 
the sharing of relevant project 
information, lessons learned and 
promote efficient use of project resources. For example, where community and stakeholder consultation is proposed, a unified approach to consultation that includes both projects will be 
adopted to save  costs and time.  
African 
Development 
Bank (AfDB)/GCF /2021  Enhancing 
Climate Information Systems for resilient development in Liberia (Liberia CIS)  Strengthen 
Liberia’s multi -
hazard impact -
based forecasting and early warning systems (MH -IBF-
EWS) through 
improved  
meteorological and hydrological systems  Reliable, timeous  
and extensive data is needed for effective monitoring, forecasting and early warning for sector - and 
location- specific 
response planning and disaster management   
 The proposed project will utili se 
information generated by the monitoring systems improved under the AfDB /GCF  project to 
inform the development of a national ICZM Plan for Liberia. Spatial and biophysical coastal data generated under the proposed project will also be incorporated into the MH-IBF-
EWS developed under the 
AfDB/GCF project. . 
UNDP/GEF / 
project under development  Enhancing the 
resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities in Sinoe County of Liberia  Protect assets 
and enhance livelihood diversification of 
Liberian coastal 
commun ities 
through the 
implementation of sea and river defense management  Incorporating sea 
and river defense  
management into ICZM is 
necessary to ensure adequate climate change adaptation planning  and 
addressing of climate change impacts and risks.  The proposed GCF project 
contributes to and aligns with the proposed GEF project interventions to increase climate 
change adaptation and resilience 
through innovative technologies 
and initiatives to promote the sharing of climate-related information.  In addition, the 
propo sed GCF and GEF projects 
both contribute to increasing the 
resilience of coastal communities 
and ecosystems from climate change-induced sea- level rise 
(SLR) and subsequent coastal 
erosion.  The GEF project will 
focus on Sinoe County for coastal 
protection measures and all other 
coastal counties for policy and 
capacity building thereby 
upscaling initiatives under the 
GCF project in Monrovia.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 97 
 
  
19. In addition to the projects listed above, Liberia’s approved Readiness Proposal supports the Government of Liberia 
to advance its National Adaptation Planning (NAP)  process in climate- sensitive sectors and is underpinned by four 
key outputs. These outputs are summarised below, along with text demonstrating complementarity with the 
activities proposed under this project:  
 
20. (A) Strengthening institutional frameworks and  coordination for implementation of the NAP process: the proposed 
project will make a strong contribution to strengthening Liberia’s adaptation- related institutions, particularly the 
national ministries responsible for coastal zone management, i.e. the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), Ministry 
of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP) and the Ministry of Public Works (MPW). Specifically, the project 
will strengthen Liberia’s existing ICZM framework by working with relevant government institutions to dev elop a 
national Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan (ICZMP) that addresses climate change risks through a 
participatory and consultative process. Development of the plan will be led by a service provider with experience 
in developing and implementing c limate risk -informed ICZM. To ensure the plan is effective and implementable it 
will be developed through a phased approach, whereby the first phase will entail producing a high- resolution, multi -
criteria vulnerability map of the entire Liberian coastline.  The second phase will entail the development of a national 
climate -responsive ICZMP through a collaborative process led by international and national experts. The plan will 
be developed based on the high- resolution vulnerability map and extensive stakehol der consultations. To ensure 
effective implementation of the ICZMP across the relevant government sectors, an ICZM Committee and Cross -
Sectoral Working Group (CSWG) will be established under this phase, with the explicit mandate of ensuring the 
integration of climate risks and the alignment and conformity of the ICZMP across the relevant government sectors. 
The CSWG will develop a detailed action plan for the implementation of the ICZMP, identifying sector -specific 
regulations and by -laws for updating and i ntegrating ICZM principals. Additionally, during the second phase, the 
ICZMP will be implemented in Monrovia with support from the GCF grant financing of the project. The final phase 
of the ICZMP development will entail updating the ICZMP three years after  the initial plan has been developed. 
This will ensure that lessons learned during the implementation process in Monrovia are incorporated into the 
second iteration of the ICZMP, which will facilitate the upscaling of this activity through ICZMP implementation 
across Liberia.  
 
21. (B) Expansion of the knowledge base for scaling up adaptation: cross -sectoral capacity development and 
knowledge empowerment are fundamental informants of the activities under Output 2 of the proposed project. Specific aspects that address the need to expand the national knowledge base and create an enabling environment 
to scale up adaptation include, but are not limited to: strengthen the technical capacity of the CSWG established 
under Sub- activity 2.1.3 to implement the ICZMP through long- term training via a Training- of-
Trainers (ToT) 
approach. To support the effective implementation of the ICZMP developed under Activity 2.1, the project will host 
workshops on ICZM planning and implementation to build the capacity of the CSWG and additional representatives 
from all relevant government institutions. As part of this process, a detailed action plan for sector -specific 
implementation of the ICZMP will be developed by the CSWG to facilitate the integration of ICZM into relevant by -
laws and regulations. Capacitating technical personnel responsible for overseeing the uptake of implementation of 
ICZM across all relevant sectors will support the effective execution, management and uptake of ICZM within the 
MMA as well as facilitating upscaling across the country.  
 
22. (C) Building capacity for mainstreaming climate change adaptation into planning, and budgeting processes and 
systems: similarly, activities within the project that promote the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into 
Liberia’s national processes and s ystems include a training and action programme for members of the CSWG to 
mainstream ICZM into relevant government entities and support mainstreaming of ICZM and coastal adaptation into national policies, programmes and plans. Sub- activity 2.2.5 has been d esigned with this need in mind: the 
international expert contracted under Sub- activity 2.2.3 will conduct a 16- week, phased training programme for the 
members of the CSWG and two additional technical personnel from each of the 10 government institutions. T his 
long-term training programme will include instruction on the implementation of the ICZMP, important considerations 
for cross -sectoral collaboration and will also include training on how to conduct the course for additional members 
within each instituti on. This training programme will emphasise knowledge and tools for integrating climate risks. 
mainstream action plans and will support the different institutions to perform their roles and meet targets as 
specified in the ICZMP. This will build the capacit y of institutional representatives to effectively implement the 
ICZMP, further capacitate government technical staff and ensure alignment between all relevant institutions,


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 97 
 
  
25 While energy -efficient cookstoves are expected to facilitate a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, the emission reduction co- benefits 
of this activity during the project lifespan are expected to be negligible. Upscaling of cook stove production after project implementation will 
increase the potential for emission reductions. Further detail on expected emission reductions is provided in Section B.3, paragraphs 101 
and 102.  
26 Further details of the gaps summarised here are given in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 7.  
27 Climate forcings will contribute to an accelerated sediment loss along the Monrovian coastline. Anticipated changes in the future climate 
conditions in the near shore environment include enhanced wave energy, continuing local sea level rise, increases in river run- off, and more 
destructive storm surges from enhanced storm intensity (Figure 10). These climate forcings will enhance longshore sediment transport and 
increase the sediment flux of rivers and bas ins. These activities are the most critical processes leading to the significant in coastal erosion 
currently present and anticipated along the Monrovian coast. A further detailed analysis of climate change and coastal erosion projections 
and expected impacts can be found in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 2 as well as in Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment, 
Section 4.  
 thereby supporting cross -sectoral collaboration and the uptake of ICZM across Liber ia. The international expert will 
also provide support to the different institutions for mainstreaming and implementing the ICZMP.  
 
23. (D) Formulation of financing mechanisms for scaling: The project’s main contribution to innovative finance 
mechanisms that create an enabling environment for upscaling is under Output 3, where the adaptive capacity of 
vulnerable communities will be strengthened and innovation enabled by supporting local fishery -based livelihoods 
through sustainable co- management of mangrove areas and providing training to catalyse the uptake of diversified 
climate -resilient livelihoods, thereby implementing ICZM at the municipal scale. Capacity development of this 
nature will be achieved through informing community members on how to use solar -powered cold storage facilities 
(Annex 2.D : Mangrove Assessment Section 6.1.1) and training those involved in small -scale informal enterprises 
to manufacture and sell eco- friendly products such as energy -efficient cookstoves. To this end, Ac tivity 3.4. is 
particularly relevant. This activity will establish small -scale manufacturing facilities and develop training material to 
capacitate community members to manufacture and sell cookstoves to support alternative climate- resilient 
livelihoods  and improve management of mangrove ecosystems25. The facilities will be incorporated into the 
education and innovation centre and will focus on producing energy -efficient products with a specific emphasis on 
activities suitable for women and other vulnerable groups, in collaboration with the  CSC established under Activity 
3.1. The focus on energy -efficient cookstoves was selected  because there is a market for these  stoves in Monrovia 
and the construction of the stoves requires minimal material input  or training. Training materials will be made 
publicly accessible to support the upscaling of the activity to other parts of Monrovia.  
 
24. While past and ongoing initiatives have made some progress in limiting the impact of climate change and coastal 
erosion on vulnerable communities, several gaps in the successful implementation of climate- responsive coastal 
adaptation are still prevalent in Liberia26. These gaps include limited: i) financial capacity of the public sector to 
invest in climate- resilient  development; ii) technical capacity of both local - and national -level governments to 
interpret climate information and integrate ecosystem- based approaches into decision- making; iii) institutional and 
financial capacity for climate- resilient land- use plan ning and enforcement; iv) policy support, as well technical and 
financial capacity for adopting and implementing ICZM at all levels of government; v) awareness of predicted 
climate change impacts among coastal communities and government -level decision -makers; vi) awareness about 
the importance of ecosystem services for livelihoods; and vii) opportunities for alternative, climate- resilient 
livelihoods. Additional investment from the GCF is sought to enable interventions to address these gaps and ensure that planning and development along the Liberian coastline is integrated, climate- responsive and supports the 
country’s adaptation priorities.  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Problem statement  
25. The proposed project will address the extremely urgent climate change- induced problem of accelerated coastal 
erosion and vulnerability of the climate- sensitive fishery industry in Monrovia , as well as mitigating the ongoing 
degradation of mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetlands . The accelerated rate of coastal erosion is directly 
linked to SLR and the increasing frequency of high- intensity storms, which enhance the erosion potential of  waves  
(Figure 10)27. The combined effect of SLR and changes in storm intensity is exacerbating current erosion — and 
expected to increase shoreline retreat along the densely -populated coastline by 110% over the next 80 years, with 
significant impacts in terms of damage to buildings and infrastructure. The absolute  urgency of this scenario is 
illustrated by the loss of ~ 10m of shoreline at West Point between January and July 2020, according to anecdotal 
sources.  In addition to accelerating coastal erosion, climate- induced SLR will lead to the loss of mangroves in the 
Mesurado Wetland (Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 4.3) , exacerbating ongoing baseline degradation and


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 97 
 
  
28 Further information about the impacts of climate change on mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland and an assessment of livelihood 
activities dependent on these ecosystems is presented in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Sections 2 and 5  as well as in Annex 2.D : 
Mangrove Sub- assessment.  
29 A rock revetment represents the most comprehensive option to address coastal erosion at the target com munity of West Point, 
addressing the problem for the entire West Point area through installation of the rock revetment at a highly active and expos ed site, which 
will protect tens of thousands of vulnerable people.  
30Comprising approximately 3,000 fisherfol k and 9,000 fishmongers, who in turn form part of the ~250,000 residents of the target 
communities within and adjacent to the Mesurado Wetlands.  impacting on local climate -sensitive livelihood activities28. These mangroves provide important ecosystem services, 
including providing breeding grounds for economically important fish species. SLR and the impacts associated with 
this process also threaten the entire coastline of Liberia to varying degrees. To date, interventions to address these impacts have been ad hoc  and uncoordinated, resulting in limited effectiveness in building resilience.  The preferred 
solution to the above- mentioned problems , described below, focuses on addressing the ad hoc  and inadequately -
designed nature of previous interventions to address coastal erosion in Liberia.  Lessons learned concerning the 
benefits of adequately resourced and robustly designed infrastructure, paired with an integrated and long- term 
approach to coastal planning i s at the heart of the preferred solution.  
 
 
Figure  10. The interrelation between forcing mechanisms and coastal retreat.  
 
Preferred solution  
 
26. The preferred solution to the above- mentioned climate hazards is to: i) address the immediate needs of vulnerable 
communities in Monrovia by protecting highly exposed areas of the Monrovian coastline from accelerated coastal 
erosion and SLR and preventing the forced relocation of vulnerable peoples through the establishment of coastal 
defence infrastructure29; ii) shift the coastal management paradigm towards an integrated, evidence- based and 
climate -responsive approach by adopting ICZM in Monrovia and Liberia to improve coordination among 
government institutions as well as with  communities and the private sector, and incorporate long- term 
considerations into adaptation efforts; iii)  secure the livelihoods of vulnerable communities who rely on climate-
sensitive fishing practices through sustainable co- management of mangrove ecosys tems; and iv) enable 
community -level innovation and learning for the promotion of climate- resilient livelihoods and development of long-
term adaptive capacity.   
 27. Securing the livelihoods of the 12,000 people
30 within the MMA who rely directly  on the climate- sensitive fishing 
sector is a particularly important aspect of the preferred solution because of the relationship between the fisheries 
and food security in Monrovia. These livelihoods are underpinned by the ecosystem services provided by 
mangroves within the Mesurado Wetland, which are under threat from climate change- induced SLR, unsustainable 
extraction and pollution. The most cost -effective approach to adapting to the impacts of climate change on these 
mangroves will be to engage communities in facilit ating the sustainable use of mangroves to reduce anthropogenic 
pressure and increase the resilience of mangroves to the impacts of climate change- induced SLR.  Similarly, 
empowering Monrovian coastal communities to develop alternative, climate- resilient livelihood activities will 
strengthen their adaptive capacity.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 97 
 
  
31 These institutions are: Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME); ii) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); iii) N ational Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Authority (NFAA); iv) Ministry of Public Works (MPW); v) National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA); vi) Liberian 
Hydrological Service (LHS); vii) Liberian Meteorological Service (LMS); viii) Liberian Maritime Authority (LMA); ix) Ministry of Finance and Development Planning ( MFDP); and x) National Port Authority (NPA). For further details on the roles of these institutions see Annex 2.A: 
Feasibility Study, Section 5.   
28. The project will catalyse a paradigm shift in Liberia’s approach to coastal spatial planning and the sustainable 
management of coastal ecosystems that addresses current and future climate change risks, incorporating long-
term, climate- responsive planning. This shift will be realised through the use of quantitative, scientifically -defensible 
data in th e development of a national climate risk -informed ICZMP, using infrastructure-  ecosystem - and 
community -based adaptation approaches , which will be implemented in the MMA  and be used as a platform to 
develop public -private partnerships for coastal management. In addition,  the paradigm shift in coastal management 
will be realised by  supporting the sustainable use of resources to address the impacts of climate change on 
livelihoods in the MMA specifically.  
 Barriers  
29. There are three main barriers to addressing the above- mentioned problem statement. These are summarised 
below and expan ded on in Section 8  of the FS . 
 Limited technical and financial capacity within the public and private sector for the establishment of coastal protection 
infrastructure in the short - to medium- term.  
30. The effectiveness of long- term adaptation planning for coastal communities in Monrovia under future climate 
change conditions will be increased by improving land use plans and effectively enforcing these plans. The GoL —  
and private sector actors in Liberi a — however, lack the technical and financial capacity for designing and 
constructing the infrastructure necessary to protect the most vulnerable communities in Monrovia in the short -term 
because of insufficient government revenue and numerous development priorities. These communities are already 
settled in areas that will be severely affected by projected climate change impacts. The private sector operating in 
the most vulnerable areas is largely made up of small and informal enterprises with limited capac ity for long- term 
planning. Lack of access to finance and support for development also limit the financial capacity of these enterprises 
for investing in climate- adaptive activities. Addressing this barrier effectively requires a combination of short -term 
— hard infrastructure — and long- term — ICZM, land use planning and strengthening informal value chains — 
interventions.  While there has been no lack of small -scale, ad hoc interventions to protect coastal infrastructure 
and vulnerable communities at West Point in the past decades, the sustainability of interventions of this nature is 
inherently limited.  
 
Limited knowledge and technical capacity within government institutions for the adoption and implementation of 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM).  
31. There is currently limited capacity within relevant government institutions in Liberia to promote sustainable and 
climate resilient coastal development through ICZM. Responsibility for the management of different aspects of the 
coastal zone in Liberia are currently distributed across 10 government institutions31. As a result, the management 
of coastal resources currently occurs largely on an ad hoc  and sectoral basis in Monrovia, which in turn detracts 
from the sustainability of management struct ures and interventions  and limits the potential for systematically 
developing public -private partnerships to support coastal management . In addition, there is limited knowledge of 
the climate change vulnerability of different coastal areas and no existing plan to support an integrated approach to coastal management and climate change adaptation, despite this being a legal requirement in Liberia.  This 
barrier is further exacerbated by insufficient  climate information systems (CIS). Limited knowledge and tec hnical 
capacity as well as the lack of an approved ICZM plan is a barrier that will need to be overcome in order to promote 
sustainability of coastal settlements, food security and climate- resilient planning.  
 Limited awareness about the impacts of climate change, including climate- sensitive nature of fishery -based livelihoods, 
mangrove ecosystems and food security, and limited development of opportunities for adapting to these impacts.  
32. A significant barrier to building the climate resilience of coastal communities in Monrovia is limited recognition and 
awareness of: i) climate change; ii) the projected impacts of climate change; and iii) the climate- sensitive nature of 
coastal livelihoods  (i.e. the unsustainability of current extractive practices) , particularly in the fisheries sector, which 
are supported by climate- sensitive mangrove ecosystems. This barrier results in the unsustainable use of 
mangrove ecosystem services in Monrovia, which contributes to degradation and reduced ecosystem services


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 97 
 
  
32 Details of the options analysis and selection process,  including the reasoning for selecting the revetment over nature- based solutions, are 
given in Chapter 6 of Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment.  
33 Further information on the wave dynamics and limited feasibility of alternative interventions is provided in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, 
Section 4 and 9 as well as in Chapter 4 and Appendices 8.A -8.F of Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Assessment. Details of the options analysis and 
selection process are given in Chapter 6 of Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment  
34 Maintenance requirements were identified through stakeholder engagements as a critical consideration in the selection of coas tal 
protection measures and the revetment was therefore designed to minimise operations and maintenance costs and requirements. Details of 
the selection and design processes can be found in Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment, Chapter 7, and on pg. 63 of Annex 6: ESAR.  
 provision. In addition, there has been limited investment in the development of alternative climate -resilient livelihood 
opportunities as a result of the limited understanding of their importance. Overcoming this barrier will require 
increasing the awareness of d ecision -makers, planners and communities regarding the projected impacts of climate 
change on coastal livelihoods and developing opportunities for the uptake of alternative climate- resilient livelihoods. 
There is also a need for decision- makers and communities to collectively agree to sustainably manage mangrove 
areas, taking into consideration the linkages between functional mangroves and the viability of the fishery sector 
that supports the livelihoods of coastal communities in Monrovia.  
 
Proposed  interventions  
 
33. This project will address the climate change impacts of SLR and increasingly frequent and intense storms through 
three outputs, namely: i) the protection of coastal communities and infrastructure at West Point against erosion caused by sea- level rise and increasingly frequent high -intensity storms; ii)
 institutional capacity building and policy 
support for the implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) across Liberia; and iii) protecting mangroves and strengthening gender - and climate- sensitive livelihoods to build local climate resilience in Monrovia. 
 
 
34. Under Output 1, coastal protection infrastructure will be constructed to protect critical sections of the coast on a local scale (see Sections 8 and 9 of the FS  for a description of site selection and the options analysis for different 
interventions
32).  This will address the technical and financial barriers to establish coastal protection infrastructure 
that is urgently needed in Monrovia. Protection for the most vulnerable areas on the Monrovian coastline —  West 
Point in particular — will require the con struction of the ‘hard intervention’ strategy of rock revetments to stabilise 
the shoreline, as opposed to ‘softer’, ecosystem- based adaptation (EbA) solutions. Such a rock revetment will be 
constructed at West Point to protect homes and infrastructure aga inst coastal erosion and storm surges.  Stabilising 
or ‘fixing’ the shoreline by means of a rock revetment is the preferred and only feasible solution to coastal erosion at West Point because of a range of factors as described in the technical studies undertaken for this project (Annex 
2.C: Engineering Sub- assessment). These include:  i) the exposed nature of the coastline; ii) the steep gradient of 
the beach and nearshore profile; and iii) the high energy wave environment
33. The hard infrastructure approach 
also represents a socially sensitive design that will be sustainable beyond the project lifespan because it requires 
low-to-no maintenance34 and accommodates launching and landing of fishing boats. A rubble mound revetment 
with rock armour — which is able to withstand extreme wave conditions and storm events — is proposed. The 
Engineering Sub- assessment showed that the northern portion of the proposed revetment is a less dynamic wave 
environment, and the conceptual design for this portion of the intervention site consequently proposes lighter rock 
armour. The revetment will be anchored in the existing beach sediment to a level of five metres below mean sea 
level to account for future deepening of the area directly in front of the revetment. A six -metre wide promenade, for 
access to the shoreline and recreation activities, is proposed between the revetment and existing dwellings at West 
Point. Two boat launching and landing sites are proposed as part of the design at the southern end and centre of 
the revetment, respectively. These launch and landing sites — which will create a locally safe environment with 
mild wave action — will be provided in addition to the open beach area to the north of the proposed revetment, 
where fishing boats are already launching and landing. This intervention has been developed through an integrated 
approach and will serve as basis for upscaling coastal protection to the rest of the MMA, as well as nationally.  
 
35. Output 2 will facilitate the paradigm shift necessary for adopting an evi dence- based ICZM approach across Liberia.  
The technical and institutional capacity of the government and communities to adapt to the rapidly changing coastal 
landscape and to undertake long- term, climate -responsive planning will be strengthened.  Two core components of 
ICZM are the promotion of reliable knowledge — based on well -established practices and procedures — and good 
governance. The adoption of an ICZM approach entails the advancement and facilitation of: i) the integration of a variety of stakeholders and stakeholder interests , including private sector stakeholders ; ii) long -term climate change 
adaptation and planning — with ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) as a fundamental concept of the ICZM


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 97 
 
  
35 Several important industries in Liberia are located in the coastal zone and are vulnerable to the impacts of  climate change in these areas. 
These industries include hotels, tourism, mines and manufacturing. During the development of the ICZMP, engagement with these 
stakeholders will be undertaken and the project will be used as a platform to leverage private sec tor support for coastal management.  
36 The manufacturing and sale of energy -efficient cookstoves has been selected for this activity to promote the adoption of alternative 
climate -resilient livelihoods and improve mangrove ecosystem management. While energy -efficient cookstoves are expected to facilitate a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, the emission reduction co- benefits of this activity during the project lifespan are expected to be 
negligible. Upscaling of cookstove production after project i mplementation will increase the potential for emission reductions. Further detail 
on expected emission reductions is provided in Section B.3, paragraphs 101 and 102.  
37 Detailed information on the exit strategy  can be found in  Section B.6 of this proposal.  approach; iii) proactive plannin g based on reliable knowledge and consideration of long -term resilience; and iv) co -
governance of coastal ecosystems. A shift to using quantitative, defensible scientific data in coastal management 
and planning will be promoted through the development of a national -scale high -resolution multi -criteria 
vulnerability map and the design a national ICZMP for Liberia in consultation with all relevant stakeholders , 
including the private sector35. This plan will include spatial planning guidelines in the context of  climate change and 
will describe adaptation actions along the coast, such as livelihood diversification as well as hard and soft coastal 
protection measures, enabling the upscaling and replication of specific coastal defence interventions undertaken 
durin g the project. Given the severity of the expected impacts of climate change in the medium-  and long- term, the 
ICZMP will also assess the feasibility of ‘managed retreat’ where appropriate. To ensure that the ICZMP can be 
implemented effectively, the projec t will focus on building the capacity of the 10 government institutions responsible 
for coastal management and will facilitate the implementation of the ICZMP in Monrovia. This focus on capacity development and coordination will ensure that ICZM continues beyond the lifespan of the project.  
 
36. Under Output 3, the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities will be strengthened and innovation enabled by 
supporting local fishery -based livelihoods through sustainable co- management of mangrove areas and providing 
training to catalyse the uptake of diversified climate- resilient livelihoods . These activities , including the co -
management of mangroves,  will be underpinned by the strengthened institutional framework for ICZM developed 
under Output 2 and will s erve to implement ICZM at the municipal scale. Lessons learned from these activities will 
be used to inform the revision of the ICZMP, ensure that policy and planning are informed by the experience s of 
target communities. Capacity development for community -level ICZM  will be achieved through informing 
community members on how to use solar -powered cold storage facilities (Annex 2.D : Mangrove Sub- assessment 
Section 6.1.1) and training those involved in small -scale informal enterprises to manufact ure and sell eco- friendly 
products such as energy -efficient cookstoves36. Please see the Mangrove Sub- assessment for more information 
on energy -efficient cookstoves and cold storage facilities.  
 
37. Taken together, the three project interventions of coastal protection, comprehensive, long- term planning for coastal 
zone management and the strengthening of local livelihoods — in conjunction with strong awareness -raising and 
knowledge management considerations — will address both the immediate and long- term impacts of climate 
change on the coast of Monrovia and facilitate the potential for upscaling these initiatives across Liberia.  These 
three outputs have been designed to incorporate sustainability considerations from the outset, with minimal 
maintenanc e required beyond the project period. An O&M Plan (Annex 21) has been developed to cover the 
minimal maintenance needed and will be part of an effective exit strategy that will ensure the long- term sustainability 
of the project interventions and their associated benefits37. The Theory of Change (ToC) diagram ( Figure 8 11) 
illustrates the impact pathways of project interventions in overcoming the abovementioned barriers to achieve the 
paradigm shift in coastal zone management.  The ToC diagram outlines how the  progression from Project Results 
(Outputs)  to Outcomes will achieve the Project Goal  — to address priority adaptation needs through the adoption 
of an ICZM approach, supporting the strengthening of climate- resilient livelihoods  and the development of coastal 
protection infrastructure. Specifically : i) Outcome 1 will see a reduced exposure to coastal erosion as a result  of  
Output  1 — the protection of coastal communities and infrastructure — and Output 2 — the building of institutional 
capacity  and policy support for the implementation o f ICZM ; ii) Outcome 2 will see institutional and regulatory 
systems strengthened for climate responsive ICZM as a result of  Output  2; and iii) Outcome 3 will see an increase 
in income from climate- resilient livelihoods as a result  of Output  3 — protecting mangroves and strengthening 
gender - and climate -sensitive livelihoods  to increase local adaptive capacity . Detailed descriptions of these 
Outputs , and the activities they consist of, are provided in B.3 below.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 97 
 
  
38 Further details on the displacement of households are available in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 3.   
Figure 11. Theory of Change . 
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
38. The proposed project will enhance the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities within the Monrovia 
Metropolitan Area (MMA) to climate change- induced sea- level rise (SLR) and an increase in the frequency of high-
inten sity storms. This overarching objective of the project will be achieved through three integrated outputs, which 
will be implemented at three distinct spatial scales — national, municipal and site- specific. These outputs will focus 
on: i) establishing effec tive and sustainable coastal protection measures for Monrovia’s most vulnerable 
communities at West Point (Output 1); ii) strengthening institutional capacity to manage coastal areas of Liberia in 
a climate- resilient manner and raising community awareness on climate change impacts and adaptation practices 
(Output 2); and iii) protecting mangroves and strengthening livelihood practices in vulnerable communities across 
the MMA to enhance people’s adaptive capacity and contribute to long- term transformational change (Output 3).   
Implementing a robust, sustainable coastal defence solution at West Point under Output 1 as well as the institutional 
and community -level changes in Outputs 2 and 3 will trigger transformational change in terms of how Liberia 
manages it s coastline in the future. The investment at West Point will serve as a demonstration site of the value of 
robust and sustainable coastal protection measures, which will be used to leverage f uture  investments in coastal 
protection infrastructure for the most vulnerable Liberian communities . In addition, the comprehensive technical 
assessments used to inform the design of the West Point revetment  provide a foundation for the design of further 
coastal protection interventions. To comp lement these measures, the integrated approach to mangrove 
management, fisheries management , and coastal planning and development taken in Outputs 2 and 3 will promote 
gender -responsive policy reforms that will apply across the whole Liberian coastline. In this way, the project will 
effect major transformational change.   
 Output 1. Protection of coastal communities and infrastructure at West Point against erosion caused by sea -
level rise and increasingly frequent high -intensity storms.  
 
39. Coastal communities within the MMA are at risk from accelerated coastal erosion and increased incidence of 
extreme weather events, which has already resulted in the displacement of at least 670 households
38. This risk is 
disproportionately borne by the poorest and most vulnerable communities in Monrovia. Under this output, GCF 
grant funding will be used to construct coastal defence infrastructure — in the form of a rock revetment — to protect 
the West Point settlement against accelerated coastal erosion and extreme storm events induced by climate


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 97 
 
  
39 Chapter 3 of the Engineering Sub -assessment (Annex 2.C) provides the detailed engineering assessment of the protection measures 
(infrastructure). It includes the design of the proposed measures. Section 3.5.2 (page 38) of Annex 2.C provides the description and 
detailing of the design for the revetment at West Point.  
40 The development of a hard revetment at West Point is very unlikely to affect wat er loads in the estuary. This is because the revetment will 
be developed at the ocean front and will not affect the flow field inside the wetland, which is dependent on tidal water level fluctuation. The revetment, like the existing beach at West Point, wi ll not affect this tidal water level fluctuation which is responsible for water levels in the 
estuary. Inundation of West Point would be a potential concern if there was insufficient drainage through the revetment during heavy rains. 
However, the revetment  structure will be permeable as it will be constructed out of rocks. Additional drainage facilities (such as drainage 
from promenade and/or culverts) have been accounted for in the costing of the revetment (both capital and operational expendi ture) and the 
drainage capacity and requirements will be assessed during the finalisation of the revetment designs. The revetment will not be proximate 
to freshwater aquifers and is therefore highly unlikely to cause saltwater intrusion. Further details on how these ri sks are taken into account 
in the design of the revetment can be found in Annex 2.C.  
41 Guidelines for the construction plan have been compiled during the feasibility assessment of the project and are available in  Annex 2.A: 
Feasibility Study, Section 10.  change. West Point is one of the most densely populated and poorest areas on the Monrovian coast and is the 
most vulnerable section of the coast to climate change- induced acceleration of coastal erosion (see Figure 2). Co-
finance will facilitate the finalisation and validation of the detailed design and construction plans , and rock material 
for the construction of the revetment at West Point will be provided as in- kind co -finance.   
 
Activity 1.1. Prepare construction plans and finalise technical design specifications for coastal defence structure at 
West Point.  
 
40. Detailed technical design specifications, based on the designs contained in  the Engineering Sub- assessment 
(Annex 2.C39), will be finalised and an in- depth construction plan developed to ensure that the construction of the 
West Point revetment and green promenade under the project (Activity 1.2) are implemented appropriately and 
with the inputs of communities (50% women)  in the final design and plan. An Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) will be conducted to inform the final design, in accordance with the requirements of Liberian law, following the Environmental and Social Assessment Report (ESAR) . In addition, a project site- specific hydro-
engineering study of West Point will be conducted by qualified engineers to ensure that the 
risks of potential 
localized and broader flooding at incorporated in the detailed design of the defence structure.  The fi nal technical 
design will be based on the existing conceptual design provided in the Engineering Sub- assessment funded by 
GCF PPF reso urces  and will consider best practices and lessons learned from other coastal protection 
interventions in Monrovia. This c onceptual design has been informed by detailed geo- physical and social 
assessments, including an options analysis of nature- based solutions and other hard infrastructure options 
(Annexes 2.A : Feasibility Study , 2.B : Vulnerability Sub -assessment , 2.C : Engin eering Sub-assessment  and 2.D : 
Mangrove Sub- assessment ). This approach will be integrated into  the GEF -LDCF  project which is currently being 
developed to strengthen ICZM  in Sinoe County, Liberia, highlight ing that nature- based solution should be used 
along with infrastructural  interventions  to reduce the vulnerability of coastal  communities . Preventing both heavier 
water loads in the Mesurado Estuary and saline intrusion into freshwater aquifers were critical consid erations in 
this initial design of this intervention40. Concurrent to the development of the technical design plans, the construction 
plan will b e developed. The construction plan will identify all necessary inputs, procurement procedures, contracting 
guidelines, relevant legislation, ESS processes and gender -responsive stakeholder consultations necessary for the 
construction of the coastal defence infrastructure41. The final detailed technical design and construction plan will 
be developed w ith input from community and government stakeholders and will be validated prior to 
implementation.  The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) will be the Responsible Party for this activity and co-
finance will be provided by UNDP.  
 41. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.1. Refine and detail the design and construction plan for the coastal defence structure and green 
promenade at West Point.  
 
Under this sub- activity, a service provider will be contracted to develop an ESIA, consideri ng the impacts associated 
with the planned revetment at West Point as well as livelihood activities under Output 3. This will be done in accordance 
with the requirements of Liberian law for the construction of the revetment, and will include an assessment of the risk 
of economic displacement as a result of: i) the revetment restricting access to boat launching sites for fisherfolk; and ii) 
the development of the mangrove co- management agreement under Activity 3.2. If required based on this assessment, 
a Livelihood Restoration Plan  (LRP) will be developed as part of the ESIA process and included in the Environmental


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 97 
 
  
42 Taking into account appropriate meeting times and places, gender - and cultural -sensitivities, so that women are able to attend and fully 
participate.   
43 Further information on the green promenade, including an artist’s impression, are provided in Annex 2.C: Engineering Sub- assessment.  
44 Associated amenities will include, but not be limited to, waste bins, benches or other seating, boat storage facilities and designated open 
areas for the drying and smoking of fish  
45 Domestic purposes include utili sation of the beach for washing, cooking and drying or smoking of fish,  
46 Validated concept designs for the revetment are included in Annex 2.C: Engineering Sub- assessment  
47 The GoL has signed an MoU stating their intention to finance any required maintenance. The government entity responsible for 
undertaking this maintenance will be identified during the development of the ICZMP under Activity 2.1.2. Please see Annex 21: O&M Plan 
for further information.  
 and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the project. A consultant will be contracted to undertake a hydro -engineering 
study  and develop the final technical design and construction plan for the coastal defence infrastructure to be developed 
at West Point , based on the ESIA. This f inal design will draw on the hydro engineering study , existing, prior work and 
the completed technical feasibility designs (see Annex IIC : Engineering Sub- assessment ) and will be developed in 
consultation with local communities and government stakeholders, with 50% women  representation , to ensure that 
sufficient access to beach landing sites is retained and that adequate drainage facilities and amenities are incorporated 
into the promenade.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.2. Host a validation workshop to present and validate final design and construction plan to government 
and community stakeholders.  
 
42. Under this activity, an official validation workshop will be held to present the f inalised design and construction plan 
to relevant government and community stakeholders and to explain how stakeholder concerns and input have been incorporated into the design. In addition to government and community stakeholders, other interested parties  and 
civil society groups such as development organisations and NGOs will be invited to attend the validation.  All 
consultative and workshop processes will be gender -responsive
42 and include 50% women.  
 
Activity 1.2. Construct coastal defence structure to protect West Point against climate change- induced coastal 
erosion.  
 43. To protect the community of West Point from the impacts of accelerated coastal erosion and extreme weather 
events resulting from climate change, an engineering firm will be co ntracted to construct a rock revetment at West 
Point. The revetment will be 1,050 m long and will include a green promenade
43 as well as associated amenities44. 
The promenade will be utilised as an open community space and will compensate for the loss of  beach areas that 
are used for numerous social, domestic and economic purposes45 but are currently dissipating from erosion. The 
design of the revetment46 is such that three areas of beach will be retained and protected to ensure that the ocean 
is accessib le for  social and domestic purposes as well as for the launching of fishing boats and the processing of 
fish. Constraints on capacity for maintaining physical infrastructure were considered in the selection and design of the revetment (see the Engineering Sub- assessment
). As a result, the revetment is designed to be a low 
maintenance intervention47 with a minimum lifespan of 30– 50 years.  To further  increase the sustainability of the 
intervention, l abourers from the West Point area engaged in the construction of the revetment will be trained on the 
best maintenance techniques for  the revetment . Women will constitute at least 40% of waged labour on project -
related activities, including construction.  MME will be the Responsible Part y for this activity, which will be financed 
by GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 44. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 1.2.1. Construct a rock revetment with a green promenade and community amenities at West Point.  
 
45. A firm will be procured , and  construction will be undertaken according to the detailed final design and construction 
plan developed under Sub -activity 1.1.1. The firm implementing the protective infrastructure at West Point will 
engage local wage labourers from the West Point area to work on the construction of the infrastructure.  
While most 
of the beach is inaccessible by cars because of the dense housing layout at West Point, bollards will be provided 
for the limited vehicular entry points to eliminate any risk of theft of site materials . The cost of bollards will be 
minimal and will be absorbed under construction costs. The type and location of access control infrastructure will


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 97 
 
  
48 The risk of theft of sand and rock materials at We st Point is low. Extraction of materials during and following construction is therefore 
unlikely. However, security personnel can be hired to reduce the risk of theft of equipment and materials during the construction phase if the 
contractors deem it neces sary. Security has been employed for safeguarding site equipment and materials on other projects and can be 
made available during the construction of the West Point revetment. After project completion, the risk of materials being sto len is 
considered minim al. In addition, the project has been designed with the West Point community’s ongoing engagement and will continue to 
play a large role in ensuring the project is effectively implemented.   form part of the detailed design phase during48. Equal opportunities  and equal p ay will be provided to men and 
women, and wages will comply with Liberian labour laws. W omen will constitut e at least 40% of waged labourers  
and the implementing firm will make provision for gender -specific safety protocols and personal protective 
equipment . The labourers engaged for the construction of the revetment will be trained by the firm on best 
maintenance techniques for the revetment. To foster sustainability and local ownership, regular monitoring of the 
structure and its perfor mance will be done in collaboration with the local communities through local leadership. 
During the construction phase, training will be provided to representatives of local communities and community 
leaders on basic monitoring systems, data collection and reporting to the lead government institution as per the 
ICZMP. This will include capacity to check for wear and tear on a regular basis and after minor weather events, 
maintenance of the promenade, planting local vegetation species under supervision of re levant authority. This 
training will also be provided to representatives of fisher folk in terms of the maintenance of the fish landing sites.  
Additionally, during the construction phase,  awareness -raising on health and safety with regards to the construction 
of coastal infrastructure will be facilitated during the daily safety debriefs, which is an important consideration for 
the construction phase given the close proximity of the densely  populated West Point community . In addition to 
ensuring the representation of women as wage labourers , at least 50% of  those providing training will be women.  
 
Output 2. Institutional capacity building and policy support for the implementation of Integrat ed Coastal Zone 
Management (ICZM) across Liberia.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 97 
 
  
49 These institutions are: Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME); ii)  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); iii) National Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Authority (NFAA); iv) Ministry of Public Works (MPW); v) National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA); vi) Liberian 
Hydrological Service (LHS); vii) Liberian Meteorological Servi ce (LMS); viii) Liberian Maritime Authority (LMA); ix) Ministry of Finance and 
Development Planning (FNDP) and x) National Port Authority (NPA).  
 46. The project will strengthen the capacity of the national government in Liberia to implement climate risk-informed 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) and to support cross -sectoral coordination among the 10 government 
institutions responsible for climate -resilient coastal management  (Figure 912 )49. The ICZM approach considers 
land-use planning in relation to climate risks, the interconnectivity of coastal systems, stakeholder sectors, as well 
as the intrinsic dependence of communiti es on coastal resources for their livelihoods. It is aligned with the GEF  
project for ICZM in Sinoe County planning. It also promotes evidence- based decision- making using scientifically 
defensible data. Implementing such an approach in the MMA  — and across Liberia — will transform the existing 
coastal management paradigm and reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities  to the impacts of climate 
change- induced SLR, accelerated coastal erosion and increased incidence of extreme weather events. The 
adoption of a climate- resilient ICZM approach will be facilitated by the development of a high- resolution, multi -
criteria vulnerability map of the Liberian coastline and a national Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan 
(ICZMP), as well as by equipping and capacitating relevant stakeholders to effectively implement the plan. 
Additionally, activities under this output will increase the knowledge of institutions and communities on climate-
change related coastal hazards, potential adaptation strategies and the importance of an integrated approach to 
coastal zone management  (Figure 12) . Through knowledge sharing and engagement, activities under this Output 
will support the development of public -private partnerships for coastal management. This will be achieved by  
developing an awareness -raising campaign targeting four communities in the MMA and upscaling the existing 
Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) which was established under a previous GEF -funded 
initiative. The participatory approach to the implementation of ICZM will improve coordination: i) between 
governmental institutions; and ii) between GoL, communities and the private sector for coastal management. The 
knowledge management, awareness -raising and vulnerability mapping components  of this output will be facilitated 
through co- financing, while GCF grant funding will be used to develop the climate- responsive ICZMP as well as 
the procurement of biophysical data collection systems and spatial data.  
 
Activity 2.1. Develop an Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan for Liberia.  
 
Figure 12. Linkages between activities under Output 2 of the proposed project.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 97 
 
  
50 These institutions are: Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME); ii) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); iii) N ational Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Authority (NFAA); iv) Ministry of Public Works (MPW); v) National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA); vi) Liberian 
Hydrological Service (LHS); vii) Liberian Meteorological Service (LMS); viii) Liberian Maritime Authority (LMA); ix) Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (FNDP) and x) National Port Authority (NPA).  
51 including hotels, mines and other coastal industries  47. Under this activity, the project will work with relevant government institutions50 to develop a national Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management Plan (ICZMP) that addresses climate change risks , through a participatory and 
consultative process. This ICZMP  will use an  integrated approach to infrastructure- , community - and ecosystem-
based adaptation in the coastal zone of Liberia. This approach will inform and be informed by  lessons learned from 
collaboration between communities, government, private sector and NGOs for : i) strengthening climate- resilient 
livelihoods and ecosystem- based adaptation under Output 3; and ii) implementing protective coastal infrastructure 
under Output 1 . Development of the plan will be led by a service provider with experience in developing and 
implementing climate risk -informed ICZM. To ensure the plan is effective and implementable it will be developed 
through a phased approach, whereby the first phase will entail  producing a high- resolution, multi -criteria 
vulnerability map of the entire Liberian coastline. The second phase will entail the development of a national 
climate -responsive ICZMP through a collaborative process led by international and national experts. The plan will 
be developed based on the high- resolution vulnerability map and extensive stakeholder consultations  with 
government institutions and private sector entities in the coastal zone51. To ensure effective implementation of the 
ICZMP across the relevant government sectors, an ICZM Committee and Cross -Sectoral Working Group (CSWG) 
will be established under this phase, with the explicit mandate of ensuring the integration of climate risks and the 
alignment and conformity of the ICZMP across the relevant government sectors. The CSWG will develop a detailed 
action plan for the implementation of the ICZMP, identifying: i)  sector -specific regulations and by -laws for updating 
and integrating ICZM principals ; ii) opportunities for strengthening public -private partnerships to support ICZM; and 
iii) strategies for financing coastal management interventions, particularly relating to climate change adaptation. 
Additionally, during the second phase, the ICZMP will be implemented in Monrovia with support from the GCF grant 
financing of the project. The final phase of the ICZMP development will entail updating the ICZMP three years after 
the initial plan has been developed. This will ensure that lessons learned during the implementation process in 
Monrovia are incorporated into the second iteration of the ICZMP, which will facilitate the upscaling of this activity 
through ICZMP implementation across Liberia.  Furthermore, the ICZMP will draw on data generated from Liberia’s 
multi -hazard impact -based forecasting a nd early warning systems (MH -IBF-EWS), which will be  strengthened 
under the proposed AfDB/GCF project “ Enhancing Climate Information Systems for resilient development in Liberia 
(Liberia CIS)”.  The ICZMP developed under this activity will be used as a base from which the GEF project will 
build on for developing county level ICZMPs.   
 
48. This process will result in a dynamic ICZMP that is continuously adaptive, iterative and a resource for the 
sustainabl e and climate- resilient management of the Liberian coastal zone. The ICZMP will: i) provide guidelines 
for integrating climate change risks into planning and coastal resource use; ii) support integrated development 
planning; iii) develop linkages between t he 10 government institutions, local research bodies , the private sector  
and civil society groups through the ICZM Committee and CSWG; and iv) facilitate the incorporation of climate change considerations into coastal zone management. This will support a s hift in the approach to managing the 
coastal zone in Liberia. To address the local gap in expertise required to develop and implement this ICZMP, the project will facilitate long- term training for relevant institutional representatives on best practice for  ICZM through a 
Training- of-Trainers (ToT) approach under Activity 2.2. MME will be the Responsible Part y for this activity, which 
will be financed by GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 
49. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 2.1.1. Develop a high- resolution, multi -criteria vulnerability map of the Liberian coastline.  
 
50. To build the knowledge base for climate risk -profiling in Liberia and to support the generation and implementation 
of an ICZMP, an international firm will be contracted to work alongside local experts to develop a high- resolution, 
multi -criteria vulnerabil ity map that assesses exposure, sensitivity and hazard parameters within coastal areas. 
Data collected from vulnerability studies conducted under the NAP Readiness process will be included in the 
development of the map, as will the high- resolution spatial datasets procured under Sub- activity 2.3.1. The 
vulnerability map will incorporate socio- economic and gender considerations in addition to biophysical and climate 
change factors to ensure long -term decision -making beyond the lifespan of the project. The re sulting map will


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 97 
 
  
52 Which will include collecting sex and age disaggregated data, supporting the trainer -of-trainers, and coordinating with relevant ministries 
on gender focus -points during the ICZMP development.  
53 including hotels, mines and other coastal industries  
54 This will include considerations on drivers and implications of illegal sandmining along beaches and rivers causing erosion and 
exacerbating the effects of climate change.  
55 The terms of reference/mandate for this committee, as well as the Cross -Sectoral Working Groups, will be defined as part of the ICZMP 
under Activity 2.2.  provide municipalities within the MMA — and across Liberia — with the knowledge base required to incorporate 
climate change considerations into future urban planning and ICZM. This is an integral step to inform the 
development of the ICZMP  by providing a baseline of scientifically defensible information on coastal vulnerability 
in Liberia and which will be enhanced by the improved national multi -hazard impact -based forecasting and early 
warning systems (MH -IBF-EWS).  
 
Sub-activity 2.1.2. Dev elop the climate- responsive ICZMP in collaboration with stakeholders, incorporating information 
from the map developed under Sub- activity 2.1.1.  
 
51. Under this activity, the project will develop the ICZMP through a participatory and consultative process. An 
appropriately qualified service provider will be contracted to engage with relevant stakeholders through a gender -
sensitive approach52 — including the leaders of vulnerable  communities, NGOs, private sector actors  located in 
the coastal zone53, the 10 relevant government institutions involved with coastal management in Liberia as well as 
the Ministry of Gender , Children and Social Protection (MoG CSP). The inputs generated by these engagements 
will be considered in relation to the vulnerability map produced under Sub- activity 2.1.1 and will inform the design 
of the ICZMP. Additional engagement s with these stakeholders  will be undertaken to inform the revision of the 
ICZMP three years after the initial development. The ICZMP will be developed at a national scale but will only be 
implemented in Monrovia under the project. Approaching implementation in a phased manner — whereby the 
project supports implementation on a limited scale — will provide an opportunity for newly capacitated institutional 
staff to exercise the skills gained through the long- term training under Activity 2.2, while providing upscaling 
potential for the ICZMP across Liberia. Additionally, under this activity, the service provider developing the ICZMP 
will: i) define the mandate of the ICZM Committee and the CSWG based on consultations with all government 
stakeholders54; ii) define the roles and targets for each of the 10 institutions; a nd iii) work collaboratively with the 
GoL to mandate responsibility for the maintenance of the revetment — constructed under Activity 1.2 —  to a 
relevant government entity. These mandates will be presented along with the ICZMP under Sub- activity 2.1.3.  
 
Sub-activity 2.1.3. Host validation workshops to present and secure ownership of the ICZMP for representatives from 
the 10 government institutions responsible for coastal management in Liberia.  
 
52. Under this activity, the two workshops will be held to present the newly developed ICZMP in Year 2 and the updated 
ICZMP in Year 6  to high- level representatives from the 10 government institutions responsible for coastal 
management in Liberia as well as the Ministry of Gender and Social Protection. The objective of the workshop s will 
be to secure the endorsement and joint ownership of the plan, including commitment to the roles and targets for 
each institution. During the workshops , any outstanding points regarding the plan will be addressed and the 
members of the 10- person ICZM Committee will be elected during the first workshop. The ICZM Committee55 will 
be comprised of high- level government representatives , comprising 50% women,  from different government 
departments . The Committee will be mandated to strengthen cross -sectoral collaboration for ICZM and support the 
mainstreaming of IC ZM into sectoral policies and plans.  
 
53. A further action undertaken during this initial validation workshop will be the nomination of government staff from 
each department to serve on a Cross -Sectoral Working Group (CSWG). The CSWG will include technical 
specialists from each of the 10 government institutions responsible for coastal management and will be capacitated 
under Activity 2.2 to mainstream ICZM into their respective institutions. The members of the CSWG will also be mandated to provide technical in
formation to their counterpart representatives on the ICZM Committee. This 
structure will contribute to information flow between decision- makers and technical personnel within as well as 
between different government institutions.  
 
Activity 2.2. Capacitate the Cross -Sectoral Working Group to mainstream ICZM into relevant government sectors 
through a Training -of-Trainers approach.


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 97 
 
  
56 Including, for example, land- use management, forestry and fishing   
54. Under this activity, the technical capacity of the CSWG established under Sub- activity 2.1.3 will be strengthened to 
implement the ICZMP through long- term training via a Training- of-Trainers (ToT) approach. To support the effective 
implementation of the ICZMP developed under Activity 2.1, the project will host workshops on ICZM planning and 
implementation  to build the capacity of the CSWG and additional representatives from all relevant government 
institutions. As part of this process, a detailed action plan for sector -specific implementation of the ICZMP will be 
developed by the CSWG to: i)  facilitate the  integration of ICZM into relevant by -laws and regulations ; ii) identify 
opportunities and develop plans for strengthening public -private partnerships for ICZM; and iii) identify financing 
strategies for climate change adaptation priorities in the coastal zone. Capacitating technical personnel responsible for overseeing the uptake of implementation of ICZM across all relevant sectors will support the effective execution, 
management and uptake of ICZM within the MMA as well as facilitating upscaling across t he country.  The GEF 
ICZM project will build on the lessons learned and best practices  noted under this activity  in its CSWG undertakings  
for mainstreaming ICZM.  
 55. The use of a ToT approach will support the various government institutions to capacitate their  staff beyond the 
lifespan of the project. In addition, ensuring that representatives from all 10 institutions receive the same training 
will allow for the requisite technical capacity to be introduced into each institution and will enable the alignment of  
ICZM across all government sectors.   MME will be the Responsible Party for this activity, which will be financed by 
GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 
56. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 2.2.1. Host an inception workshop to present and provide orientation to the CSWG on the finalised ICZMP.   
 
57. An inception workshop will be held under this activity to introduce the ICZMP to the members of the CSWG 
nominated under Sub- activity 2.1.3. The CSWG will include one representative from each of the  10 government 
institutions involved in coastal management as well as representatives from the Ministry of Gender, Children & Social Protection (MoGCSP) and the Integrated Coastal Zone Management Unit (ICZMU). This inception workshop 
will provide an opport unity for the members of the CSWG to engage with each other, become familiarised with the 
ICZMP and provide initial input for the training to be developed under Sub- activity 2.2.2.  
 
Sub-activity 2.2.2. Host a planning workshop for the CSWG to develop an action plan for implementing the ICZMP, 
including plans for changes and updates required for sector -specific regulations and by -laws 
 
58. Once the CSWG has undergone initial training, a two- day planning workshop will be hosted to develop an action 
plan for the implementation of the ICZMP. This action plan will include the identification of regulations and by -laws 
in each of the relevant sectors56 that need to be updated and changed to align with ICZM as well as a stocktake of 
job descriptions for staff involved i n ICZM to assess where formal roles and responsibilities need to be assigned to 
support ICZM implementation. The institutions responsible for each of these regulations and by -laws will also be 
identified, along with the processes for updating each of them.  A plan for strengthening partnerships between 
government institutions and private sector stakeholders — including hotels, mines and other industries with an 
interest in coastal management — will also be developed. In addition, a session in the workshop will be dedicated 
to the identification of possibl e financing strategies for coastal climate change adaptation interventions  and the 
development of a financing plan to leverage investment in coastal protection . The effectiveness of the financing 
plan will be monitored as part of the Impact Assessment conducted under Activity 3.3 and the collation of lessons 
learned under Activity 2.4.  This information will be used to inform the revision of the ICZMP in Year 6 of project 
implementation.  The possible  role of private sector investment in coastal adaptation wi ll be considered as part of 
this plan.  Roles, responsibilities and timelines for the required changes, updates and actions will be set out in the 
action plan. Through engagement between the representatives of the 10 government institutions on the CSWG 
and those on the ICZM Committee, support for the implementation of the action plan will be developed within each 
of the relevant institutions.  
 
Sub-activity 2.2.3. Develop a curriculum and train ing program to capacitate relevant technical personnel on cross -
sectoral coordination and the effective implementation of the ICZMP.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 97 
 
  
59. Under this activity, an international expert with experience in coastal management and the ToT approach will be 
contracted to develop a training curriculum and program to capacitate the CSWG and additional technical staff from each of the 10 government ins titutions in ICZM. The expert will develop the framework of the training curricula with 
input from the consultants engaged under Sub- activity 2.1.2 and will finalise the curricula through a participatory 
process with the ICZM Committee under Sub- activity 2 .2.4. The consultant engaged under this activity will use the 
finalised curricula and program to train the CSWG in best practice for cross -
sectoral coordination and the 
implementation of ICZM as well as capacitate members of the CSWG to conduct the trainin g within each of their 
respective departments.  
 Sub-activity 2.2.4. Host a validation workshop with the CSWG to finalise training curricula.  
 60. To facilitate a participatory approach for defining the training curricula, a three- day co -creation workshop will be 
held with all members of the CSWG and ICZM Committee to present the framework of the training program and 
work collaboratively to: i) define the various roles and responsibilities for each of the 10 institutions engaged in coastal management; and ii) fi nalise the curricula to be included in the training program. The national consultants 
engaged under Sub- activity 2.1.2 will support this activity by attending the workshops and guiding the development 
of the curricula to ensure it incorporates the most important considerations of effective ICZM.  
 Sub-activity 2.2.5. Conduct a training and action programme for members of the CSWG to mainstream ICZM into 
relevant government entities and support mainstreaming of ICZM into national policies, programmes and plans.  
 
61. Under this activity, the international expert contracted under Sub- activity 2.2.3 will conduct a 16- week, phased 
training programme for the members of the CSWG and two additional technical personnel from each of the 10 government institutions. This lon g-term training programme will include instruction on: i)  the implementation of the 
ICZMP ; ii) financing strategies for ICZM priorities; iii) important considerations for cross -sectoral collaboration ; and 
iv) training on how to conduct the course for addit ional members within each institution. This training programme 
will emphasise knowledge and tools for integrating climate risks , mainstream action plans and will support the 
different institutions to perform their roles and meet targets as specified in the ICZMP. This will build the capacity 
of institutional representatives to effectively implement the ICZMP, further capacitate government technical staff 
and ensure alignment between all relevant institutions, thereby supporting cross -sectoral collaboration and the 
uptake of ICZM across Liberia. The international expert will also provide support to the different institutions for 
mainstreaming and implementing the ICZMP.  
 Activity 2.3. Strengthen the asset base and technical capacity of the ICZMU for the collection of spatial and biophysical 
coastal information to support the implementation of the ICZMP.  
 
62. A significant knowledge gap in the form of limited spatial, meteorological and oceanographic data was identified 
during the project feasibility process. This stems from the current reliance by the Liberian Meteorological Services 
on remotely -sensed data as opposed to in situ  data collection by means of wave buoys. In addition, access to 
remote sensing data is limited to low -resolution publicly available satellite data. Under this activity, the project will 
procure high- resolution satellite imagery for the Mesurado Wetland and coastline of Monrovia. These data will 
enable detailed mapping and monitoring of coastal ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland as well as coastal erosion 
and will be used in the vulnerability mapping under Sub- activity 2.1.1 and project impact monitoring under Sub-
activity 3.3.1. An international firm will also be contracted under this activity to develop an integrated solution for 
the col lection, processing and synthesis of meteorological and oceanographic data offshore of Monrovia. This 
integrated system will be hosted by the ICZMU and will support the implementation of the ICZMP by providing a 
local knowledge base on ocean dynamics for t he 10 relevant government institutions involved with the 
implementation of the ICZMP.  The system will be linked to existing climate information and early warning systems.  
Furthermore, the system will complement  the GC F/AfDB project “Enhancing Climate Infor mation Systems for 
resilient development in Liberia (Liberia CIS)” currently under development to improve Liberia’s meteorological and 
hydrological systems .  MME will be the Responsible Party for this activity, which will be financed by GCF.  
 
63. Sub-activities under this activity will include:


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 97 
 
  
57 The datasets will have a resolution of 2 m or higher and will include red, green, blue and near -infrared bands of satellite images.  Sub-activity 2.3.1. Procure high -resolution remote sensing data to monitor coastal erosion and mangrove ecosystem 
healt h and degradation in the MMA, to be made publicly accessible and used for the vulnerability map under Sub-
activity 2.1.1.  
 
64. Under this activity, high- resolution satellite imagery57 will be procured for the MMA. Fi rst, five historical datasets —
one for every second year for the past ten years — will be procured along with a new dataset in Year 2 of the 
project. Additional datasets will be acquired in Years 4 and 6 of the project. The historical datasets will be used to 
inform the development of the vulnerabili ty map under Sub- activity 2.1.1. In addition, all data procured under this 
activity will be processed and analysed under Sub- activity 3.3.1 to assess the health and degradation of mangrove 
ecosystems and evaluate the impact of the project in terms of reduc ing mangrove degradation. Processed satellite 
imagery and datasets will be made publicly accessible through the Environmental Knowledge Management System 
(EKMS) under Activity 2.4.  
 Sub-activity 2.3.2.  Contract a specialist firm to provide an integrated, n ear-shore wave buoy -based data collection and 
processing system to support the collection of meteorological and oceanographic data for improved generation of 
information on parameters relevant to ICZM and meteorological decision- making in Liberia.  
 65. The above- mentioned integrated solution will include: i) four wave buoys that are capable of capturing, recording 
and transmitting data relating to inter alia  wind direction, windspeed, wave height, sea- level pressure, sea surface 
temperature and tides; ii ) associated information and technology equipment; iii) the development and installation 
of a database for collecting, processing and cataloguing data; iv) training courses on the installation, use and 
maintenance of the system; and iv) on- site and off -site technical support in integrating the system with the existing 
early warning system and weather forecasting system established under projects funded by the GE F as well as the 
AfDB/GCF project  currently under development . The training courses on the instal lation, use and maintenance of 
the system will be delivered to technical staff at relevant government institutions, including the EPA, NDMA, LMS 
and ICZMU and training materials will be made available to the trained staff to facilitate training of addition al staff.  
 
The specialist firm will also be contracted on an annual basis to provide off -site technical support to ensure that the 
system is fully operational and that technical staff trained in the installation, use and maintenance of the system 
(including staff of the EPA, NDMA, LMS and ICZMU ) benefit from technical assistance for the duration of the project. 
This will assist technical staff within relevant institutions to continue to maintain the system beyond the project lifespan.  
 
Activity 2.4.  Strengthen the existing Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) to act as a platform for 
awareness -raising and sharing of climate risk -informed ICZM approach.  
 
66. The project will support the newly implemented Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) in Lib eria 
by extending accessibility to the system, incorporating resources on climate- risk informed ICZM and contributing 
to awareness on the application of the system. The EKMS will be hosted by the EPA to act as a platform linking 
the 10 institutions respons ible for addressing climate change impacts within the coastal zone and to provide 
information relating to climate risks and ICZM to the private sector . Additionally, the project will help establish a 
partnership between the EPA and research institutions , including the University of Liberia,  to develop case studies , 
and further the national understanding of coastal protection . Information and communication (ICT) equipment will 
be procured to link these institutions and provide a platform to access and share climate information to support 
climate -responsive ICZM. This information will include: i) climate dynamics; ii) best practice for ICZM; iii) the training 
material for ICZM developed under Sub- activity 2.2.3; iv) the ICZMP developed under Sub- activity 2.1.2 ; v) the 
spatial data procured under Sub- activity 2.3.1; vi) the high- resolution multicriteria vulnerability map developed 
under Sub- activity 2.1.1; and vii) lessons learned for upscaling and replicating project activities, which will be 
reported on under Activity 3.3. A national service provider will also be contracted under this activity to regularly 
update the system and to collect reports on the implementation of the ICZMP on an annual basis, which will be 
collated into a synthesis report and included as lessons learned in the database.  Systems established under this 
activity for knowledge sharing will be used for upscaling through collaborative efforts with the GEF ICZM systems 
to provide  climate information,  products  and services relating  to coastal  flood and erosion early -warning and risk 
management . The cross -project collaboration will contribute to effective coastal protection  and adequate  climate


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 97 
 
  
58 Relevant private sector partners will be identified by  the service provider in consultation with the 10 government institutions. These private 
sector partners will be targeted because of their location in the coastal zone and the relevance of coastal climate change adaptation to their 
businesses.  
 change  adaptation pl anning that will limit the impact of climate change hazards on vulnerable communities  and 
reduc e their vulnerability . 
 
67. To further support uptake of the system, the project will support the distribution of knowledge products to 
government entities and private sector stakeholders to increase awareness on the application of the EKMS. 
Improved awareness of the system in conjunction with increased ease of access to the EKMS will support improved 
access to environmental and climate change information for  all government institutions responsible for coastal 
management.  The EPA will be the Responsible Party for this activity, which will be financed by GCF and UNDP.  
 68. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 2.4.1. Procure ICT equipment for each of the relevant government institutions to access and use climate 
and environmental information through the platform.   
69. Under this activity, the project will procure computer equipment, remote servers and on- site data storage to facilitate 
access to the EKMS for the 10 government institutions responsible for management of the coastal zone and 
associated climate change impacts in Liberia. The ICT equipment procured under this activity will also be linked to 
the near -shore data- collection and monitor ing system established under Activity 2.3. This will enable technical staff 
in the relevant government departments to access a shared resource on ICZM and facilitate access to data on current ocean conditions. As a result, cross -sectoral coordination as well as planning will be improved and early 
warnings for extreme storm surges or other storm- related disasters will be enhanced.  
 Sub-activity 2.4.2. Collect lessons learned on ICZM on an annual basis and incorporate this information into the EKMS.  
 
70. A national service provider will be contracted under this activity to collect lessons learned, prepare a report and 
update the EKMS on an annual basis. The report will provide suggestions on best practice for effectively addressing 
climate change risks by implementing the newly developed ICZMP in Liberia and by scaling up project activities. 
This will be informed by project monitoring initiatives under Activity 3.3. Collecting lessons learned on an annual 
basis will not only support future updating of ICZM fr ameworks in Liberia in an effective and iterative way but will 
also ensure that all relevant government institutions benefit from lessons learned within each separate institution, as well as enabling research institutions to develop case studies and increase 
understanding about coastal 
protection and management  in Liberia.  
 Sub-activity 2.4.3. Design and disseminate knowledge products on climate- responsive ICZM in government institutions  
and to the private sector .  
 
71. Under this activity, a national service provider will be contracted to develop an awareness -raising strategy to 
increase knowledge on the EKMS and facilitate greater uptake of the EKMS within government institutions  and 
among private sector partners58. Knowledge products developed under this strategy will include posters and 
brochures which will provide information on the EKMS as well as on how to access ICZM and climate change information on the system. These knowledge products will be tailored to identified user -groups , which will include 
staff members of the relevant government institutions and private sector stakeholders in the coastal zone.  The 
knowledge products will be designed in a gender -sensitive manner and will ensure that they are equally ac cessible 
for all government employees  and private sector stakeholders . Furthermore, the products will depict the benefits of 
ICZM and the EKMS for different economic activities and social groups practicing different livelihoods strategies.  
 
Activity 2.5. Conduct an awareness -raising campaign for communities in focus areas on climate change impacts and 
adaptation practices.  
 
72. A specialist media or communication firm will be contracted to design a contextually appropriate campaign using a 
participatory p rocess. The awareness -raising campaign will include developing visual communication materials and


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 97 
 
  
59 West Point , Jacob’s  Town, Fiamah and Topoe Village  knowledge products as well as facilitating local radio programmes and community meetings, which will serve as 
the primary platforms to engage communities. The  communication materials — for example, billboards, posters, 
brochures and stickers — will be distributed within the four communities prioritised by the project59 — West Point, 
Jacob’s  Town, Fiamah and Topoe Village — and will be erected in public spaces. T hese four communities have 
been selected based on their vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, linked to their proximity to the coastline 
(West Point) and degraded areas of the Mesurado Wetland (Jacob’s  Town, Fiamah and Topoe Village). The 
campaign will be designed in a gender -sensitive manner with a specific emphasis on differentiated impacts of 
climate change on social groups practicing a variety of livelihoods, as well as including information on a range of potential adaptation practices . The development and dissemination of knowledge products under this campaign 
will be further supported by upscaling the EKMS under Activity 2.4, which will serve as a repository for the 
knowledge products developed by the contracted firm.  
 
73. To support further awareness -raising on coastal climate change impacts under this activity, knowledge- sharing 
groups will be established in each of the four communities prioritised for awareness -raising, making use of existing 
community structures where they exist. These groups  will be overseen by the Community Stewardship Committee 
(CSC) established under Sub- activity 3.1.2 and linked to the knowledge and innovation centre established under 
Sub-activity 3.1.1. These groups will facilitate on- the-ground awareness -raising events,  conduct visits to schools 
and various community organisations to distribute the knowledge products and raise awareness on climate change 
impacts  and the actions that  can be taken by communities to help reduce the pressures placed on local 
environments, such as the use of energy -efficient  cookstoves introduced under Activity 3.4 over traditional wood 
fuel cookstoves . This activity will be implemented by the EPA and financed by GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 
74. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 Sub-activity 2.5.1. Design an awareness -raising campaign on climate change impacts and adaptation practices.  
 
75. Under this act ivity, a media firm with experience in West Africa and expertise in communications, climate change 
and gender will be contracted to design an awareness -raising campaign on climate change impacts and adaptation 
practices. The firm will develop the initial c ampaign material through a participatory approach with relevant 
institutions and will update the campaign on an annual basis based on lessons learned — collected by the 
knowledge- sharing groups engaged under Sub- activity 2.5.3. The awareness -raising campai gn and knowledge 
products will prioritise the impacts of climate change on mangroves and on the coastline, gender -specific climate 
change vulnerabilities and a range of adaptation practices , including activities that reduce pressure on mangrove 
ecosystems .  
 
Sub-activity 2.5.2. Host radio programmes on climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation practices in coastal 
and wetland areas.  
 
76. Under this acti vity, radio shows will be hosted every three months on climate change impacts, vulnerability and 
adaptation practices relating to coastal and wetland areas. The radio shows will  each be one hour long and will be 
facilitated by government or project employees with experience and knowledge on climate change and adaptation 
practices. Additionally, the show s will include  provision for men and women in communities to call -in and present 
questions and/or input, capitalising on local ecological knowledge as well as ongoing innovative and sustainable 
adaptation strategies.  
 
Sub-activity 2.5.3. Establish, train and engage community -based knowledge- sharing groups to support on- the-ground 
awareness -raising and knowledge- sharing.  
 
77. Under this activity, knowledge- sharing groups will be established i n each of the four  communities selected for 
awareness raising under the project. The knowledge- sharing groups will consist of four members in each of the 
four areas  — at least half of whom will be women.  The members of the knowledge- sharing groups will be nominated 
by their communities  and the selec tion process will be managed by the Community Ste wardship Committee (CSC) 
established under Sub- activity 3.1. 2. The roles and responsibilities of the knowledge sharing groups will be set out 
in the constitution of the CSC  and all members of the knowledge -sharing groups will sign agreements with the CSC


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 97 
 
 when they are selected . As the Executing Entity, the EPA will oversee this process and ensure and verify that the 
selection of the members of the knowledge- sharing groups is  consistent with the needs of the project . The 
knowledge- sharing groups  will be  trained through annual five- day workshops and will  be paid a monthly stipend for 
the duration of the project . The stipend will cover the time and transport costs of the group members  and will be 
transferred to eac h group member  using mobile money services . The EPA will also oversee the payments of 
stipends to the knowledge- sharing groups, which is included in the project budget and co- financed by the GoL . The 
groups will be mandated to assist the project in raising awareness by facilitating workshops organis ed under Sub-
activity 2.5.5 as well as to collect lessons learned on the awareness -raising campaign and success of the 
knowledge products under Activity 3.3.  The training of the knowledge- sharing groups will include links with the 
AfDB/GCF project focusing  on climate information and early warning systems  (EWS) . In collaboration with the 
project management team from that project, synergies will be developed, including supporting last mile coverage 
of EWS through the knowledge- sharing groups. The community members engaged under this activity will be  
overseen by the Community Steering Committee (CSC) established under Sub- activity 3.1.2 and will be based at 
the education and innovation centre established under Sub- activity 3.1.1. In addition to  assist ing the project  with 
awareness -raising workshops, the groups will  conduct community outreach  on a monthly basis, including 
undertaking visits to schools and other community gatherings for the dissemination of information on climate 
change, adaptation practices and co- management of natural resources . 
 Sub-activity 2.5.4. Install and distribute awareness -raising knowledge products within the four communities prioritised 
for awareness -raising interventions.  
 
78. The visual media and other knowledge products  designed under Sub- activity 2.5.1 will be produced, installed and 
disseminated under this activity. These products will include billboards, posters, brochures, stickers, caps and t -
shirts. Large visual products, such as billboards and posters will be inst alled in open public spaces and around 
communal areas such as schools and community buildings. The smaller products — including stickers, brochures, 
caps and t -shirts — will be distributed through the education and innovation centre established under Sub- activity 
3.1.1 as well as by the knowledge- sharing groups established under Sub- activity 2.5.3. These products will be 
refined annually by the firm contracted under Sub- activity 2.5.1 taking into account lessons learned by the 
knowledge- sharing groups  and i ncorporating information from relating to early warning systems from the AfDB/GCF 
project . 
 
Sub-activity 2.5.5. Organise community meetings to raise awareness around climate change adaptation and the 
benefits of proposed interventions.  
 
79. Under this activity , gender and socially sensitive community meetings will be held to raise awareness around 
climate change impacts, adaptation practices and the benefits of the interventions being implemented under the project. A total of three community meetings will be held annually in each of the four areas prioritised for awareness -
raising under the project. Two of the three meetings will be accessible to any members of the community and one 
will be exclusively accessible to women to provide a forum for raising awareness  on gender -specific climate change 
impacts and adaptation practices, as well as to disseminate information on women’s rights, women’s empowerment and strategies for reducing gender -based violence.  
 
80. These community meetings will be held at venues in the com munities to ensure that they are accessible to 
community members and will be co- facilitated by the knowledge- sharing groups established under Sub- activity 
2.5.3. The meetings will also serve as events to distribute the smaller knowledge products designed under Sub-activity 2.5.1 and to implement other awareness -raising actions — including setting up billboards in public spaces 
and disseminating information posters to schools.  
 
Output 3. Protecting mangroves and strengthening gender - and climate -sensitive livelihoods to build local 
climate resilience in Monrovia.  
 
81. Under Output 3, the proposed project will put measures in place to reduce the anthropogenic pressure on mangrove 
ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland. By reducing this pressure, th e health of the ecosystems will be improved 
and their resilience to sea- level rise (SLR) and the impacts of climate change will increase, so increasing the 
resilience of the communities in Monrovia that rely on these ecosystems for their livelihoods. In addition, reducing 
the degradation of mangroves will increase the likelihood of their long -term survival and adaptation to climate


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 97 
 
  
60 Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment provides details of how the Mesurado Wetland supports livelihoods of communities in Monrovia 
as well as an analysis of the threats to these ecosystem both from climate change and anthropogenic pressure.  
61 See Section 3 in Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment.  change through migration. These mangroves are likely to be negatively impact by climate change -induced SLR 
which will decrease the area of the Mesurado Wetland in which they can grow. In addition, urban encroachment 
into the mangrove forests and the harvesting of mangroves for fuelwood, charcoal production and fish smoking 
have resulted in degradation of the mangrove ecosystems in  Monrovia60. In order to develop long- term climate 
resilience within vulnerable, mangrove- dependent communities there is a need to: i) support community 
conservation of mangroves in the MMA to secure the provision of critical ecosystem services in the face of observed 
and expected climate change impacts; and ii) develop local climate- resilient livelihood activities and strengthen 
market access for small and informal enterprises engaged in these activities. These community level approaches 
to adaptation will benefit from improved coastal protection measures being implemented under Output 1 and will 
integrate with the long- term adaptation planning being developed under Output 2, to support transformative change 
at both institutional and community levels.  
 
82. Activities under this output will target four communities adjacent to degraded areas of the Mesurado Wetland. West 
Point, Jacob ’s Town, Fiamah and Topoe Village are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change as a 
result of their proximity to and reliance on the coast and mangroves for their livelihoods  (Figure 13)61. These 
communities will also play an important role in ensuring the long- term protection of these mangrove ecosystems 
as they surround degradation hotspots in the Mesurado Wetlands. These activities will focus on four integrated 
thematic areas for building climate resilience, namely: i) safeguarding ecosystem services provided by mangroves; 
ii) improving community knowledge on climate change impacts and adaptation practices; iii) reducing pressure on mangrove forests from fuelwood harvesting by reducing demand for fuelwood; and iv) strengthening climate-
sensitive livelihoods and supporting the uptake of climate- resilient livelihoods. To capitalise on the experience of 
NGOs based in Monrovia, the project will seek to engage NGOs — with experience in the four aforementioned 
thematic areas — as service providers for relevant activities under this output.  
Figure 13. Landcover map of Monrovia, showing the Mesurado Wetland and focus areas (in bold text)  for the proposed project —  
West Point, Topoe Village, Jacob’s Town, Plonkor  and Fiamah.  
 
83. To ensure the safeguarding of mangrove ecosystem services, a community -centred co- management agreement 
will be developed based on the principles of Community -Based Na tural Resource Management (CBNRM), 
developed through extensive stakeholder engagement. An awareness -raising campaign will be conducted to inform 
the focus area communities about the co- management agreement, alternative livelihood opportunities, climate 
change impacts and the importance of mangrove ecosystems. The impact of these awareness -raising activities will


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 97 
 
  
62 The project proposes to upgrade existing buildings/structures to establish the innovation centres, which will minimise the co st of this 
intervention.  
63 The expenditure to pay the CSC members is USD500 per month. If the income is insufficient to cover this cost, the EPA will support the 
CSC to collectively decide whether to reduce the monthly stipend for each member or other options that will enable the C SC to continue 
functioning effectively. It is expected that the time commitment expected from the CSC will be reduced after the project has been 
completed.  
 be assessed through annual state -of-knowledge assessments. Finally, to reduce pressure on the mangrove 
ecosystems from fuelwood harvesting, facilit ies for the manufacturing of energy -efficient cookstoves will be 
established at the education and innovation centre and solar -powered cold storage facilities will be established 
near major fish processing sites to reduce the need for fish smoking. The cold  storage facilities will be managed by 
women in the community and will significantly reduce food wastage, which will contribute to making fisheries more 
resilient to climate change impacts. In this way, the facilities will support the vulnerable coastal co mmunities to 
increase their income and improve their adaptive capacity. The incorporation of solar self -sustaining cold storage 
facilities into fishing communities is a priority within the MMA because of the limited infrastructure and capacity for 
generati ng electricity required to prolong the shelf -life of fish prior to transport to the market.  
 
Activity 3.1. Establish a community education and innovation centre to function as a community knowledge generation 
and learning hub, repository on climate change adaptation practices and to host community activities under Output 3.  
 
84. Under this activity, an education and innovation centre will be established in West Point, through co- financing, to 
host and coordinate activities under Output 3. Because of its central  location, the centre will be accessible to 
communities across Monrovia and will act as a repository for material on awareness -raising, knowledge- sharing, 
livelihood development and innovation related to climate change62. An existing building on community - or 
government -owned land will be identified and renovated to make it fit for purpose and accessible to people with 
disabilities. Multi -purpose facilities, including cooking areas, open training areas and appropriate sanitation facilities 
will be  installed as part of the renovations, thereby ensuring that the centre serves as a multi -purpose space and 
receives buy -in from the actively engaged local communities. Additionally, t he centre will host training on the 
community -level maintenance of the r evetment  build under Output 1 ( see Annex 21: O&M Plan) . All activities and 
initiatives implemented through the centre will incorporate gender -responsiveness as a primary consideration.  
 
85. Management of the centre will be undertaken by the community knowledge- sharing groups established under Sub-
activity 2.5.3 with oversight provided by the project management team and the Community Stewardship Committee 
(CSC) established under Sub- activity 3.1. 2. The centre will be governed by a set of by -laws agreed upon by t he 
community or government entity that owns the centre and the CSC , in consultation with the MPW and MoGCSP. 
The by-laws will be subject to review and acceptance by the Executing Entity. The CSC will be legally registered 
as a community -based organisation (CBO) . Two bank accounts will be opened by the CSC , in association with the 
centre to facilitate : i) the management of  income from the cookstoves sold under Activity 3.4 and purchase of further 
materials for manufacturing the cookstoves ; and ii) the management of the nominal fees  from the usage of the cold 
storage facilities established under Activity 3.5 and maintenance of these facilities. The income derived from these 
activities will be managed by the CSC and reported on quarterly  to the PMU for the duration of the project. All 
income will be used to support the sustainability and upscaling of project activities and will not be considered profit. 
Indicative estimates of the income managed by the CSC are provided in the descriptions of Activity 3.4 and 3.5 
below.   After project completion, the funds will also be used to continue to pay a monthly stipend to the CSC 
members63. In addition to facilitating the various community training workshops, the centre wi ll act as the home 
base for the CSC and for consultants conducting assessments under Activities 3.2; 3.3 and 3.5. The establishment 
of the centre as a physical location wi ll significantly contribute to the impact of Output 3 in developing alternative 
livelihoods, increasing community awareness on climate change and shifting the community’s perception of the 
value of mangroves.   This activity will be implemented by the EPA and financed by GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 
86. Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.1. Locate, renovate and equip existing structure situated on community or municipal -owned land in 
West Point.


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 97 
 
  
64 The buildings will not be purchased under the project –  instead existing community -owned structures (structures owned by community 
groups or local government). There will be no issues with property rights since the project will be utilising community or public land and/or 
buildings.  
65 These contractual agreements between the CSC members and the EPA wil l apply both during and after the project period.  87. Under this activity, a site will be identified  by the PMU in consultation with community and government stakeholders,  
to serve as the education and innovation centre and an agreement will be reached with the respective community, 
government department or municipality overseeing it64. The site will be selected according to: i) availability and 
willingness of owners for it to be used by the community; ii) size and suitability for use as an education and 
innovation centre; and iii) location and accessibility to the community. The centre will be renovated by the Ministry 
of Public Works, overseen by the EE , to ensure that is a safe environment to host community engagements and 
accessible to people with disabilities. It will be outfitted with basic cooking, training and sanitation facilities to ensure  
that it  acts as a community gathering area. The newly renovated centre will also be equipped with basic furniture 
or with other equipment — for example, tables and seating — to facilitate the hosting of workshops and other 
training activities. Maintenance costs f or the centre are expected to be minimal as only basic and durable facilities 
will be installed. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be reached with the community or government entity 
that owns of the renovated centre to undertake any required maintenance for the duration of the project.  
 Sub-activity 3.1.2. Establish and commission the ten- person Community Stewardship Committee with representatives 
from each of the four areas.  
 
88. Under this activity, the Community Stewardship Committee (CSC) will be established and registered as a 
community -based organisation to provide high- level oversight for all community -based activities under Output 3 
and 1. The members of the CSC will be selected  every 3 years  based on community nominations  and each member 
will enter into a contractual agreement with the EPA  which will outline their roles and responsibilities  and the 
conditions of their stipends65. They will  include at least 50% women and be representative of the four focus areas  
(West Point, Topoe Village, Jacob’s Town, and Fiamah and Plonkor) and include the women managing the cold 
storage facilities under Activity 3.5. The CSC will provide community oversi ght and support for each of the activities 
under Output 3 and community -based activities under Output 1 (revetment maintenance) . The education and 
innovation centre will act as a headquarters for the CSC who will host regular meetings with the knowledge- sharing 
groups to provide input and guidance. The PMU will facilitate the development of a formal constitution for the CSC, which will be finalised and validated during the workshop under Sub- activity 3.1.4. The constitution will set out the 
roles and responsibilities of the CSC and the knowledge- sharing groups established under Activity 2.5. In addition, 
two bank accounts will be opened and governed by the CSC to manage the income and expenditure relating to: i) 
the energy efficient cookstoves developed under Activity 3.4.; and ii) the use and maintenance of the cold storage facilities developed under Sub-
activity 3.5.2. These funds will also be used to pay monthly stipends to CSC 
members after the end of the project lifecycle.  The CSC will report  to the PMU every quarter  on the income and 
expenditure relating to these two activities for the duration of the project.  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.3. Host an inauguration event to open the centre to the public and present the members of the 
Community Stewardship Committee.  
 
89. To promote the education and innovation centre and secure community buy -in, an inauguration event will be held 
at the centre. This event will incorporate awareness -raising activities and during the event community members 
nominated for the CSC  — as well as the by -laws governing the education and innovation centre —  will be presented 
by local officials and community authorities.  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.4. Host a collaboration workshop for government representatives, CSC members and NGOs to meet 
and define the guiding principles for the education and innovation centre.  
 
90. Under this activity and subsequent to the launch of the education and innovation centre, a two- day collaboration 
workshop will be organised for all members of the CSC, as well as representatives from relevant government 
ministries, NGOs, development, conservation and community organisations. This workshop will provide an 
opportunity for all relevant stakeholders to: i)  finalise and validate the constitution of the CSC; ii) define a set of  
guiding principles for the education and innovation centre; iii) develop linkages between similar ongoing initiatives ; 
and iv)  share innovative ideas and lessons learned from past experiences. Additionally, during the workshop, guest 
speakers on each of t he three thematic areas prioritised under Output 3 — CBNRM, local livelihood development


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 97 
 
  
66 Local buy -in to proposed co- management agreements is critical to this activity and will be facilitated by an analysis of lessons learned 
from similar co -management projects undertaken in Liberia. The anal ysis on mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland (Annex 2.D) 
and engagement with Conservation International in particular will contribute to further inform this activity.  
67 These include the GEF -funded Conservation International project entitled “Impro ve sustainability of mangrove forests and coastal 
lamangrove areas in Liberia through protection, planning and livelihood creation –  building blocks towards Liberia’s marine and coastal 
protected areas”, and the GEF -funded World Bank project entitled “Cons olidation of Liberia’s Protected Area Network”  and awareness -raising — will be invited to give presentations as well as experts on climate change, ICZM and 
gender mainstreaming.  
 
Activity 3.2. Establish community -led co -management agreement to ease anthropogenic pressure on mangroves in the 
MMA.  
 
91. To safeguard ecosystem services and livelihoods that depend on mangroves, the project will facilitate the 
development of a community -led co -management agreement for mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland66. The 
agreements will be underpinned by the existing land- use management framework and the improved institutional 
and regulatory framework for ICZM developed under Output 2.  They will also be supported by  awareness -raising 
activities and incentives for alternative livelihood practices developed under Activities 3.4 and 3.5.  The development 
of the co-management  agreements will be facilitated by expert negotiators and will be undertaken through a 
participatory approach — engaging the CSC, relevant government institutions, NGOs and civil society. Particip ation 
of these stakeholders in the design process will ensure that community needs and concerns are incorporated into 
the agreement and that community buy -in and ownership of the agreement are developed. The agreement will 
prioritise equitable access and w ill seek to shift the paradigm of community members from considering themselves 
as users of mangrove ecosystems to participating in the co- management of the ecosystems. These objectives will 
be supported by the engagement and relationship- building between stakeholders.  The co- management 
agreements will be developed in concert with the development of the ICZMP under Activity 2.1 and, like the ICZMP, 
will be reviewed and revised during the project period. This will ensure that both processes have opportunity for 
learning and that the CBNRM co- management model developed under Activity 3.2 can be incorporated into the 
ICZMP. The development of the co- management agreement will draw on lessons learned from similar initiatives 
elsewhere in Liberia67 and will provide a foundation for future initiatives to conserve mangroves in Monrovia.  This 
activity will be implemented by the EPA and financed by GCF.  
 Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.1. Develop the community -led co- management agreement through a participatory, gender -sensitive 
process.  
 
92. Under this activity, two national consultants with experience in facilitation and natural resource management will be contracted to draft the co- management agreement. The consultants will undertake extensive consultations with 
conservation organisations, government institutions and community members to develop an understanding of the 
various pressures currently exerted on mangroves, as well as the various uses of mangroves 
and mangrove 
products by communities. These engagements will provide the consultants with the information necessary to draft 
the co- management agreement in such a manner as to ensure that the concerns of all relevant stakeholders are 
taken into account and incorporated into the agreement  and provide an opportunity for stakeholders to build 
relationships and share information related to the complexities of managing urban mangrove ecosystems . Building 
on the institutional and regulatory framework for ICZM (Output 2), and the initiatives targeting alternative livelihood 
practices in Output 3, the co- management agreement will include the synthesi s of positive incentive s and for the 
sustainable use and conservation of the mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland.  The primary parties to 
the co- management agreement will be the communities of  West Point, Topoe Village, Jacob’s Town, Plonkor and 
Fiamah and the EPA . Through the consultation under this sub- activity, the national consultants will identify and 
confirm additional parties to the agreements, including, for example, NGOs like Conservation International and 
government agencies like the Ministry of Gender, C hildren and Social Protection (MoGCSP).  Details of the 
monitoring of conservation actions (linked to Activity 3.3) and delivery of the agreed benefits will also form part of 
the co- management agreement . 
 
Sub-activity 3.2.2. Host a three- day co- design and v alidation workshop for the community -led co- management 
agreement.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 97 
 
  
93. Under this activity, a three- day co -design and validation workshop will be hosted for relevant government ministries, 
NGOs, conservation organisations and CSC members to engage on the draft  co-management agreement 
developed under Sub- activity 3.2.1. Women and vulnerable groups will be represented at the workshop to ensure 
the inclusion of their specific concerns in this process. The workshop will be facilitated by the national consultants 
contracted under Sub- activity 3.2.1 and will provide an opportunity for any outstanding concerns or points of 
contention to be raised by concerned parties. The final day of the workshop will be used as a validation session to ensure that the final version of  the co- management agreement incorporates the needs of all relevant stakeholders 
and secures buy -in from communities, government and NGOs alike.  
 Sub-activity 3.2.3. Design and implement an awareness -raising campaign on sustainable Community -Based Natural 
Resource Management (CBNRM) and the co- management agreement.  
 
94. Two national consultants or service providers with experience in community awareness -raising and visual media 
design will be contracted under this activity to develop an awareness -raising campai gn to disseminate information 
on the benefits of Community -Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) and the sustainable management 
of mangroves.  The campaign will also include information on detrimental environmental practices , such as sand 
mining along beaches and rivers , and information on practi ces that help reduce the pressure on the environment, 
such as the use of  the energy -efficient cookstoves  introduced under Activity 3.4 over traditional wood fuel 
cookstoves . The servic e provider will work in collaboration with the national consultants contracted under Sub-
activity 3.2.1 to ensure that the knowledge products developed: i)  align with the co -management agreement and 
are gender -sensitive in their design; ii) are informed by local ecological knowledge; ii i) depict the uses of mangroves 
by different social groups and sectors ; and iv) provide an appropriate level of information for dissemination within 
communities. The knowledge products produced under this activity will include posters for each of the four areas, 
brochures to be distributed through the education and innovation centre and large signboards that will be installed 
within communities and at commonly -used entry points to access the mangroves, particularly in degradation 
hotspots.  The awareness -raising campaign strategy and materials will be updated annually and informed by the 
state -of-knowledge assessment s conducted under Sub- activity 3.3. 2. This intervention will build on links with the 
AfDB/GCF project t o strengthen Last Mile coverage of the early warning systems (EWS) developed under that 
project . This will be done by including information on EW S in the awareness -raising materials, in collaboration with 
the project management team of the AfDB/GCF project , and raising awareness about how to access EWS.  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.4. Host a workshop to assess the effectiveness of the co- management agreement (Activity 3.2.1) and 
re-negotiate it in Year 5 based on findings from Activity 3.3.  
 
95. Under this activity, a two -day workshop will be hosted for the CSC, relevant government institutions, NGOs and 
civil society in Year 5 of the project implementation period. At this workshop, the impact of the co- management 
agreement will be assessed based on informat ion collected under Activity 3.3 and the experience of the relevant 
stakeholders. Drawing on these lessons learned, the co- management agreement will be revised and validated by 
the stakeholders at the workshop. Outcomes of this process will also inform the  revision of the ICZMP in Year 6 
under Activity 2.1.  
 
Activity 3.3.  Conduct annual assessments to evaluate the project -induced changes in mangrove degradation, 
community perceptions and awareness of climate change impacts, adaptation options and mangrove ecosystems 
throughout the project implementation period.  
 
96. To assess the adaptive capacity of the four communities prioritised for awareness -raising and livelihood 
development, state- of-knowledge assessments will be undertaken periodically under this activity. These 
assessments — building on preliminary work under taken during the PPF phase of the project — will consider 
community awareness on climate change impacts and adaptation options, CBNRM and the role of mangrove 
ecosystems in the MMA as well as the different types of climate- resilient livelihoods currently being practiced within 
the MMA. These surveys will be conducted periodically to determine the annual change- in-state, which will help to 
refine the awareness -raising campaigns and support the uptake of additional climate resilient livelihoods. The state-
of-knowledge assessments will be complemented by periodic assessments of mangrove health and degradation 
in the Mesurado Wetland, conducted using the high- resolution spatial data procured under Sub- Activity 2.3.1. The 
reports produced from this analysis will assess the impact of the project on mangrove protection in Monrovia. The


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 97 
 
  
68 See Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study and Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment; Annex 6: Environmental and Social Assessment Report; 
and Annex 8: Gender Assessment and Action Plan.  primary purpose of this activity is not to inform the development of any interventions, but to act as a method to 
collect data on what interventions are effective as well as how successful community awareness raising, the co-
management agreement and livelihood development activities are on an annual basis. Furthermore, the collection of data will enable research institutions , including, for example the University of Liberia,  
to strengthen their 
knowledge and understanding of coastal livelihoods and ICZM  in Liberia . This will contribute to the development of 
national capacity for driving ICZM. In addition to the long- term benefits , ongoing monitoring and assessment  will 
suppor t the adaptive management of the project — including through the revision of the ICZMP and co-
management agreement — and contribute to the development of further effective awareness raising activities and 
livelihood development initiatives beyond the lifes pan of the project. To this end, lessons learned collated under 
this activity will be made available through the EKMS under Activity 2.4.   This activity will be implemented by the 
EPA and financed by GCF, UNDP and GoL.  
 Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 
Sub-activity 3.3.1. Using high- resolution remote sensing data procured under Sub- activity 2.3.1, conduct analyses of 
mangrove extent and degradation in the Mesurado Wetland to assess the impact of project interventions  
 
Under this activity, a report on trends in mangrove health and degradation in the Mesurado Wetland will be produced 
based on the high- resolution remote sensing data procured under Sub- activity 2.3.1. First, the report will provide an 
analysis of historical trends in mangrove degradation over the ten years prior to the project implementation period. This 
report will provide a baseline for measuring project impact on mangrove protection. Th e baseline report will be updated 
based on new datasets acquired in Years 4 and 6 of the project period to assess the impact of the project on mangrove degradation trends. These updates will be used in concert with those produced under Sub- activity 3.3.2 to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the co- management agreement and awareness -raising activities (Activity 3.2) and to collate lessons 
learned from the project interventions.  
 
Sub-activity 3.3.2. Conduct a baseline state- of-knowledge survey on climate change impacts, adaptation options, 
CBNRM and mangrove ecosystems and undertake annual sur veys to determine the change- in-state over the duration 
of the project.  
 
97. Under this activity, a service provider will be contracted to conduct community -level assessments in each of the 
four areas prioritised under the project to develop indicators that determine baseline community perceptions and 
awareness on climate change, adaptative strategies, as well as the role and importance of mangrove ecosystems. 
Surveys carried out in the first year will be collated into a report that will act as a baseline on the state of community 
knowledge on climate change, adaptation and mangroves. Further annual surveys will be conducted throughout 
the project period to determine the effectiveness of the awareness -raising programme. Reports produced from the 
annual surveys w ill act as lessons learned and will be used to by consultants engaged under Sub- activity 2.5.1 to 
update the awareness -raising campaign on an annual basis, as well as to inform revisions to the co- management 
agreement under Sub- activity 3.2.4 , and by terti ary institutions to further research on coastal protection and 
management in Liberia. The reports produced under this activity will be made publicly accessible through the EKMS 
(Activity 2.4) to support the replication and upscaling of successful awareness -raising strategies.  
 
Sub-activity 3.3.3.  Undertake periodic assessments of climate- resilient livelihood practices and new opportunities to 
inform the design of new options and determine their uptake as a result of the project.  
 
98. An important function of t he education and innovation centre established under Sub- activity 3.1.1 will be to provide 
community members — particularly women — with alternative climate- resilient livelihood activities to increase their 
resilience to climate change. To support livelihood development and the uptake of climate- resilient livelihoods, a 
national service provider with expertise in the development of alternative, climate- resilient livelihoods will be 
contracted to assess the baseline of existing livelihood strategies  (includi ng income levels)  in the four target 
communities. Building on the preliminary information generated as part of the project PPF phase68, the service 
provider will detail a menu of potential alternative livelihood strategies and/or strategies to increase the climate-
resilien ce of existing livelihood practices. During the project PPF phase, the manufacturing of eco -friendly


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 97 
 
  
69 An example of an improved kiln is the FAO Thiaroye Processing Technique kiln, details of which are available online at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/a -i8301e.pdf  
70 See Section 7.2 of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment for further information on the proposed design of these cookstoves.  
71 See Section 2 of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment for details of fuelwood harvesting in the Mesurado Wetland.  
 cookstoves (Activity 3.4) was identified as a  climate -resilient livelihood activity. Under Sub -activity 3.3.3, further  
alternative climate -resilient livelihoods will be identified by the service provider and incorporated into the training of 
community members under Activity 3.4, to support the ongoing adoption of climate- resilient livelihood practices 
beyond the implementation period and geographical scope of the project .  An alternative livelihoods option targeted 
under the LDCF UNDP Liberia project in Sinoe County aims to stimulate the Compressed Stabilised Earth Blocks 
(CSEB) industry as alternative to beach and river sand mining. This will be assessed for viability in Monrovia, along 
with the viability of agricultural residue for use as fuel-pellets . The assessment of agricultural residue will identify 
whether the fuel -pellet industry can foster and promote a circular economy while also reducing pressure on 
mangroves and forests . The livelihoods being assessed by the service provider will specifically focus on practices 
that can be taken up by women and other vulnerable people.  In addition to the identification of alternative  
livelihood s, the assessment will identify the viability  of improved fish smoking kilns69 as complimentary interventions  
to the  demonstration site at the EIC and improved cookstoves under Activity 3.4 and as  support to the cold storage 
units  introduced under Activity 3.5.  
 
99. The service provider will additionally undertake annual surveys to determine the uptake of these livelihoods within 
the four communities — as well as outside of the project focus areas —, monitor the effectiveness of the financing 
plan developed under Activity 2.2. 2 and prepare annual reports. In addition, the annual surveys and reports should 
be used to provide information on whether the livelihoods promoted by the project are appropriate and are able to 
secure community buy -in. Further upscaling of climate- resilien t livelihoods will be supported by presenting the 
reports, which will act as a resource on what types of livelihoods are seen as appropriate as well as which of these 
gain the greatest buy -in by local communities.  
 
100. The dissemination of information from these assessments —  which will be collated into a report and associated 
knowledge products — will make use of the EKMS (Activity 2.4) and will contribute to the uptake of further 
alternative and diversified livelihood opportunities facilitated by the education and innovation centre.  Furthermore, 
by providing access to these knowledge products  the project will enable tertiary institutions to explore and support 
the replication and upscaling of successful strategies .  
 
Activity 3.4. Establish small -scale manufacturing facilities and develop training material to capacitate community 
members to manufacture and sell cookstoves to support alternative climate- resilient livelihoods.  
101. Under this activity , the project will support the uptake of diversified climate- resilient livelihoods and improved 
mangrove management by developing training courses, establishing small -scale manufacturing facilities, and 
providing material inputs for the fabrication of value- added products — specifically energy -efficient cookstoves70. 
The manufacturing facilities will be incorporated into the education and innovation centre in West Point (established 
under Activity 3.1) and will be accessible to communities from around Monrovia, including the other project focus 
areas of Topoe Village, Jacob’s Town,  and Fiamah and P lonkor. The activity  will focus on developing alternative 
climate -resilient livelihood opportunities  for women and other vulnerable groups, in collaboration with the CSC 
established under Activity 3.1.  The activity will build on lessons learned from the African Improved Cooking Stoves 
Programme of Activities , and t raining materials will be made publicly  accessible to support the upscaling of the 
activity to other parts of Monrovia.  This activity will be implemented by the EPA and financed by UNDP.    
 
102. Energy -efficient cookstove production was selected as a focus for this activity because there is a market for 
these stoves in Monrovia and the construction of the stoves requires minimal material input or training. In addition 
to providing alternative livelihood opportunities, supporting the uptake of energy -efficient stoves across the MMA 
will support the implementation of the mangrove co-management agreement (Activity 3.2) by reducing existing 
anthropogenic pressure on the MMA ’s mangroves, specifically relating to harvesting of mangroves for fuelwood71. 
In the awareness -raising campaign under Activity 3.2 , alternative livelihood practices such as the use of improved, 
energy -efficient cookstoves will be promoted and links to Activity 3.4 will be made as a way to support behaviour 
change within the target communities . Although the largescale adoption of energy -efficient cookstoves has potential


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 97 
 
  
72 The African Improved Cooking Stoves Programme of Activitieswill have a measurable impact on GHG emissions in Liberia and has been 
registered through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). Further information about this project is available at: 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/filestorage/7/T/S/7TSH21WOQ6CKNDXAZE48RJPG3FL5I9/PoA%205342%20CPA %2000014%20Liberia%20v4.0%
2029032019?t=SE18cWwwZHZvfDALXuqkklfrkBFTXxfpsKD -  
73 US$16,000 is included in the project budget to purchase materials for the cookstoves and will support the manufacture of ~640 stoves 
(half in Year 2 and half in Year 4).  
74 Assum ing the emissions reductions from the project -supported cookstoves will be equivalent to those of the African Improved Cooking 
Stoves Programme of Activities registered under CDM, each cookstove will reduce GHG emissions by ~2.47 tCO 2e per year.  
75 It is assumed that cookstoves manufactured in Year 2 will be operational from Year 3 and those manufactured in Year 4 will be 
operational from Year 5.  
76 calculated using national GHG emission information from the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution, avai lable at: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Liberia%20First/INDC%20Final%20Submission%20Sept%20
30%202015%20Liberia.pdf  
77 Mindjimba, K., Rosenthal, I., Diei -Ouadi, Y., Bomfeh, K. and Randrianantoandro, A. 2019. FAO -Thiaroye process ing technique: towards 
adopting improved fish smoking systems in the context of benefits, trade- offs and policy implications from selected developing countries. 
FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Paper no. 634. Rome. FAO. 160 pp. Licence: CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO.  
78 See Section 7.2 of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment for further information on the proposed design of these cookstoves.  
79 The income from manufacturing cookstoves is estimated at US$8,000/year (US$25/cookstoves x 320 cookstoves manufactured per 
year), w here US$8,000 is budgeted for the initial purchase of material inputs and cookstoves are sold at cost price to incentivize uptake.  
 benefits in terms of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction72, the mitigation co -benefits of this project activity 
are very small. It is expected that the use of project -suppor ted stoves73 will reduce GHG emissions by ~4,750 
tCO 2e74,75 during the project period and by ~1,580  tCO 2e/year  (less than 0.0002% of Liberia’s annual GHG 
emissions76), for the lifespan of the stoves. Because of the small scale, emission reduction benefits of the activity 
will not be measured under the project. T raining under Sub- activity 3.4.1 and workshops under Sub- activity 3.4.3 
will, however,  develop skills and capacity for community members to upscale energy -efficient cookstove production 
beyond the lifetime and geographical scope of the project.  Additionally  a larger scale fish smoking kiln  system 
(which can be used for larger volumes of fish, for example by collectives of fish mongers) will be installed at the EIC  
as a demonstration site , allowing communities to test this technology,  and training will be provided on the benefits 
of  the technology  for potential up- scaling77. 
 
Sub-activities under this activity will include:  
 Sub-activity 3.4.1. Develop a training programme and publicly available training materials and conduct trainings to 
capacitate community members to manufacture energy -efficient cookstoves.  
 
103. In order to provide communities with immed iate benefits — as well as to contribute to increasing energy 
efficiency and reducing demand for fuelwood — a national service provider will be contracted under this activity to 
develop a training course and provide training on the construction of energy -efficient stoves through a training- of-
trainers approach. The service provider will prepare a training manual for constructing these stoves, which will be accessible at the education and innovation centre (Activity 3.1) and through the EKMS (Activity 2.4). The service 
provider will also organise trainings at the centre to ensure that interested community members have the requisite 
information to construct the energy -efficient cookstoves. The service provider will undertake further annual trainings 
at the education and innovation centre to capacitate community members to undertake a variety of diversified livelihoods or develop a range of value- added products, based on the results of the assessments conducted under 
Sub-activity 3.3.2. This training, and specif ically the training- of-trainers approach, will contribute to the sustainability 
of the livelihood activities beyond the project lifespan and facilitate the replication of the activities in other 
communities in Monrovia.  
 
Sub-activity 3.4.2. Establish a small -scale manufacturing workshop and procure equipment and material for the 
education and innovation centre.  
 104. Under this activity, basic facilities —  including open- air roofed structures — will be constructed and installed in 
close proximity to the educati on and innovation centre. These structures will be used during the training conducted 
under Sub- activity 3.4.1. Additionally, under this activity material inputs will be provided by the project to facilitate 
the initial construction of the energy -efficient cookstoves
78. These materials will provide the initial financial input for 
manufacturing the first batch of stoves, with additional material inputs  for the construction of further cookstoves  to 
be entirely provided by income gained from selling the stoves79. The sale of the cookstoves will be managed by 
the CSC. Through the bank account  established under Sub -activity 3.1.2, management of this income and


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 97 
 
  
80 Mindjimba, K., Rosenthal, I., Diei -Ouadi, Y., Bomfeh, K. and Randrianantoandro, A. 2019. FAO -Thiaroye processing technique:  towards 
adopting improved fish smoking systems in the context of benefits, trade- offs and policy implications from selected developing countries. 
FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Paper no. 634. Rome. FAO. 160 pp. Licence: CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO.  
81 See Section 2  of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment for further information on anthropogenic pressures on the Mesurado Wetland.  
82 See Sections 6.5 and 7.1 of Annex 2.D: Mangrove Sub- assessment for further information on the proposed design of these cold storage 
facilit ies. 
 purchasing of additional material will be overseen by the CSC, in collaboration with the Project Management Unit 
and UNDP. Additional limited funds will be provided two years after the inc eption of this activity to purchase further 
material inputs based on the assessments undertaken under Sub- activity 3.3.2.  Furthermore, the project will install 
an improved communal  fish smoking kiln  system, modelled after the FAO -Thiaroye fish processing t echnique 
(FTT), for use as a demonstration and education tool80. Introducing communal smoking facilities could change the 
way this informal economy operates. By demonstrating this technology, its potential up- take in the community  can 
be assessed.  
 
Sub-activity 3.4.3. Host an annual workshop at the education and innovation centre to capacitate women’s groups on 
business strategies and connect them with value chain actors to upscale the development of energy efficient value-
added pr oducts.  
 
105. To support the uptake and upscaling of the livelihoods being supported under the project, annual workshops 
and consultations  will be hosted at the education and innovation centre to act as information sessions and 
networking events for women’s groups, fishmongers, value- chain actors  and the domestic private sector , informal 
finance institutions and agencies. By facilitating rel ationship- building between community members and value chain 
actors, these events will provide practical support for the development of small cookstove manufacturing 
businesses. In addition to creating networking opportunities, t he events will : i) enable business skills development ; 
ii) provide training  on marketing strategies and links to the awareness -raising campaign under Activity 3.2;  and iii) 
facilitate access to finance for investments into,  and upscaling of, the value- added products being developed at the 
education and innovation centre, including the energy -efficient cookstoves. These workshops will also support 
access to higher value markets for fishmongers  — who will be benefiting from im proved access to higher -value 
fresh fish as a result of the cold storage facilities established under Activity 3.5 — by connecting the fishmongers 
to hotels, restaurants and other local private sector actors.  Informed by the livelihood assessment (Sub- activity 
3.3.3), the events under this sub- activity  in the later years of project implementation  will also create space to explore 
other potential innovations and alternative livelihood opportunities , including for example , the upscaling of 
communal fish smoking facilities like those demonstrated at the education and innovation centre (Sub- activity 
3.4.2).  
  
Activity 3.5. Purchase and install low -maintenance eco- friendly cold storage facilities  near fish processing sites to 
reduce pressure on mangroves  and increase market efficiency.  
 
106. The fishing industry in Monrovia accounts for a significant percentage of the food consumed by the population 
of the MMA, however limited access to cold storage means that most fish needs to be smoked to increase shelf life. This contributes to the demand for fuelwood from mangrove forests in the Mesurado Wetland
81. Despite 
smoking, a significant proportion of the fish caught by communities does not make it to market (see Annex 2.D). To reduce waste and the reliance on fuelwood sourced from the mangroves as  well as to improve food security for 
the MMA, cold storage units will be designed and installed in proximity to the major fish processing site in the MMA 
at West Point
82. The proposed cold storage facilities under this activity are intended to be accessibl e to all fisherfolk 
in the area and to be provided at a relatively small scale, based on a preliminary assessment of the costs of these interventions. The units will be designed to require limited maintenance and any required maintenance will be 
facilitate d by designated women on the CSC — who will be mandated with overseeing the operation and condition 
of the cold storage units as well as facilitating access for local community members. Funding for required 
maintenance will be supported by charging those w ho use the units a small fee, to be paid into a community fund 
established under Sub- activity 3.1.2. This will ensure the sustainability of the units and the ability to meet their 
minimum maintenance requirements. This activity will be implemented by the E PA and financed by UNDP.  
 
Sub-activities under this activity will include:


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 97 
 
  
83 Refer to Annex 2.D Section 6.1.1 for details on possible service providers  
84 As the EE, the EPA will approve the management structure, which will be incorporated into the constitution of the CSC and the 
contractual agreementss between the two relevant CSC members and the EPA.  
85 See Section 5.6.1 of Annex 2.D and Annex 8 for further information on gender sensitivity in the context of this activity.  
86 The income from the cold storage facilities will come from charging those who use the units a small fee. The income is estima ted at 
1,500$/month (10$/month x 150 users).  
 Sub-activity 3.5.1. Develop site -specific eco -friendly, solar -powered cold storage units for the West Point fish 
processing site based on the needs of fishers and fishmongers  
 
107. Under this activity, a service provider will be contracted to develop site- specific designs for the cold storage 
units based on the needs of the community, building on prior community engagements that have established the basic requirements for facilities of t his type
83. The service provider will also be responsible for developing a 
management s ystem , in consultation with the CSC , that aligns with the preferred method for community 
management of the units and focuses on empowering women. Two representatives of the fishing community will be selected for the CSC and will be responsible for overseeing the management of the cold storage units
84. This 
information will be generated through stakeholder consultations undertaken with fisherfolk in the ar ea. All 
stakeholder engagements will be conducted in a gender -sensitive manner and will take into consideration the needs 
of vulnerable peopl e and women for utilising and accessing the cold storage units85. The same service provider will 
be contracted to undertake annual assessments to evaluate the differentiated use and impact of the cold storage 
units by fishmongers and to determine the financ ial feasibility of upscaling this initiative across Monrovia and other 
regions of Liberia.  
 
Sub-activity 3.5.2. Host a workshop in the targeted community to validate the designs (Sub- activity 3.5.1) and capacitate 
fisherfolk in the use and management of the cold storage units.  
 
108. The designs developed under Sub- activity 3.5.1 will be validated by community members at a training and 
validation workshop. The service provider contracted under Sub- activity 3.5.2 will also provide training on the use, 
management and maintenance of the cold storage facilities as well as making community members aware of the 
benefits of using these facilities. The workshop will be conducted in a gender -sensitive manner, to ensure that the 
needs and inputs of both women and men are c onsidered in the finalisation of the design for the cold storage units. 
This will also ensure that all user groups receive the appropriate training and information.  
 
Sub-activity 3.5.3. Install and operate the low -maintenance eco- friendly solar -powered col d storage units.  
 
109. A firm with experience in developing similar solar -powered cold storage units will be contracted under this 
activity to construct and install two eco- friendly cold storage units at the West Point fish processing site based on 
the designs validated in Sub- activity 3.5.2. The cold storage units will be constructed from upcycled shipping 
containers and will not require regular maintenance. In addition to developing the units, the contracted firm will be 
responsible for providing technical specifications, designs and training to relevant government representatives and 
the CSC to support future maintenance of the units and the potential for upscaling this system across other coastal 
areas of Liberia86. These designs will be publicly acces sible through the EKMS (Activity 2.4).  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
110. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM),  according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) between UNDP and the GoL, the Country Programme Action Plan 
(CPAP), and as per the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP .  
 
111. UNDP provides oversight and quality assurance involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at regional and 
headquarters levels. The quality assurance role involves objective and independent project oversight and 
monitoring functions. This will include overseeing the achievement of project management milestones that are 
established as per the board- approved project proposal. Project assurance is independ ent of the Project 
Management function. As such the National Project Steering Committee cannot delegate any quality assurance 
responsibilities to the National Project Coordinator and/or anyone paid for by the project resources.  The project 
assurance role i s covered by the Accredited Entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, 
UNDP is required to deliver GCF -specific oversight and quality assurance services including: i) day -to-day oversight 
and supervision; ii) oversight of project c ompletion; and iii) oversight of project reporting.


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 97 
 
  
87 The Environm ental Protection Agency of Liberia (EPA) is a semi -autonomous body under the legal personality of the Government of 
Liberia (GoL). The EE for all activities under this project is the GoL represented by EPA.   
Executing Entity  
112. The national Executing Entity (EE) for this project is the Government of Liberia represented by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)87. The EE  is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the 
monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP 
resources. Accredited Entity shall sign a project document with the EE. The Project Document will be legally binding 
and outline the detailed financial, procurement and implementation plan of the Project , as well as the relevant 
provisions for the compliance by the Executing Entity and Responsible Parties with the requirements from t he AMA 
and FAA . The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) , as a Responsible Party  will enter  into a legally binding 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  with the EE to assist in successfully implementing project activities  and are 
directly accountable to the EPA as outlined in the terms of their agreement .  Specifically, the Ministry of Mines and 
Energy will be responsible for Activities : 1.1 Prepare construction plans and finalise technical design specifications 
for coastal defence structure at West Point ; 1.2 Construct coastal defence structure to protect West Point against 
climate change- induced coastal erosion; 2.1 Develop an Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan for Liberia; 
2.2 Capacitate the Cross -Sectoral Working G roup to mainstream ICZM into relevant government sectors through 
a Training- of-Trainers approach; and 2.3 Strengthen the asset base and technical capacity of the ICZMU for the 
collection of spatial and biophysical coastal information to support the implementation of the ICZMP  (Table 2) . The 
EE will delegate  to the M ME as a Responsible Part y –– government enti ties with the technical competence in their 
respective areas –– to ensure that the activity is implemented according to national requirements.  A Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU ) will be established between the EE and the MME  outlining their respective responsibilities 
under Activity 1.2.  The funds for selected activities, as requested by the GoL, including Activit y 1.2 (due to their 
higher value and high risk nature) will be chan neled directly to service providers by UNDP as part of UNDP support 
services to GoL. Any other funding requests will be channeled through the EPA.   The Ministry of Public Works 
(MPW) will assist the EE and the MME to implement Activity 1.2 and will be repr esented on the Project Steering 
Committee and Technical Sub- Committee. No funds will be channeled through the MME.  Similarly, the Ministry of 
Gender, Children and Social Protection (MoGCSP)  will be included on the Project Board to support gender 
sensitivity and oversight during the project implementation period.  
 
113. The Project Board/Steering Committee will be chaired by the Director of the EPA  and will be comprised of 
representatives from the EPA, MFDP, UNDP and MGSP , including at least 30% women.  The World Bank and the 
African Development Bank will also be invited as members of the Steering Committee in order to realize synergies 
with their similar investments in the country, particularly the AFDB GCF -funded project. The Project Board is 
responsibl e for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. 
Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development 
results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition.  In case 
consensus cannot be reached within the Board, the UNDP Resident Representative (or their designate) will 
mediate to find consensus and, if this cannot be found, will take the final decisi on to ensure project implementation 
is not unduly delayed.  The Project Board will meet according to established practices.  
 
114. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will implement the project with support from the EPA and UNDP and will 
report to the Project Board . The Project Manager will be appointed to lead the PMU which will run the project on a 
day-to-day basis on behalf of the EPA within the constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager 
function will end when the final project terminal evalu ation report and other project closure activities and 
documentation required by the GCF and UNDP have been completed and submitted to UNDP. The Project 
Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the project. The Project Manager’s 
prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the 
required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost.   The Executing Entity 
(Implementing Partner in UNDP te rminology) will designate one of its employees as a National Project 
Director responsible for the overall direction, strategic guidance and timely delivery of the Project.  
Implementation of the project will be further supported by a technical  sub-committee  constituted of institutional, 
community and civil society representatives. The members of this committee will be called on to provide input for 
relevant project activities. The project management arrangements are summarised in the diagram below (Figure 
14).


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 97 
 
  
Funds Flow: Donor funding, including the GCF funding, will be received by the administrative agent (UNDP) on behalf 
of the Executing Entity ( GoL represented by the EPA ) based on a standard letter of agreement (LOA)  signed between 
the donors and UNDP an d an MOU between UNDP and the Executing Entity separately.  As per UNDP’s National 
Implementation polic y (NIM), the Project Management Unit’s (PMU) capacity assessment, determined that funding may 
be advanced to entities for lower risk activities. UNDP will support the handling and channelling of funds for higher 
value activities  that exceed a budget threshold of US$250,000  (for example, Activity 1.2) as a support service 
provisioned for in the LOA.   For these higher value activities , a ‘Direct Payments’ option will be  utilised where UNDP 
needs to ensure value for money and minimise any risks associated with exceeding the capacity of government 
agencies to manage procurement and deliver activities timeously. Through this option,  transfers will be made directly 
from UNDP to the go ods and service providers upon the request of the EE, and to the PMU for its day -to-day running 
functions. The Direct Payments modality ensures: i) that the request has come from an authori sed official; ii) verification 
that the requested payment is in accordance with the project workplan; and iii) verification that payment is made to the 
designated party . For activities where a Direct Payments modality is being used, GCF Proceeds and the Accredited 
Entity’s Co -financing will  not flow through the Executing Entity. Instead UNDP (as administrative agent of the Executing 
Entity) will channel such funding via a Direct Payments option whereby transfer will be made directly to goods and 
services provi ders hired by the Accredited Entity and upon request of the Executing Entity. On the other hand, the Co-
financing from the Government of the Host Country will flow to the EPA as budget allocations and used directly by such 
ministry to pay procured parties and/or transfer such funds to the relevant Responsible Part y. For lower risk activities, 
funds will be advanced to the Executing Entity by UNDP and the Executing Entity will procure and transfer funders to 
the goods and service providers  hired to implement those activities.  
 
 
   
 
         
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Project Organisation al Structure  
Project Steering Committee  
EPA, MFDP, UNDP,  MGSP, MME, MPW, WB, ADB  
Senior Beneficiary/ 
Executing Entity  
EPA 
Executive  
EPA 
Senior Supplier/ 
Accredited Entity  
UNDP  
Project Assurance  
•
 UNDP Country Office –  Liberia  
•
 Regional Service Centre –  Addis 
Ababa 
•
 HQ – New York  
Executing Entity  
EPA 
Technical Sub -Committee  
•
 MoME  
•
 Community Leadership 
Representatives (x4)  
•
 MoPW  
•
 MoGSP 
•
 NGO Representatives  
•
 LMS 
•
 UNDP  
•
 EPA 
•
 Cross -Sectoral Working Group 
Responsible 
Party  
MME  
MPW  
Project Management Unit  
•
 Project Manager  
•
 Administration & Finance Officer  
•
 Procurement Expert  
•
 Monitoring & Evaluation Officer  
•
 Gender Officer  
•
 Administration & Finance Assistants


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 97 
 
  
 
Figure 14. Institutional arrangements and financial flows.  
  
Experience and track record of the Accredited Entity: UNDP  
115. In Liberia, UNDP has led environmental protection and climate change responses through the facilitation of 
policy formulation, strategic planning, law making, coordination and information sharing. Through this role, UNDP 
has built strong relationships with decision -makers and proven its strengths as an impartial provider of technical 
advice and support. With its central role in the UN system, UNDP facilitates a multi -sectoral approach to assist the 
GoL to respond to complex issues such as climate change and green growth and is recognized as an experienced 
agency in institutional development and capacity building, bringing a long- term institutional and people- centred 
focus to capacity development.  
 
116. As a multilateral organisation, UNDP can promote the dissemination of international norms and standards, 
bring technical assistance, experience and good practices to bear in Liberia. UNDP has demonstrated its long -term 
commitment to the provision of technical assistance to affect and sustain the institutional changes required in 
realising tangible improvements in institutional capacity. Over the last five years UNDP has implemented a coastal 
adaptation project, a climate change adaptation project in the agricultural sector, an early warning system project 
and an extr active industry sustainable development project.  
 Experience and track record of the Executing Entity: Government of Liberia represented by the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA)  
117. Under the National Environmental Policy of Liberia (2003), the GoL set up the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) as an independent authority for the management of the environment. The EPA is an autonomous body tasked with enforcing the National Environment Protection and Management Law under the Executive Branch of 
Government  and is overseen by a nine- member board of directors from specific government agencies and the 
private sector. This board of directors is required to establish Technical Committees to advise the EPA on priority issues including climate change and marine an d coastal ecosystems.  
 
118. As the National Designated Authority (NDA) for Liberia, the EPA has been involved in the submission of several 
Concept Notes and Readiness Proposals for the GCF. These projects include: i) the Simplified Approval Process 
(SAP) Concep t Note: Resilient and Low Carbon Tree Crop Extension Project II ; and ii) Liberia Adaptation 
Readiness Proposal . Similarly, the EPA has a strong track -record of implementing climate adaptation projects for 
the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Between 2008 and 2018, the EPA implemented 12 GEF -funded projects 
with a focus on climate change adaptation in Liberia. The most recent of these projects are:  
• Building and Strengthening Liberia’s National Capacity to Implement the Transparency Elements of the Paris 
Climate Agreement , 2018 (GEF -ID 9923);  
Finance flows  
GCF Funds  
Executing Entity  
Service providers  
Beneficiaries  
UNDP  
Direct Payment modality


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 97 
 
 • Conservation and Sustainable use of Liberia’s Coastal Natural Capital , 2017 (GEF -ID 9573); and  
• Improve Sustainability of Mangrove Forests and Coastal Mangrove Areas in Liberia through Protection,  Planning 
and Livelihood Creation-  as a Building Block Towards Liberia’s Marine and Costal Protected Areas , 2016 (GEF -
ID 5712).  
 
Table 2. Responsible Part y, Legal Agreement , Beneficiaries and Co-finance for each Activity.  
Activity  Responsible 
party Legal agreement  Beneficiaries  Co-finance  
Activity 1.1. Prepare 
construction plans and finalise 
technical design specifications 
for coastal defence structure at West Point.  
 MME  MoU  between EPA 
and MME  
 Contract with service providers  West Point  
 UNDP  
Activity 1.2. Construct coastal 
defence structure to protect West Point against climate 
change-induced coastal 
erosion.  
 MME  MoU  between EPA 
and MME  
 
MoU between EPA 
and MPW  
 
Contract with service 
providers  West Point  UNDP and GoL  
Activity 2.1. Develop an 
Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management Plan for Liberia.  
 MME  MoU  between EPA, 
and MME  
 
Contract with service 
providers  MMA  UNDP and GoL  
Activity 2.2. Capacitate the 
Cross -Sectoral Working Group 
to mainstream ICZM into 
relevant government sectors 
through a Training- of-Trainers 
approach.  MME  MoU between EPA 
and MME  
 Contract with service 
providers  MMA  UNDP and GoL  
Activity 2.3. Strengthen the 
asset base and technical 
capacity of the ICZMU for the 
collection of spatial and 
biophysical coastal information to support the implementation 
of the ICZMP.  MME  MoU between EPA 
and MME  
 Contract with service providers  MMA  No 
Activity 2.4.  Strengthen the 
existing Environmental 
Knowledge Management 
System (EKMS) to act as a 
platform for awareness -raising 
and sharing of climate risk -
informed ICZM approach.  EPA Contract with service 
providers   MMA  UNDP  
Activity 2.5. Conduct an 
awareness -raising campaign 
for communities in focus areas 
on climate change impacts and 
adaptation practices.  
 EPA Agreement between 
the Knowledge 
Sharing Groups and 
the CSC  
 
CSC Constitution and  contractual 
agreements 
between  the EPA 
and CSC members  
 
Contract with service 
providers  
 West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, 
Fiamah and 
Topoe Villages  
 UNDP and GoL  
Activity 3.1. Establish a 
community education and 
innovation centre to function as 
a community knowledge EPA CSC Constitution  
and  contractual 
agreements West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, 
Fiamah and 
Topoe Villages  UNDP and GoL


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 97 
 
  
88 World Bank Data Portal. 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?cid=GPD_31&locations=LR -XL. 
Further information on the socio- economic context of Liberia is available in Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 1.  
 generation and learning hub, 
repository on climate change 
adaptation practices and to 
host community activities under 
Output 3.  
 between  the EPA 
and CSC members  
 
MoU between the 
owners of the center 
and EPA 
 
Contract with service 
providers   
Activity 3.2. Establish 
community -led co -
management agreement to 
ease anthropogenic pressure 
on mangroves in the MMA.  
 EPA Co-management 
agreement between 
target communities and EPA 
 
Contract with service 
providers  West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, Fiamah and Topoe Villages
 
 No 
Activity 3.3.  Conduct annual 
assessments to evaluate the 
project -induced changes in 
mangrove degradation, 
community perceptions and 
awareness of climate change 
impacts, adaptation options 
and mangrove ecosystems 
throughout the project 
implementation period.  EPA Contrac t with service 
providers   West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, Fiamah and Topoe Villages
 
 UNDP and GoL  
Activity 3.4. Establish small -
scale manufacturing facilities 
and develop training material 
to capacitate community 
members to manufacture and 
sell cookstoves to su pport 
alternative climate-resilient livelihoods. 
 EPA Contract with service 
providers   
 CSC Constitution 
and contract ual 
agreement s 
between  the EPA 
and CSC members  
 West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, 
Fiamah and 
Topoe Villages  
 UNDP  
Activity 3.5. Purchase and 
install low -maintenance eco-
friendly cold storage facilities 
near fish processing sites to 
reduce pressure on mangroves 
and increase market efficiency.  EPA Contract with service 
providers   
 
CSC Constitution 
and  contractual 
agreements between  the EPA 
and CSC members  West Point, 
Jacob’s Town, Fiamah and 
Topoe Villages
 
 UNDP  
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
119. GCF grants are critical for this proposed project given the limited economic resources of Liberia and its 
numerous development priorities. While some government funds have been made available as co- financing, the 
current economic situation and borrowing profile of the Government of Liberia (GoL) i s limited. Liberia has been 
classified as a Least Developed Country (LDC) with a 2018 GDP per capita of USD 674 —  significantly lower than 
the LDC average GDP per capita of USD 1,04288. In addition, Liberia’s Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.465 
ranks the country 176th out of 189 countries assessed by the UNDP Human Development Report 2018. Economic 
and social gains made by Liberia in the post -civil war period from 2000 –2010 were severely curtailed by the 
outbreak of the Ebola virus and subsequent epidemic  between 2014 and 2015.  The current COVID -19 pandemic 
poses a new threat  to the Liberian economy. External demand for Liberian exports is expected to decrease and


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 97 
 
  
89 World Bank. 2020. The COVID -19 Crisis in Liberia: Projected Impact and Policy Options for a Robust Recovery. Available at: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/34271/Liberia- Economic -Update- The-COVID -19-Crisis -in-Liberia- Proje cted-
Impact -and-Policy -Options -for-a-Robust -Recovery.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y    
90 International Monetary Fund, 2019 -  https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2019/03/08/pr1971- imf-staff-completes -2019- article -iv-mission -
to-liberia  
91 International Monetary F und Staff Report, 2018 -  https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pdf/2018/dsacr18172.pdf  
92 Hard infrastructure as well as EbA measures were considered in the suite of possible interventions for coastal protection along the 
coastline of the MMA: i) Chapter  6 of the Vulnerability Sub- assessment (Annex 2.B) provides an overview of all the potential options 
considered; ii) Section 6.1 provides an overview of the objectives and requirements for protection and 6.2 provides overview of ICZM 
strategies; iii) Section 6.3.3 (page 101) provides an overview of the feasibility of all the protection options that have been considered 
including below will be incorporated into the revised FS and appropriately referred to in the FP: i) Chapter 6 of the Vulnerability Sub -
asse ssment (Annex 2.B) provides an overview of all the potential options considered; ii) Section 6.1 provides an overview of the objectives 
and requirements for protection and 6.2 provides overview of ICZM strategies; iii) Section 6.3.3 (page 101) provides an overview of the feasibility of all the protection options that have been considered including NBS (Sections 8.J, 8.K and 8.L provide a comple te list of 
options); iv) Chapter 7 provides a description of which options are proposed and why; v) Section 7.4 (page 118 to 121) gives a full 
description of the alternative options that are considered for West Point and which options are favoured as well as the respe ctive 
advantages and disadvantages of each approach.  
93 Preparatory work to be financed by UNDP includes  the development of a specific and focused ESIA and associated ESMP in accordance 
with Liberia law.  
 may disrupt investment in the export -oriented mining, agriculture, and forestry sectors89. A recent study by IMF90 
observed that macroeconomic stability in Liberia was already  elusive with a faltering GDP growth and a spike in 
inflation  when the pandemic emerged. The International Monetary Fund had  cut down Liberia’s 2019 growth outlook 
with the exchange rate depreciating by 26% over the year, and inflation accelerating to 28% at end- December. 
Growth in GDP for 2018 was 1.2%, while the projection for 2019 is a 1.4% contraction in the economy. Liberi a also 
does not have an established borrowing programme of its own and its primary financing91 includes concessional 
capital from IMF, WB, AfDB and other bilateral agencies. Due to these economic risks that persist and the IMF’s 
cautionary stance on economi c growth and inflation, Liberia is not currently able to raise any external financing in 
the form of concessional loans to replace GCF’s grant for this proposed project. In addition, due to the public good 
nature of the benefits derived from the project, t he serviceability of any such loans is uncertain. Without intervention, 
the estimated cost of accelerated coastal erosion at West Point alone is USD 47 million.  
  
120. This project’s proposed structure includes three outputs and twelve  activities92. However, non e of the activities 
or outputs clearly result in direct and quantifiable earnings or direct and quantifiable savings to the project owners 
or the project beneficiaries in a predictable time period. All the activities and outputs of this proposed project result 
only in non- attributable savings that are public goods and will benefit vulnerable communities in Liberia. Hence, a 
financial modelling -based analysis has not been conducted and a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) has not 
been calculated for any of these activities.  
 
121. However, considering the GCF’s minimum concession policy, this project’s proposed activities have been 
analysed from a macro- economic and government perspective to assess the need for GCF grant as the only 
feasible financial instrument to fund the project activities. Hence, taking into consideration the factors such as the: i) climate -resilient sustainable development benefits arising out of the project; ii) identified climate change impacts; 
iii) fragile economic nature of the target population and Liberia’s challenging economic situation; iv) persistent 
inflationary risks; v) lack of borrowing programmes; and vi) catalytic nature of the GCF grants, we recommend the 
following –  
 
• The nature of the benefits does not accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a 
loan instrument.  
• The vulnerability of beneficiaries and the level of essentiality of the service do not accommodate repayment of 
capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan i nstrument.  
• There is co- financing from GoL and there is no incremental ability to stretch their contributions owing to budgetary 
and fiscal consolidation reasons.  
• Hence, it is recommended that in order to reduce / close the existing financing and knowledge gaps and barriers 
to improve resilience of Liberia’s population to climate change- induced hazards, GCF grants are essential.  
GCF’s approach to financing only the incremental costs of adaptation have been given full consideration during 
the development of  this proposal. Under Output 1, GCF will be financing only the construction phase of the 
protective infrastructure at West Point, with additional on- the-ground preparatory work93 receiving co- finance 
directly from UNDP. Under Output 2, the bulk of GCF fundi ng will be directed towards awareness raising on 
climate change adaptation as well as the development of an ICZMP, technology transfer and technical support


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 97 
 
  
94 Preparatory work to be financed by UNDP includes the development of a specific and focused ESIA and associated ESMP in accordance 
with Liberia law.  
95 Refe r to Figure 4 in section B.1 which shows average coastal retreat between 2000 and 2100.  
96 A joint mission was undertaken by GoL  (Ministry of Mines and Energy, EPA) and UNDP, to assess availability of rock at a quarry site 
originally used by GoL to source rocks for past GoL projects.  
97 Details of these stakeholder consultations are given in Chapter 6  of Annex  2.B: Vulnerability Sub -assessment and pg. 63 of Annex 6: 
ESAR.  
 to capacitate the GoL to implement a proactive, climate -sensitive approach to coastal zone manageme nt. 
Additional activities under Output 2 — which represent a composite of adaptation and development interventions 
— will be co -financed by UNDP and GoL. Similarly, under Output 3, GCF funds will only be used for awareness 
raising on adaptation strategies and the provision of technical oversight, with the remainder of Output 3 —  which 
focuses on conserving resources, supporting the development of climate- resilient livelihoods and strengthening 
food security — exclusively funded by a combination of UNDP and GoL co- finance.  
 
122. The GCF’s approach to financing only the incremental costs of adaptation have been given full consideration 
during the development of this proposal. Under Output 1, GCF will be financing only the construction phase of the 
protective infrastructure at West Point, with additional on- the-ground preparatory work94 receiving co- finance 
directly from UNDP. Under Output 2, the bulk of GCF funding will be directed towards awareness raising on climate change adaptation as well as the  development of an ICZMP, technology transfer and technical support to capacitate 
the GoL to implement a proactive, climate- sensitive approach to coastal zone management. Additional activities 
under Output 2 — which represent a composite of adaptation and development interventions — will be co -financed 
by UNDP and GoL. Similarly, under Output 3, GCF funds will only be used for awareness raising on adaptation 
strategies and the provision of technical oversight, with the remainder of Output 3 — which focuses on conserving 
resources, supporting the development of climate- resilient livelihoods and strengthening food security —  
exclusively funded by a combination of UNDP and GoL co- finance.  
 
123. GCF is being requested to finance the cost of the  construction of  protec tive infrastructure at West Point under 
Output 1, as climate change is clearly contributing to increased rates of coastal erosion
95. As evidence of its 
commitment to coastal adaptation and protection, the Government of Liberia (GoL) will contribute rock material96 
for the construction of the revetment as in- kind co- finance. The request for GCF support is being made to address 
the limited  technical capacity of the GoL to design and implement an intervention of this type while considering the  
latest climate information and models. Additionally, as indicated in this section, the GoL has extremely limited 
financial resources and numerous urgent development priorities. GCF financing of this intervention will, however, 
contribute significantly to the knowledge base in Liberia on developing climate- resilient infrastructure a nd facilitate 
the strengthening of partnerships which will support the expansion of robust coastal protection and ICZM elsewhere 
along Liberia’s vulnerable coastline, thereby creating an enabling environment for future country -led initiatives of a 
similar nature.  
 
124. Financial support from GCF with maximum concessionally is consequently required to capacitate the GoL to 
protect vulnerable coastal communities against accelerated climate change- induced coastal erosion and safeguard 
livelihoods that are reliant on climate- sensitive mangrove ecosystems. In the absence of GCF involvement, the 
coastal community in West Point and across the MMA will become increasingly exposed to the impacts of 
accelerated coastal erosion, SLR and reduced provision of mangrove ecosystem servic es that support local 
livelihoods.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page)  
125. The proposed project has been designed with specific focus on an effective exit strategy that will ensure the 
long-term sustainability of the project interventions and their associated benefits. The specific elements of the exit 
strategy are presented below.  
 
Post -project operations and maintenance  
126. Project interventions have been designed to incorporate sustainability considerations from the ou tset, with 
minimal to no maintenance required beyond the project period. Through stakeholder consultations, the burden of 
operations and maintenance was identified as a risk to the sustainability of potential coastal protection 
interventions97. The rock rev etment (Activity 1.2), for example, was therefore selected and designed to have low 
maintenance requirements once installed (detailed in Annex 2.C: Engineering Sub -assessment). For what


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 97 
 
  
98 The revetment has been designed to have a lifespan of 30– 50 years and is only expected to require maintenance if it is damaged by 
extreme events. The O&M costs are estimated between 0% and 0.5% per year for the rock works. Further information on the O&M 
requirements and plan are provided in Annex 21.  maintenance is required, the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME)  has co mmitted to financing and undertaking 
O&M after project completion98. The required financial commitments for maintenance of protective infrastructure 
beyond the project period are outlined in Annex 21:  Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Plan. To further increase 
the sustainability of the intervention,  community leaders, construction workers and fisherfolk from West Point will 
be trained on techniques for monitoring the revetment by the service provider  responsible for its construction. A 
dedicated communication channel between the community and MME to report on revetment maintenance 
requirements will be established during project implementation. MME will oversee the monitoring of the revetment 
and perform regular technical inspections (ass detailed in the O&M Plan), using the information provided by the 
community and from these inspections to determine and meet all maintenance requirements. Workers  from the 
West Point area engaged in the construction of the revetment will be trained by the construction firm on the technical 
skills needed to perform revetment  maintenance, to ensure that local labour with the required training is available 
to MME when they need to perform maintenance activities . Overseen by the MME, t he CSC will be responsible for 
the routine upkeep of the education and innovation centre,  and will have access to small amounts of funds for this 
purpose t hrough the income generated for the centre under Activity 3.4.  During the collaboration workshop for 
government representatives, CSC members and NGOs under Sub- activity 3.1.4, the specific roles and 
responsibilities of the CSC members in terms of maintaining the education and innovation centre will be allocated 
among the CSC members.  Maintenance for the education and innovation centre is expected to be low -cost as 
facilities are planned to be basic and durable.  The MME will provide support for additional maintenance needs in 
cases where these costs go beyond the capability of the community, including the replacement of the roofing and 
window fittings.  Similarly , any maintenance required for the cold storage facilities (Activity 3.5) will be funded 
through the nominal fee paid by community members who use the facilities and managed by the CSC , overseen 
by the MME . This will ensure the sustainability of the facilities and enable communities to hold the CSC accountable 
for their maintenance. Public sector investments into O&M will build ownership by relevant stakeholders, 
maximising th e likelihood of effective, sustained maintenance beyond the project’s implementation period. Co-
management arrangements between relevant stakeholders, will also ensure cooperation and sustainable 
management of project interventions in the long term.  
 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) approach   
127. The sustainability of project interventions will be underpinned by the introduction of an integrated approach to 
coastal zone management in Liberia that emphasises capacity -building, cross -sectoral coordination and ongoing 
learning. The development of a vu lnerability map and an ICZMP will form the basis of the ICZM approach in 
Monrovia and across Liberia. This process will be informed by active engagement with local stakeholders — including private sector partners and local communities  in the coastal zone, with a focus on women — to ensure 
relevance to the local context. Training on the implementation of the ICZMP will also be operationalised through a Trainer -of-Trainers approach that will ensure that the skills are retained within relevant institutions and can be 
shared both nationally and regionally, facilitating the upscaling of ICZM and the sharing of knowledge. The use of 
a Training- of-Trainers approach in capacity -building activities will also foster buy -in from stakeholders and facilitate 
continued us e of project tools, plans and policies beyond the project’s lifespan. 
 By bringing together government 
institutions across sectors, the project will facilitate the harmoni sation  of policies (Sub -activity 2.2.2)  and planning 
relating to infrastructure, ecos ystems and communities, creating an enabling environment for integrated adaptation 
and further investment in coastal adaptation. In particular, the harmoni sation of policies and improved cooperation 
across government institutions will enable these institut ions to: i)  collaborate more effectively to leverage 
government finance for coastal adaptation;  and ii) engage more systematically with the private sector and 
development partners to leverage additional investments . In addition, updating the ICZMP during the project period 
to reflect lessons learned from its initial implementation and from the implementation of the mangrove co-
management agreements under Activity 3.2 will ensure that ICZM is implemented adaptively and grounded in the experiences of local communities.
 
 
128. The ICZM C ommittee and CSWG will be well -established before the end of the project period and will continue 
to function in a decentralised manner after the period of project implementation. Similarly, recommendations will be made during development of the ICZMP for : i) the assignment of departmental budget allocations for continued 
fundi ng of ICZM activities outlined in the plan ; and ii) the inclusion of ICZM into the job descriptions of relevant


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 97 
 
 officials across government institutions. Moreover,  strategies for financing coastal climate change adaptation 
initiatives will be identified by the CSWG , their success monitored over the course of the project  and updated to 
inform the ICZMP . This government buy -in to the ICZM approach will ensure its sustainability beyond the project’s 
lifespan. Additionally, the establishment of a wave buoy -based coastal data processing system and upscaling the 
existing EKMS will strengthen the information base underpinning the effective implementation of ICZM and will 
ensure that lessons learned on ICZM are actively collected, collated and disseminated to releva nt stakeholders in 
accessible formats. The continued use of these tools will facilitate the ongoing application of the innovative 
approach to coastal zone management in Liberia beyond project completion.  
 
Participatory approach to managing ecosystems  
129. To ensure the sustainability of ecosystem management activities, the development of community -led co -
management agreements for mangrove ecosystems will be undertaken with the close involvement of  communities  
bordering the Mesurado Wetland. Their needs and concerns will be carefully considered, facilitating community 
buy-in and ownership of the agreements. The agreements and incentives for mangrove co- management will be 
underpinned by : i) the existing land- use management framework ; ii) the strengthened institutional and regulatory 
systems for ICZM developed under Output 2 ; and iii) activities within the project that will increase awareness of the 
importance of mangrove ecosystems and how to sustainability manage them (Activities 2.5 and 3.2)  and provide 
opportunities for the adoption of alternative livelihood practices (Activities 3.4 and 3.5) . Lessons learned from the 
implementation of the mangrove co- management agreements will be incorporated into the revision of the ICZMP. 
Embedding participatory ecosystem management within the broader institutional framework will ensure ongoing 
support for mangrove conservation and management beyond the project period through the established institutional and regulatory systems. Conversely, incorpora ting lessons from community -based implementation of ICZM into 
the planning framework will increase the effectiveness and applicability of the ICZMP going forward.  Similarly, the 
establishment of a Community Stewardship Committees (CSC) will promote communi
ty involvement and 
engagement in ecosystem management. Attention will be paid to the local context within which th is committee will 
operate, in the interests of ensuring that the committee is self-sustaining. beyond the project lifespan Increased 
knowledge  resulting from this involvement in the project will catalyse a shift in the way communities perceive and 
value mangroves, highlighting the link between mangrove conservation and health, livelihoods and food security. This will encourage continued participation and ongoing commitment to the safeguarding of these ecosystems. In 
addition, the small income streams developed through the cold storage facilities (Activity 3.5) and eco- friendly 
livelihood products (Activity 3.4) will enable the community facilities and the CSC to operate beyond the project 
lifespan.  
 
Climate -resilient, gender -responsive and sustainable community livelihoods  
130. A fully participatory approach will be used in the design of activities to build Monrovian communities’ resilience 
to climate change and to generate gender -responsive, sustainable livelihoods. In particular, the long- term benefits 
of sustainable livelihoods will be promoted as an alternative to timber extraction from mangroves. This will have a 
sustained impact, as commun ities are likely to continue to use practices that are beneficial to them after project 
implementation.  
 
131. Project activities are predominantly targeted at Monrovia’s coastal fishing communities, approximately 60% of 
which are comprised of women. The long-term benefits of project activities will therefore inherently contribute to 
sustained gender equality. In addition, all committees established during project implementation will prioritise the 
inclusion of women, ensuring that future decision- making i ncorporates the interests of all genders. This will 
contribute to a shift in gender relations, which will additionally reduce inherent gender -based vulnerability in future. 
It also anticipated that, because of women’s roles as primary caregivers, there wil l be externalities on future 
generations that will contribute to the sustainability of project interventions.  
 
Scaling up and continuation of best practice  
132. All project activities have been designed to incorporate sustainability considerations from the outs et, including 
the potential for scaling up and continuation of best practice. Information generated through the development of the high- resolution vulnerability map — as well as best practice and lessons learned through the implementation 
of the ICZMP in Monrovia — will be shared widely and used to scale up project interventions across all coastal 
counties in Liberia. 
During the implementation period, collaboration between development partners — which have 
been initiated during project development — will be  consolidated, including between UNDP, CI, the World Bank 
and JICA. These partnerships and experience will provide a robust platform for the implementation of other projects


---
*Page 56*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 97 
 
 in the coastal zone . Extensive engagement with the private sector during the devel opment and implementation of 
the ICZMP will strengthen public -private partnerships for coastal management , increasing support for future coastal 
protection and adaptation initiatives . The design of these activities will, in conjunction with the training -of-trainers 
approach used, ensure that their implementation will continue successfully post project implementation.  In addition, 
activities promoting uptake of climate- resilient liveliho od activities  — including the manufacturing of energy -efficient 
cookstoves  and demonstrations on the benefits of improved community  fish smoking systems  — will focus on 
facilitating the development of small  business es, to enable the upscaling and replication of these alternative 
livelihood activities beyond the project implementation period and geographical scope. This will be done by : i) 
facilitating relationship building between potential community entrepreneurs and v alue chain actors ; ii) providing 
training on business management skills ; iii) supporting access to finance for initial investments in business start -
ups; iv) supporting market analysis through the livelihood assessment under Activity 3.3 and marketing through the 
awareness -raising campaigns under Activities 2.5 and 3.2; and v) using the education and innovation as a platform 
for testing new technologies and innovations in the local community .


---
*Page 57*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 97 
   
 
 INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  FINANCING  Currency  
17,255,755   USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  17,255,755     
(vii) Result -based  payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
8,383,150  USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
UNDP  Grant  1,577,750   USD ($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of Liberia  Grant  2,540,000  USD ($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of Liberia  In kind  4,265,400  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
25,638,905  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max.  250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including  tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Output  Activity  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financi
al 
Instrum
ent Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Output 1. 
Protection of 
coastal 
communities 
and 
infrastructure at West Point against erosion caused by 
sea-level rise Activity 1.1:  
Prepare construction plan 
and finalise technical design specifications for  
coastal defence structure 
at West Point.  705,712 333,012 Grants  372,700  Grants  UNDP  
Activity 1.2:  
Construct coastal defence 
structure to protect West Point against climate 17,442,309  13,169,909  Grants  7,000  
4,265,400  Grants  
In-kind   UNDP  
GoL


---
*Page 58*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 97 
   
 and 
increasingly 
frequent 
high -intensity 
storms.  change -induced coastal 
erosion.  
Output 2: 
Institutional 
capacity 
building and policy 
support for 
the implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) across 
Liberia  Activity 2.1:  
Develop an Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management Plan for 
Liberia.  2,426,014 912, 014  Grants  1,508, 500 
5,500  Grants  
Grants  GoL 
UNDP  
  
 
Activity 2.2:  
Capacitate the Cross -
Sectoral Working Group 
to mainstream ICZM into relevant government sectors through a Training -of-Trainers 
approach.  322,460  128,360  Grants  181,100 
13,000  Grants  
Grants  
  GoL 
UNDP  
  
 
Activity 2.3:  
Strengthen the asset base and technical capacity of the ICZMU for the collection of spatial and biophysical coastal 
information to support 
the implementation of the 
ICZMP.  383,250  383,250  Grants  - -  
Activity 2.4:  
Strengthen the existing 
Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) to act as a 
platform for awareness -
raising and sharing of 
climate risk -informed 
ICZM approach.  186,500 40,250 Grants  146,250  Grants  UNDP  
  
 
Activity 2.5:  
Conduct an awareness -
raising campaign for 
communities in focus 
areas on climate change impacts and adaptation 
practices.  787,400  185,000  Grants  320,400 
282,000  Grants  
Grants  GoL 
UNDP  
  
 
Output 3. 
Protecting 
mangroves and strengthenin
g gender and 
climate-sensitive livelihoods to build local climate resilience in 
Monrovia  Activity 3.1:  
Establish a community 
education and innovation centre to function as a 
community knowledge 
generation and learning hub, a repository on climate change adaptation practices and 
host community activities 
under Output 3.  689,982  323,482  Grants  330,000 
36,500  Grants  
Grants  GoL 
UNDP  
  
 
Activity 3.2:  
Establish community -led 185,750 185,750 Grants  - -


---
*Page 59*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 97 
   
 co-management 
agreement to ease 
anthropogenic pressure on mangroves in the 
MMA.  
Activity 3.3:  
Conduct annual assessments to evaluate 
the project -induced 
changes in mangrove degradation, community perceptions and 
awareness of climate 
change impacts, adaptation options and mangrove ecosystems 
throughout the project 
implementation period.  1,010,000  780,000 Grants  200,000 
30,000 Grants  
Grants  GoL 
UNDP  
Activity 3.4:  
Establish small -scale 
manufacturing facilities 
and develop training material to capacitate community members to manufacture and sell 
cookstoves to support 
alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods.  134, 550   134,550 Grants   UNDP  
Activity 3.5:  
Purchase and install low -
maintenance eco -friendly 
cold storage facilities near 
fish processing sites to 
reduce pressure on 
mangroves and increase 
market efficiency   148,250  -    Grants  148,250  Grants   UNDP  
Project 
Management 
Cost   1,216,728   
814,728 Grants  402,000  Grants  UNDP  
Indicative total cost  USD ($)    25,638,905  
 17,255,755  8,383,150  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
133. One of the major barriers to increasing the uptake of climate- resilient planning for coastal zones in Liberia is 
limited technical capacity to implement ICZM as well as a lack of access to real -time oceanographic monitoring 
systems. GCF financing will be used to address this barrier by developing an ICZMP (Activity 2.1) and capacitating 
relevant technical staff across 10 government institutions to implement ICZM (Activity 2.2). To further support the 
GoL to implement ICZM across the country and better under stand climate change impacts in real -time, an integrated 
real-time oceanographic monitoring system will be procured under the project (Activity 2.3), and relevant institutional 
representatives will be capacitated to use the system. The benefits of transfer ring technology of this type into the 
Liberian context are numerous as the system will: i) increase the capability of the GoL to implement the ICZMP; ii) 
provide real -time data on ocean conditions, which will contribute to improved meteorology and EWS; and  iii) provide


---
*Page 60*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 97 
   
 a means to measure and quantify climate -change impacts in the coastal zone, thereby supporting the country to 
develop a long- term data- set on the coastal impacts of climate change in Liberia.


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 97 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
134. The proposed project will contribute to the achievement of the GCF’s Paradigm Shift objective of increased 
climate -resilient sustainable development. This will be achieved by actively protecting infrastructure against climate 
change impacts, improving climate- responsive coastal pla nning, strengthening local livelihood practices and 
promoting the sustainable use of mangrove ecosystems to reduce the climate vulnerability of coastal communities 
in Monrovia. In so doing, the project will contribute to several indicative assessment factors in the GCF Performance 
Measurement Framework, including Fund- level Impacts:  
• A1.0 Increased resilience of most vulnerable people, communities and regions; and  
• A3.0 Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change.  
 
Project Outcomes  
135. Activities under the project will contribute to the achievement of two GCF Fund- level Outcomes (as per the 
Performance Measurement Framework) that will be used to assess the contribution of this project to climate-
resilient sustainable dev elopment, as detailed below.  
• A5.0 Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate- responsive planning and development.  
Training on mainstreaming climate adaptation and improved management of coastal systems delivered through 
the project (Acti vities 2.1 - 2.2) will enhance the technical capacity of the GoL to plan for and respond to the 
impacts of climate change. Specifically, a Cross -Sectoral Working Group CSWG) will be established and trained 
to facilitate this mainstreaming process. An ICZM approach will also be integrated into national institutional 
processes to facilitate climate- responsive planning.  
• A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. The coastal protection measures 
implemented through this project wi ll reduce Monrovian communities’ vulnerability to climate risks. Specifically, 
the risk of accelerated coastal erosion and associated damage to infrastructure and houses in the West Point 
community will be substantially reduced.   
 
Adaptation impact  
136. The project is expected to directly benefit 250,000 people99 (49% women) in the target communities of : i) West 
Point (through coastal defence and enhanced livelihoods); ii) Topoe Village; iii) Plonkor and Fiamah ; and iv) Nipay 
Town and Jacob ’s Town (through enhanced livelihoods and improved protection of mangrove ecosystems).  It is 
also expected to indirectly benefit approximately 1 million100 people in Monrovia (49% women). This will be achieved 
by: i) reducing the impacts of climate change- induced coastal er osion; ii) improving the resilience of climate-
sensitive livelihoods; and iii) developing a national -scale ICZMP and improving the capacity for ICZM in Liberia.  
 
137. Through the construction of coastal protection measures, approximately 1,050 m of coastline at West Point will 
be defended against coastal erosion (Output 1), preventing 150 m of shoreline retreat by 2050 and 360 m by 
2100101 (RCP8.5). These interventions will directly benefit the coastal population of West Point (approximately 
10,800 people, 49% women) whose homes, lives and livelihoods would otherwise be lost to coastal erosion. This will reduce damages to exposed and vulnerable infrastructure by USD 47 million
102. The project will also improve 
the adaptive capacity of Monrovia’s citizens who reside within and alongside the Mesurado Wetlands  by 
strengthening the climate resilience of fishery -based livelihoods through the protection of  mangrove ecosystems 
and supporting the uptake of diversified climate- resilient livelihoods (Output 3). When counted with the West Point 
beneficiaries described above, th ese interventions  will directly benefit approximately 2 50,000 people living in the 
areas prioritised for interventions, many of whom are involved in fishing and fish processing103. The entire 
population of Monrovia (approx. 1 million people, 49% women) will benefit indirectly from the project through the 
establishment of climate -responsive ICZM practices and related capac ity development (Output 2) in the MMA .  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
 
99 See Annex 2.B (Vulnerability Sub -assessment), calculation based on number of houses counted using Open Street Map data 
100 Calculated based on 2008 census data, with a population growth rate based on national population growth from 2008– 2018 
101 See Annex 2.B (Vulnerability Sub -assessment)  
102 Present value of predicted damages up to 2100, RCP8.5; see Annex 2.A: Feasibility Study, Section 3  
103 46% of whom are women: see Annex 2.B (Vulnerability Sub- assessment)


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 97 
   
  
138. The project will catalyse a paradigm shift in the approach to coastal management in Liberia, shifting from a 
focus on immediate needs and short -term planning to incorporating medium-  and long- term climate change 
considerations into coastal and development planning. This shift will be realised through the cons truction  of robust  
coastal defence  measures protect one of Liberia’s most vulnerable communities  (Output 1) , the development of  a 
climate -responsive ICZMP and the establishment of cross- sectoral coordination mechanisms (Output 2), as well 
as novel approaches to address the impacts of climate change on livelihoods in the Monrovia Metropolitan Area 
(Output 3). The use of quantitative data and scientific information in the development of the technical sub-
assessments for the proposed project will strengthen the case for adopting the ICZM approach in Liberia  and the 
strengthening of data collection and management under the project (Activities 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, and 3.3)  will improve 
the evid ence- base to support future ICZM decision- making. The project itself will serve as a model for integrated 
investment in coastal adaptation, as it incorporates  infrastructure- , planning- , ecosystem - and community -based 
approaches to addressing complex adaptation challenges in the coastal zone, informed by robust  analyses. The 
proposed project has the further potential to leverage alternative sources of finance (such as the local private sector 
and other development partners ) to support similar coastal protection infrastructure and broader adaptation 
initiatives, as it will create a robust enabling environment for investment in the coastal zone. This potential will be 
explored as part of the implementation of the ICZMP and development of a financing plan to leverage additional 
investment in coastal adaptation (Activit ies 2.1 and 2.2) . 
 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
139. The three project outputs will contribute to replicable and scalable climate- resilient development p athways in 
Monrovia, and elsewhere in Liberia, including building on institutional capacity development under the Liberia NAP readiness process — where assessments are being conducted on the economic impacts of climate change on 
vulnerable people and sectors — and lessons learned from previously implemented GEF -funded coastal defence 
projects
104. Stabilisation of the shoreline at West Point under Output 1 lends itself to replication because other parts 
of Monrovia’s coast (and indeed other coastal counties of Liberia) face similar risks in similar contexts. In particular, 
lessons learned (collect ed under Activity 2.4) and technical and project management capacity developed through 
the successful stabilisation of the shoreline at West Point will form the basis for replicating this process in other 
priority areas in Monrovia ( assessed by the Feasibi lity Study ) and elsewhere in Liberia. Similarly, under Output 2, 
the framework for implementing effective ICZM and coastal adaptation will be strengthened through: i) the 
development and revision after 3 years of a national ICZMP ; ii) improved coordination and relationship- building 
between relevant government institutions  (Activity 2.2) ; iii) harmonisation of policies and regulations across sectors 
to support coordinated ICZM; and i v) extensive (16-week) training of technical officials within the 10 government 
institutions involved in coastal zone management through a ToT approach. This strengthened framework and 
experience from the  implementation of the ICZM  in Monrovia will facilitate the expansion of this planning framework 
to the eight remaining coastal municipal areas in Liberia as well as the ongoing improvement of the national ICZM 
strategy , thereby  realising the shift to including long- term climate change considerations into in coastal planning at 
municipal level across the country. Output 3, which focuses on strengthening livelihoods for vulnerable coastal 
communities in Monrovia will yield valuable lessons that can inform and be replicated through projects/interventions 
in similar contexts — i.e. vulnerable urban settlements and fishing communities — in Monrovia and across Liberia, 
as well as contributing a to stronger, more implementable ICZMP . This will include supporting community members 
to develop small businesses based on the construction of  improved cookstoves , enabling the upscaling of more 
energy efficient cookstoves across Monrovia.  The demonstration of an improved communal  fish smoking system, 
at the education and innovation centre, will provide a further opportunity, along with the livelihood assessment 
(Activity 3.3.) , forcommunity members to test a new technology with potential to upscale that technology and realise 
substantial economic and environmental benefits in fishing communities . In the short -term, lessons learned from 
all three outputs will be used to inform the implementation of a GEF -funded coastal resilience project in Sinoe 
County105. Like the proposed project, this project in Sinoe Count y includes improving coastal protection, 
strengthening cross -sectoral coordination and developing alternative, climate- resilient livelihoods .   
  
Potential for knowledge management and learning  
 
104 Specifically, the GEF -funded Enhancing Resilience of Vulnerable Coastal Areas to Climate Change Risks in Liberia, which was originally 
implemented in the city of Buchannan and recently replicated in the vulnerable New Kru Town community in Monrovia.  
105 Further information on this project is provided in Section 6.1 of Annex 2A: Feasibility Study.


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 97 
   
 140. A number of activities under the project will contribute to knowledge management and learning. First,  Activity 
2.2 will contribute strongly to l earning and knowledge management through the development of ICZM capacity and 
expertise. To this end, technical officials from 10 government institutions will be capacitated through a ToT 
approach to adopt and implement climate- responsive ICZM for sustainability of coastal settlements and growth 
under climate change conditions. Technical skills will be imparted to government officials, including but not limited 
to: i) the synthesis and analysis of beach profile data; ii) coastal protection feasibility asses sments; and iii) 
maintenance of coastal protection infrastructure. Second, Activity 2 .3 will establish a system for data collection, 
analysis and management relating to coastal dynamics and ecosystems. This will help to increase the evidence 
base to support ICZM decisions -making, Third,  Activity 2.4 will contribute to the improved knowledge management 
by upscaling the existing Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) established under a GEF -funded 
initiative. This will include facilitating greater access to the system across 10 government institutions  and private 
sector partners, as well as  incorporating information on climate change adaptation and ICZM , which will be 
particularly important in promoting the sharing of project lessons and knowledge. Based on the EKMS, targeted 
knowledge products will be developed and disseminated to government institutions and the private sector to maximise the benefit  of the information gathered under the project. Effective knowledge management will ensure 
that long- term adaptation planning incorporates context -specific lessons learned and best practices  
and that 
knowledge is shared across sectors and between partners to strengthen coastal management . The involvement of 
research institutions in the knowledge management and learning process will also ensure that the project supports 
the development of a growing evidence base for ICZM . Fourth, t he establishment of an education and innovation 
centre under Activity 3.1 will contribute to increased community knowledge on alternative climate- resilient 
livelihoods and adaptation practices, particularly for the manufacturing of eco- friendly, energy -efficient products. 
Similarly, members of the communities of West Point, New Kru Town, Hotel Africa and the Atlantic Seaboard will 
be engaged to inform the development of a co- management agreement for the sustainable use of mangroves under 
Activity 3.2. Fifth, the annual alternative livelihood assessment undertaken under Activity 3.3 will increase the 
knowledge  base to support the development of climate- resilient livelihood opportunities.  Using the education and 
innovation centre as a platform to share the inf ormation collected and test new technologies, the project will  foster 
community innovation . Finally, the project will support sharing of lessons learned and best practice through 
continuous monitoring and evaluation under Activities 2.4, 2.5 and 3.3. The generation of lessons learned and best 
practice under these activities on an annual basis will not only support adaptive project management, but also 
inform learning and best practice across community, sub- national and national levels as well as regional initiatives 
such as WABICC.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
141. The project will create an enabling environment for climate- resilient coastal planning, the sustainable 
management of mangrove ecosystems and the uptake of climate- resilient  livelihoods beyond the project lifespan. 
Output 2 has been specifically designed to create enabling conditions for the integrated approach to coastal management and governance that are necessary to undertake long- term, climate- resilient planning in vulner able 
coastal areas such as Monrovia. This enabling environment will be created by improving coordination and policy 
harmonisation among government institutions  and building capacity for the implementation of ICZM. The 
introduction of ICZM as  an iterative and cyclical management approach will ensure that institutional arrangements 
and strategies established by the project will endure beyond its duration. A focus on strengthening public -private 
partnerships for ICZM under the project will also contribute to enabling further private sector inv olvement and 
support for coastal adaptation in Liberia in future. Similarly, embedding the mangrove co-management activities 
under  Activity 3.2  in the institutional and regulatory framework strengthened unde r Output 2  will create an enabling 
environment to systematically improve mangrove co
nservation efforts throughout and beyond the project 
implementation period. The involvement of community, government, private sector and NGO stakeholder in this process will ensure that feedbacks between top- down and bottom -up approaches strengthen 
both and that 
initiatives incorporate the expertise and experience of a broad range of stakeholders. This and other activities under 
Output 3 have  been designed as iterative activit ies that result in the ongoing development of diversified and climate-
resilient livelihoods, as well as contributing to the sustainable use of mangrove ecosystems.  
 Contribution to regulatory frameworks and policies  
142. The project will make a strong contribution to the development of ICZM policy in Liberia and assist the country 
to meet is legislative requirement of developing an ICZMP and updating this plan every three years. This will be 
achieved through the development of two iterations of an ICZMP during the project lifespan. ICZM is by definition 
an integrative framework and will consequently: i) take existing legislation and policy into account both strategically


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 97 
   
 and operationally; ii) contribute new knowledge and best p ractice to the policy landscape in Monrovia, and Liberia; 
and iii) influence changes in plans and policies at a county and district level. The regulatory landscape in Liberia 
will be further strengthened by ICZM capacity development within all relevant gov ernment institutions  and through 
the harmonisation of policies and regulations related to ICZM across government institutions .  
 
Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation stra tegies and plans  
143. The proposed activities have been designed to remove specific barriers that impede the achievement of fund-
level impacts and project outcomes as per the GCF Performance Measurement Framework (refer to Section D1). 
Project outputs lead to l onger -term outcomes that include reduced vulnerability to future impacts of climate change, 
reduced loss from potential natural disasters, and enhanced livelihoods. The project will ultimately result in 
increased capacity of the GoL to undertake ICZM both locally, and at the national level. Through this capacity 
development process, climate change adaptation planning will be mainstreamed to increase resilience of coastal 
ecosystems and communities to climate change. Output 2, which will establish the ICZMP for Liberia, will be well -
aligned with, and contribute to, the operationalisation of the GoL’s key legislation, strategies and policies. 
Additionally, through Output 3, the project is in line with, and contributes to, the: i) Pro- poor Agenda for Prosperity  
and Development; ii) Republic of Liberia Agenda for Transformation: Steps Towards Liberia Rising 2030; and iii) 
Liberia Climate Change Policy, which all guide the country’s efforts in both adaptation and mitigation. Furthermore, 
through instilling climate- resilient planning and protecting climate- sensitive livelihoods, the project will contribute to 
the achievement of the objectives of the Liberia National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA) and the National 
Strategic Action Plan for Climate Change and Dis aster Risk Management (NSAP).  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
144. The proposed project will contribute to the achievement of seven Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
namely: i) SDG 1 – No poverty; ii) SDG 2 –  Zero Hunger; iii) SDG 3 –  Good health and well -being;  iv) SDG 11 – 
Sustainable cities and communities; v)  SDG 13 – Climate action; vi) SDG 14 – Life below water. Apart from its 
contribution to the SDGs, the project will yield several environmental, economic, social, and gender co- benefits. 
These are described below.   
 
Environmental co -benefits  
145. The project will contribute to the protection of ecosystems and biodiversity in Monrovia through strengthening 
and promoting climate- resilient livelihoods (Outcome 3). This will yield the environmental co- benefits listed below:  
• Reducing pressure on natural resources, including mangrove ecosystems, by promoting the manufacture and 
sale of energy -efficient livelihood products.   
• Conserving Monrovia’s mangrove ecosystems by engaging communities in an effective co- management 
system, thereby supporting the provision of ecosystem services including: i) stabilising sediments; ii) providing 
breeding habitats for a range of marine and terrestrial species; iii) improvi ng and maintaining water quality; and 
iv) acting as carbon sinks .  
• Reducing greenhouse gas emissions from burning fuels for cooking,  by facilitating the production  of energy -
efficient cookstoves. The emissions reductions during the project are expected to be negligible106. However, 
project activities will promote the upscaling of cookstove production beyond the project implementation period 
and geographical scope, which will lead to more substantial emission reductions.   
 
Economic co -benefits  
146. Through the coastal protection defence interventions implemented at West Point (Outcome 1), the project will 
reduce replacement costs of economic and social assets damaged by erosion and storm surges.  In addition to this 
direct benefit, several economic co- benefits are expected through the implementation of ICZM (Outcome 2) and 
the promotion of climate- resilient livelihoods (Outcome 3). These co- benefits are described below:  
• Reducing economic losses in  key sectors on the coast of Monrovia and West Point in particular — including 
industry, transport and housing — will benefit the city through inter alia  circumventing loss and replacement 
costs.  
 
106 Assuming equivalent emission reductions to the African Improved Cooking Stoves Programme of Activities, registered under the Clean 
Development Mechanism, the use of project -supported cookstoves will reduce GHG emissions by ~4,750 tCO 2e during the project 
implementation period.


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 97 
   
 • Improving management of mangroves in the Mesurado estuary wi ll benefit the fishing sector as these 
ecosystems act as critical breeding habitats for economically important fish species. The economic value of 
mangroves to fisheries has been estimated at USD 12,800/ha/year on the Atlantic coast of Central Africa107.  
• Improving community co- management of mangroves will contribute to the sustainable use of these ecosystems 
for diversified livelihood activities.   
• Generating short - and long- term work opportunities for the construction, operations and maintenance of coastal  
defence infrastructure established by the project, as well as through the Community Stewardship Committee (CSC), will benefit the population of Monrovia. The use of local communities for casual labour, with specific 
provisions for the employment of women,  has been incorporated into the design of the project.  
• Installing cold storage facilities in fishing communities will reduce spoilage of fish, thereby and increasing the 
income/earning- potential of fishery -based livelihoods without increasing demand on fis h stocks.  
• Establishing facilities for the manufacture and sale of energy -efficient livelihood products will provide income -
generation opportunities for community members.  
 
Social co -benefits  
147. The project will contribute to social development and cohesion by building the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities and their livelihoods to the impacts of climate change. This will yield multiple social co- benefits, 
including those described below:  
• Enhancing coastal defence infrastructure (Outcome 1)  will protect coastal communities, reduce mortality and 
reduce damage to the dense concentrations of economic assets and critical social infrastructure associated 
with coastal zones — including homes, schools, clinics and roads, as well as livelihood asset s such as boats 
and fish processing equipment — from SLR and storm surges in the low -income area of West Point. The 
defence infrastructure will also protect hundreds of households from being displaced, thereby avoiding 
significant social disruption that would occur without the project.  
• Improving the climate resilience of fishery -based livelihoods by working with communities to improve the 
management of mangrove ecosystems will contribute to the nutritional health, well -being, resilience and social 
cohesion of these communities.  
 
Gender -sensitive development  
148. The project will contribute to the implementation of both Liberia’s Gender Policy (2009), which aims to reduce 
gender inequality, and the Climate Change Gender Action Plan for Liberia (2012), which promotes gender -
responsive interventions to address climate change- related coastal erosion. This contribution will be achieved 
through the implementation of gender -sensitive activities, including: i) gender -responsive training for the 
management of mangrov es; ii) assessing gender -specific climate vulnerabilities; iii) developing gender -specific 
adaptation options and alternative livelihood opportunities; and iv) increasing the resilience of Monrovia’s fishing 
community which includes 9,000 fishmongers, most  of whom are women.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups  
149. Liberia’s population is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, ranking 4th in the 2017 Climate 
Change Vulnerability Index108. This vulnerability is largely linked to the country’s exposure to SLR and extreme 
weather events on its 560 km coastline. Increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events are 
expected under future climate cond itions, and the socio- economic impacts of such events, coupled with SLR and 
the resulting coastal retreat, are likely to be severe. The extent of these impacts is exacerbated by the high 
population density and associated concentrations of economic and soci al assets in the country’s coastal zone as 
well as the dependence of this population on climate- sensitive livelihoods. Indeed, Liberia ranks 8th in the world 
for the percentage of the population living in low elevation coastal zones — mostly concentrated i n the capital city 
of Monrovia. The target site for Output 1 — West Point — is located on a large sand spit on the western fringe of 
the Mesurado Wetland, making it one of the most vulnerable communities to SLR and extreme weather events in 
Liberia, with a pproximately  10,800 people —  49% women —  projected to be directly at risk from coastal retreat by 
2050109. 
 
 
107 Ajonina GJ, Kairo G, Gr imsditch G, Sembres T, Chuyong G, Mibog DE, Nyambane A and FitzGerald C. 2014. Carbon pools and multiple 
benefits of mangroves in Central Africa: Assessment for REDD+.  
108 Verisk Maplecroft. 2017. Climate Change Vulnerability Index.  
109 Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- assessment (page 9)


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 97 
   
 150. The growth of Monrovia’s population — at 3% per year — coupled with the ongoing shoreline loss, is leading 
to an increase in the density of the city’ s population, putting considerable pressure on the environment and 
ecosystems on which many livelihoods depend. The fisheries sector contributes approximately 10% of the national 
GDP and employs at least 37,000 people in Monrovia alone. The vulnerability of these livelihoods is being 
exacerbated by the impacts of SLR and the increasing frequency of intense storms. The low -income areas along 
the coast of Monrovia, including West Point, are home to the traditional artisanal fisherfolk of the Kru and Fanti communities who derive livelihoods from coastal waters and fish stocks. The mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland 
serve as critical habitat and nursery grounds for these fish stocks, strongly linking the livelihoods of fisherfolk to the 
health of mangrove ecosyst ems. In addition, these mangroves are an important source of fuelwood and other 
resources for the surrounding communities
110. However, the loss of land and mangroves associated with SLR and 
extreme weather events is threatening the supply of these resources,  including nutrient -rich fish which serve as the 
major protein source for much of the MMA’s population. In turn, the decreasing supply of fish negatively affects: i) the food security of these communities; and ii) revenues from fisheries — especially for w omen, as 60% of persons 
active in the fishing sector are women
111.  
 151. The proposed project addresses these vulnerabilities by: i) building a coastal revetment on 1,050 m of coastline 
at West Point — ensuring landings for fishing boats (Output 1); ii) improving the management of Liberia’s coastal 
zone by developing capacity for ICZM (Output 2); and iii) supporting the development of gender - climate -resilient 
livelihoods and improving the resilience of climate- sensitive livelihoods in Monrovia (Output 3).  
 Domestic finance, social and economic status quo  
152. Since 1990, Liberia has been classified as a Least Developed Country (LDC) with a 2018 GDP per capita of 
USD 674 —  significantly lower than the LDC average GDP per capita of USD 1,042
112. In addition, Liberia’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) of 0.465 ranks the country 176th out of 189 countries assessed by the UNDP Human Development Report 2018. Economic and social gains made by Liberia in the post -civil war period from 2000 –2010 
were severely curtailed by the outbreak of the Ebola virus and subsequent epidemic between 2014 and 2015. The 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat (UN/DESA) compiles a snapshot report of all LDCs every three years based on three composite indices
113, namely the Economic Vulnerability Index 
(EVI, where lower is better), the Human Assets Index (HAI, where higher is better) and the Gross National Income (GNI, where higher is better). Figure 15 shows that in 2018, Liberia: i) was more economically vulnerable than the 
average of all LDCs in terms of the EVI; ii) had a GNI index equivalent to only 30% of the LDC average; and iii) had 
a lower HAI than the average figure for LDCs.  
 
Figure 15. Comparison between Liberia and averages of all Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in 2018 in terms of the Economic 
Vulnerability Index (EVI), Human Assets Index (HAI) and Gross National Income (GNI) index114. 
 
 
110 A detailed assessment of the role of these mangrove ecosystems in supporting livelihoods and the threats to the ecosystems is  given in 
Annex 2D: Mangrove Sub- assessment, Section 3.  
111 Annex 2.B: Vulnerability Sub- asse ssment  
112 World Bank Data Portal. 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?cid=GPD_31&locations=LR -XL. 
113 UN/DESA. 2018.  The Least D eveloped Country Category: 2018 Country Snapshots. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp- content/uploads/sites/45/Snapshots2018.pdf . 
114 UN/DESA. 2018.  The Least Developed Country Category: 2018 Country Snapshots. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp- content/uploads /sites/45/Snapshots2018.pdf .


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 97 
   
 153. Liberia is disproportionately reliant on its primary production sectors for economic growth and development, 
with the agriculture, forestry and fishing sectors accounting for approximately 70% of GDP in 2018115. Reliance on 
the export of primary commodities — with little to no value -addition — results in the Liberian economy being 
extremely vulnerable to global commodity price fluctuations and market shocks. This economic vulnerability in turn 
compromises the ability of the GoL to deliver basic services such as water, housing, transport and energy to its 
citizens in a sustainable manner. The necessary emphasis by the GoL on basic development needs — including 
poverty reduction and health — means that funding climate change adaptation interventions to protect v ulnerable 
communities is not considered as a priority, despite the urgent need for such interventions. Consequently, the GoL 
does not have the financial capacity to adequately fund adaptation initiatives at the scale required to significantly 
reduce climat e change impacts on vulnerable communities.  
 Institutional capacity needs  
154. To date, the GoL has established several laws, policies, strategies and institutions to address the increasing 
impact of climate change on the lives and livelihoods of people in Liberia (Section D.5). However, limited technical 
and financial capacity within most government departments is a significant barrier to the implementation of climate 
change adaptation, and ICZM in particular. The structural economic problems faced by the country — described 
above — as well as financial resources being directed towards the provision of social services, such as education 
and health, result in limited national sources of financing being available for adaptation interventions. In addition, 
limited understanding of the economic benefits of coastal adaptation interventions restricts the opportunities and 
entry points for private sector investment. Financial limitations constrain the implementation of adaptation 
interventions resulting in insufficient: i) work facilities; ii) access to technical equipment; iii) training to use and maintain technical equipment; and iv) data collection, analysis and management. Furthermore, there is limited 
technical capacity within government institutions and NGOs at both the national and local level to effectively use and enhance knowledge management systems  
as well as to disseminate information products to coastal 
communities for reducing their vulnerability to climate change.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
155. The GoL considers the management of coastal erosion and the impacts o f extreme climate events to be a high 
priority, as evident from the development of several national policies and plans  and the commitment of the GoL to 
providing rock material as in- kind co- finance for Output 1 of the proposed project , as well as the commitment of the 
Ministry of Mines and Energy to ensuring the effective operatin and maintenance of the project assets beyon d the 
project implementation period. The proposed project’s alignment with these plans and policies is described below.  
 
156. The Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development (PAPD, 2018 -2023) is Liberia’s five- year National 
Development Plan which underpins strategies and plans across multiple sectors of government. The project 
contributes to three of the four pillars of the PAPD, namely: i) ‘Power to the People’ by contributi ng to lifelong 
environmental education and reducing gender inequalities; ii) ‘Economy and Jobs’ by enhancing the resilience of 
climate -sensitive livelihoods; and iii) ‘Governance and Transparency’ by building the capacity of the GoL for 
effective ICZM.  
157. The National Policy and Response Strategy on Climate Change  (2018) is the central policy underpinning 
Liberia’s response to climate change and serves as the basis for all future adaptation and mitigation planning. It 
identifies the sectors most vulnerable to climate change impacts and names five enabling pillars to support the 
safeguarding of these sectors. The project will contribute to four of these pillars, specifically cross -sectoral 
coordination, capacity -building, integrated planning and the development of infrastructure.  
158. The National Adaptation Plan of Action  (NAPA; 2006) emphasises addressing coastal erosion as a critical 
national adaption priority. Along with addressing coastal erosion in vulnerable areas of the MMA, the project further aligns with Liberia’s NAPA by supporting: i) improved urban planning capacity in government institutions for 
incorporating climate change considerations; and ii) the dissemination of information to improve climate change 
knowledge at local and national levels.  
159. Liberia’s Climate Change Gender Action Plan  (ccGAP; 2012) prioritises the mainstreaming of gender equality 
into national climate change policies, programmes and interventions. The project contributes to one of the ccGAP’s  
six priority areas for gender mainstreaming,  namely the improvement of gender mainstreaming within coastal areas. 
This will be achieved by: i) protecting vulnerable homes through establishing hard infrastructure; ii) incorporating 
 
115 Ibid.


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 97 
   
 gender considerations into the ICZMP; and iii) increasing participati on of women in decision -making at community 
and institutional levels, including involvement in CBNRM.  
160. The Initial National Communication  (INC) to the UNFCCC (2013), provides a broad overview on the projected 
climate impacts on Liberia and an indication of the country’s current GHG inventory. The adaptation priorities in the 
INC focus on the need to adapt to the impacts of projected SLR and increasingly frequent extreme climate events. 
The project is aligned with the approach recommend by the INC for reducing coastal impacts of climate change, 
including through the construction of protective infrastructure within the MMA.  
161. Liberia’s statement of its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  (INDC; 2015) identifies adaptation 
actions focusing on reducing the impacts of climate change on seven critical sectors, including agriculture, energy, 
health, forestry, coastal zones, fisheries and infrastructure — conditional on the provision of international financial 
assistance and aid. The project will align with one of the three adaptation priorities identified under the INDC, namely the construction of coastal defences to reduce the vulnerability of urban coastal areas.  
 
162. In addition, the project will contribute to the implementation of and creating an enabling enviro nment for land -
use planning and management in Liberia, through the strengthening of policies and coordination among 
government institutions for ICZM. This will support the implementation of the Land Use and Management 
Framework developed by the Liberian Land Authority, as well as existing zoning ordinances in Monrovia and 
elsewhere.  
 
Capacity of Accredited and Executing Entities to deliver:  
163. UNDP, as the Accredited Entity of the project, provides a qualified team of national and international experts 
that are equipped to assist the GoL to respond to complex issues such as climate change and green growth. Through their support, UNDP will ensure that the project adopts a comprehensive, multi -sectoral  approach that is 
centred around results -based activities. This support will include equipping Executing Entities with the knowledge 
and skills required to achieve expected project outputs. The strong relationships that exist between UNDP and local decisio n-makers, as well as UNDP’s proven track record as an impartial provider of technical advice and support, 
will facilitate the strengthening and expansion of analytical work in key sectors and the advancement of disaster 
risk management within the broader c ontext of sustainable development.  
 164. The EPA
116 – an autonomous body tasked with enforcing the National Environment Protection and 
Management Law under the Executive Branch of Government – is the National Designated Authority (NDA) for 
Liberia and is respons ible for the overall management of GCF engagement in Liberia. Under the supervision of 
UNDP and a multi -sectoral Board of Directors –  represented by public and private sector stakeholders –  the GoL 
represented by the EPA will serve as Executing Entity (EE)  for the project. To date, the EPA has implemented 
projects with a focus on climate change in Liberia, demonstrating their capacity to successfully implement the 
project. The Board of Directors has also established sector -specific Technical Committees to a dvise the EPA on 
priority issues, including climate change as well as marine and coastal ecosystems. These committees will provide 
strategic oversight during the implementation of the project.  
 
Stakeholder Engagement117 
165. The project was developed following an extensive stakeholder engagement process, beginning with initial 
institutional and community engagements during the first phase of project design in 2016, prior to the initiation of 
the PPF -financed Feasibility Study. The majority of the first  phase engagements focussed on identifying broad 
needs and vulnerabilities within the MMA, which were incorporated into early project design. Numerous 
engagements were also organised with relevant government departments to validate the design of the projec t and 
ensure alignment with national priorities.  
 
166. Further stakeholder engagements focused on beneficiary communities were conducted in 2019 as part of the 
second phase of development. In total, over 40 community stakeholder engagements were conducted from 
February to May 2019 to ensure local ownership of the project and to capture the needs of communities more 
clearly. In this context, stakeholder engagement was primarily intended to:  
 
116 The EPA was established under the National Environmental Policy of Liberia (2003) as an independent authority for the managem ent of 
the environment  
117 Further details on the stakeholder engagement process are presented in Annex 7.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 97 
   
 • ensure  that expectations and concerns of local stakeholders were incorporated into project design and 
implementation;  
• establish rapport with beneficiary communities to encourage local buy -in for the project;  
• identify a range of desired gender -related development  impacts of climate change projects in the target sites 
and to make sure that such impacts are incorporated into the design framework;  
• support executing entit y in preparing gender assessments and action plans; and  
• ensure that all stakeholders, especially women, are effectively involved and equally represented throughout the 
project design and implementation process.  
 
167. Final institutional stakeholder engagements and validation were held during the concluding phases of project 
development, between July and September 2019. These engagements included a three- day workshop in Monrovia 
that was attended by institutional representatives from relevant government institutions118, UNDP and the prioritised 
communities, as well as several consultants and technical experts involved with the development of the project. 
These engagements were organised primarily for government institutions and communities to voice concerns and 
provi de input. The final project design was validated at a workshop held in Monrovia on the 5th of September 2019 
and attended by government and representatives from the West Point, New Kru Town, Hotel Africa and Atlantic 
Seaboard communities.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
168. The proposed project is requesting grant finance from the GCF to address the climate change impacts of SLR, 
accelerated coastal erosion, and increasingly frequent and intense storms on vulnerable coastal communities. The grant funds requested from GCF will  be reinforced by additional co- finance from UNDP and the GoL.  
 Incorporation of best practice  
169. The project incorporates best practice and lessons learned from relevant ongoing interventions and 
initiatives119 that focus on the protection of vulnerable communities and ecosystems in the coastal zone — 
particularly two GEF -funded projects in Monrovia (refer to Section B.1. for further detail). Best practice and lessons 
learned from these initiatives have guided t he development of the project’s methodologies, tools and techniques 
for: i) the construction of coastal protection measures — including labour practices appropriate for the Monrovian 
context —; ii) the management of mangrove ecosystems, particularly throug h liaising with communities that rely 
directly or indirectly on mangroves for their livelihoods and/or for raw materials;  and iii) the development of a contextually -relevant ICZMP for Monrovia. Specific aspects of best practice that have been incorporated into the 
design of the project are summarised below.  
• Designing the coastal protection measures to have minimal maintenance requirements to ensure their 
sustainability;  
• Incorporating updated technical information such as beach profile data, bathymetry and sediment dynamics 
into local planning and management of coastal activities;  
• Adopting an integrated approach to coastal zone management by applying a systemic and coordinated 
approach to local planning in risk -prone coastal areas;   
• Improving governance in ICZM planning through establishment and management of the cross -sectoral working 
group (CSWG) alliances (institutional connectivity);  
• Capitalising on the wealth of local ecological knowledge held by civil society by establishing and sustaining 
community -based participation in improved co- management and monitoring of natural resources ;  
• Collaborating with development partners120 working in Liberia, throughout the design and implementation of the 
project.  
 
170. The project also incorporates the principles of adaptive management by making provision for iterative design 
and revision under several activities. For example, the ICZMP (Activ ity 2.1) will be revised three years after it is 
initially developed to incorporate lessons learned from its initial implementation. In addition, the awareness -raising 
campaign (Activity 2.5) and state- of-knowledge assessments (Activity 3.3) will be updated annually for the duration 
of the project. These iterative processes will maximise the effectiveness of the project interventions by ensuring 
that they are specific and responsive within the Liberian context.  
 
118 Government representatives included assistant ministers and technical personnel from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), Ministry of Public Works (MPW), Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP).  
119 These investments include both public expenditure and donor -funded initiatives  
120 During project development, UNDP engaged with Conservation International, the World Bank and JICA to validate project design and 
explore opportunities for synergy. Engagement with these and other development partners will continue throughout project implementation.


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 97 
   
  
Cost -effectiveness  
171. A conservative estimate of  the expected net present value (ENPV) of the project is USD 17.73 million using a 
10% discount rate, with an economic internal rate of return of 21% . In addition to the above damages estimated, 
benefits also include an increase in income growth and the social benefit of the project through improved 
infrastructure.   
 
172. Of the USD 25 million of project costing, 34% of the necessary budget resources or USD 8.4 million is 
contributed in the form of Co- financing with majority funded by GoL in spite of its economic and budget constraints 
mentioned above, bringing in co- finance resources — in the form of grants and in- kind contributions — to the project 
demonstrates its commitment to the project and more strongly its moral responsibility to invest in building climate 
resilience of its population.  
 173. This project proposes the construction of coastal protection measures along approximately 1,050 m of exposed 
and vulnerable coastline as well as measures to protect and enhance the climate- resilience of the livelihoods of 
~25% of Monrovia’s population . The cost of these measures i s USD 104 / beneficiary. This is a reasonable cost, 
especially given, the fact that the indirect beneficiaries are excluded.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 97 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
121 Direct benefits will accrue at the site- specific scale. Project interventions will directly benefit West Point’s communities through coastal 
defence and enhanced livelihoods; and through enhanced livelihoods and improved protection of mangrove ecosystems in the comm unities 
of Topoe Village; Plonkor and Fiama; and Nipay Town and Jacobs Town.  
122 Indirect benefits will be realised through the adoption of a climate risk informed ICZM at the municipal scale within the project area. 
Therefore, indirect beneficiaries have been calculated as the total population of Monrovia Metropolitan Area (MMA) in Liberia . E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing  _____   Choose an item.     
(b) Requested GCF amount  _____  Choose an item.  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(g) Public source co -financed  _____   Choose an item.  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) _____   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  _____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  250,000121 
122,500 female  
127,500 male  
Indirect  1 million122 (total population of Monrovia)  
490,000 female  
510,000 male  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 1 7. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  6% (~3% of the total population of women and ~3% of the total 
population of men)  
Indirect  21% (~10% of the total population of women and ~11% of the total 
population of men)  
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in annex 1 7.


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 97 
   
  
E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows 
as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions  
 A1.1 Change in 
expected losses 
of lives and economic assets (US$) due to the impact of extreme 
climate -related 
disasters  
 Impact 
assessment 
report completed by ICZM Unit, including: i) on 
the ground 
longitudinal 
survey augmented with transect 
walks 
assessing damages and 
wave/storm 
ingress; and ii) GIS 
assessment of 
change over time of 
coastline
 Damage to 
infrastructure at 
West Point in 
the 2008-2018 period totals 
USD5.23 million  
 
0 lives reported 
as lost as a result of coastal erosion in West Point in the 2008-2018 
period
123.  
  
 Damage to 
infrastructur
e and assets vulnerable to climate change 
impacts at 
West Point 
expected to be reduced by USD0 by 
2024
124, 
compared to 
a scenario with no intervention
125. 
 Damage to 
infrastructure and assets vulnerable to climate change 
impacts at 
West Point 
expected to be reduced by USD1.23 
million by 
2027
126, 
compared to a scenario 
no intervention
127.  
 Rock revetment 
will protect infrastructure, assets and communities against ongoing 
coastal erosion as 
well as extreme 
climate related 
disasters.  
 
No new 
settlements in exposed areas that are not protected by revetment during 
project period.  
 
Direct tangible 
damage without the project was estimated for 2030 in the Economic Analysis (Annex 
3A)
 128.  
 
Damage from 
coastal retreat and storms will only be 
reduced by the 
 
123 The AE will not report on losses of lives due to the fact that no loss of life has been reported in West Point as a result of  coastal erosion 
to date and no loss of life is expected. Coastal erosion in this area is primarily a result of wave action and is  therefore incremental rather 
than sudden. It is, therefore, mostly possible to avoid loss of life.  
124 At mid -term, the construction of the revetment will be underway, and it will not yet be an effective coastal protection measure. The 
change in expected lo ss from coastal retreat and storms is therefore USD0.  
125 In a scenario with no intervention, loss and damage of USD7.84 million is expected by 2024. This is calculated as 40% of the expected 
loss and damage of USD19.6 million by 2030 presented in Annex 3A: Economic Analysis.  
126 The construction of the West Point  revetment will be completed in Year 5 of the project period. It is therefore expected that the revetment 
will reduce the expected loss and damage from coastal retreat and storms over one year during the project period. The target given is the 
sum of the r educed loss and damage from coastal retreat (~USD920,000) and storms (~USD310,000) in the first year after the construction 
of the revetment is complete. Further detail is provided in Annex 3B: Economic Analysis Spreadsheet.  
127 In a scenario with no intervention, loss and damage of USD13.72 million is expected by 2027. This is calculated as 70% of the expected 
loss and damage of USD19.6 million by 2030 presented in Annex 3A: Economic Analysis.  
128 Details of these estimates are provided in Annex 3A: Economic A nalysis. Avoided losses as a result of the completed West Point 
revetment have been projected to 2030 (USD19.6 million), 2050 (USD85.1 million) and 2100 (USD154.9 million).


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 97 
   
 revetment after 
construction is 
completed.   
 
Average damage 
for hou ses at 
West Point due to coastal erosion between 2008 and 2018 is assumed to be 50% of the value of the houses, which is valued at 
USD15,600 per 
dwelling
129.  
A1.2 Number of 
males and 
females 
benefitting from 
the adoption of diversified, 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options 
(including fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  
 
 Household and 
affected 
stakeholder 
surveys 
compiled by 
ICZM Unit  
 
Remote 
sensing surveys 
compiled by 
ICZM Unit  to 
monitor the 
extent of the mangrove forest degradation from human 
activity  
 
 0 beneficiaries 
with improved 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods  Total 
beneficiaries with 
improved, 
climate -
resilient 
livelihoods:  
Males = 
1,625  
Females = 2,425  
 
Mangrove 
conservat ion 
Males= 1,600  
Females= 2,400  
 
Adoption of 
solar -
powered cold storage 
facilities  
Males= 0  
Females= 0  
 
Adoption of 
energy 
efficient 
cookstove Total 
beneficiaries with 
improved, 
climate -
resilient 
livelihoods:  
Males = 
4,867  
Females = 7,267  
 
Mangrove 
conservation  
Males= 4,800  
Females= 7,200  
 
Adoption of 
solar -
powered cold storage 
facilit ies 
Males= 720  
Females= 1,080  
 
Adoption of energy 
efficient 
cookstove Mangrove 
protection and 
cons ervation 
efforts will have a positive impact on fish stocks, 
improving the 
climate resilience of fishery -
dependent livelihoods in 
Monrovia. All 
fisherfolk and 
fishmongers in 
Monrovia will 
benefit from this.  
 
At least 25% of 
West Point fisherfolk and fishmongers will use the cold storage facilities. These beneficiaries will 
also benefit from 
mangrove 
conservation.  
 
100% of West 
Point fisherfolk will 
benefit from more 
climate -resilient 
boat launching 
sites. These 
beneficiaries will also benefit from 
 
129 Annex 3: Financial and Economic Assessment, Appendix J –  Damage and CBA model Monrovia base case


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 97 
   
 manufacturin
g 
Males= 50  
Females= 
50 
 
 
Decreased 
exposure of 
boat-
launching 
sites to 
dangerous 
conditions  
induced by 
climate 
change  
Males= 0  
Females= 0  
 
  manufacturi
ng 
Males= 125  
Females= 125
130 
 
Decreased 
exposure of boat launching 
sites to 
dangerous 
conditions 
induced by climate 
change  
Males= 
1,800  
Females= 0  
 mangrove 
conservation.  
 
Annual training 
workshops will be held for 150 participants from Year 2 to Year 5. It is assumed that there will be 33% uptake of training on cookstove manufacturing, and at least 50% of the uptake will 
be among people 
who are not fisherfolk or 
fishmongers and therefore are not included in the beneficiaries of mangrove conservation 
initiatives.  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
infrastructure and the built environment to 
climate change
 A3.1 Number 
and value of 
physical assets made more resilient to climate variability 
and change, 
considering 
human benefits  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 Impact 
assessment 
report compiled by 
ICZM Unit
131   
 
  
 No protected 
boat launching 
sites, and zero metres of resilient public amenity space 
at West 
Point
132.  No boat 
launching 
sites and  
400 m of 
public amenity space  resilient to coastal erosion and 
wave action, 
with a value 
of USD6.03 
million  
 2 boat 
launching 
sites and  
1050 m of 
public amenity space resilient to coastal erosion and 
wave action, 
with a value 
of USD17.22 
million  
 
 Boat launching 
sites will be 
considered resilient if fisherfolk are able to continue to 
launch boats at 
the same sites 
despite increased wave action and 
storm surges.  
 
Public amenity 
space will be considered 
resilient if the 
space is still 
accessible and suitable for community use despite increased wave action and 
storm surges.  
 
130 There are a total of ~12,000 fisherfolk and fishmongers in Monrovia, ~60% of whom are female. See Section B.1 for further det ails. 
131 Sources of data for the impact assessment will include: i) household and affected stakeholder surveys augmented with remote sensing 
surveys; ii)  an on the ground longitudinal survey augmented with transect walks assessing damages and wave/storm ingress; and iii) GIS 
assessment of change over time of coastline  
132 Fishing boats are currently launched from informal beach sites exposed to coastal erosion and extreme wave action. The beach is also 
currently used as public amenity space and is exposed to coastal erosion and dangerous waves.


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 97 
   
  
  
Resilience of 
infrastructure, boat launching sites and public amenity space will be increased from reduced exposure to damage-causing waves, 
SLR and coas tal 
retreat.  
 
Value of resilient 
boat launching 
sites and public 
amenity space calculated from the cost of 
construction of the 
revetment and green promenade, including boat 
launching sites
133. 
 
Mid-term target is 
~35% of the total 
target for the length of the 
revetment . 
 
 
 
133 As represented in Annex 4: Detailed budget plan.  
134 It is necess ary for this Coordination Report to be project generated to avoid bias in performance measurement which may result from 
one of the entities being assessed also being responsible for its own assessment.,  
135 The report will be informed by a scorecard incorporating effectiveness level indicators: Level 0 = coordination mechanism for ICZM has 
yet to be established. Level 1 = coordination mechanism for ICZM is established, but not operational. Level 2 = Coordination mechanism for 
ICZM is partially operational, engaging effectively across government institutions, but implementation of the ICZMP is not fully effective. 
Level 3 = coordination mechanism for ICZM working effectively to implement the ICZMP in Monrovia.  E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed.  
Expected 
Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for climate -
responsive A5.2 Number 
and level of 
effective 
coordination 
mechanisms  Coordination report 
produced by the 
project M&E 
Specialist134,135 One 
coordination 
mechanism 
(ICZM Unit) at 
Level 1  3 
coordinatio
n 
mechanism
s for ICZM 
(ICZM Unit, 
ICZM 3 
coordination 
mechanisms 
for ICZM 
(ICZM Unit, 
ICZM 
Committee Political and 
institutional 
stability enable 
establishment and 
functioning of


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 97 
   
  
136 This assessment will use indicator levels for the integration of ICZM: Level 0 = No government institution or agencies implementing 
ICZM; Level 1= Institutions engaged in developing an ICZMP; Level 2 = ICZMP developed using a participatory approach; Level 3  = 
Institution -specific action plan for the implementation of ICZMP developed; Level 4 = A portion of each target government institution’s 
budget allocated to implementing the ICZMP.  planning and 
development   
Two 
coordination 
mechanisms 
(ICZM 
Committee 
and CSWG) 
at Level 0  Committee 
and 
CSWG) at 
Level 2  
 and CSWG) 
at Level 3  
 ICZM coordination 
mechanisms  
 
 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to c limate 
risks A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of 
Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate change 
and variability  Coastal 
management 
assessment 
conducted by ICZM 
Unit136 
 
 
 No 
government 
departments 
or agencies 
using ICZMP  
 (Level 0)  
 10 target 
government 
institutions 
at Level 2  10 target 
government 
institutions 
at Level 4  
 
 
 
 Capacity building 
activities will lead 
to behaviour 
change and 
uptake of climate-
resilient practices  
 
Political will and 
staff retention  
CSWG and the 
ICZM Committee 
will have the 
authority to plan 
updates to 
regulations and 
by-laws  
ICZMP will be 
used to change 
management 
practices


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 97 
   
   
 
137 The baseline understanding of climate change and its impacts will be defined from the baseline state- of-knowledge surv ey  
138 These opportunities include use of cold storage facilities, and the manufacture and use of efficient cookstoves developed under the 
project  Annual state -of 
knowledge surveys 
compiled by 
contracted service 
provider (Activity 
3.3) 
 
Household surveys 
conducted by the 
ICZM Unit  
 
 Targeted 
communities 
have limited 
understandin
g of climate 
change and 
its likely 
impacts on 
livelihoods in 
Monrovia137. 
 
0% of 
targeted 
communities 
have made 
changes to 
livelihood 
practices and 
have adopted 
alternative 
livelihood 
opportunities 
to increase 
their climate 
resilience138   
 
 
 
 10% of 
targeted 
communitie
s have an 
improved 
understandi
ng of 
climate 
change and 
its likely 
impacts on 
livelihoods 
in Monrovia  
 
0% of 
targeted 
communitie
s have 
made 
changes to 
livelihood 
practices 
and have 
adopted 
alternative 
livelihood 
opportunitie
s to 
increase 
their 
climate 
resilience    
 
 25% of 
targeted 
communities 
have an 
improved 
understandin
g of climate 
change and 
its likely 
impacts on 
livelihoods in 
Monrovia 
 
15%  of 
targeted 
communities 
have made 
changes to 
livelihood 
practices 
and have 
adopted 
alternative 
livelihood 
opportunities 
to increase 
their climate 
resilience   Knowledge and 
resources 
accessed via the 
education and 
innovation centre 
will improve 
climate -resilient 
practices amongst 
targeted 
communities and 
diversify livelihood 
options


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 97 
   
  
139 Non-residential buildings and assets in West Point include community buildings, small shops , markets, religious and cultural centres, and 
schools and government buildings. A list of all assets to be protected under Output 1 is provided in Annex 3: Economic  Analysis.  E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Output 1. Protection of 
coastal communities and 
infrastructure at West Point 
against erosion caused by 
sea-level rise and 
increasingly frequent high-
intensity storms . Length of formal 
coastal protection 
revetment at West 
Point constructed 
during project lifespan  
 Implementation 
report from 
contractor on 
construction of 
coastal defence 
infrastructure  
 
Site survey of 
coastal 
protection 
infrastructure 
conducted by the 
ICZM Unit  No formal 
coastal 
defence 
structure 
at West 
Point 400 m of 
revetmen
t 
construct
ed at 
West 
Point 1050 
m of 
revetm
ent 
constru
cted, 
and 
green 
prome
nade 
establi
shed at 
West 
Point No extreme 
natural or social 
economic events 
delaying 
construction.  
Number of dwellings 
and non-residential 
buildings and assets 
in West Point behind   
coastal protection 
revetment 
infrastructure 
constructed during 
project lifespan 
 Spatial survey of 
damages to 
buildings/signs of 
ocean ingress.  
 
GIS assessment 
of coastal 
erosion rate 
compiled by 
ICZM Unit  
 
Household 
surveys 
assessing 
community 
perceptions of 
coastal erosion 
and risk compiled 
by ICZM Unit  0 
dwellings 
in West 
Point   
protected 
from 
coastal 
erosion  
 
 
 
0 non-
residential 
buildings 
and 
assets in 
West 
Point 
protected 
from 
coastal 
erosion  
 
 500 West 
Point 
dwellings 
protected 
from 
coastal 
erosion 
by 
revetmen
t 
  
 
 
 
65 non-
residenti
al 
buildings 
and 
assets139 
in West 
Point 
protected 
from 
coastal 
erosion 
by 1,812 
West 
Point 
dwellin
gs 
protect
ed 
from 
coastal 
erosion 
by 
revetm
ent 
 
217 
non-
residen
tial 
assets 
and 
buildin
gs in 
West 
Point 
protect
ed by 
revetm
ent Number of 
dwellings and 
non-residential 
buildings in area 
to be protected 
remains constant 
or increases.  
 
Dwellings will be 
‘protec ted’ as rock 
revetment will 
prevent damage 
or destruction 
from coastal 
erosion and storm 
surges.  
 
No new 
settlements in 
exposed areas 
that are not 
protected by 
revetment during 
project period.


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 97 
   
  
140 The baseline will be determined under Activity 3.3 as part of the baseline data collection on climate- resilient livelihoods.  revetmen
t  
  
Output 2: Institutional 
capacity building and policy 
support for the 
implementation of 
Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management (ICZM) 
across Liberia.  Change in how ICZM 
is integrated into roles 
and responsibilities of 
government staff 
involved in coastal 
zone management   
 
 Annual 
performance 
reviews for staff 
of government 
institutions  
 
Stocktake of job 
descriptions 
conducted by the 
CSWG  Responsib
ility for 
ICZM 
implement
ation not 
formally 
assigned  
 ICZM 
impleme
ntation 
not 
formally 
integrate
d into the 
roles and 
responsi
bilities of 
all 
relevant 
staff 
 
However, 
at least 
10 staff 
members 
contributi
ng to 
ICZM 
impleme
ntation  
 
 ICZM 
implem
entatio
n is 
formall
y 
integra
ted into 
the job 
descrip
tions of 
relevan
t staff  
 
At 
least 
40 staff 
memb
ers 
contrib
uting to 
ICZM 
implem
entatio
n  No government 
restructuring, or  
major political 
changes occur 
that impede 
adoption of 
ICZMP.  
 
The availability of 
staff time and 
assignment of 
roles and 
responsibilities will 
result in improved 
implementation of 
ICZM.  
 
The details of how 
ICZM will be 
implemented will 
differ substantially 
between 
government 
entities.  
  
 
      
Output 3: Protecting 
mangroves and 
strengthening gender - and 
climate -sensitive 
livelihoods to build local Change in income 
levels for community 
members using the 
education and 
innovation centre from 
the adoption of Baseline survey  
 
Participant 
surveys compiled 
by CSC  TBD140 
 No 
change 
in income 
levels  30% 
increas
e from 
the 
baselin
e in 
income Interventions for 
improving climate-
resilient 
livelihoods from 
the target 
communities will 
be taken up and


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 97 
   
  
142 The baseline will be determined u nder Activity 3.3 as part of the baseline mangrove spatial analysis.  climate resilience in 
Monrovia.  climate -resilient 
livelihoods   
Annual state-of -
knowledge 
assessments 
compiled by CSC  
 compa
red to 
the 
baselin
e for at 
least 
50% of 
commu
nity 
memb
ers 
engag
ed in 
liveliho
od 
enhanc
ement 
activiti
es will result in a 
measurable 
increase in 
income.  
Consideration of 
mangrove 
conservati on in 
decisions about 
livelihood activities for 
members of the four 
targeted communities  Impact 
assessment 
reports compiled 
by ICZM Unit  
 
Annual state-of -
knowledge 
assessments 
compiled by CSC  
 Mangrove 
conservati
on not 
explicitly 
considere
d in 
decisions 
about 
livelihood 
activities 
for 
members 
of four 
targeted 
communiti
es 
 25% of 
surveyed 
communi
ty 
members 
understa
nd 
mangrov
e 
conserva
tion and 
its 
benefits 
and are 
aware of 
the links 
between 
mangrov
e 
conserva
tion and 
livelihood 
security  .  25% of 
survey
ed 
commu
nity 
memb
ers are 
able to 
give at 
least 
one 
exampl
e of 
where 
consid
eration 
of 
mangr
ove 
conser
vation 
has 
change
d their 
decisio
ns 
about 
liveliho
od 
activiti
es.  No social or 
political 
developments that 
will lead co-
management 
parties to not 
honour their 
commitments in 
the agreements.  
 
Consideration of 
mangrove 
conservation in 
livelihood -related 
decisions will 
reduce 
anthropogenic 
pressure on 
mangroves.  
 
Behavioural 
change will occur 
after an 
understanding of 
mangrove 
conservation is 
evident.  
  
 
Rate of degradation of 
mangrove ecosystems  Impact 
assessment 
reports compiled 
by ICZM Unit  
 TBD142 Degradat
ion of 
mangrov
e 
ecosyste
ms Degrad
ation of 
mangr
ove 
ecosys
tems Implementation of 
co-management 
agreements will 
result in a 
measurable 
decrease in


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 97 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
141 The extent  of mangrove  coverage  in the Mesurado Wetland of Monrovia is ~2320 ha. Remote sensing 
and GIS 
assessment of 
mangrove extent  
compiled by 
ICZM Unit. 
Baseline 
established at 
start of project141 
 reduced 
by 10% 
compare
d to the 
baseline 
in area 
covered 
by 
mangrov
e co-
manage
ment 
agreeme
nt reduce
d by 
30% 
compa
red to 
the 
baselin
e in 
areas 
covere
d by 
mangr
ove co-
manag
ement 
agree
ment  mangrove 
degradation.  
 
Percentage of 
fisherfolk and 
fishmongers in West 
Point using cold 
storage facilities  CSC report on 
use of the cold 
storage facilities  
 
Impact 
Assessment 
Report for the 
project produced 
by the ICZM Unit  0% of 
fisherfolk 
and 
fishmonge
rs at West 
Point 
using 
project -
developed 
cold 
storage 
facilities  0% of 
fisherfolk 
and 
fishmong
ers at 
West 
Point 
using 
project -
develope
d cold 
storage 
facilities  25% of 
fisherfo
lk and 
fishmo
ngers 
at 
West 
Point 
making 
use of 
cold 
storag
e 
facilitie
s Cold storage 
facilities will open 
access to 
refrigerated fish 
markets for 
fisherfolk and 
reduce spoilage 
by preserving fish 
for longer  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1. Prepare construction plan 
and finalise technical design 
specifications for coastal defence structure at West 
Point.
 A construction plan will be 
developed and detailed 
design finalised for a revetment and green promenade at West Point, 
based on the existing 
conceptual design in the 1.1.1.  Refine and detail the 
design and construction plan for the coastal defence infrastructure and green 
promenade at West Point.  
 • Detailed engineering 
designs and construction 
plan produced by 
engineering firm  
• ESIA conducted for the coastal defence 
revetment to inform


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 97 
   
 Engineering Sub -assessment 
(Annex 2.C). This detailed 
design and construction plan will id entify all required inputs 
and guidelines for 
procurement procedures, 
contracting, ESS processes and gender -sensitive 
consultations. The design and 
construction plan will be 
validated by the community 
and government stakeholders 
prior to implementation.
 1.1.2.  Host a validation 
workshop to present and 
validate final design and construction plan to government and community 
stakeholders.  
 
 design and construction 
plans at West Point.  
• 1 workshop report based 
on validation workshop 
occurring in year 2 for 
100 participants  
 
1.2. Construct coastal defence 
structure to protect West Point 
against climate change-
induced coastal erosion.  An engineering firm will be 
contracted to build the 
revetment and green promenade according to the design and construction plan 
developed under Activity 1.1. 
The revetment will protect the 
West Point community from 
accelerated coastal erosion 
and provide an open 
community space as well as preserving launching sites for 
fishing boats.
 1.2.1. Construct a rock 
revetment with green 
promenade and community 
amenities at West Point.  • Revetment (coastal 
defence measures) of approximately 1,050 m at 
West Point with green 
promenade constructed
 
• Report on training for 
monitoring and 
maintenance of the 
revetment  
2.1. Develop an Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management 
Plan for Liberia.  A national Integrated Coastal 
Zone Management Plan 
(ICZMP) will be developed in consultation with relevant government institutions and stakeholders. This will be done in phases by: i) producin g a multi -criteria 
vulnerability map of the Liberian coastline; ii) collaboratively developing an ICZMP; iii) establishing an 
ICZM Committee and Cross -
Sectoral Working Group 
(CSWG) to implement the 
plan; and iv) revising and 
updating the ICZMP after three years to incorporate 
lessons learned.
 2.1.1. Develop a high -
resolution, multi -criteria 
vulnerability map of the 
Liberian coastline.  
 
2.1.2. Develop the climate-
responsive ICZMP in collaboration with 
stakeholders, incorporating 
information from the map deve loped under Sub-activity 
2.1.1.  
 
2.1.3. 
 Host validation 
workshops to present and 
secure ownership of the 
ICZMP for representatives 
from the 10 government 
institutions responsible for coastal management in 
Liberia.
 • High-resolution multi -
criteria vulnerabil ity map 
of Liberian coastline 
produced  
• ICZMP developed and adopted by year 3 and 
updated in year 6  
• Workshop reports for 2 
validation workshops with 
50
 participants including 
the ICZM Committee and the CSWG, one 
conducted in year 2 and 
one in year 6 for the development and 
updating of the ICZMP 
respectively  
• 10-member CSWG 
established 
 
• 10-member ICZM 
Committee established  
2.2. Capacitate the Cross -
Sectoral Working Group to 
mainstream ICZM into relevant government sectors through a Training- of-Trainers 
approach.
 The Cross -Sectoral Working 
Group (CSWG) will be trained through a Training- of-Trainers 
(ToT) approach to increase their capacity to implement the ICZMP. This will include hosting an extensive series of training workshops for members of the CSWG and 
representatives of relevant 2.2.1. Host an inception 
workshop to present and provide orientation to the CSWG on the finalised 
ICZMP.  
 
2.2.2. Host a planning 
workshop for the CSWG to • Action plan developed 
during two-day meeting 
for integrating ICZM into by-laws and regulations 
for the 10 relevant 
institutions  
• Workshop reports based 
on two inception 
workshops organised,


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 97 
   
 government institutions. The 
ToT approach will enable the 
10 government institutions responsible for ICZM to further capacitate their staff. 
To support the implementation 
of the ICZMP, the CSWG will also develop an action plan for integrating ICZM into 
sector -specific regulations and 
by-laws.
 develop an action plan for 
implement ing the ICZMP, 
including plans for changes/updates required for sector -specific regulations and 
by-laws.  
 
2.2.3. Develop a curriculum 
and training program to 
capacitate relevant technical 
personnel on cross -sectoral 
coordination and the effective 
implement ation of the ICZMP.  
 
2.2.4. Host a validation 
workshop with the CSWG to 
finalise training curricula.  
 
2.2.5. Conduct a training and 
action programme for 
members of the CSWG to mainstream ICZM into relevant government entities and support mainstreaming of ICZM into national policies, 
programmes and plans.
 one in year 2 and one in 
year 6, for 25 participants  
• 2 co- design workshops 
for 39 members of the 
CSWG and the ICZM Unit 
(one in year 2 and one in 
year 5) to introduce the 
ICZMP and 
collaboratively define curricula 
• Training curricula for capacitating relevant technical personnel on 
ICZM developed 
• Long-term (16-week) 
training programme 
conducted to capacitate 
36 technical staff from 
relevant government 
institutions (3 members 
from each of the 10 
relevant institutions and 6 members of the ICZMU)
 
• Stocktake of  job 
descriptions assessing integration of ICZM into 
roles and responsibilities 
of government staff 
involved in coastal zone 
management 
 
2.3 Strengthen the asset base 
and technical capacity of the 
ICZMU for the collection of spatial and biophysical coasta l 
information to support the 
implementation of the ICZMP.
 The capacity of the ICZM Unit 
(ICZMU) for the collection, 
processing and synthesis of spatial, meteorological and oceanographic data will be developed. This will include: i) the procurement of high-resolution spatial data for Monrovia; ii) the acquisition of wave buoys and other 
relevant equipment; iii) the 
installation of a database for 
collecting and processing the 
data; and iv) training and 
support for technical staff to 
use and maintain the system.
 2.3.1. Procure high -resolution 
remote sensing data to 
monitor coastal erosion and mangrove ecosystem health and degradation in the MMA to be made publicly accessible and used for the vulnerability map under Sub-
activity 2.1.1.  
 
2.3.2. Contract a special ist 
firm to provide an integrated, 
near-shore wave buoy -based 
data collection and processing system to support the collection of meteorological and oceanographic data for improved generation of information on parameters 
relevant to ICZM and 
meteorological decision-
making in Liberia.
 • High-resolution spatial 
datasets for eight years 
(five historical and three 
during the project)  
• Integrated, near -shore 
wave buoy -based data 
collection and processing 
system operationalised 
through  
• the installation of 4 wave buoys and associated 
ICT equipment;  
• development of database, 
data collection and processing systems; and  
• training courses on use and O&M     
 
2.4.  Strengthen the existing 
Environmental Knowledge 
Management System (EKMS) to act as a platform for awareness -raising and The newly implemented 
EKMS will be upscaled by improving its accessibility and incorporating information on 
ICZM into the system. ICT equipment will be procured for 
the 10 government institutions 2.4.1. Procure ICT equipment 
for each of the relevant government institutions to access and use climate and environmental information 
through the platform.  • ICT equipment for the 
EKMS procured, 
including:  
o 20 laptops for 10 
ministries  
o Storage capacity 
installed and


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 97 
   
 sharing of climate risk -
informed ICZM approach.  responsible for coastal 
management to enable them 
to access and operate the knowledge management platform. In addition, 
knowledge products on ICZM 
and the EKMS will be developed and disseminated 
to government institutions.
  
2.4.2. Collect les sons learned 
on ICZM on an annual basis 
and incorporate this 
information into the EKMS.  
 
2.4.3. Design and disseminate 
knowledge products on 
climate -responsive ICZM in 
government institutions and to 
the private sector.  bandwidth capacity 
improved 
• Annual reports on 
lessons learned for ICZM 
produced  
• Knowledge products on 
ICZM and the EKMS 
produced and disseminated over 5 
years, including:  
• 500 posters per year  
• 1,000 brochures per year  
2.5. Conduct an awareness -
raising campaign for 
communities in focus areas on 
climate change impacts and 
adaptation practices.  An awareness -raising 
campaign on climate change 
impacts and adaptation 
practices will be designed and 
conducted among four priority communities in Monrovia — 
West Point, Jacob Town, 
Fiamah and Topoe Village. 
The campaign will include community meetings, radio programmes and visual 
communication materials. The 
campaign will be supported by 
knowledge- sharing groups in 
each of the four target communities and will be developed to take gender -
differentiated vulnerabilities to climate change into consideration. The campaign will be reviewed and updated annually for the project 
duration.
 2.5.1 . Design an awareness -
raising campaign on climate 
change impacts and 
adaptation practices.  
 
2.5.2. Host radio programmes 
on climate change impacts, 
vulnerability and adaptation practices in coastal and 
wetland areas.  
 
2.5.3. Establish, train and 
engage community -based 
knowledge- sharing groups to 
support on-the -ground 
awareness raising and 
knowledge- sharing.  
 
2.5.4. Install and distribute 
awareness -raising knowledge 
products within the four communities for awareness -
raising interventions.  
 
2.5.5. O rganise community 
meetings to raise awareness 
around climate change adaptation and the benefits of 
proposed interventions.
 • Awareness -raising 
strategy developed and 
updated annually  
• 4 radio programmes per year for 5 years  
• 20 5-day workshops organised (one f or each 
of the 4 areas annually for 5 years)  
• Knowledge-sharing 
groups consisting consist 
of 4 members for each of 
the 4 areas established 
and trained  
• 12 Billboards  (3 for each 
of the 4 targeted areas) in public spaces for 5 years  
• Awareness raising products  distributed per 
year for 5 years (400 
posters, 400 brochures, 
800 stickers, 400 caps 
and 400 t -shirts)  
• Minutes from 3 community meetings for 
100 participants 
organized per year in 
each of the 4 areas for 
awareness raising
 
3.1.  Establish a community 
education and innovation 
centre to function as a 
community knowledge 
generation and learning hub, 
a repository on climate 
change adaptation practices 
and to host community 
activities under Output 3.  An education and innovation 
centre will be established in 
an existing community or 
government -owned building to 
host and coordinate community -based activities 
(Activities 3.2 and 3.4) and all 
community -level awareness -
raising being implemented under Output 3. The centre will be managed by a 
Community S tewardship 3.1.1. Locate, renovate and 
equip existing structure situated on community or 
municipal -owned land in West 
Point.  
 
3.1.2. Establish and 
commission the ten-person Community Stewardship Committee (CSC) with • Existing building identified 
and renovated to be 
established as  an 
education and innovation 
centr e 
• Detailed operation and 
maintenance plan for 
education and innovation 
centre  
 
• 10-person Community 
Stewardship Council 
(CSC) with  at least 50%


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 97 
   
 Committee (CSC) and will 
serve as the focal point for all 
community events and 
capacity building activities.  representatives from each of 
the four areas.  
 
3.1.3.  Host an inauguration 
event to open the centre to the public and present the 
members of the CSC.  
 
3.1.4. Host a c ollaboration 
workshop for government 
representatives, CSC 
members and NGOs to meet 
and define the guiding 
principles for the education 
and innovation centre. 
 women representatives 
commissioned  
• Inaugural event (1,500 
participants) to launch the 
education and innovation 
centre organised  
• Workshop report based on one 2-day 
collaboration workshop 
organised for CSC 
members as well as for 
representatives from 
relevant government 
ministries, NGOs, and 
development, 
conservation and 
community organisations
 
• CSC Constitution  
3.2. Establish community -led 
co-management agreement to 
ease anthropogenic pressure 
on mangroves in the MMA.  A co-management agreement 
will be developed through a 
participatory process to facilitate the sustainable use of — and reduce 
anthropogenic pressures on 
— mangroves in the 
Mesurado
 Wetlands. This 
agreement will be developed 
taking into consideration: i) 
uses of mangroves by different social groups; ii) 
gender considerations; and iii) 
guidance provided by government stakeholders and 
NGOs involved in the 
conservation of mangrove areas. Roles and 
responsibilities, including for 
the CSC and community 
members will be clearly 
outlined. The agreement will 
be revised after three years to 
incorporate lessons learned 
during the project.
 3.2.1. Develop the 
community -led co-
management agreement 
through a participatory 
gender -sensitive process.  
 
3.2.2 . Host a three-day co -
design and validation 
workshop for the community -
led co-management 
agreement.  
 
3.2.3. Design and implement 
an awareness -raising 
campaign on sustainable Community -Based Natural 
Resource Management (CBNRM) and the co-
management agreement.  
 
3.2.4.  Host a workshop to 
assess the effectiveness of 
the co-management agreement (Activity 3.2.1) and re-negotiate it in Year 5 based 
on findings from Activity 3.3.  
 • Co-management 
agreement for reducing 
anthropogenic pressure 
on mangroves finalised  
• Workshop report from 
one 3- day co- design and 
validation workshop organised for relevant 
government ministries, NGOs, conservation 
organisations and CSC 
members  
• Awareness -raising 
campaign on CBNRM designed and 
implemented (100 
posters and 400 
brochures distr ibuted per 
year for 5 years and 20 
signboards erected)  
• Workshop report from one 2- day workshop 
organised for the assessment and re-
negotiation of the co-
management agreement, 
for relevant government 
ministries, NGOs, 
conservation 
organisations and CSC 
memb ers
 
3.3. Conduct annual 
assessments to evaluate the 
project -induced changes in 
mangrove degradation, community perceptions and awareness of climate change impacts, adaptation options and mangrove ecosystems throughout the project 
implementation period.
 Spatial analyses of the health 
and degradation of mangrove 
ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland will be undertaken using the high-resolution data acquired under Activity 2.3. An initial assessment will be conducted and updated twice during the project period to 
assess the impact of the 3.3.1. Using high -resolution 
remote sensing data procured under Sub-activity 2.3.1, conduct analyses of mangrove extent and degradation in the Mesurado Wetland to assess the impact 
of project interventions  
 • 3 reports on mangrove 
extent and degradation in 
the Mesurado Wetland incorporating spatial 
analysis to assess the 
impact of project 
interventions. Reports to 
be delivered in years 2, 4 
and 6.  
• Baseline report with annual updates on state-


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 84 OF 97 
   
 project. In addition, a baseline 
state -of-knowledge 
assessment will be 
undertaken on community awareness on: i) climate 
change impacts and 
adaptation options; ii) CBNRM and the role of mangrove ecosystems in the MMA; and 
iii) different types of climate-
resilient livelihoods currently 
being practiced within the MMA. The baseline surveys will be collated into a report 
and annual follow -up surveys 
will be conducted to determine the annual change-in -state, 
which will help to refine the 
awareness -raising campaigns 
and support the uptake of additional climate- resilient 
livelihoods.
 3.3.2. Conduct a baseline 
state -of-knowledge survey on 
climate change impacts, adaptation options, CBNRM and mangrove ecosystems 
and undertake annual surveys 
to determine the change-in -
state over the durat ion of the 
project.  
 
3.3.3.  Undertake periodic 
assessments of climate -
resilient livelihood practices and new opportunities to inform the design of new 
options and determine their 
uptake as a result of the 
project.  
 of-knowledge develo ped 
based on four 
community -level 
assessments conducted 
in each of the four focus 
areas targeted under the 
project to develop 
indicators that determine baseline  
• Baseline reports and 
annual updates on 
current and potential 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods pra ctices 
produced based on alternative, climate-
resilient livelihoods strategies developed for 
the four target 
communities  
• Baseline and final project impact assessment conducted
 
3.4.  Establish small -scale 
manufacturing facilities and 
develop training mater ial to 
capacitate community members to manufacture and sell cookstoves to support alternative climate-resilient 
livelihoods.
 The uptake of diversified 
climate -resilient livelihoods 
will be supported by 
developing training courses, facilities and providing material inputs for the fabrication of value- added 
products, specifically for energy -efficient cookstoves. 
The facilities will be incorporated into the education and innovation centre and will focus on producing energy -efficient 
products with a specific 
emphasis on activities suitable 
for women and vulnerable 
social groups. Different livelihood activities will be supported throughout the project lifespan depending on the results of the assessment 
conducted under Activity 3.3 
and all training materials will 
be publicly available to 
support the upscaling of 
activities.
 3.4.1. Develop a training 
programme and publicly 
available training materials, and conduct trainings to capacitate community members to manufacture 
energy -efficient cookstoves.  
 
3.4.2. Establish a small -scale 
manufacturing workshop and 
procure equipment and material for the education and 
innovation centre.  
 
3.4.3.  Host an annual 
workshop at the education and innovation centre to capacitate women’s groups on business strategies and 
connect them with value chain 
actors to upscale the 
development of energy 
efficient value -added 
products.  
 • Specification for  energy -
efficient cookstoves 
publicly available 
• 5 annual workshops at 
the innovation centre 
designed and organised 
for implementing the community -based training 
program  
• 1 vocational training centre (simple workshop area) established with 
equipment and material 
inputs procured for 
production of energy efficient cookstoves  
• Workshop reports from 5 workshops (1 per year for 
5 years) organised f or 
100 participants to 
capacitate women on 
business practices
 
3.5. Purchase and install low -
maintenance eco-friendly cold 
storage facilities near fish 
processing sites to reduce 
pressure on mangroves and 
increase market efficiency.  Cold storage facilities  will be 
designed and installed in 
proximity to the West Point 
fish processing site. These 
cold storage facilities will be 
designed according the 
community requirements as 
determined by a needs assessment. They will be 
powered by solar energy and 3.5.1. Develop for site -specific 
eco-friendly, solar -powered 
cold storage units for the West 
Point fish processing site, 
based on the needs of fishers 
and fishmongers.  
 • Detailed report on 
community needs for cold 
storage produced based 
on needs assessment 
conducted.  
• Validation workshop 
conducted to endorse the  
final cold -storage designs


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 85 OF 97 
   
 will be m anaged by women in 
the community in collaboration 
with the CSC established under Activity 3.1.2. The facilities will be designed be 
accessible to all fisherfolk in 
the area and to require limited maintenance and any required maintenance will be provided 
by the service provider 
contracted to develop the 
storages, with support from 
UNDP.
 3.5.2 . Host a workshop in the 
targeted community to 
validate the designs (Sub -
activity 3.5.1) and capacitate fisherfolk in the use and 
management of the cold storage units   
 
3.5.3. Install and operate the 
low-maintenance eco -friendly 
solar -powered cold storage 
facilities.  
 • 2 eco -friendly, solar -
powered cold storage 
units installed  
• Report on trainings provided to the members of the facility managers, 
CSC and representatives 
of fishmongers to 
operate, maintain and manage the solar -
powered cold facilities.


---
*Page 88*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 86 OF 97 
   
  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
174. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy .   
 
175. The primary r esponsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The 
Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective 
measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staf f maintain a high level of 
transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.  
 
176. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Off ice is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as 
outlined in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support 
will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders 
including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.  
 
177. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant 
parties to: i) re- orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context 
that influence project i mplementation; ii) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including 
reporting and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; iii) review the results framework and 
discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; iv) review financial 
reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; and v) 
plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The final inception report 
will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser and approved by the Project 
Board and submitted to the GCF within 6 months after the Funded Activity Agreements effectiveness date.  
 
178. A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager, 
the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual GCF 
APR. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored 
annually well in advance of the GCF APR submission deadline. Progress against the gender action plan, 
stakeholder engagement, social and environmental safeguards updates, challenges and del ays must also be 
monitored by the Project Manager and reported in the GCF APR. The GCF APR will be shared with the Project 
Board and other stakeholders.  
 
179. An independent interim revaluation will be undertaken, and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half 
of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final evaluation report will follow the 
standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre . The final evaluation repor t 
will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser and will be approved by the 
Project Board. The final evaluation report will be available in English.  
 
180. An independent final evaluation will take place when project activiti es have concluded. The terms of reference, 
the evaluation process and the final evaluation report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on 
the UNDP Evaluation Res ource Centre . The final evaluation report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and 
the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be available 
in English.


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 87 OF 97 
   
  
 181. A key tool for MRV for the project is an in dependent impact assessment which will be commissioned to a third 
party. While the detailed scope of the assessment will be further developed, it is expected that the assessment will 
involve data collection, at least twice in the course of the project at t he baseline and end- line of a representative 
sample of households in the four prioritized communities in Monrovia. These surveyed households will include both 
the project target and non -target beneficiaries with controlled comparison of project impact at v arious levels. 
Adoption rate will also be measured with test of options to improve the rate of adoption of some of the interventions. 
Importantly, the outcome of interest in this assessment includes the changes in productivity; access to alternative 
livelihoods, fishing activities; importance of cold storages and the extent to which climate information influences 
households such as use of mangroves and settlement planning. The execution of activities such as livelihood 
options, co- management of mangroves, c limate advisory services that are disseminated to a larger population 
could possibly permit investigation of impacts of these three interventions independently as well as in combination 
(the feasibility to be confirmed). With a higher number of vulnerable households than the project can serve, there 
will be potential to objectively select who will receive the program and who will not. This will be based on vulnerability 
and need at the beginning of the project with a phase- in design because the program may not be rolled out within 
one year. Moreover, this assessment will make use of satellite data to assess the changes in settlement patterns, 
the efficacy of the revetment and reduced rate of mangrove degradation etc. before and after interventions.  
 
182. The UNDP  Country Office will include the planned project evaluations in the UNDP Country Office evaluation 
plan, and will upload the evaluation report in English and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation 
Resource Centre (ERC) ( www.erc.undp.org).  
 
183. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
 
184. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document.  
 
185. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies and Accreditation 
Master Agreement signed between GCF and UNDP.


---
*Page 90*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 88 OF 97 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSME NT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
186. A summary of the identified risks to the proposed project’s implementation and sustainability, associated 
impacts and mitigation measures are presented in the risk tables below. Overall, the risk assessment concludes 
that the proposed project’s overall risk rating is low. However, this is predicated on successful mitigation, particularly 
with regards to amending governmental practices to ensure project effectiveness.  
 
Table 3. Risk matrix143. 
   Impact   Risk  
   Low Medium  High   Very Low Risk  
   1 2 3   Low Risk  Likelih
ood Low 1 1 2 3   Medium Risk  
Medium  2 2 4 6   High Risk  
High 3 3 6 9   Extreme Risk  
 
187. Selected Risk Factors were assessed according to the risk matrix ( Table 3 ), initially without and then with 
mitigation measures being undertaken to express the baseline risk and mitigated risk. These results are shown in 
Table 4 below.  
 
Table  4. Project risk factors and mitigated risks.  
Factor #  Likelihood  Impact  Risk  Mitigation Potential  Mitigated Risk  
1 Medium  Low Low Risk  High Very Low Risk  
2 Low Medium  Low Risk  High Very Low Risk  
3 Medium  Medium  Medium Risk  Medium  Low Risk  
4 High High Extreme Risk  Medium  High Risk  
5 Low Medium  Low Risk Medium  Very Low Risk  
6 Medium  High High Risk  High Low Risk  
7 Medium  High High Risk  High Low Risk  
8 Low Medium  Low Risk  High Very Low Risk  
9 High Low Medium Risk  High Very Low Risk  
10 Medium  Low Low Risk  High Very Low Risk  
11 Medium  High High Risk   High Low Risk  
12 Medium  Medium  Medium Risk  High Low Risk  
13 Low Low Low Risk  High Very Low Risk  
14 High High Extreme Risk  Medium  Medium Risk  
 
188. Factor 4 (governance) is essential to the overall success of the project but presents the highest risk ( Table 4). 
Commitment to effective land use planning by the GoL is therefore critical to ensure that this risk is mitigated. Factor 
14 — Land Tenure infringement — is also noted as an Extreme Risk. Government structures will need to support 
the projec t in addressing these concerns and mitigate the risk to medium.   
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Inadequate engagement with local -level stakeholders and project partners. This may occur as a result of insufficient 
coordination between implementing agencies during project implementation and/or limited integration of local 
knowledge into project activities.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The project design has involved extensive engagement with local stakeholders to ensure support for project 
activities.  
• Extensive engagements with project partners, other agencies operating in the area and stakeholders will continue 
during project implementation.  
• Project implementation activities will build on and/or draw from existing local committees, groups, systems and 
procedures to ensure local stakeholder participation.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
 
143 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 2017. National Disaster Risk Assessment, Governance System, Methodologies,  and 
Use of Results.


---
*Page 91*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 89 OF 97 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Inadequate incorporation of gender sensitivity as well as social safeguards considerations and livelihoods into the 
implementation of the project activities. The management structures and systems may have adverse impacts on 
gender equality and may reproduce discrimination based on gender.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• A Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8) has been developed and will be implemented to ensure that 
gender equality is central to all interventions.  
• Activity design will include the full participation of women in consultations and capacity development and be 
sensitive to gender vulnerability disparities in all decision- making. The project design will consider the livelihood 
capacity development of women in the fishing industry and in the local communities.  
• A Social Management Plan as part of the ESMP has been designed based on a detailed screening process. The 
ESMP provides a framework for ensuring that project activities do not have a negative impact on the env ironment 
or local communities (Annex 6).  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The failure to commit and provide the co -financing commitment from "new money" or sustainable “payment -in-kind” 
for project development resulting in funds from other fundamental services/development being compromised.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
UNDP has committed to providing co- financing for the project and has worked with the GoL to identify further sources 
of co- financing and in- kind activities. The availability of in -kind co -finance for Activity 1.2 in the form of rock materials 
has been verified by the GoL and UNDP.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  High High 
Description  
The long -term project success requires a commitment to coastal and land -use planning policies and actions to 
safeguard communities/infrastructure. It is also necessary to ensure that there is no overlap and/or misalignment 
between project activities and other actions in the MMA.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The project has been designed with extensive stakeholder engagement at all levels of government and affected 
parties to ensure that there is synergy between project activities and any past and ongoing initiatives in the MMA.  
• Regular meetings will be held between the GoL and relevant in dividuals/organisations responsible for the 
management of the project. This will ensure that future projects or initiatives are aligned with the project’s 
interventions.  
• Government commitment to address land tenure arrangements during project implementation in coastal and tidal 
areas agreed as a condition of the project. This will include a commitment to new legal instruments and enforcement 
where necessary.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description


---
*Page 92*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 90 OF 97 
   
 Changes in political leadership or focus could result in delays in project implementation or even abandonment of 
some activities. Additionally, turnover of government staff may impede capacity building, the retention of skills and 
knowledge, and knowledge management across the relevant institutions to ensure coastal and land use policy and 
actions are aligned with sustainable practices.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Regular engagement with non- political actors – such as government agency officials, staff and local community 
members – will be prioritised during project implementation. In so doing, knowledge regarding the project planning 
and implementation processes will be shared amongst a number of individuals who can hold the implementing 
agencies accountabl e for delivery in the case of key individuals leaving their respective organisations.  
• The formulation of local ordinances, mainstreaming of project interventions into local planning and budgeting 
systems and establishment of accountable centres/offices wil l ensure that political changes will have negligible 
impact on the sustainability of project interventions.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  High 
Description  
Corruption (at any level) hampers activities and the delivery of outputs and risks project cost escalation or delivery 
overrun.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The UNDP Country Office will support implementation and provide oversight to minimise the risk of corruption . The 
overall risk level assessed for this project using UNDP’s Partner Capacity Assessment Tool (PCAT) is “low.” The 
PCAT is used in conjunction with the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT), undertaken by an 
independent third party for every UNDP Programme Cycle (every 4 years), accompani ed by regular spot checks 
and specific project audits (annual in the case of this GCF project). UNDP has undertaken a HACT micro-
assessment of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to assess the risks associated with the entity as an 
Executing Entity (EE) in Liberia. The micro- assessment provides an overall assessment of the EE’s programme, 
financial and operations management policies, procedures, systems and internal controls.  In addition to the HACT 
micro assessment, and as part of this project, UNDP Country Office will undertake the following actions to detect 
and address any issue related to the risks identified in the project: i) Spot checks will be carried out once every year 
by an external independent party and by UNDP; ii) NIM Audit – A project audit will be undertaken annually as 
budgeted for under this project; and iii) Review of annual work -plans to ensure that the planned expenditures are 
in line with the budgeted project activities.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  High 
Description  
Government officials and local communities do not take ownership of the project’s community -based interventions. 
This could lead to limited commitment by communities to achieve the project outcomes and objectives, as well as 
limited sustainability of project interventions after the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Stakeholder engagement is essential to community ownership and will enable communities to be involved in the planning of the project and the ongoing positive benefits.  
• Target communities will be active participants in the design and implementation of interventions focusing on 
improving the resilience of climate- sensitive livelihoods and supporting CBNRM. Social marketing and awareness -
raising campaigns will be developed to promote community support of the project activities. These strategies will 
be developed to ensure all community members understand and benefit from the establishment of the community 
education and innovation centre and the activities associated with them.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Category  Probability  Impact


---
*Page 93*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 91 OF 97 
   
 Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
International experts/consultants/developers do not perform according to expectations.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The services of consultants and contractors will be procured as per the guidelines in the UNDP manual. This will 
ensure that only suitably qualified applicants are contracted for project activities.  
• The UNDP Country Office will have an active role in project oversight ensuring that standards are not compromised 
in any aspect of the project.  
Selected Risk Factor 9   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Low 
Description  
Limited long- term operations and maintenance of hard interventions to effectively combat coastal erosion.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Initial local consultations concluded that maintenance of hard structure interventions was unlikely to be undertaken 
regularly or appropriately given budget and capacity constraints of local authorities. The designs of the revetments and groyne were done with this limitation in mind and are intended to function as designed for a minimum of 50 
years.  
• Operations and Maintenance costs are estimated to aver age ~USD50, 000 per year (Annex 21: Operations and 
Maintenance Plan) . The ICZMP process is intended to address the institutional responsibilities and budgets for its 
implementation, including the maintenance of the coastal defence structures. The ICZMP itself  and the institutional 
responsibilities associated will be endorsed at the highest level of government as part of the government policy 
processes.  
Selected Risk Factor 10   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Extreme ocean weather events/hazards could negatively affect or delay project on- the-ground project interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The revetment and groyne material will be resilient to most weather and ocean conditions.  
• The final construction plan will incorporate careful planning of activities informed by ocean conditions, weather and climate briefs. Interventions will be scheduled  in conjunction with this forecasting information to reduce the potential 
for extreme weather events to negatively affect the implementation project interventions.  
Selected Risk Factor 11   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
The potential unintended environmental and dynamic changes to shore and nearshore sediment erosion and 
deposition as a result of physical coastal interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• An Environmental and Social Assessment Report (Annex 6) has been developed to specifically mitigate the 
potential changes that may result from the implementation of coastal physical interventions.  
Selected Risk Factor 12


---
*Page 94*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 92 OF 97 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Inadequate incorporation of environmental safeguard considerations into the implementation of the project activities 
as well as its management structures and systems. The scale of pollution in the creeks, estuaries and mangrove 
swamps around Monrovia proves too extensive for control by existing agencies.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• An Environmental Management Plan has been designed based on a detailed screening process. This will provide 
a framework for ensuring that project activities do not have a negative impact on the environment.  
• Project design will include surveys of drainage and pollution sources, focussed on identifying curable problems to 
be addressed by the project, with others raised for longer -term action by the authorities.  
Selected Risk Factor 13   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational  Low Low 
Description  
Project might involve temporary or permanent and full or partial physical displacement.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The project has been designed to avoid physical displacement.  
• Should it prove to be necessary for a small number of people, then a full UNDP - (and IFC -) compliant resettlement 
approach will be used.  
Selected Risk Factor 14   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  High High 
Description  
Project development may infringe on land tenure arrangements in marginal coastal areas.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The GoL  has committed to address land tenure arrangements in coastal and tidal areas. This will include a 
commitment to new legal instruments and enforcement where necessary. Adopting the ICZM approach and 
developing the ICZMP with a specific section dedicated to coastal land tenure regulation in high- risk areas will 
serve to mitigate this risk. The above- mentioned component of the ICZMP will be fully aligned with the World Bank -
funded land use masterplan for Monrovia currently under development144. 
• Project design will support government actions by including messages on land tenure in its community awareness 
raising programmes.  
• Project design will also include support to government agencies through its capacity strengthening programme.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 15   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low High 
Description  
 
144 The enforcement of the ICZMP will not be specifically dependent on the wider adaptation policy development processes supported by 
the World Bank project. Alignment and collaboration will rather ensure that there is no duplication of efforts, and that stak eholders, 
especially communities, are clear on the two processes.


---
*Page 95*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 93 OF 97 
   
 Construction of coastal protection measures has the unintended consequence of exacerbating  existing  flood risk in 
West Point  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• The revetment at West Point has been designed to armour the vulnerable shoreline and fix it in place. The revetment 
will use porous materials , a permeable design  and include a drainage system to enable water to drain through the 
structure into the sea, rather than creating a levee which would contain flood water . 
• During the development of the detailed design  and construction plan under activity 1.1, a  site-specific hydrological 
study of West  Point , to be conducted under the activity,  will also be used  to assess  the impact of the revetment on 
existing localised and broader flooding and  mitigate this risk by  enabling the design of adequate  drainage capacity.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
• Currency fluctuations (both nationally and internationally) could negatively influence the project’s budget, including 
the implementation costs. This may result in: i) suboptimal and incomplete implementation; and ii) a reduction in 
sustainability and upscaling potential.  
• Project development might be delayed by the COVID -19 pandemic as  national and regional responses to the 
pandemic may involve restrictions including lockdowns.  The project and its personnel will abide by all rules and 
regulation mandated by the Government of Liber ia in response to C OVID -19. Project staff will take additional 
precautions to ensure that stakeholders and beneficiaries are not exposed to and that project activities do not in 
any way, allow spreading of the virus. Awareness among project staff and stakeholders, including communities will 
be embedded in all interactions. Project staff will distribute awareness materials and personal protective gear that 
is made available by parallel efforts in the region.  If and when possible, project staff and consultants who require 
movem ent between regions and internationally will immunise themselves.


---
*Page 96*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 94 OF 97 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
189. The environmental and social risk associated with the project was evaluated in accordance with GCF’s 
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) as well as UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards (SES). The 
project is considered to be Category B or Medium Risk (GCF ESS) and Moderate Risk (UNDP risk category). This 
initial categorisation was determined during the PPF -financed Feasibility Study conducted from 2018– 2019. 
UNDP’s Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP) and the Environmental and Social Assessment 
Report (ESAR) developed for the project substantiate this categorisation. The ESAR complies with the broad ESS 
requirements of the GCF and includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). It is, however, 
important to note that the ESAR is an interim report and in order to comply with national legislation, an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)145 will need to be conducted and a pproved by the EPA —  as 
the environmental authority in Liberia — prior to the implementation of Activity 1.2. The primary environmental and 
social risks that may be associated with the project — as identified by the ESAR — are presented below.  
 
Environmental impacts  
190. Overall the project is likely to result in some negative environmental impacts. These impacts are, however, 
expected to be temporary and mitigated effectively through appropriate management measures. During the 
construction phase of Output 1, substantial earthworks will need to take place along the West Point beachfront. 
Potential negative impacts that are associated with the establishment of coastal infrastructure include local changes 
in water quality in the short -term as well as a shift in sed iment transport patterns in the long- term. Additionally, there 
are inherent pollution risks146 associated with the use of earth- moving equipment in coastal environments. These 
risks have, however, been accounted for in the ESAR and ESMP, and appropriate risk  mitigation procedures will 
be included in the Terms of Reference for contractors. In addition, any long- term shifts in sediment transport 
patterns are expected to exhibit minor impacts on a local scale as a result of an existing perpendicular breakwater associated with the port of Monrovia.  
 Social impacts  
191. Two main social risks were identified during the Feasibility Study as a result of the construction of a revetment 
at WestPoint — and an associated loss of beach areas — both of which have been mitigated  through an adaptive 
design process. These include impacts on: i) social cohesion, that will occur because of reduced access to 
community land used for domestic purposes, bathing and sociali sing; and ii) fishing livelihoods, which will occur 
because of a r eduction of available locations for the launching fishing boats and the processing of fish. The current 
design for the revetment includes a green promenade with associated amenities that will be available to be used 
as community space and for the processing of fish. Additionally, the design will incorporate at least two protected 
beach areas to act as boat launching and landing sites and associated boat storage space, which will allow 
fishermen and community members to continue access the bay.  
 192. No further potential negative social impacts have been identified as a result of the other activities under the 
project, which are expected to yield a range of social benefits, including strengthened livelihoods, food security and mangrove areas as well as the protect ion of homes and infrastructure. It should be further noted here that 
resettlement, land acquisition and any potential impacts on Indigenous People have been investigated and will not 
occur under the project.  
 Grievance Redress Mechanism  
193. A Grievance Redres s Mechanism (GRM) and Complaints Register (CR) have been developed for this project 
and are described in detail in the ESMP. These two mechanisms are compatible with Liberian legislation and 
compliant with UNDP and GCF standards and will allow any project stakeholders who have a complaint or feel 
aggrieved by the project to communicate their concerns and/or grievances through an appropriate process. The 
GRM and CR will be used at all stages of the project and will provide an accessible, rapid, fair and effective 
response to concerned stakeholders, especially any vulnerable groups who may lack access to formal legal 
systems or support.  
 
145 The Ministry of Mines and Energy will be responsible for obtaining the permit, as the Responsible Party for Activities 1.1 and 1.2.  
146 A number of pollution risks are associated with the use of earth moving vehicles and construction of large- scale infrastructure, including  
synthetic pollutants, organic waste and construction debris. Further details on potential pollutants are provided in the ESAR  (Annex 6).


---
*Page 97*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 95 OF 97 
   
 G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
194. A gender assessment and action plan — in line with the objectives of the GCF’s Gender Policy and gender 
guidelines — has been developed by UNDP to inform the design of the proposed project (Annex 8). The document 
was based on 24 field consultations, as wel l as available data from studies conducted by the GoL, UN agencies, 
civil society organisations (CSOs), donor agencies and multilateral development banks.  
 
195. The gender assessment shows that gender inequality persists in Liberia, largely due to patriarchal norms that 
maintain women’s low status and the legacy of violence against women during the civil wars147. The country has a 
low Gender Development Index (GDI), ranking 177 out of 188 countries in 2018. Gender gaps in human 
development between men and women are evident in inter alia: i) mean years of education — 3.5 years for women 
and 6.1 years for men; ii) mean income — USD 577 for women and USD 755 for men; and iii) levels of adult HIV 
— 2.4% for women and 1.8% for men148. The burden of family car e imposed upon women through the socio-
cultural allocation of gender roles restricts their livelihood options, which suggests why approximately 90% of 
women are employed in the informal sector149. This high participation of women in the informal sector limit s their 
social safety nets to adapt to the impacts of climate change.  
 
196. As a result of these gender roles and inequalities, women in Liberia are more vulnerable than men to coastal 
erosion which causes the destruction of infrastructure, loss of property, d isplacement, decreases in income, as well 
as rises in insecurity and gender -based violence. Additionally, coastal erosion contributes to increased gender 
inequalities by exacerbating the challenges women already face such as family care and food insecurity . For 
example, stakeholder meetings held in Monrovia from March to April 2019 revealed that women play a central role 
in the informal fishing sector. Representing 60% of the fishing community, women are mostly involved in drying 
and selling fish while men are predominantly involved in fishing. Since women sell the fish, they carry the weight of 
economic fluctuations related to fish stock and quality — both impacted by climate change.  
 
197. From the findings of the gender assessment, a gender action plan (GAP) for the project was developed to 
ensure gender is mainstreamed in project design and implementation. In particular, the GAP recommends that a 
women’s empowerment approach is employed in the design and implementation of the project, increasing women’s 
skills and economic opportunities. By increasing the climate- resilience of Monrovia’s fishing community, the project 
intentionally targets and benefits women —  and by extension, their families and communities. All activities, training 
and stakeholder consultations under the project will be conducted in a gender -sensitive manner and encourage 
women’s active participation. Activities will contribute to women’s empowerment through upskilling of women’s 
groups to pursue climate- resilient and sustainable livelihoods in the Mesurado mangroves, as well as through 
women’s active participation in the mangroves’ management. This empowering approach, combined with gender -
sensitive activities and stakeholder consultations, will contribute to reducing the gender gap of social, economic 
and environmental vulnerabilities to climate change in Monrovia.  
 
198. In project -level implementation arrangements, a Gender Specialist will be posted to the Project Management 
Unit to provide advice and quality assurance oversight, conduct capacity building and to monitor the implementation of gender -related activities and gender -sensitisation. The collaborative relationship between this specialist, UNDP, 
the Environmental Protection Agency, the Center for all Disasters Management, the Ministry of Gender, Children 
and Social Protection, and local NGOs will create the cross -sectoral technical perspectives required to ensure the 
success of this gender -sensitive approach in the project.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
199. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available here.  
 
200. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section 
of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement 
standards and guidelines across each pha se of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in 
 
147 Republique of Liberia. 2018. Pr ogramme Against Sexual and Gender Based Violence and Harmful Traditional Practices.  
148 UNDP. 2018.  Human Development Report.  
149 According to the 2008 report issued to the Committee on the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW).


---
*Page 98*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 96 OF 97 
   
 UNDP. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM 
guidelines available here. 
 
201. The UNDP Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Policy identifies 'Capacities of the Partners' as a key Strategic 
Risk to be managed for the success of UNDP's work. The Partner Capacity Assessment Tool ( PCAT ) was designed 
to assess the level of risk that is present when UNDP works with Partners to implement programmes and projects. 
The level of risk is identified by analysing partner capacity and mat ching project management and oversight with 
the level of risk assessed. By identifying areas for capacity improvement, the PCAT should also help to reduce 
future Partner risk levels if the capacity building actions are implemented and sustained. The Partner Capacity 
Assessment is conducted for all projects and covers executing entities, responsible partners, grant recipients and 
other partners to ensure that the proposed project partners are not a prohibited organization and do not engage in 
practices that are inconsistent with UNDP's social & environmental standards and code of ethics.  
 
202. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the executing entities  by undertaking an evaluation of capacity 
following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Executing Entiti es (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers - HACT ). All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and 
applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, i ncluding all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entit y’s disclosure policy, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 99*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 97 OF 97 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA No -objection letter(s)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
 Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  
☐ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plans  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex x  Other references


---
*Page 100*
---

Annex I NDA No -objection letter  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALH 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 101*
---

 Annex I NDA No -objection letter  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
 H


---
*Page 102*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country 
or location (s) of programme  Liberia, with a focus on Monrovia Metropolitan Area 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Tuesday, February 2, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English is the official language of Liberia, and stakeholders 
will be able to understand and provide any feedback in 
English.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.lr.undp.org/content/liberia/en/home/librar
y/environment_energy/environmental -and-social -
assessment -report.html  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  Provision for a n ESIA  consistent with the requirements for 
a Category B  project is contained in the “ Environmental 
and Social Assessment Report (ESAR) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Tuesday, February 2, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English is the official language of Liberia, and stakeholders 
will be able to understand and provide any feedback in 
English.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.lr.undp.org/content/liberia/en/home/librar
y/environment_energy/environmental -and-social -
assessment -report.html
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category 
B project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Assessment Report (ESAR) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A


---
*Page 103*
---

Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on accredited 
entity’s website  Stakeholder Engagement Plan/ Tuesday, February 2, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English is the official language of Liberia, and stakeholders 
will be able to understand and provide any feedback in 
English.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.lr.undp.org/content/liberia/en/home/librar
y/environment_energy/mmcrp -stakeholder -engagement -
plan.html
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, February 2, 2021  
Place  Physical copies were made available to the West Point 
Communities through the local leadership, and were 
displayed for public scrutiny at the office of the 
Commissioner within West Point.  Address:  
C/O Hon. C. Wea, Commissioner  
Waterside Market  
Township of Westpoint  
Monrovia  
Web l inks (URL) to, and email attachments of , the ESAR and 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan  were shared with the 
National Designated Authorit y, Environmental Protectio n 
Agency, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Ministry of Public 
Works , the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning , 
the African Development Bank, the World Bank , and civil 
society organizations.  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Tuesday, March 16, 2021  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 104 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP160 
Proposal name:  Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Liberia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks : 
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project addresses impending shoreline 
regression at West Point, where dwellings  and 
public infrastructure  are under threat , including  
boat launching sites that are critical to fishery -
based livelihoods.    Risk of maladaptation needs to be carefully 
assessed  and mitigated  when refining and 
finalizing the engineering design of the revetment 
construction at West Point.  
The Government of Liberia contributes to a 
considerable amount of co- financing  despite its 
budgetary constraints.   
2. The Board may  wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XV II, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. Monrovia , the  capital city of Liberia, is vulnerable to the climate change impacts of sea-
level rise (SLR) and the increasing frequency of high -intensity storms, both of which contribute 
to coastal erosion and shoreline retreat. SLR  also threatens  the sust ainability of ecosystem 
services provided by mangroves in the Mesurado estuary at the centre of the Monrovia 
Metropolitan Area (MMA), exacerbating the already vulnerable mang roves that are under threat 
of over -exploitation and urban encroachment.  These cha nges have resulted in change of habitat 
for economically important fish species and loss of these nursery areas  which consequently 
impact the fishery -based livelihoods of Monrovians.  
4. The most vulnerable part of the MMA coast is West Point , one of the most  densely 
populated and poorest areas on the Monrovian coast and the section most vulnerable to climate 
change -induced acceleration of coastal erosion. Near West Point, the shoreline has regressed by 
30 met res in the last decade , leading to loss of 670 dwellings, and threatening public spaces and 
boat launching sites that are critical to fishery -based livelihoods. I t is forecast that coast erosion 
resulting from climate change will cause further shoreline regression of 190 met res by 2100.   
5. The GCF project a ims to address this urgent need for adaptation in Monrovia through 
three interrelated focus areas : (i) coastal protection; (ii) coastal management; and ( iii)


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 105 
 
 
diversified climate -resilient livelihoods. In this way, the proposed project will build the long -
term climate resilience of coastal communities in Liberia by both addressing immediate 
adaptation priorities and creating an enabling environment for upscaling coastal adaptation 
initiatives to other parts of Monrovia and Liberia.  
6. The total project co st is USD 25.6  million, all in the form of grants. GCF financing 
amounts to USD 17.3  million, most of which will be contributed to the revetment construction 
along the coast near West  Point. The remaining cost will be born e by the Government of Liberia 
(USD  6.8 million in form of grant and in -kind contributions ) and UNDP (USD 1.6 million grant).  
7. The environmental and social safeguards classification of the project is category B, as 
informed by the screening performed by UNDP.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis   
Output 1 : Protection of coastal communities and infrastructure at West Point against erosion 
caused by sea -level rise and increasingly frequent high -intensity storms ( total cost: US D 18.1 
million; GCF  cost:  USD 13.5  million, or 75  per cent ) 
8. Under this output, GCF grant funding will be used to protect the vulnerable community 
at West Point through construction of a revetment structure . This revetment structure was 
selected as the preferred solution because while a “soft solution” in the form o f beach 
nourishment with an associated groyne was considered technically feasible, its sustainability is 
questionable as the required regular maintenance is not considered feasible in the local context. 
The revetment structure is expected to prevent  sediments and sand  being washed away . As per 
common good practice, appropriate drainage will be included in the detailed design of the 
structure to allow run -off and prevent localised flooding behind the structure.  
9. GCF proceeds will cover 75 per  cent of t he total cost of this construction and the 
remaining cost s are born e by co -financiers, which will cover the cost of finalisation and 
validation of the detailed design and construction plans, and rock material for construction of 
the revetment at West Point .  
10. Structural measures for coast protection may cause changes of wave patterns  which 
lead to maladaptation in other areas along the coast. Recognizing this risk, the accredited entity 
(AE) has confirmed that through detailed modelling it is evident that no  effect on the water 
movement will take place around West  Point due to stabilising  the coastline with marine 
boulders.  
Output  2: Institutional capacity -building and policy support for the implementation of Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) across Liberia  (total cost : USD 4.1 million; GCF  cost:  USD 1.6 
million , or 40 per cent ) 
11. This project will develop a national -scale high -resolution multi -criteria vulnerability 
map and will design a national risk -informed Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan in 
consultation with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector. This output will also 
support cross -sectoral coordination among the 10 government institutions responsible for  
climate -resilient coast management. Implementing ICZMP  in the MMA , and across Liberia , will 
transform the existing coastal management paradigm and reduce the vulnerability of coastal 
communities to the impacts of climate change -induced SLR, accelerated co astal erosion and 
increased incidence of extreme weather events.  
Output  3: Protecting mangroves and strengthening gender - and climate -sensitive livelihoods to 
build local climate resilience in Monrovia  (total cost: US D 2.2 million; GCF  cost:  USD 5.7 million , or 
59 per cent )


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 106 
 
 
12. Under this output, the proposed project will put measures in place to reduce the 
anthropogenic pressure on mangrove ecosystems in the Mesurado Wetland. By reducing this 
pressure, the health of the ecosystems will be improved and t heir resilience to sea -level rise and 
the impacts of climate change will increase, thus  increasing the resilience of the communities in 
Monrovia that rely on these ecosystems for their livelihoods. In addition, reducing the 
degradation of mangroves will in crease the likelihood of their long -term survival and 
adaptation to climate change through migration. These mangroves are likely to be negatively 
impact ed by climate change -induced sea -level rise which will decrease the area of the Mesurado 
Wetland in whic h they can grow.  
13.  In addition, urban encroachment into the mangrove forests and the harvesting of 
mangroves for fuelwood, charcoal production and fish smoking have resulted in degradation of 
the mangrove ecosystems in Monrovia. In order to develop long -term climate resilie nce within 
vulnerable, mangrove -dependent communities there is a need to: ( i) support community 
conservation of mangroves in the MMA to secure the provision of critical ecosystem services in the face of observed and expected climate change impacts; and ( ii) develop local climate 
resilient livelihood activities and strengthen market access for small and informal enterprises 
engaged in these activities. These community level approaches to adaptation will benefit from 
improved coastal protection measures being  implemented under Output 1 and will integrate 
with the long -term adaptation planning being developed under Output 2, to support 
transformative change at both institutional and community levels.  
Output  4: Project management ( total cost: US D 1.2 million; GC F cost:  USD 0.8 million , or 75 per 
cent ) 
14. Total project management costs (PMC s) amount to  USD 1.2 million , to be financed by 
GCF and  UNDP . The total PMC s and the split between GCF and co -financiers comply with the 
GCF Policy on F ees for A ccredited Entities.  
III. Assessment of performance against i nvestment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                         Scale: Medium  to high  
15. Following a feasibility study funded through the GCF Readiness facility,  the proposal has  
established that c limate projections based on the Representative Concentration Pathway  (RCP)  
for both RCP4.5 and  RCP 8.5 show significant impacts on Liberia’s coast lines  over a range of 
decision timelines (up to 2100). These impacts include risks to  Monrovia’s local coastal 
communities, their livelihoods  and the broader coastal infrastructure  in the form of ( i) 
degradation of the mangrove ecosystems on which their livelihoods and  food security depend  
and (ii) inundation of vital infrastructure such as boat -launch sites, dwellings and 
socioeconomic spaces and amenities such as fish markets.  
16. In particular, t he proposal has articulated well how the city of Monrovia has become 
highly  vulnerable to climate -induced coastline erosion and shoreline retreat as a result of sea 
level rise and increasing frequency of high -intensity storms and off -shore waves  (coastline 
retreat is estimated to be 110  per cent  compared to the baseline) . It has also detailed how th ese 
impacts, in addition to over -exploitation of its resources for community livelihoods and asset 
generation, are threatening the Mesurado Wetland , resulting in  loss of economically important 
fishery -based livelihoods of 55 ,000 Monrovi ans, of which 46  per cent  are women.  
17. The project expects the outcomes will contribute to the achievement of the GCF 
objective of increased climate  resilient sustainable development in three ways: ( i) actively 
protecting infrastructure against climate chang e impacts ; (ii) improving climate -responsive 
coastal planning ; and (iii) strengthening local livelihood practices and promoting the


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 107 
 
 
sustainable use of mangrove ecosystems to reduce the climate vulnerability of coastal 
communities in Monrovia. Outcome  1 is realistically achievable and the plans in the proposal 
are well constructed. There is concrete action proposed together with evidenc e that the 
Government of Liberia is engaged and willing to participate.  
18. Outcome s 2 and 3 rely much more on engaging the community and changing habits and 
the way of life for some Liberians. Outcome 3 in particular relies heavily on community 
engagement an d education to achieve the proposed changes and it is not clear how much 
community engagement has occurred to date to judge how well the affected communities might 
view these proposals.  
19. Clearly these interventions alone will not yield the optimal results i f operational climate 
information and early warning services over a range of decision timelines (subseasonal to 
seasonal) are not integrated into  the design and implementation  of the project  (operations and 
maintenance) . In particular, impact -based forecas ts related to severe weather ( marine 
forecasts, storm surge, sea level rise, waves/tides, lightning, thunder storms, flooding and 
heatwave)  will enable early action for resilience of the communities and their livelihoods to 
climate variability and change.  
20. The proposal will therefore benefit from a strategy for enhancing coherence and 
complementarity between  this project and  the already approved GCF project “Enhancing 
Climate Information Systems for Resilient Development in Liberia (Liberia CIS)”. It should detail 
how operational climate information and early warning services will be applied to 
implementation of the project  under consideration . This should include marine forecasts such 
as storm surge, sea level rise, waves/tides and related severe weather suc h as flooding, 
heatwave, storms, lightning , that could impact on the lives and livelihoods of the communities.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                Scale: Medium  
21. Liberia is endowed with significant natural resources but without external support its 
ability to effectively manage them will remain  a challenge. In addition,  climate variability and 
change is posing significant risks to its coastal resources and the situ ation will be further 
exacerbated as climate change gathers pace. A more integrated and comprehensive approach to 
managing these coastal resources will require the harmonization of Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management (ICZM) and disaster management strate gies and their effective operationalization 
to manage the scale and intensity of the climate risks described in relation to the impact 
potential in section 3.1. This will ensure that flood risk issues and associated disasters provoked 
by maladaptation are bet ter managed through anticipatory actions.  
22. The propos al has identified specific interventions through a vulnerability assessment  
underpinned by a robust c limate rationale and extensive stakeholder consultation . It seeks to : 
(i) under output 1, p rotect  the coastal communities and infrastructure at West Point through 
the c onstruct ion of  a rock revetment and green promenade; (ii) strengthen  institutional 
frameworks and coordination for implementation of the national adaptation plan ( NAP)  process  
through participatory capacity strengthening of Liberia’s adaptation -related institutions  
(namely  the Ministry of Mines and Energy, Ministry of Fina nce and Development Planning and 
the Ministry of Public Works ) and the develop ment of  a national ICZM  plan ; (iii) expand the 
existing knowledge base for scaling up adaptation through cross -sectoral capacity development  
under output 2, which includes  an action plan for sector -specific implementation of the ICZM  
plan  and the integration of ICZM into relevant by- laws and regulations as well as mainstreaming 
climate change adaptation into planning, and budgeting processes and systems; and ( iv) 
promoting  sustain able co -management of mangrove areas and innovative finance approaches 
under output 3 to support the local fishery -based livelihoods.  This include s training and 
facilities for small -scale manufacturing and selling of cookstoves to reduce pressure on the 
mangrove ecosystems.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 108 
 
 
23. Although these approaches are well -established globally, it is the first time that such an 
integrated and comprehensive approach will be applied in Liberia. It is clear from the proposal 
that if it is successfully implemented, new skil ls will be introduced to the Monrovian community 
and new business activities will be generated. As a result, it is likely that the proposal will create 
new jobs  and create low -emission and climate -resilient livelihoods for the broader coastal 
communities.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                  Scale: High  
24. The proposal seeks to strengthen a daptative measures to help minimise impacts of 
climate variability and change through awareness and building institutional and community 
capacities for implementation of the protective measures,  such as the construction of 
revetments  and beaches , to protect against rising sea level , storm surge and beach erosion . 
25. A cost -benefit analysis for  the economic feasibility of both  protective and adaptive 
measures  has reviewed  the vulnerability analysis and damage estimation in the do -nothing 
scenario  for five sections of the Monrovia coastline  with  a return period of 100 years under 
RCP8.5 and RCP4.5 in 2100 . Under the RCP8.5 scenario, t he intervention at West poi nt is 
projected to prevent 150 m of shoreline retreat by 2050 and 360 m by 2100. . 
26. For West Point, the cost of inaction will lead to damage of USD 40 –48 million by 2100.  
The interventions would protect the fishery industry that currently supports about 3, 000 
fisherfolk and 9,000 fishmongers in Monrovia. The support provided for manufacturing eco -
friendly cookstoves (Activity 3.4) will support women to engage in activities that will reduce the 
burden on the mangroves.  
27. The proposal is expected to have a posi tive impact on the environment by reducing 
coastal erosion and sustaining , and ultimately improving , the nearby wetland areas.  
28. The proposal presents evidence that the interventions are likely to improve the health 
and food security of the community around  the wetlands in the long term.   Evidence is also 
provided that the intervention may save some residential areas in the area from inundation and 
erosion.  
29. The proposal also indicates that it will provide the affected communities with additional 
education and training opportunities, however, it does not in dicate that these will necessarily 
create net income for residents within the proposal’s scope or target area. While this is possible  
it is not specifically indicated . 
30. There is expected to be an increase in physical infrastructure as a result of the proposal. 
However, there needs to be some measure of engagement with, and reassurance provided to, 
the fisher folk who use the beach at West Point that during and following the installation of the 
revetment there will always be sufficient room for them to launch  and retrieve their boats and 
clean and smoke their catches.  
31. There are clear efforts to ensure equitable gender participation in the contribution to 
the expected outcomes. It should be noted that the target is for 40  per cent  female participation 
in the co nstruction phase of the revetment but this is likely to be much higher than the current 
level of female participation in the earthmoving and (heavy) construction industries in Liberia.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                    Scale: High  
32. Liberia is classified as a least developed country ( LDC ) which is vulnerable to climate 
change ranking fourth in the 2017 Climate Change Vulnerability Index. It is particularly 
vulnerable in its coastal margins. The future impacts of a number of climate chan ge scenarios 
have been well presented in the proposal.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 109 
 
 
33. Limited technical and financial capacity within most government departments is a 
significant barrier to the implementation of climate change adaptation, and ICZM in particular. 
The structural economic problems faced by the country as well as financial resources being 
directed towards the provision of social services, such as education and health, result in limited 
national sources of financing being available for adaptation interventions. 4.  
3.5 Country ownership                       Scale: High  
34. The proposal is well aligned with the nationally- determined contribution, national 
adaptation plans , Sustainable Development Goals, Sendai Framework for Action, National 
Disaster Management Strategy and related natio nal development plans . 
35. From the evidence provided by the proposal, it would appear that the Government of 
Liberia  considers the management of coastal erosion and the impacts of extreme climate events 
to be a high priority . They have develop ed several national policies and plans in this regard and 
demonstrated their c ommitment to the project by providing rock material  as in -kind co -finance 
for Output 1 of the proposed project.  
36. The National Policy and Response Strategy on Climate Change (2018) is the central 
policy underpinning Liberia’s response to climate change and serves as the basis for all future 
adaptation and m itigation planning. It identifies the sectors most vulnerable to climate change 
impacts and names five enabling pillars to support the safeguarding of these sectors. The 
proposal  will contribute to four of these pillars, specifically cross- sectoral coordin ation, 
capacity -building, integrated planning and the development of infrastructure . 
37. UNDP is the accredited entity of the project and will provide a qualified team of national 
and international experts equipped to assist the Government  to respond to complex issues such 
as climate change and green growth. In the proposal, UNDP state that they will ensure that the projec t adopts a comprehensive, multi -sectoral approach that is centred around results -based 
activities. The proposal indicates that strong relationships exist between UNDP and local 
decision -makers, and that UNDP has a proven track record as an impartial provid er of technical 
advice and support . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness               Scale: Medium  to high  
38. The project seeks to  address an urgent adaptation need in Monrovia by the constructi on 
of a rock revetment sea defence to protect West Point against climate  impacts. The revetment  is 
a preferred solution  compared to  beach nourishment with groyne due to lower maintenance 
cost s and for sustainability reasons . The infrastructure will protect  approximately 1,050 m etres  
of vulnerable coastline and enhance r esilience of the livelihoods of about 25 per cent  of 
Monrovia’s population  at a cost of USD  104 per beneficiary.  
39. An expected net present value (ENPV) for the project is estimated to be USD 17.73 
million based on a 10  per cent  discount rate, and an economic internal rate of return of 21  per 
cent . The co -financing ratio of about 34 per cent  show s a strong commitment of the government 
despit e the major budgetary and economic constraints . 
40. The project incorporates best practice s and lessons learned from relevant ongoing 
interventions and initiatives that focus on the protection of vulnerable communities and 
ecosystems in the coastal zone – particularly two Global Environment Facility ( GEF )-funded 
projects in Monrovia . The Government of Liberia has identified the material for revetment 
construction and is committed to contribut ing this to the project and for future coastal 
protection . The Government ’s commitment improved the co -financing ratio from initial design 
and strengthen ed the case for sustainability and scale -up potential of the intervention.  These 
efforts by the G overnment will enable the remaining four sites identified and extensively


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 110 
 
 
analysed by the feasibility study to be constructed utilising the lessons and best practices that 
will be acquired through the implementation of this project.   
41. The proposal will benefit from detailing a coherence and complementarity strategy with 
other coastal infrastructur e project s, such as that implemented by  the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency and the World  Bank.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
42. Environmental and social risk category and safeguards inst ruments . The project 
aims to provide adaptive interventions such as institutional development, capacity building, 
awareness campaign, conduct of assessments and feasibility studies, management and 
development planning, support for regulations enforcement; and protective interventions such 
as the construction of about 1,050 -meters of revetment wall to protect the most vulnerable 
section of the coastline from climate change induced erosion in the coastal area of Monrovia. 
The project interventions will generally target the Mesurado River and St. Paul River estuaries 
and mangrove areas, as well as in other smaller inlets in the area, and the West Point coastline. 
The AE has prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment Report (ESAR) and a Stakeholder 
Engageme nt Plan (SEP). The ESAR contains detailed description of the environmental and social 
profile of the project area, the country's regulations relevant to assessing and managing 
environmental and social impacts of the project, an initial assessment of the en vironmental and 
social risks and impacts of the project activities, and a risk mitigation/management plan.  
43. The AE has assigned an environmental and social risk (E&S) of Category B for the 
project. The Secretariat agrees with this categorization and confir ms that the project’s E&S risk 
category is within the level by which the AE is accredited to.  
44. Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards.  The 
project is designed to primarily promote sustainable use of coastal resources, eco logical balance 
while protecting communities. The E&S risks and impacts and how they will be managed are further described below.  
45. ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts.  The project underwent E&S screening using the AE’s Social and Environmental 
Screening Procedure (SESP). An ESAR was prepared based on the screening and included a sub -
assessment of the area such as the mangrove area. The ESAR contains fairly detailed social and 
environmental characterization of the p roject site, an analysis of the environmental and social 
impacts and risks, and an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) which contains an 
Environmental and Social Mitigation and Monitoring Matrix (ESMMM). The ESAR also covered 
and addressed all the risks relating to each of the ESS Standards. However, the project will still 
have to undergo a formal environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) process in 
accordance with Liberia's Environmental Protection and Management Law (EPML). The ESAR 
recommends a number of additional surveys and detailed plans as part of the ESIA, including a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The ESAR will thus be upgraded into a full ESIA with additional information, including an updated ESMPs and sub -plans based on these  additional data and 
information.  
46. Based on the ESAR review, the key environmental and social risks of the project include: 
(i) potential for land acquisition and involuntary relocation of residential structures along the 
alignments of the access road and revetment wall structure, (ii)  potential impact in terms of 
restriction of access to their livelihoods among the coastal communities, particularly the fishing 
communities along the West Point coast and the small scale/subsistence sand extractors, (iii)


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 111 
 
 
construction -related occupational and community health and safety risks, including potential 
labor management issues; and (iv) possible unintended long -term adverse induced impacts to 
adjacent unprotected coastlines and the estuarine due to likely changes in  coastline dynamics, 
including freshwater -marine water interactions, beach scouring fronting the wall, and altered 
sediment distribution. The detailed ESIA process that will be conducted will revisit these risks 
and prepare site -specific management measure s to avoid and/or mitigate these risks.  
47. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions.  The construction of the revetment wall will 
require hiring of staff and engagement of contractors. The ESAR has projected about seven 
expatriates and around 25 local staff to be engaged in the project, plus an undetermined 
number of local workers. The project and contractor's staff and workers will potentially be 
exposed to occupational health and safety (OSH) hazards at construction sites, quarry sites and 
construction routes. Th e ESAR has assessed that there is a small possibility of residual 
unexploded ordnance (UXO) in the area. There is also potential risk of worker discrimination 
including gender -based denial or violation of basic workers' rights and child exploitation.  
48. The E SMMM in the ESAR has already mandated strict compliance with OSH standards at 
construction sites and checks for the presence of UXO prior to any civil works. Project 
contractors and service providers will also be required to provide a written commitment to  
equal opportunity hiring, social inclusion and adherence to the prohibition of child labour in accordance with the International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention 138. These broad 
measures will be fleshed out in more details in the ESIA. The ESIA will further assess OSH 
compliance issues prevalent in Liberia as well as any labor management issues, including 
special labour contract arrangements that might violate labour standards and update the 
ESMMM accordingly.   
49. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution  preventions.  The risk of release of air and 
water pollutants, and hazardous wastes to the environment is assessed to be negligible and 
limited to accidental spillage of fuel and lubricants, and effluents from batching plants. Dusts 
and noise may also be g enerated at the quarry, batching plant, hauling routes and construction 
sites. To address these issues, the ESMMM includes a detailed waste management plan, quarry 
management and hauling arrangements. The project may also cause short -term erosion and 
sedim entation of water bodies, including the beach during construction. In the long term, the 
project may cause shore and nearshore sediment erosion and deposition change. The ESAR has 
recognized this risk and has indicated that additional investigation and res earch will be 
conducted to evaluate the real extent of the changes and how they might occur and addressed.  
50. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security.  The project will expose the local 
communities to health and safety hazards during the construction per iod. There is also the risk 
of exposure of workers to communicable diseases brought by the influx of labour, and vice 
versa. The risk of spreading communicable diseases may be exacerbated by the crowded 
conditions of the settlers in the West Point area. Du ring construction, the local communities 
may be exposed to safety hazards at the construction sites and construction routes, including 
heavy equipment traffic, obstructions, sharp objects, boulders and deep excavations. In the long 
run, unanticipated chang es in the ecology resulting from the revetment wall may also trigger 
emergence of latent diseases, particularly water/vector borne diseases.  
51. The ESMP of the ESAR advocated for "strong adherence to standard construction site 
processes of work segregation fr om public access, traffic safety measures, and standard health 
and safety practices" and provision of the "awareness -raising measures on health risks as a 
matter of standard good practice. Due to the situation in the area, the project should ensure that 
contractors formulate and adopt an occupational and community health and safety (OCHS) plan 
which would include community safety management measures, installation of fences, proper 
lighting and warning signs, construction traffic management, among others, as well as require 
compulsory medical screening of staff and workers. The project management should also adopt 
a simple disease surveillance protocol for the community and workers.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 112 
 
 
52. A further safety risk relates to the possibility of. This risk is amplified b y the fact that a 
large proportion of the population reportedly still suffers from mental illnesses or were 
mentally or physically traumatized, due to 14 years of intense civil conflict. The project should 
be cognizant of this risk during the planning and consultation phase, be transparent and strive 
for equal treatment of groups, and should respond immediately for any perceived unfairness in 
the allocation of benefits and the social and economic costs burden between groups.  
53. ESS 5: Land acquisition and rese ttlement.  The ESAR has rated the risks of physical 
displacement (i.e., loss of dwellings) and economic displacement (i.e. loss of productive assets 
and entire or portions of livelihood) as "insignificant". While the construction of the revetment 
wall and p romenade, including its access road and quarry site could potentially affect the assets 
and livelihood of the current occupants of the area, the AE indicated “that the design of the 
revetment and all proposed construction works is seaward of the houses at West Point, so no 
physical relocation of communities (housing) is required”.  
54. The revetment wall may also impact the livelihood of the residents in the area since the 
revetment and promenade may displace small informal businesses. The main livelihood of the 
residents in the West Point is also fishing which requires immediate access to gently sloping 
beach to provide fish landing and space storage of nets and canoes and for other activities and 
the revetment wall with promenade will constitute a barrier betwe en the settlements and the 
beach. Moreover, the loss/reduction of the beach area may deprive the community of a vital recreational amenity. To address this, the design provides for two beach fish landing sites, one 
in the middle of the stretch and another at the southernmost end of the wall. The AE further 
explained that “early construction of new canoe storage will be required to enable fishers to 
relocate canoes to allow unencumbered construction traffic movement up and down the 
shoreline.  Close liaison with community and traffic management during construction will be 
required. To maintain the social functions that the beach currently provides, a total width of 6 m 
for a promenade along the top of the revetment is accounted for, which is sufficient for 
recreation and access for pedestrians to enjoy the ocean view.”  
55. As part of the ESIA, a more detailed assessment of the involuntary resettlement impacts 
of the revetment wall, access road and quarry site, based on their actual alignments should be 
made and o nce detailed engineering designs become available. A resettlement action plan (RAP 
will also be prepared to address all these impacts including partial and temporary losses to 
businesses and livelihood should this be identified in the assessment. The poten tial impacts of 
project support for regulation of fishing and sand extraction should also be addressed through intensive stakeholder consultations for possible mitigation measures, such as finding of 
alternative sites and gradual phasing in of the implemen tation of the policy or regulation, 
financing support, among others. The ESAR indicates that the RAP will be prepared and 
implemented should the detailed ESIA indicates this will be required.  
56. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of l iving natural 
resources.  The project clearly aims to conserve the marine and estuarine resources as a means 
of sustaining the low carbon fisheries. The adaptive interventions will have beneficial impacts to marine ecosystem and estuary most especially the Mesurado Wetland. Among the project 
interventions are awareness campaigns, capacity building and support for policies and 
regulations on improved urban waste management, regulations to stop encroachment into the 
coastal mangroves, fuel harvesting, fishing methods and fish catch regulations for endangered 
marine fish such as the Cassava Croakers, some shark and ray species, as well as sea turtles and 
marine mammals such as the sei whale, the blue whale and the Atlantic humpback dolphin. 
However, some project  interventions may have unintended adverse consequences to the marine 
and estuarine ecosystems should these not be managed well. The revetment wall for instance, 
will inevitably alter the seawater flow and sediment deposition patterns, freshwater -marine 
water mixing. These may have long term unintended consequences for the morphology and 
ecosystem of wetland area. The access road and quarry site may also cause direct damage to


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 113 
 
 
natural habitat if not properly located. Any unintended adverse impacts should be minimized or 
managed.  
57. Direct impacts of the proposed revetment wall to the Mesurado Wetland ecosystem are 
not expected to be significant, if any. However, impacts on specific areas of the coast, such as the 
inlet of the Mesurado estuary, could be locally  significant if interventions are not specifically 
designed according to the prevailing dynamic processes. To further gain knowledge of the 
ecosystem and potential indirect impacts, the ESAR recommends further research under the 
project as a basis for inte rventions. Biological surveys must be conducted in the potential 
disturbance areas prior to the commencement of any construction activities, including in the 
quarry sites, and areas of high biological density or diversity must be avoided.  The design of th e 
project’s interventions takes into account the likely coastal process reactions that will result 
from the construction of the revetment wall. Guidelines for the release of endangered bycatch 
species must also be agreed with the fishermen. The ESMP, which  will be finalised after the ESIA 
has been conducted in the first year of the project, will include the required habitat monitoring 
utilising well established scientific methodologies.  
58. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS  7: Indigenous Peoples. Liberia has a multi-
ethnic population and in Monrovia where the project is located, the AE has screened that there 
are no group or groups that are identified as “indigenous” based on the definition of the 
accredited entity as well as t he criteria of GCF. The three (3) fishing communities in the project 
area trace their origins elsewhere: the Krus are originally from Maryland and Sinoe County, the 
Fanti from Ghana while the Popo are from Togo. The Togolese Popo fishing group could have 
been regarded as a minority, but they are integrating rapidly through proximity and 
intermarriage such that designation as a minority is not useful. Additionally, no group living in the affected communities is socially excluded by factors such as tribal ori gin, language spoken, 
historical or cultural influences. Nevertheless, the project should ensure an approach inclusive 
of all groups. The ESMMM will contain provisions to trigger free, prior informed consent (FPIC) 
procedures in the event of indigenous peo ples being encountered in a pocket of the project -
affected areas.  Comprehensive culturally appropriate consultations have been carried out 
during the conduct of the environmental and social assessment (ESA). The consultations shall 
continue during the con duct of the ESIA and during project implementation in accordance with 
the SEP. The ESIA should further assess the impacts and benefits of the project to each of these groups. The SEP should clearly identify these various groups and made sure that they will be 
represented during consultations.  
59. ESS 8: Cultural heritage.  There are a number of historically important sites and 
landmarks within the general project area such as the landing spot of freed American slaves who resettled to Liberia in the early 1820s; the oldest cotton tree; the abandoned Hotel Africa 
which hosted the Organization of African Unity conference in 1979; and the Providence Island 
itself which a major Portuguese trading post. None of these sites however will be affected by the 
physical activ ities of the project. The ESAR does not indicate any cultural heritage site present in 
West Point coastal section where the revetment wall will be constructed. Nevertheless, the ESMMM of the ESAR contains a number of provisions to quickly identify and prot ect cultural 
heritage sites. The ESMMM also refers to the Chance Find Procedure for any chance discovery of archaeological artifacts and sites.  
60. Implementation arrangements.  The Environmental Protection Agency will be the 
Executing Entity (EE) for the project and will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will include specialists in environment, social development, and gender and social 
inclusion, as well as technical specialists. The PMU will also be responsible for the supervision of 
the ESMP and will ensure that it is implemented throughout the project cycle. While the service 
providers and contractors that will be engaged by the project will be responsible for the day to 
day compliance of the ESMP, a site supervisor will be responsible for th e daily environmental


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 114 
 
 
inspections at the construction site. Monitoring of the ESMP implementation will also be 
conducted.  
61. Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism.  The ESAR includes a 
stakeholder engagement plan stating its objectives, contents and key features. It also describes 
the consultations that have been conducted in developing the project proposal. A more detailed 
stakeholder engagement plan will be prepared by the Project Management Unit (PMU) after the 
ESIA has been conducted during the first year of the project. Aside from ensuring meaningful 
and inclusive consultation, the stakeholder engagement should also ensure that conflict 
between groups that may ar ise (e.g. presence of two distinct fishing communities in the area, 
the Kru and the Panti groups) due to any perceive disproportionate distribution of benefits and costs that may result from the project will be properly addressed.  
62. The ESAR also includes a project -level mechanism to register complaints and provide 
grievance redress at the ground level. The AE’s institutional Stakeholder Response Mechanism (SRM) will also be applicable.  In line with the GCF indigenous peoples policy, the GCF 
independent Redr ess Mechanism and GCF indigenous peoples focal point will be available for 
assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.  
4.2 Gender policy  
63. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the gender policy of the fund.  
64. The gender assessment describes the enabling environment for the pursuit of gender 
equality in Liberia. Liberia has a relatively strong legal and regulatory framework to support the 
pursuit of gender equality. It is party to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women  (CEDAW ), the Constitution guarantees all persons, regardless of 
sex, the enjoyment of fundamental rights and freedom in addition to : the Domestic Relations 
Law; the Inheritance Act of 1998 (which specifies e qual rights in marriage and inheritance 
under customary and statutory laws); the Rape Law of 2005 ;  and the Anti -Human Trafficking 
Act of 2005. These laws and treaties are supported by the Liberia Revised National Gender 
Policy (2018 –2022) , which promotes gender equality and is supported by the Ministry of 
Gender, Children and Social Protection for implementation; and the Civil Service Reform 
Strategy (2008 –2011) , which is focused on mainstreaming gender and establi shing mechanisms 
for implementing an affirmative action program me, such as the establishment of Gender Focal 
Points (GFPs) in each Ministry, Agency and Commission Corporation .  Liberian employment law 
prohibits discrimination based on gender and discrimination against women in working 
conditions and wages.    
65. Despite the enabling  environment, the assessment indicates that though the 
Constitution grants equal ownership rights to land and non- land assets to both men and 
women, Liberia has a dual land tenure system where customary tenure systems generally 
prevail.   Under customary la w, women can only access land through their husbands and are 
unable to inherit land. However, w hile equal opportunity for all is granted to citizens to engage 
in governance of the state , several efforts to pass a bill mandating legislative quotas have not yet 
borne fruit. Women and men have equal right s to access financial services, including credit and 
bank loans. However, in practice, women often have difficulty accessing credit due to low 
literacy rates, and/or because they cannot meet the requirements n eeded to take out a loan. 
Gender inequality in Liberia varies according to age, status, means of income, county, 
rural/urban area and traditions, but in general, access to education, healthcare, land, property 
and justice is more limited for women. These inequalities continue to pose an excessive burden 
of care on women, maintain unequal power relations in the household and economic 
disempowerment for women. In addition, women experience lack of access to basic services, 
rights , opportunities,  legal and jud icial services , and are subject to  low participation in decision -


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 115 
 
 
making in public spheres and institutions. The situation for adolescent girls is critical, with high 
school  dropout  due to  poverty, teenage pregnancies and sociocultural norms. Rates of sexual 
and gender -based violence, harmful practices, female genital mutilation, child marriage and 
teenage pregnancy are all high, while access to sexual and reproductive health rights is low. 
Members of the LGBTIQ community have limited access to basic rights,  services, social freedom, 
social justice, social economic empowerment and access to health services,  and suffer from 
denial of their fundamental rights to expression, equality and association.  
66. The gender action plan provided by the AE fulfils the requirem ent of the gender policy. 
It is in line with the findings of the gender assessment and includes baseline, indicators, targets, 
timelines and budgets. The g ender action plan proposed by the AE considers some of the key 
barriers such as limited access to cre dit, raw materials, training, marketing, etc.; absence of an 
enabling environment to contribute effectively to the economy ; limited access to productive 
resources; limited access to decision -making positions in public service; limited participation in 
more  profitable sectors ; limited opportunities for economic empowerment ; and discriminatory 
customary practices, stereotypes, norms and biases that continue to prevent equal access to and 
control over land and land use.  
67. The AE will hire a full -time gender exp ert to mainstream gender throughout the project , 
and gender expert consultants for specific activities where necessary. At least 20  per cent  of 
project management unit staff will be women involved in effective management and 
implementation. The Project Ste ering Committee and other management bodies will be 
comprised of at least 30  per cent  women. The project will put in place mechanisms to ensure 
women have easy access to report grievances and incidents of gender -based violence. Women 
are targeted as specific beneficiaries of project interventions and activities which challenge 
unequal gender relations, gender disparities, inequalities and promote women’s empowerment. 
Activities are designed to contribute to chang ing norms and behavio ur through a number of 
areas including: gender -responsive training; ensuring equitable access to resources, services 
and technologies for climate -smart livelihoods;  and improving coordination and institutional 
capacity -building related to  gender -transformative climate change adap tation. More specifically , 
the project will engage women in the design of the coastal defen ce structures and provide 
training and employment opportunities related to the construction  process. M easures to 
support equal access to employment , such as provision of childcare , will be implemented . The 
project will ensure equal participation of women in the development of both an integrated 
Coastal Management Plan and the Train ing of Trainer’s curriculum which will  include social and 
gender dimens ions target ing relevant government ministries involved in Integrated Coastal 
Zone Management. Activities are designed to ensure women are trained in monitoring of spatial 
and biophysical coastal information, and that gendered messaging is included in aware ness -
raising regarding climate change and coastal zone management. The project also takes 
measures to ensure that women have equal access to a community education and innovation 
cent re that function s as a community knowledge generation and learning hub. It  is intended to 
develop training and to provide capital for women to establish small -scale manufacturing of 
cookstoves and other livelihood opportunities in the target communities. Lastly , the project will 
purchase and install cold storage facilities near fish processing sites to support fishmongers,  of 
which 60  per cent  will be women.  
68. Overall the activities are expected to address challenges of access to services, provide 
income opportunities, skills and training opportunities that will build the resilien ce of women to 
cope with climate change challenges. It will also support the nurturing of an enabling 
environment that will address sociocultural and gender -based violence issues.     
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment (medium risk)


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 116 
 
 
69. GCF is requested to pro vide a grant of USD 17  million  for climate change adaption in the 
coastal zone of Monrovia. The project will address its adaptation needs by constructing a rock 
revetment and diversifying livelihoods. The Government of Liberia  is providing USD  2.5 million 
and USD4.2  million in a form of grant and in -kind, respectively. The AE is providing a grant of 
USD  1.5 million.  
70. Liberia is an LDC. The project expects to have revenue from the manufacturing of 
cookstoves and collecting fees from the usage of cold storage  facilities.   However, the AE 
supports a full grant request as all income will be used to support the sustainability of the 
project , which also  covers the incremental cost of the adaptation measure.   The country has 
economic constraints and limited capacity to borrow from the capital market.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity (AE/EE) capability to execute the current 
programme ( low  risk)  
71. UNDP is the AE for the project and has extensive track record of implementing climate 
change projects. Over the last five years UNDP has implemented a coastal adaptation project, a 
climate change adaptation project in the agricultural sector, an early warning system project 
and an extractive industry sustainable develo pment project  in Liberia.  
72. The Environmental Protection Agency of Liberia (EPA)  is the EE for the project. The 
Acting Executive Director of the EE is appointed as a national designate authority ( NDA ) to GCF 
in Liberia. Th e EE has managed projects with budg ets ranging from USD  3 to 7 million financed 
by external donors. The AE has conducted the capacity assessment of the EE,  which resulted in 
moderate risk.  
73. To minimize the risk of corruption, the AE will use the direct cash transfer method 
where necessary. A  majority of GCF resources (87  per cent , USD  13million) will be used for the 
construction of a rock revetment under Activity 1.2. The AE states that the funds for selected 
activities, as requested by the G overnment of Liberia , including Activities 1.1, 1.2 , 2.3 and 3.5 
due to higher value and high -risk nature , will be channelled directly by UNDP to service 
providers. Any other funding will be channelled through the EE.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific risks (medium risk)  
74. Project design: To achieve climate impact the proje ct needs to accomplish  satisfactory 
construction and operations of the activities. The quality of construction and operations is  
influenced by project design, and adherence to international sound engineering practices and to 
the underlying substantial proj ect feasibility studies. Based on the documents submitted by the 
AE, the Secretariat has identified certain gaps and deviations in the project design.  To mitigate 
these concerns, the term sheet provides that AE will submit by no later than four months befo re 
the anticipated start of any structural work and before seeking any disbursement for such structural work, the following studies to be conducted by engineer(s) with valid 
certificate(s)/licence(s):  
(a) a project -level site -specific hydro -engineering study of the West Point of Monrovia 
ensuring that no localized or broader flood will be induced by the structural works 
under this Project, followed by a detailed design of the coastal defence structure 
incor porating flood risk by designing  sufficient drainage capacity to facilitate removal of 
localized and broader flooding in the  project area.  
75. Oversight responsibility  of the community stewardship committee ( CSC ): The CSC 
will manag e income from the sale of c ookstoves and fees from the usage of cold storage 
facilities. The CSC member s will receive monthly stipends. The AE estimates that the CSC will 
manage ~USD 20,000 per year which will be used to purchase of materials for the cookstoves 
and operation and mai ntenance  (O&M) for the cold storage. The financial statements will be


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 117 
 
 
reported to the project management unit ( PMU ) and the EE is responsible for the oversight of 
CSC operation s. However, in case the expected income is lower and insufficient to pay CSC 
mem bers’ stipends, the project may need some additional financial resources. This amount is 
expected to be small at about USD 6 ,000 p.a. and it is advised that the AE keeps some funding 
aside for such a contingency.  
76. Use of diesel back -up generators : The cold  storage facilities under subactivity 3.5.1 
will be solar -powered and may have back -up diesel generators where necessary or battery 
systems. This activity is entirely financed by the AE’s co -financing. The grid connection, battery 
solutions, O&M plan for s olar power, and tariff are not clearly demonstrated in the funding 
proposal . It is recommended that the AE ensures that the project design pertaining to the 
composition of solar photovoltaic , battery storage and diesel back -up generators is optimum to 
minimise the negative climate impact of operating the diesel back -up generators.  
77. O&M plan : The project estimates the O&M cost of ~USD  50,000 per year following 
project implementation for a period of six years. The ICZMP process is intended to address 
institutional responsibilities and budgets for O&M and will be endorsed by the G overnment as 
part of its  policy processes. C o-financing from the G overnment does not include the O&M cost s. 
Given that the responsibility for and financing of O&M  is not yet decided , the G overnment’s 
commitment to endorse the O&M plan and allocate required resources is critical.  
78. Stakeholder consent for coastal and land  use: The AE identified the governance risk 
relat ed to coastal and land  use as high risk. The project requires a commitment to coastal and 
land -use planning polices and actions that are aligned with other actions by the ministry and 
safeguard communities. The proposal states that the G overnment’s commitm ent to address land 
tenure agreements during project implementation has been agreed as a condition of the project. 
The project would benefit from the confirmation of stakeholder consent for the use of land for 
the project before GCF disbursement in the ter m sheet.  
79. Economic analysis :  An economic analysis has been carried out and resulted in an 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR ) of 22  per cent  over 50 years. The benefits considered 
the avoided damages and the increase in income as a result of the proje ct investment.   The 
sensitivity analysis tested three scenarios (i) total cost increase by 15  per cent ; (ii) total benefits 
decreased by 15  per cent ; and (iii) total cost increased by 15  per cent  and simultaneously total 
benefits decreased by 15  per cent . The test still shows the EIRRs ranging between 16  and 19 per 
cent which is higher than the 10  per cent  discount rate used.  
4.3.4.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)  
80. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on GCF portfolio concentration , in 
terms of result area and single proposal , is not material.  
4.3.5.  Compliance risk rating (medium)  
81. As the AE, UNDP confirmed that none of the project activities will be undertaken in any 
jurisdiction which is subject to or affected by United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
resolutions. Furthermore, no individual or entity that is listed on any UNSC sanctions list, including 
the UN Consolidated Sanctions list , will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, 
either as a counterparty, implementer, or beneficiary.  
82. UNDP systematically screens all entities being considered as UNDP  contract ors or 
partner s (including donors) against the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions List. This is 
built into the capacity screening tools for partn ers, as well as the Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) for Vendor Management.  
83. UNDP also secures contractual representations from its national implementing partners 
that address risks of funds received for implementation of projects being used to support


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 118 
 
 
individuals or entities associated with terrorism , and inclusion on the Consolidated UN 
Sanctions Lists of recipients of any amounts provided by UNDP.  
84. UNDP confirmed that it has  risk-based due diligence requirements for partners and 
private entities that it intends to engage with. When developing a new project, UNDP ensures 
that risks are fully identified and considered in the project design and processes , and that 
adequate and effective measures to prevent, monitor and address such risks are put in place.  
85. UNDP advised that a Partner Capacity Assessment (PCA) was undertaken using UNDP’s 
PCA Tool (PCAT) to assess the risk levels associated with the EE  overall, and for construction 
activities, which is the largest cost item for this project. The overall risk  level assessed for this 
project is “low ”. 
86. The result of the assessment recommended UNDP to continue working with the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as an implementing partner (UNDP  terminology 
equivalent to GCF executing entity ) for the project. Th e PCAT also has a construction assessment 
component for projects involving construction. The result of the construction assessment in the 
PCAT rated EPA “ low” risk for construction. This is complemented by the PCAT mechanisms put 
in place in project design  to keep the risks low. These provisions are that EPA will receive 
technical support from qualified personnel and consultants to be hired by the project, and from 
qualified government ministries (Ministry of Mines and Energy and the Ministry of Public 
Work s) to ensure construction follows best standards.  
87. The PCAT is used in conjunction with the Harmonized Approached to Cash Transfer 
(HACT)  Framework. UNDP’s HACT provides a common operational (harmonized) framework 
for transferring cash to government and no n-governmental partners to support a closer 
alignment of development aid with national priorities and to strengthen national capacities for 
management and accountability.  The HACT Framework comprises the micro  assessment, 
national implementation ( NIM ) audi t, spot checks, and programmatic visits. The micro  
assessment and spot checks are undertaken by an independent third party.  
88. While the micro  assessment is for every UNDP Programme Cycle (every four  years), 
project -specific assessment and checks are more fr equent (regular spot checks are carried out 
at least once a year , while specific project audits will be done annually in the case of this GCF 
project). UNDP has undertaken a HACT micro  assessment of the EPA to assess the risks 
associated with the entity as  an implementing partner/executing entity in Liberia.  
89. The micro  assessment provides an overall assessment of the i mplementing partner’s 
programme, financial and operations management policies, procedures, systems, and internal 
controls. It includes:  
(a) Review of the implementing partner’s legal status, governance structures, and financial 
viability;  
(b) Programme management, organizational structure and staffing, accounting policies and 
procedures, fixed assets and inventory, financial reporting a nd monitoring, and 
procurement; and  
(c) Compliance with policies, procedures, regulations and institutional arrangements that 
are issued both by the Government and the implementing partner .  
90. The risk areas covered by the assessment include programme management , 
organizational structure and staffing, accounting policies and procedures, fixed assets and 
inventory, financial reporting and monitoring, information systems, and procurement . The 
overall risk rating is “ moderate” across all the risk factors.  
91. In additio n to the HACT micro assessment, and as part of this project, the UNDP Country 
Office will undertake the following actions to detect and address any issue related to risks identified in the project:


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 119 
 
 
(a) Spot checks will be carried out once every year by an external independent party and by 
UNDP;  
(b) NIM audits – project audits will be undertaken annually as budgeted for under this 
project; and  
(c) Review of annual workplans to ensure that the planned expenditures are in line with the 
budgeted project activities.  
92. UNDP ad vised that before transfers are made to the EE , UNDP verifies previous 
expenditure and activity reports to ensure all previous payments have been used for their 
intended purposes. Should any incidents be detected during any one of the assessments and 
audit s mentioned above, UNDP will adjust the cash transfer modality to safeguard project funds 
and address any vulnerabilities related to money laundering, terrorist financing, or prohibited 
practices among the activities, counterparties, executing entities, or  beneficiaries. This will 
include changing modalities from cash transfers to the EE to direct payments of service 
providers.  
93. UNDP confirmed that the project will not directly or indirectly distribute cash or 
commodities to beneficiaries, but will rather pr ovide them with services according to the details 
provided in the description of project activities.   
94. The Ministry of Mines and Energy will be the responsible party for the construction and 
ICZM components of the project, but will not itself receive cash t ransfers from UNDP for project 
purposes. The project is also designed such that UNDP makes direct payments, and supervises 
procurements of large construction and construction design activities.  
95. UNDP informed that annual audits, spot -checks and project gove rnance structures will 
be used to prevent, mitigate, identify, report and remedy any risks, indications and allegations 
of money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions violations or prohibited practices. UNDP’s 
procurement and project oversight functions at country, regional and HQ levels will also be used 
for this purpose.  
96. UNDP advised that the project will be subject to UNDP’s policies and operational 
procedures that are contained in its Internal Control Framework and other documents, and will 
apply t hem to the project and counterparties. The framework covers assets as well as financial 
resources to ensure that they are used for their intended purposes. It also defines roles and 
responsibilities of different individuals, ensuring segregation of duties to avoid conflict of 
interest s, as well as accountability.  
97. UNDP advised that t he project, through the social and environmental safeguards 
framework, has provided for a grievance redress mechanism that can be used by all 
stakeholders.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
98. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  A majority of GCF resources (87%) will be 
invested in the construction of rock revetment. The AE/EE’s coordination to 
procure service providers to design, 
implement, operate and maintain the 
revetment as per sound engineering practices 
is crucial for the project.    Accredited entity/executing entity  
capability to implement this 
programme  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 120 
 
 
4.4 Fiduciary   
99. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) will serve as the accredited entity 
(AE) of the project while the national executing entity (EE) for this project is the Environmental 
Protection Agency of Liberia (EPA).  
100. The EE is accountable to UNDP for managi ng the project, including the monitoring and 
evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of 
UNDP resources. The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), Ministry of Finance and 
Development Planning (MFDP) and the M inistry of Public Works (MPW) have entered into 
agreements with the EE to assist in successfully delivering project outcomes and are directly 
accountable to the EPA as outlined in the terms of their agreement. The EE will delegate to the 
MFDP and MPW as Re sponsible Parties – government entities with the technical competence in 
their respective areas – to ensure that the activity is implemented according to national 
requirements. A memorandum of understan ding (M OU) will be established between the EE and 
the MFDP and MPW outlining their respective responsibilities under Activity 1.2. No funds will 
be channe lled through the MME and MPW.    
101. The funds for selected activities, as requested by the Government of Liberia , including 
Activities 1.1 and 1.2, 2.3 and 3.5 (due to their higher value and high -risk nature) will be 
channelled  directly to service providers by UNDP as part of UNDP support services to the 
Government . Any other funding requests will be channelled  thro ugh the EPA.  
102. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will implement the project with support from the 
EPA and UNDP and will report to the Project Board. The Project Manager will be appointed to 
lead the PMU which will run the project on a day -to-day basis on beh alf of the EPA within the 
constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the 
final project terminal evaluation report and other project closure activities and documentation 
required by GCF and UNDP have been completed and submitted to UNDP.  
103. Donor funding, including GCF funding, will be received by the administrative agent 
(UNDP) on behalf of the EE (Environmental Protection Agency) based on a standard letter of 
agreement signed between the donors and UNDP and an MOU between UNDP and the EE 
separately.  As per UNDP’s National Implementation policy (NIM), the Project Management 
Unit’s capacity assessment determined that funding may be advanced to entities for lower risk 
activities. UNDP will support the handling and cha nnelling of funds for higher risk activities as a 
support service provisioned for in the letter of agreement . For the avoidance of doubt, GCF 
proceeds and the AE’s co-financing will not flow through the EE . Instead, UNDP (as 
administrative agent of the EE)  will channel such funding via a d irect payments option whereby 
transfer will be made directly to goods and services providers hired by the AE and upon request 
of the EE.  
104. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP 
financial rules and regulation s. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply 
with the relevant GCF policies and accreditation master agreement signed between GCF and 
UNDP. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the EEs  by undertaking a n evaluation of 
capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Executing Entities (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers /HACT). All projects will be audited following the 
UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
105. The funding proposal  aims to achieve climate change adaptation in the coastal zone of 
Monrovia, Liberia through coastal protection, effective management and resilient livelihoods.


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B.2 8/02/Add.07 /Rev.01  
Page 121 
 
 
The project i s expected to benefit 250,000 direct beneficiaries – 122,500 female and 127 ,500 
male , and one million indirect beneficiaries – 490,000 female and 510,000 male – in Liberia.  
106. Overall, the funding proposal and log frame are assessed to have adequately applied  the 
elements of the GCF results management framework and performance measurement 
framework. The revised log -frame meets GCF  requirements on monitoring and reporting the 
anticipated results of the intervention. Pertinent information on MoVs, baseline and t argets 
have been provided. Similarly, the log -frame contains clear presentation of project -level results, 
their indicators and other required information in concise manner. Their diligent application 
during implementation would facilitate results monitorin g, progress reporting, performance 
assessment and finally their delivery on the ground.  
107. However, the recent feedback provided need s to be addressed to improve the overall 
quality of the final log -frame.  
108. Implementation timetable: t he implementation timetab le has been provided in the 
required structure and format and would enable progress assessment during the 
implementation period. The milestones and deliverables are well articulated and reporting 
timelines are provided as required .  
4.6 Legal assessment   
109. [The Term Sheet for the proposed project has not yet been reviewed nor agreed. In 
accordance with Clause 6.01 of the accreditation master agreement , all funding proposals 
submitted to the Board for consideration shall be accompanied by a term sheet agreed by the accredited entit y and GCF , setting out, in summary form, the key terms and conditions relating 
to the proposed funded activity. This is a preliminary legal assessme nt subject to revision based 
on the review and negotiation of the term sheet with the accredited entity .] 
110. The Accreditation Master Agreement (the  “AMA”), was signed with the accredited entity 
on 5 August 2016 and it became effective on 23 November 2016.  
111. The accredited entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
112. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Liberia, a count ry in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed.   The Secretariat and the Republic of L iberia have not yet engaged in 
negotiation of an agreement on privileges and immunities.  
113. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF 
are made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection ag ainst litigation and 
expropriation in the country or  has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
114. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the fu nded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval;  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat .


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 122 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP160 
Proposal name:  Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Liberia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                             Scale:  Medium  to high  
1. Liberia’s capital , Monrovia, is extremely vulnerable to the climate change impact of sea -
level rise  (SLR) , which is combining with changes in nearshore wave conditions and sediment 
flux in the Mesurado Wetland Basin to accelerate a process of gradual coastal erosion, with 
additional rapid coastal erosion during extreme storm events, which have become more 
frequent with climate change. In the period from 2000 to 20 20, significant shoreline retreat has 
been  recorded in five vulnerable hotspots, with the worst damage on the Wes t Point peninsula, 
whose artisanal fishing communities lost 670 dwellings and significant infrastructure, as the coast retreated by 30 metres. Using a combination of climate and wave models to understand 
likely future trends, the project proponents indicat e anticipated shoreline retreat in these five 
hotspots, with and without the impacts of key climate change parameters, and show that West 
Point is likely to experience the most rapid acceleration as a result of climate change.  
Figure 4 from Funding Proposa l, showing the actual (2000 to 2020) and anticipated (2020 to 
2100) averaged trend in annual coastal retreat for five coastal sections in Monrovia with climate 
change  (continuous lines) and without climate change  (dashed lines) under the scenario RCP 8.5. 
West Point is Section 3 (shown in yellow).  
 
2. To adapt to the severe impacts of climate change anticipated  on Monrovia’s coast, the 
project seeks to change the current approach from a focus on short -term solutions to long -term 
integrated planning that is climate risk -informed and involves the public sector, private sector


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 123 
 
 
and communities,  at all levels of governance. The proposed project is requesting GCF support to 
address barriers to effective climate change adaptation in the coastal zone of Monrovia, an d 
Liberia more generally, through interventions in three interrelated focus areas: Component 1  
will focus on establishing effective and sustainable coastal protection measures for Monrovia’s 
most vulnerable communities at West Point; Component 2  will stren gthen institutional capacity 
to manage coastal areas of Liberia in a climate- resilient manner and rais e community 
awareness on climate change impacts and adaptation practices  through an Integrated Coastal 
Zone Management (ICZM) approach ; and Component 3  will contribute to protecting mangroves 
and strengthening livelihood practices in vulnerable communities across the M onrovia 
Metropolitan Area – to enhance the  adaptive capacity of these communities and these natural 
ecosystems which, kept intact, can contribute to stabilizing the shoreline and act as important 
fish breeding grounds.  
1.1.1.  Adaptation impact  
3. The impact potential of the project is considered medium to high. The project will 
address directly one of the most urgent adaptation needs in Monrovia by cons tructing a rock 
revetment to stop  the West Point shoreline from regressing further. ( The revetment was 
selected as the preferred solution, because while a ‘soft solution’ in the form of beach nourishment with an associated groyne was considered technically  feasible, the sustainability of 
this option would be limited, with  the high level of regular maintenance required not seen as 
feasible in the local context.)  This will significantly reduce vulnerability of beneficiaries: 
protecting homes, artisanal fishin g livelihoods, and infrastructure  of approximately 10,800 
people in West Point , avoid ing damages of up to USD 47 million to individual and communal 
property , and securing climate -proof launch sites for fishing boats. The project is expected to 
directly ben efit a total of 250,000 people in the target communities of West Point (through 
coastal defence and enhanced livelihoods); as well as Topoe Village; Plonkor and Fiamah; and 
Nipay  Town and Jacob’s Town (through enhanced livelihoods and improved protection of 
mangrove ecosystems)
.  
4. The construction of th e coastal protection infrastructure will form part of a strategic, 
cohesive coastal adaptation strategy using an Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) 
approach, creat ing pathways to scale for adapting to climate change along the country’s whole 
coastline. The work with communities in the neighbouring Mesurado Basin to protect 
mangr oves and promote fuel -efficient cooking and fish -smoking will  help to support the ICZM 
efforts . The joint GCF -Government of Liberia investment at West Point will serve as a 
demonstration site of the value of robust and sustainable coastal protection measures, which 
will be used to leverage future investments in coastal protection infrastructure for the most 
vulnerable Liberian communities  in all the coastal counties over time . In addition, the 
comprehensive technical assessments used to inform the design of the West Point revetment 
will p rovide a foundatio n for the design of further coastal protection interventions , and help 
develop local capacity for construction, inspection and maintenance . The i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel ( TAP)  notes that keeping mangroves healthy and intact can be seen as 
contri buting to an integrated “grey -green” coastal protection system for the city, and that this 
concept could be utilized within the ICZM approach and explored further during project 
implementation.  
5. A possible limitation on the project’s impact stems from the d ifficulty of achieving 
effective land use planning and management in Liberia as the basis for climate risk -informed 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management  – both in the urban coastal context  of Monrovia  with 
ongoing in- migration and spread of unplanned informa l settlements, and in rural coastal 
contexts with a dearth of state enforcement, for example  to prevent illegal sand mining activity 
(a directly  anthropogenic contributor to coastal erosion outside the metropolitan area). In 
response to a question on this, the accredited entity ( AE) highlight ed the e xisting land -use


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 124 
 
 
policies in Liberia and Monrovia, including zoning ordinances, the National Land -Use and 
Management Framework and the Liberia Land Rights Policy. It is noted that g rounding the ICZM 
Plan in existing land -use planning frameworks and processes will contribute to the existing 
enabling environment that these policies are creating for land -use planning , but the scale of the 
challenges remain s daunti ng. 
6. The impact p otential of the project would be more clearly demonstrated if the climate 
rationale were more fully articulated in the f unding proposal , using more of the material 
contained in the Feasibility Study and Vulnerability Assessment to convey the complexity of the 
climate change parameter s that have already begun to impact Liberia’s coastline, the evidence 
for these observed  trends, and the anticipated future trends based on climate and wave 
modelling.  The simplification of several complex, interrelated factors down to just two – sea-
level rise and increased frequency  of intense storm events – does not do justice to the 
complexity of the processes involved, nor to the work done by the project proponents  in 
understanding these. It is also not clear to the independ ent TAP whether the AE has exhausted 
all possibilities for seeking historical data on observed trends in order to validate the use of 
models from which the anticipated rate of coastal retreat with climate change is derived. It is for 
these reason s that a c ondition is prese nted at the end of the document, involving the 
development of an additional r eport , strengthening the climate rationale by providing  a clear 
summary of observed and predicted changes along Monrovia’s coastline in relation to the following parameters: sea level rise, sediment transport and exchange, wave conditions, and 
high -intensity storms; also showing how these parameters are being af fected by climate and 
non- climate drivers, and how they interact to produce shoreline regression – both historical and 
anticipated. The report will also facilitate the potential replication of this important project in 
other coastal countries in West Africa experiencing similar climate change vulnerabilities.  
7. To provide more detail on the issue in paragraph 6 of this assessment above about  
conveying the complexity of the climate change parameters: The funding proposal identifies the primary climate change p arameters as SLR and increased frequency of intense storms, which 
are linked to the secondary impact and key hazard of coastal retreat. The Feasibility Study and 
Vulnerability Assessment, however, indicate a more complex situation – with coastal retreat 
(both under pre -climate change conditions, and with climate change) being a result of both 
ongoing gradual structural retreat (related to SLR, sediment deficit and “regular” storm 
erosion), and also periodic rapid retreat as a result of occasional extreme st orm events (whose 
return interval has become shorter, and is predicted to continue to decrease with ongoing 
climate change). This is explained well in Section 3.3.1 of the Feasibility Study. The three 
interlinked factors causing the underlying gradual retr eat could have bee n explained more fully 
in the funding proposal:  
(a) A shift in equilibrium profile due to sea -level rise (Bruun Effect ); 
(b) Chronic erosion due to sediment deficit caused by longshore sediment transport and 
sediment exchange with rivers and estu aries; and  
(c) Storm erosion.  
8. Paragraph 12 of the funding proposal does indicate that the Feasibility Study undertook 
modelling of the impact of SLR, waves and sediment transport under future climate conditions. 
The Vulnerability Assessment uses Global Circul ation Models to consider the impact of climate 
change on wave conditions, run -off and temperature, and portrays a fairly complex picture, as 
conveyed in the graphic below. The AE has chosen to simplify this complex process in the 
funding proposal, for exam ple stating in the Executive Summary that “Liberia’s capital city, 
Monrovia, is extremely vulnerable to the climate change impacts of sea- level rise (SLR) and the 
increasing frequency of high -intensity storms, both of which contribute to coastal erosion an d 
shoreline retreat”, and in the section on climate change impacts: “Accelerated coastal erosion, 
resulting from a combination of sea -level rise and an increase in the frequency of high -intensity


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 125 
 
 
storms” (para 10). It might be more accurate to say that Mon rovia  is “extremely vulnerable to 
the climate change impact of sea -level rise, which is combining with changes in nearshore wave 
conditions, run -off and temperature (all influenced by climate change) to cause shifts in 
longshore sediment transport patterns  along the coast, as well as sediment flux through the two 
river estuaries and tidal inlet of the Mesurado Wetland Basin. These factors have accelerated the 
process of gradual coastal erosion, with additional rapid coastal erosion also occurring during 
extreme storm events, which have become more frequent with climate change.”  
Figure 10 from the Funding Proposal: The interrelation between forcing mechanisms and coastal 
retreat  
 
9. In finalizing the i ndependent TAP assessment it has also been observed that the word 
“forcing” seems to be used in a different sense from the usual sense of referring to processes 
that alter the global energy balance, for example, in the graphic above, and in the Vulnerability 
Assessme nt and the Feasibility Study, e.g. in Section 3.3.2 on “Climate change impacts on forcing 
mechanisms of coastal erosion” of the Feasibility Study.  
10. To provide more detail on the issue in paragraph 6 of this assessment above about using 
all available histori cal data, three specific areas where this applies  are discussed briefly here: (i) 
For shoreline regression, it would have been useful to see satellite images, if available, showing the shoreline of West Point in 1988 and 1998 (as well as 2008 and 2018). Data on this  must be 
available at least for a 20year period, since the graph in Figure 4 of the FP (see paragraph 1 
above), s hows shoreline retreat from 2000 . (ii) For sea-level rise, the assessment uses only 
global models validated with global data, arguing  that regional variations are insignificant. Some 
discussion could have been included on what limited data is available for sea -level rise in Africa, 
including West Africa – see, for example, Evadzi, P. et al.  (2019) “West African sea level 
variability und er a changing climate – what can we learn from the observational period?” , 
Journal of Coastal Conservation , 23(4). (iii) For validating the wave modelling used, the 
Vulnerability Assessment states that no historical wave measurements were available. 
Howeve r, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) production hindcast 
from 2005 -2018 was used, in addition to re -analysis data. It could have been made clearer what, 
if any, actual historical data was used by NOAA in constructing the open source global hindcast 
data sets, which the AE used to generate data for a point offshore from Monrovia and shown in 
the Feasibility Study as “Figure 1. Observed impact on wave height last two decades… ” 
particularly since the Feasibility Study states  that “Wave height distribution in the area offshore 
of Monrovia has increased  [our emphasis] over the past two decades ( Figure 1). 
11. Figure 4 in the funding proposal is important in conveying the project’s impact potential, 
as discussed in the first paragraph of this assessment. In finalizing the independent TAP 
assessmen t, however, it has been observed that Figure 4 has a slightly misleading title and an


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 126 
 
 
error. It refers to “A verage coastal retreat between 2000 and 2100” when it could more 
accurately be captioned: “A ctual (2000 to 2020) and anticipated (2020 to 2100) aver aged trend 
in annual coastal retreat”. The West Point lines (Section 3), described as “orange”, should be 
“yellow”. The narrative accompanying the graph does not explain how the values were arrived 
at for anticipated retreat in the absence of climate chang e. It is also noted that the most extreme 
representative concentration pathway (RCP) 8.5 scenario is used in constructing the graphs 
associated with the alternative scenario without the project, even though the more moderate 
RCP 4.5 scenario seems to show similar predictions for accelerated coastal erosion.  
12. The funding proposal section on climate change impacts includes a sub -section on 
precipitation which states that “increased frequency of high -intensity storms will increase flood 
risk in parts of Monrovi a and reduce the ability of fishers to safely operate by making landing 
sites unsafe and decreasing the number of days where fishers are able to safely operate. The 
design of the coastal protection measures under Output 1 (Figure 7) include drainage system s 
to reduce flood risk and protection of boat launching sites for fishers.” We note that, while the 
rock revetment will be constructed from porous materials so that any water that flows over it 
can flow back and avoid flooding, as is currently the case wit h the sandy beach, the presence of 
the revetment does not seem likely to prevent coastal flooding where topographical features 
already allow flooding to happen. It is therefore well designed to prevent maladaptation (with 
extreme storms likely to become mo re frequent), but the project revetment works are not likely 
to have a major impact in terms of reducing the hazard of coastal flooding.  
1.2 Para digm shift potential                                                             Scale:  Medium  
1.2.1.  Innovation  
13. The paradigm shift involved in the proposed project is rated as medium overall. The 
project utilizes an approach to coastal zone planning and management which is innovative in 
the Liberian context, where land -use planning  is not yet well advance d, where cross -sectoral 
public sector collaboration has not been employed in the coastal zone, where communities’ 
capacities to participate in coastal governance have not been systematically developed, and 
where long -term planning for climate risk manageme nt has not been widely undertaken. The 
project enables a crucial shift from short -term ad hoc coastal protection to climate risk -
informed planning, involving state and community actors , and embarking on the p rocess of 
private sector  engagement. The project  is centred around the use of a known  best practice  
technology to construct coastal protection works to reduce vulnerability of a priority coastal stretch  in the capital city. In response to questions from the independent TAP, the project 
proponents expand ed on the issues that should be taken into account in the detailed design 
phase for the “green promenade”  to be constructed along the kilometre -long rock revetment , 
which has the potential to be highly innovative  in the manner in which it caters for  the artisanal 
fishing communities’ socioeconomic needs  in the context of evolving climate risks.  
1.2.2.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
14. The project has a strong orientation to knowledge management and learning. This 
includes activities to: (i) develop ICZM  capacity and expertise of technical officials from 10 
government institutions, to be trained as trainers for synthesis and analysis of beach profile 
data, coastal protection feasibility assessments, and maintenance of coastal protection 
infrastructure; (i i) establish a system for data collection, analysis and management relating to 
coastal dynamics and ecosystems, helping to increase the evidence base to support ICZM 
decision -making; (iii) upscale the existing Environmental Knowledge Management System to 
incorporat e information on climate change adaptation and ICZM, with targeted knowledge 
products developed and disseminated; and (iv) establish an education and innovation centre to


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 127 
 
 
function as a community knowledge generation and learning hub, especially fo r the 
manufacturing of energy -efficient technologies. The project will also support sharing of lessons 
learned and best practice to inform learning and best practice across community, subnational 
and national levels as well as regional initiatives such as the West Africa Biodiversity and 
Climate Change WA BiCC programme . 
1.2.3.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
15. The pro posed pro ject will unde rtake significant work to create an enabling environment 
in relation to the public sector,  though it could do  more  in relation to the pr ivate sector.  
Component 2 is focused on creating enabling conditions for an integrated approach to coastal 
management and governance that are necessary to undertake long -term, climate resilient 
planning in vulnerable coasta l areas such as Monrovia. This includes jointly developing a  
national Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan and cap acitating an ICZM Committee and 
Cross Sectoral Working Group to implement and update the plan . This will be supported  by 
improving coordina tion and policy harmonisation among government institutions,  and building 
sectoral and community capacity for the implementation of ICZM  at national, county and local 
levels.  The mangrove co -management activities under Component 3 will also be embedded in 
the strengthened institutional and regulatory framework to create an enabling environment for  
systematically improv ing mangrove conservation efforts.  
16. The funding proposal states that there will also be a focus on strengthening public -
private partnerships for ICZM that will contribute to enabling further private sector 
involvement and support for coastal adaptation in Liberia in future. Th e livelihoods support 
work in Component  3, co-financed by UNDP , takes  a small -scale direct appr oach involving 
demonstration,  rather than  a wider  market -orientated approach that would  utilize project 
resources to catalyse further private sector investments. The project  co-finance from UNDP and 
Government establishes an  education and innovation centre, run by a project -trained 
Community Stewardship Committee  (CSC)  which will construct  a small- scale manufacturing  
workshop  and build 640 fuel- efficient cookstoves, providing two training workshops  per year – 
one to community members on manufacturing and selling cookstoves, and one to women’s 
groups on business strategies and connecting to partners. Following a query from the 
independent TAP, the design was adjusted to also include a demonstration of a larger scale fuel -
efficient fish -smoking oven (used by women’s coop erative s in other West African contexts, with 
potential to be used by emerging women’s Collaborative Associations in Liberia 
https://ejfoundation.org/news -media/women -are-the-strongest -pillar ). Similarly, project co -
finance will be  used to construct two solar -powered cold storage units to extend the  shelf life  of 
fish for sale , with an exit strategy that sees the CSC continuing to run  the facilities post -project 
by charging  a small user fee. The addition by the project proponents of some detail on what will 
be achieved through the annual workshops se ems rather ambitious, as one -off events can surely 
have only a limited effect on business skills development, access to finance, and access to higher 
value markets for fishmongers.  
17. The emphasis in Component 3 on direct  use of project f unds to set up demons tration 
operations is a valid  approach , but does  not appear to have been based on full market and value 
chain analyses that get to the bottom of the barriers to dissemination of these technologies. 
More thought could have been given to how the project coul d catalyse impact beyond a one- off 
investment – contributing  to market transformation at scale in the adaptation context. In 
response to comments from the independent TAP, the project proponents have decided to 
maximize the potential of Activity 3.3.3. “ Undertake periodic assessments of climate resilient 
livelihood practices and new opportunities to inform the design of new options and determine their 
uptake as a result of the project” to at least in vestigate  other technologies relevant in the con text 
of adaptation to climate change . These  includ e technologies related to non -climate drivers of 
coastal ecosystem damage , such as stimulating the Compressed Stabilised Earth Blocks (CSEB)


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 128 
 
 
industry as an alternative to beach and river sand mining; and th e agricultural residue fuel -
pellet industry, promoting a circular economy while also reducing pressure on mangroves and 
forests.  
1.2.4.  Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies   
18. The project will enable the development of ICZM policy in Liberia and assist the country 
to meet i ts legislative requirement of developing an ICZM  Plan and updating it  every three 
years, through the development of two iterations of the Plan  during the project lifespan, as well 
as efforts to achieve the harmonisation of polic ies and regulations related to ICZM across 
government institutions. In response to a query from the independent TAP about the difficulty 
of achieving effective land use planning and management in the Liberian context , where much 
development is unplanned in practice, the AE responded by highlighting that the ICZM work will 
be based on and support the implementation of the Land -Use and Management Framework 
developed by the Liberian Land Authority, as well as existing zoning ordinances in Monrovia and elsewher e. In relation to Component 3, they explained that “ embedding participatory 
ecosystem management within the broader institutional framework will ensure ongoing support 
for mangrove conservation and management beyond the project period through the establish ed 
institutional and regulatory systems. Conversely, incorporating lessons from community -based 
implementation of ICZM into the planning framework will increase the effectiveness and applicability of the ICZMP going forward. ” 
1.2.5.  Scalability and replicability  
19. The project has potential to leverage additional investment in coastal protection works 
for adaptation priorities  during the project lifetime , enabling replication at other vulnerability 
hotspots along the coastline of Monrovia and Liberia as a whole. Info rmation generated through 
development of the high -resolution vulnerability map, as well as lessons learned through 
implementation of the ICZM  Plan, will be shared widely and used to scale up project 
interventions across all the coastal counties. In Monrovi a, in terms of the other two vulnerability 
hotspots where  engineering studies were conducted for the project, New Kru Town is already 
seeing additional investment, but the Atlantic Shore –US Embassy coastal stretch, where there is 
high exposure of valuable infrastructure, would be a top priority for replication of approaches 
and lessons learnt th rough the proposed GCF project . The Atlantic Shore –JFK Hospital stretch 
and the Hotel Africa stretch are also important for the city’s adaptation strategy.  
20. In respon se to a question on this from the independent TAP, the project proponents 
decided to include in Component 2 an additional deliverable of a “ financing plan to leverage 
investment in coastal protection ”, along with measures to monitor the effectiveness of th e plan. 
The i ndependent TAP sees this as a good start , but notes that additional efforts will be needed 
by government and its technical and financial partners to proactively seek new partnerships 
and unlock investments in specific coastal protection projects. It is appreciated that a reference 
has been added to t he funding proposal  to say that collaboration between the Government and 
development partners initiated during project development  “will be consolidated, including 
between UNDP, CI  [Conservation International ], the World Bank and JICA  [Japan International 
Cooperation Agency] . These partnerships and experience will provide a robust platform for the 
implementation of other projects in the coastal zone. ” The funding proposal notes that,  “Extensive 
engagement with the private sector during the development and i mplementation of the ICZMP will 
strengthen public -private partnerships for coastal management , increasing support for future 
coastal protection and adaptation initiatives ”, though  potential private sector partners have not 
yet been identified.  
1.3 Sustainable  development potential                         Scale:  Medium  to high


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 129 
 
 
1.3.1.  Environmental co-benefits  
21. The project ’s sustainable development potential overall is rated as medium to high. In 
terms of the environment, t he project  is expected to have some benefits in contributing to the 
protection of ecosystems and biodiversity through Component 3 . This involves  a small 
reduc tion of  pressure on Monrovia’s mangrove ecosystems,  as a fuelwood source,  by promoting 
the manufacture and s ale of energy -efficient livelihood products; and making a modest 
contribution to c onserving the mangroves by engaging communities in an effective co -
management system, thus supporting mangrove  functioning in: (i) stabilising sediments; (ii) 
providing breed ing habitats for a range of marine and terrestrial species; ( iii) improving and 
maintaining water quality; and ( iv) acting as carbon sinks . The independent TAP notes that the 
mangrove co -management agreements will not include explicit enforcement of legislation to 
prevent damage to mangroves, nor will it  include negotiated benefit packages  to incentivise 
protection of mangroves , as with the successful agreements concluded through Conservation 
International in other parts of Liberia.  In response  to a question from  the independent TAP on 
this, it is noted that the AE  describe s the goals of this work as deliberately  limited in ambition : 
“to do the groundwork of engagement with communities , to support the development of more 
complex conserva tion frameworks in future ”. 
1.3.2.  Social co-benefits  
22. The project interventions to enhanc e coastal defence infrastructure (Component 1) will 
protect coastal communities, reduce mortality and reduce damage to the dense concentrations 
of economic assets and critica l social infrastructure in West Point – including homes, schools, 
clinics and roads, as well as livelihood assets such as boats and fish processing equipment . The 
coastal defence infrastructure will also protect hundreds of households from being displaced, 
thereby  avoiding significant social disruption that would occur without the project. The 
adaptation investment will  also allow the Kru and Fanti communities to maintain their way of 
life centred around the artisanal fishing trade. At the indepen dent TAP’s suggestion, the project 
proponents have made sure that t he detailed design of the promenade along th e revetment  will 
include provisions for amenities such as benches, fireplaces, sheds and huts , to accommodate a 
number of social fun ctions previo usly utilizing the beach .  
1.3.3.  Economic co -benefits  
23. Through the coastal protection defence interventions  to be  implemented at West Point, 
the project will reduce replacement costs of economic and social assets that would otherwise be damaged by erosion and sto rm surges. In addition to this direct benefit, several economic co -
benefits are expected through the implementation of ICZM (Component 2) and the promotion of 
climate -resilient livelihoods (Component 3). Improving management of mangroves in the 
Mesurado Basin will benefit the fishing sector economically, since these ecosystems act as 
critical breeding habitats for economically important fish species. Economic benefits will also be 
generated in the form of short - and long -term work opportunities for the cons truction, 
operation and maintenance of the rock revetment structure  established by the project, as well 
as through the Community Stewardship Committee (CSC). Installing cold storage facilities in 
fishing communities will reduce spoilage of fish, thereby in creasing the earning  potential of 
fishery -based livelihoods without increasing demand on fish stocks. Furthermore, establishing 
facilities for the manufacture and sale of energy -efficient livelihood products will provide 
income -generation opportunities for  community members.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development impact  
24. Clear efforts have been made to promote  gender -responsive livelihood development in 
the project design, both by providing direct opportunities for women in waged labour – as part


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 130 
 
 
of the construction of the West Point r ock r evetment  – and by supporting livelihood 
enhancements for  female fishmongers and other women. In response to a suggestion from the 
independent TAP, to enhance not only women’s access to fuel -efficient stoves (for household 
stove -top cooking with pots), but also to new fuel- efficient enclosed ovens for smoking fish ( to 
replace open fires, reduce the fuelwood collection burden , and take pressure off mangroves and 
forests ) the project proponents added to Activity 3.3 an assessment of th e possibility of 
introducing larger scale fuel- efficient kilns (such as the F ood and A griculture  Organization’s 
Thiaroye Processing Technique smoking kilns) as part of the alternative livelihood assessment. 
Such technology could also be introdu ced as a pilot  technology for a pilot women’s cooperative 
structure supported through the education and innovation centre, if the AE and Government 
wished to further enhance the potential in this area.  
25. In response to questions from the independent TAP and the Secretariat about whether it 
is realistic to have a target of 40  per cent  female participation in the construction phase of the 
revetment, the AE responded to the Panel’s satisfaction, noting that ” The quota of 40% women in 
the wage labour contracted under Activity 1.2 was recommended as part of the Gender Action Plan 
based on the Gender Assessment (Annex VIII), and is not expected to present a challenge. While 
there are few women in Liberia in some rol es in the construction industry (for example, civil 
engineers), contracting women as waged labourers does not present the same challenges. Similar 
projects, like the construction of the revetment at New Kru Town, have successfully employed a 
quota of women  as waged labourers. It is important to the gender -responsive approach of the 
project to provide equal opportunities to women under this activity as it is a direct income -earning 
and skills development opportunity which will enhance their ability to work o n construction in 
future. Examples of non -engineering waged labour activities that women can participate in — as 
stated in the Gender Action Plan — include  supervision, security, unskilled labor and catering. In 
addition, this activity presents an opportun inty to address gender norms that prevent women from 
engaging in manual labour, and similar occupations.”  
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                  Scale:  High  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country , vulnerable groups  and gender aspects  
26. The needs of the recipient for the proposed project are rated as high. Liberia’s 
population is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, ranking 4th in the 2017 
Climate Change Vulnerability Index. This vulnerability is larg ely linked to the country’s 
exposure to sea -level rise  and extreme weather events along  its 560 km coastline. The predicted 
impact of climate change on shoreline retreat  is exacerbated by the high population density and 
associated concentrations of economi c and social assets in the country’s coastal zone , as well as 
the dependence of th e population on climate -sensitive livelihoods. Liberia ranks 8th in the 
world for the percentage of the population living in low elevation coastal zones , with the 
majority concentrated in the capital city of Monrovia. The target site for costal protection works, 
West Point , is located on a l ong, narrow  sand spit on the western fringe of the Mesurado 
Wetland, making it one of the most vulnerable communities to shoreline erosion , which 
advanced by 30 metres in the past decade,  and is project ed to accelerate, placing  approximately 
10,800 people’s homes, livelihoods and infrastructure  directly at risk over time . This includes 
49 per cent  of the population which is female, including  many women fishmongers whose 
livelihoods  depend on smoking and selling the fish caught along West Point . 
1.4.2.  Economic and social development  
27. The growth of Monrovia’s population at 3  per cent  per year , coupled with the ongoing 
shoreline loss, is leading to an increase in the density of the population of West Point and the 
city more widely , putting considerable pressure on the environment and ecosystems on which


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 131 
 
 
many livelihoods depend. As shown in the f unding proposal, t he fisheries sector contributes 
approxima tely 10  per cent  of the national GDP and employs at least 37,000 people in Monrovia 
alone. The vulnerability of these livelihoods is being exacerbated by the impacts of SLR and the 
increasing frequency of intense storms. The low -income areas along the coas t of Monrovia, 
including West Point, are home to the traditional artisanal fisherfolk of the Kru and Fanti 
communities,  who derive livelihoods from coastal waters and fish stocks, and 60 per cent  of 
persons active in the fishing sector are women . The mangroves in the Mesurado Wetland serve 
as critical habitat and nursery grounds for these fish stocks,  and nutrient -rich fish serv e as the 
major protein source for much of the  Monrovia Metropolitan  Area population.  The proposed 
project addresses these vulnerabilities by: building a coastal revetment on 1,050 m etres  of 
coastline at West Point – ensuring landings for fishing boat s, improving the management of 
Liberia’s coastal zone by developing capacity  for ICZM , and supporting the development of 
gender -sensitive and  climate -resilient livelihoods  in Monrovia . 
1.4.3.  Absence of alternative sources of financing  
28. Since 1990, Liberia has been classified as a least developed country (LDC) with a 2018 
GDP per capita o f USD 674  – significantly lower than the LDC average GDP per capita of USD 
1,042, according to the f unding proposal . In addition, Liberia’s Human Development Index (HDI) 
of 0.465 ranks the country 176th out of 189 countries assessed by the UNDP Human Development Report 2018. Economic and social gains made by Liberia in the post -civil war 
period from 2000 –2010 were severely curtailed by the outbreak of the Ebola virus and 
subsequent epidemic between 2014 and 2015. According to the United Nations Secretariat 
(UN/DESA) , in 2018 Liberia was more economically vulnerable than the average of all LDCs in 
terms of the Economic Vulnerability Index ; had a Gross National Income index equivalent to 
only 30  per cent  of the LDC average; and had a lower Human Assets Index  than the average 
figure for LDCs. The country  is disproportionately reliant on the agriculture, forestry and fishing 
sectors , and r eliance on the export of primary commodities , with little to no value -addition , 
results in the economy being extremely vulnerable to global commodity price fluctuations and market shocks. This economic vulnerability in turn compromises the ability of the G overnment 
of Liberia  to deliver basic services such as water, housing, transport and energy to its citizens in 
a sustainable manner. The necessary emphasis by the Government on basic development needs 
– including poverty reduction and health – means that it has been difficult  to prioritize the 
funding of climate change adaptation interventions to protect vulnerab le communities, despite 
the urgent need for such interventions. Consequently, the Government does not have the 
financial capacity to adequately fund adaptation initiatives at the scale required to significantly reduce climate change impacts on vulnerable c ommunities.   
1.4.4.  Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
29. The G overnment of Liberia  has established several laws, policies, strategies and 
institutions to address the increasing impact of climate change on the lives and livelihoods of 
people in Liberia, but limited technical and financial capacity within most government 
departments is a significant barrier to the implementation of climate change adaptation, and 
climate risk -informed ICZM in particular. Where adaptation measures have been instituted, 
financial limitations often constrain the ir implementation  due to:  insufficient  work facilities; 
lack of access to technical equipment ; lack of training to use and maintain technical equipment; 
and no data collection, analysis and management  facilities. Furthermore, there is limited 
technical capacity within government institutions and NGOs at both the national and local level s 
to effectively use and enhance knowledge management systems as well as to disseminate 
information products to coastal communities for reducing their vulnerability to climate change.  
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  does, however, have a track rec ord of 
implement ing projects with a focus on climate change in Liberia, advised by sector -specific 
Technical Committees,  including those on climate change as well as marine and coastal


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 132 
 
 
ecosystems, and is in a good position to utilize the GCF investment to strengthen institutional 
capacity .  
1.5 Country ownership                          Scale:  High  
30. Country ownership of the proposed project  is rated as high overall. The project  has 
strong alignment with Liberia’s climate change strategies and adaptation priorit ies, as well as 
broader national development plans. These include: the National Policy and Response Strategy 
on Climate Change (2018), the Pro -poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development (PAPD, 2018 –
2023), and the Republic of Liberia Agenda for Transformation: Steps Towards Liberia Rising 2030. Through promoting  climate  resilient planning and protecting climate -sensitive 
livelihoods, the project will contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Liberia 
National Adaptation Program me of Action (NAPA, 2006), the National Strategic Action Plan for 
Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management (NSAP), and the Climate Change Gender Action Plan (ccGAP; 2012). In relation to the Paris Agreement, the pr oject will align with one of the 
three adaptation priorities identified under Liberia’s I ntended Nationally Determined  
Contribution (2015), namely the construction of coastal defences to reduce the vulnerability of 
urban coastal areas.  
31. The project was dev eloped following an extensive stakeholder engagement process, 
beginning with initial institutional and community engagements during the first phase of 
project design in 2016, prior to the initiation of the P roject Preparation Facility -financed 
feasibility study, identifying broad needs and vulnerabilities within the Monrovia Metropolitan 
Area , and engaging with relevant government departments to validate the design of the project 
and ensure alignment with national priorities. In 2019, after the rock revetme nt was identified 
as the preferred coastal protection solution, 40 community consultations were conducted with 
the West Point community, in which the trade -off between coastal protection and changes in 
access to the beach and sea w as discussed  in depth . This included consultations to identify a 
range of desired gender -related development impacts of the  project , and to make sure that such 
impacts were incorporated into the project design. Full support for the selected option was 
expressed by all participants , and by the Kru and Fanti traditional leadership structures. The 
detailed design phase will provide a further opportunity for community input on and validation 
of the proposed alterations to beach fisheries access sites,  and plans for the development of 
public space on the promenade.  
32. The national executing en tity (EE) for the project is the Government of Liberia , 
represented by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). As the GCF national designated 
authority  for Liberia, th e EPA has been involved in the submission of several Concept Notes and 
Readiness Proposals for the GCF, with a climate information systems simplified approval 
process project through the African Development Bank approved at B.27, and has a strong 
track -record of implementing climate adaptation and other projects for the Global Environment 
Facility.  The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), as a Responsible Party , will enter into a 
legally binding memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the EE to assist in succ essfully 
implementing project activities.  The funds for selected activities, as requested by the 
Government of Liberia , including the major cost of the infrastructure works at West Point, due 
to their higher value and high risk nature, will be channelled d irectly to service providers 
procured by UNDP , as part of UNDP support services to the Government . The Ministry of Public 
Works will assist the EE and the MME to implement the infrastructure works.  As the AE, UNDP 
will deliver GCF -specific oversight and qu ality assurance services  for the project . In Liberia, 
UNDP has led environmental protection and climate change responses through the facilitation 
of policy formulation, strategic planning, law making, coordination and information sharing. 
Through this role , UNDP has built strong relationships with decision -makers and proven its 
strengths as an impartial provider of technical advice and support. In addition to the co -finance 
letters from UNDP and Government of Liberia , commitment of the G overnment to the pro ject’s


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 133 
 
 
sustainability has recently been confirmed with a letter of financial commitment for the post -
project operations and maintenance (O&M) . An initial concern , expressed  by the independent 
TAP, that the O&M p lan was vague on responsibilities, actions and costs was rectified through 
the AE’s work with Government to produce a new and much more detailed O&M p lan, which 
clarified these matters , as well as plans for capacity transfer through the major contract for the 
reve tment works.  
1.6 Efficienc y and effectiveness               Scale:  Medium  to high  
33. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is rated at medium to high. The 
effectiveness of the project’s central investment by GCF and the Government of Liberia in the 
rock revetment at West Point is seen as effective in applying best available practice in coastal 
engineering, and latest innovations in techniques. The selection of the approach was based on  
detailed hydraulic studies for the Monrovia Metropolitan Area, us ing climate models, wave 
models and morphological models, with a vulnerability assessment covering the anticipated impacts of climate change on coastal structural retreat and storm erosion . A full on-site 
engineering study consider ed the alternatives and m otivat ed for the revetment approach, on 
the basis of its efficacy, cost -effectiveness and light burden in terms of post -project operations 
and maintenance. The  project  designs for the recommended rock revetment and promenade, a s 
well as  the O&M p lan, include clear risk mitigation measures that must be taken  to avoid 
flooding and unrepaired storm damage causing erosion of sediment into scour -holes.  
34. The project’s cost -effectiveness could be maximized by follow -through on the 
implementation of a financi ng plan to be developed through the project, to facilitate new 
partnerships for financing additional coastal protection measures in vulnerability hotspots, 
especially the Atlantic Shore –US Embassy coastal stretch in Monrovia. There is also potential 
during  project implementation  to leverage further investment in the community mangrove 
conservation agreements , and in small business development for technologies that take 
pressure off natural resources  and help preserve ecological protection infrastructure . In 
response to questions from the independent TAP about engagement of the domestic private 
sector, the AE clarified that “ Relevant private sector partners will be identified by the service 
provider in consultation with the 10 government institutions. These p rivate sector partners will be 
targeted because of their location in the coastal zone and the relevance of coastal climate change 
adaptation to their businesses.”  
35. The total project cost is USD 25.6 million, including  GCF grant financing of USD 17.2 
million , the bulk of which (70  per cent ) will contribute to the revetment construction at West 
Point. The remaining USD 8.4 million (34  per cent  of the total project cost) will be borne by the 
Government of Liberia (USD 6.8 million in form of grant and in -kind co ntributions) and UNDP 
(USD 1.6 million in grants). The government co -financing is considered to be significant, given 
that Liberia is an  LDC with a limited revenue base. As part of this, the Government is making an 
important contribution of USD 4,5 million  worth of rock rubble to be used as a major input to 
the construction of the West Point rock revetment. GCF has also received a letter of commitment 
from the Ministry o f Mines and Energy to ensur e that the costs of approximately USD 62,000 per 
year for the  ongoing O&M  of the West Point works, the community education and innovation 
centre, and the cold storage facilities, will be covered.  It is noted that the grant request to GCF is 
made in the context of coastal adaptation generating largely public goods, and not generating 
revenue streams from which loans might be repaid.  
36. The economic analysis conducted for the project indicates a conservative estimate of the 
expected net present value (ENPV) of the project at USD 17.73 million , using a 10  per cent  
discount rate, with an economic internal rate of return of 21  per cent . In addition  to estimates 
for damages avoided, benefits also include an increase in income growth and the social benefit 
of the project through improved infrastructure. This project pr oposes the construction of


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B.28 /02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 134 
 
 
coastal protection measures along approximately 1,050 m etres  of exposed and vulnerable 
coastline as well as measures to protect and enhance the climate resilience of the livelihoods of 
~25  per cent  of Monrovia’s population. The c ost of these measures is USD  104 per beneficiary. 
The i ndependent TAP agrees with the AE that this is a reasonable cost, especially given the fact 
that the indirect beneficiaries are not included in this calculation.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
37. The i ndependent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval with the 
following condition:  
(a) Prior to the first disbursement of the project, the accredited entity shall submit to the 
Secretariat an additional Report, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat, 
which:  
(i) Further strengthens the project’s climate rationale by summarizing clearly the 
observed and predicted changes along Monrovia’s coastline in relation to the 
following parameters: sea level rise, sediment  transport and exchange, wave 
conditions, and high -intensity storms; also showing how these parameters are 
being affected by climate and non- climate drivers, and how they interact to 
produce shoreline regression – both historical and anticipated.


---
*Page 135*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 8/02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 135 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 160) 
Proposal name:  Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Liberia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
 
Impact potential  
We note the iTAP’s  assessment and rating of the project with respect to its impact potential. 
The scale of  the challenges pertaining to land - use planning is well noted, and the need for 
grounding the ICZM Plan in existing land -use planning frameworks and processes to 
cont ribute to the existing enabling environment that these policies are creating for land -use 
planning.  
Paradigm shift potential  
We note and agree with the i TAP’s assessment and rating of the project with respect to its 
paradigm shift potential. Implementati on of the project will have a focus on the innovations 
and partnerships that will strengthen this investment criterion.  
Sustainable development potential  
The overall rating and assessment is well noted. During implementation, the project will pay 
attention to increasing the project’ s co-benefits as indicated in the assessment by iTAP . 
Needs of the recipient  
We note and agree with the i TAP’s  assessment of the project on addressing the needs of the 
recipient both at the national and community levels.  
Country ownership  
The iTAP’s  assessment of the project against the “country ownership” criterion is consistent 
with the process followed in its origination, development and implementation arrangements. 
This will be maintained during implementation to ensure it continues being owned b y the 
country at all levels.  
Efficiency and effectiveness


---
*Page 136*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 8/02/Add. 07/Rev.01  
Page 136 
 
 
 The overall assessment against this criterion and the medium to high rating is noted, as well 
as the recommendation to maximize this through the implementation of a financing plan to 
be developed by the project to facilitate new partnerships for financing.  Attention will be paid 
to the recommendation during implementation.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
We thank the i TAP for recommending the project for funding.  
The comprehensive assessment of the project is well appreciated, as well as the ratings on 
each of the criteria. During implementation, we will continue work ing with the Executing 
Entity and other stakeholders to strengthen the areas that have been highlighted in this assessment.  The request by iTAP for an additional annex has been noted, and the summary 
requested will be prepared based on the analyses undertaken during project design, and included in the feasibility and vulnerability studies and their detailed annexes.


---
*Page 137*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
1 H 
ANNEX 8: GENDER ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN 
FOR THE 
MONROVIA METROPOLITAN CLIMATE RESILIENCE PROJECT 
(MMCRP)  
S
eptember 2019 
Gender documentation for FP160


---
*Page 138*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
2 
 H 
 
I - Introduction  
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) recognizes the central importance of gender considerations in terms of 
both impact and access to climate funding and  requires a Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
to be submitted as part of the project -funding proposals that it assesses. The main obj ective of the 
Gender Assessment is to screen the gender aspects of the GCF project, and to subsequently strengthen 
the gender responsive actions within the project  “Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilience Project” 
(MMCRP) . Therefore , this gender assessmen t aims to provide an overview of the gender situation in 
Liberia, with a goal to strengthen  the resilience of affected women and men living in “hotspots” of 
Monrovia Metropolitan Area  (MMA)  where the country’s coastal areas are facing increasing risks of 
coastal erosion and extreme climate events.  
Specifically, the assessment will identify gender issues in Liberia that are relevant to the project and  
examine potential gender mainstreaming o pportunities. Given the fact that gendered climate 
vulnerability is at the center of the project,  the information and design considerations in this Annex 
should not be considered additional, but rather part of the basis of the proposal, including the Feasi bility Study, Stakeholder Engagement and Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) Annexes.  
The assessment was based upon conducting field consultations, gathering information from available 
data from studies conducted by the Government of Liberia,  UN and civil society organizations , donor 
agencies and multilateral development banks . Lessons learned from past studies and assessments on 
gender in Liberia were also taken into stock . Stakeholders consultations engaging, men, women  and 
youth also raised  gender concerns that will be i ntegrat ed as the project indicators, targets and activities, 
identifying women as beneficiaries including as leaders and decision -makers. 
Gender  mainstreaming  in this project aims to be both gender responsive, by integrating  women’s 
perspectives, and guidance to ensure that existing inequalities are not exacerbated, but also gender 
transformative, in the sense that it deals with root causes of vulnerability and  structural barriers to 
climate resilience, and challenges the norms around the gendered distribution of labor  and constraints 
in regards to access to resources , capacity building and ability to engage in adaptative  measures.   
The proposed GCF funded project not only intentionally targets and benefits women, but also considers the intersectional vulnerability: there are some categories that face additional forms of marginalization 
and stigma due to poverty, health  and disabiliti es, including women, (and women -headed households), 
youth and children, the elderly, people living with disabilities and marginalized groups  such as those 
with  HIV/aids and LGBTIs living  in the target areas.  
The project design recognizes that SLR and coas tal erosion ha s immediate and long -term impacts on 
women as described  in the consultation reports and in the current the gender analysis . In addition, the 
project recognizes the effects of changing environmental conditions by supporting climate resilient 
livelihoods and better integration  of gender considerations  into the  Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management ( ICZM ) and into local value chains, in which women are already playing a growing role.   
The Gender Assessment intends to  provid e additional information on the national and local gender 
context, particularly regarding  women’s access to resources, their role in decision -making and the


---
*Page 139*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
3 
 H 
gendered aspects of local livelihoods . It provides the basis for, and lessons on which, the Gender A ction 
Plan (which is reflective of the overall project design) has been built.  
Overall, the project objective is to enhance the climate resilience  of the most SLR -impacted MMA 
communities that are constantly exposed to  storm surges, flooding and salinity i ngress through the 
installation of coastal defence options. These actions will be conducted  with a special attention to 
women - and by extension, their families  - and communitie s who are re ndered the most  vulnerable . 
Specifically, GCF resources will be use d to enable all relevant institutions including the Minister of 
Gender to implement activities in the context of a n ICZM that will empower more  targeted vulnerable 
women to become leaders in the adoption of climate change resilient livelihoods and the management 
of the ICZM options,  ensuring that women are involved in the ownership, operationalization  and 
management of the selected options  with the technical and financial backstopping support from 
concerned institutions. Resources will also be used to p romote climate resilient livelihood options and 
participation in their associated value chains for women whose existing livelihoods are particularly 
vulnerable to salinity ingress. Finally , resources will also be used to strengthen the capacities of nation al 
institutions  to enable  gender -responsive, climate -resilient solutions for both coastal security and 
livelihoods.  
The primary measurable benefits that will be realized as a result of the GCF investment includes  
• Prov ision of  assistance to communities in the MMA , with a special focus on women, youth 
and other vulnerable groups,  to pursue climate resilient livelihoods and facilitate their access 
to associated market linkages, with investment in assets, tools, and training , 
• Change of perceptions  and norms o f gender equality and women ’s empowerment to induce a 
transformative change within the communities  to improve gender relationship at the family 
and community levels ,  
• Inclusion of women in  all the national, local and community activities of the ICZM , at 
management and operational levels , 
• Strengthen ed capacity, coordination and knowledge sharing of national institutions and local 
communities intervening in the project.  
 
II – Existing Gender inequality and social ex clusion in Liberia   
Women play a crucial role in Liberia . Not only do they comprise almost half of its population, but they 
also play important roles at household level, in the rural and urban economies at all  levels . The Liberia 
Revised National Gender Policy (2018 -2022)  states that “Gender inequality and the marginalization of 
women in Liberia are perpetuated by socio -cultural perceptions, practices, and stereotypes that 
support male dominance and the subordination of women” 1i . This happens  partly  through 
socialization of girls and boys, social norms and customs, which carries into schools, the community and 
the workplaces . 
Gender inequality is not uneven in Liberia . It varies according to age, status,  means of  income , county  
rural/urban areas  and traditions , but in  general, access to education, healthcare, land, property, and 
justice is limited to women as compared to men . Gender imbalance  causes such as excessive burden of 
 
1 Liberia Revised National Gender Policy (2018 -2022), page 5


---
*Page 140*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
4 
 H 
care  on women, illiteracy  unequal power relations  in the household,  lack of access to basic s ervices, 
economic disempowerment, low participation in decision -making in public spheres  and institutions  and 
in the household, lack of access to legal and judicial services, vulnerability  to Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immune Deficienc y Syndrome (AIDS), and unequal access to rights and 
opportunities ; the situation is worse for adolescents girls that are often school drop -outs because of 
poverty and face the issue of teen -age pregnancies.   
 Gender Inequality Index es - (GII) and other relevant gender indices  
Through the years, several indices have developed to quantify the concept of gender inequality.  The 
United Nations Development Programme uses the Gender Inequality Index (GII) and Gender Development Index (GDI). 2 GII is a comp osite measure that shows inequality in achievement between 
women and men in reproductive health, empowerment and the labor  market while with a measure’s  
achievement in human development in three areas: health, education, and command over economic 
resources . The GDI considers the gender gaps on human development between men and women.  
Despite the ratification of the Maputo protocol, its domestication has remained inadequate. With 
strong patriarchal social norms and entrenched, socially accepted violence against women and girls, the Gender Inequality Index of 0.610 ranks Liberia at 177 out of 188 countries assessed, a decline from 
earlier years
3. Gender gaps are evident in mean  years of education (3.5 vs. 6.1) and income (US$577 
vs. US$755).  While patriarchal norms that maintain the low status of women and girls persist, the legacy 
of violence against women during the civil wars has been normalized.4 Almost 14 percent  5 of the 
population living with disabilities confronts stigma and lack of income -earning opportunities. High level 
of adult HIV prevalence at 2.1 percent6 (2.4 percent among women, 1.8 percent among men), indicates 
underlying policy and health system deficiencies an d unequal gender relations.7 
 
 The Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) of the World Economic Forum examines the gap between men 
and women in four categories: economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, health 
and survival; and political empowerment.8 Out of 14 9 countries, Liberia ’s rank based on GGGI in 201 8 
is given below9: 
 
Description  Score  Rank  
Gender Gap Index 2018  0.681  96 
Economic participation and opportunity  0.729 41 
Educational attainment  0.792 141 
Health and survival  0.968 118 
Political empowerment  0.236 47 
 
2 United Nations Development Programme. Human Development Report. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table -4-gender -inequality -index .  
3 Human Development Report, UNDP 2016 and 2018; Inequality -adjusted HDI for 2017 is 32 percent lower  
4 Programme Against Sexual and Gender Based Violence and Harmful Traditional Practices, Republic of Liberia, 2018  
5 National Census, Republic of Liberia. 20 08 
6 Catch up plan to end AIDS 2017 -2020 
7 Gender analysis in UNDP Liberia CPD (2020 -24), §  3 
8 World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report 2018 Country Profiles. http://reports.weforum.org/global -gender -gap-report -
2014/economies/#economy=LIB   
9 http://reports.weforum.org/global -gender -gap-report -2014/economies/#economy=LIB


---
*Page 141*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
5 
 H 
  
* Inequality = 0.00; Equality = 1.00. Source: The Global Gender Gap Report 201 8 
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) developed the Social Institutions 
and Gender Index (SIGI), a composite index that scores countries:  percentage varies to  0 to 1 00 on 14 
indicators grouped int o four sub-indices . Liberia scores as follows:  1 - discrimination in the family (60%), 
2 -restricted physical integrity  (34%) 3 - restricted access  to productive and financial resources 4 - (41%) 
Restricted civil liberties  (53%)  to measure the discrimination against women i n social institutions across 
160 countries. The 201 9 SIGI value for Liberia equals  47 % suggesting that gender inequality and 
discrimination  against women  and girls  is high.10 
Poverty  
After emerging  from  years of conflict, the Ebola crisis and the resultant economic downturn11, Liberia 
faces many economic challenges. A ccording  to the 2018 UNDAF Liberia Common Country Assessment12 
these economic challenges are : high inflation, declining global commodity prices, growing foreign debt, 
and import dependency13, which together slowed down14 economic growth15, reducing fiscal space16 
for delivery of essential services . Acute poverty and vulnerability in Liberia are a result of entrenched 
social, and econo mic inequalities and exclusion – which resulted in years of conflict17 and continue to 
persist due to high levels of centralization in the Capital and a concessions -based growth model.  
Liberia’s Human Development Index (HDI) has been declining, with the HD I value for 2017 at 0.435, 
placing Liberia at 181 out of 189 countries  18. More than half of the country’s population 19 lives below 
the poverty line20 and marginalization remain deeply entrenched21. In 201822, 71.2 percent of Liberians 
experienced multi - dimensional poverty -  33.2 percent severely poor while 20.4 percent “vulnerable” 
to slipping back into poverty23. 
Weak administrative procedures and limited human and institutional capacities24 have led to delays in 
citizens’ access to justice, especially in cases of human rights violations and sexual and gender -based 
violence .  
Women economic empowerment and access to resources   
Despite  the central economic roles of women in households and in the economy in general , women 
still face some constraints in order to participate effectively in the economic li fe of the country  because 
of discriminatory norms and practices and inequitable policies,  such as:   
 
10 Source: OECD (2019), Gender, Institutions and Development Database, https: //oe.cd/ds/GIDDB2019.  
11 World Bank, 2018  
12 UNDAF Liberia Common Country Assessment, 2018  
13 World Bank, 2018  
14 8.7 percent (2013) down to 0 percent (2015) and -1.6 percent in 2016  
15 IMF Staff 2019 Article IV Mission to Liberia ( link) 
16 Africa Economic Outlook (2017)  
17Truth and Reconciliation Commission (2009),  Agenda for Transformation (2012), PAPD 2018  
18 Human Development Report, UNDP 2016 and 2018; Inequality -adjusted HDI for 2017 is 32 percent lower  
19 4.7million (UN Population Division, 2017)  
20 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2016  
21 Poverty: 71.6 pe rcent in rural areas and 31.5 percent in urban ar eas 
22 Multidimensional Poverty data 2018  
23 Human Development Report, UNDP 2016, 2018  
24 Liberia Peacebuilding Plan, 2017.


---
*Page 142*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
6 
 H 
• Limited access to credits, raw materials, training, marketing, etc . 
• Absence of enabling en vironment to contribute effectively to the economy and limited access 
to productive resources  
• Limited access in decision  making positions in public service  
• Limited participation in more profitable sectors and limited  opportunities for economic 
empowerment  
• Discriminatory customary practices, stereotypes, norms and biases  that continue to prevent 
equal access to and control over land and land use  
It is important to note that when facing climate hazards , women are  more d isproportionately affected 
than men. For example, women may be forced to spend savings during climate shock events, and this  
loss of  savings  can subsequently lead a great number of small businesses  (women owned and also  
where women are customers)  to collapse. Small businesses predominantly owned by women were 
largely affected  during the economic downturn in Liberia because they were selling perishable food 
items  and many los t their ovens . 25 
 
Social protection  
The main goal of the PAPD is  to improv e protection of the poorest and most vulnerable population s and 
groups from poverty, deprivation, and hunger, and enhanced resilience to risks and shocks  through a 
multi -sector approach to support and finance social protection interventions and  improve livelihoods 
and increase employment readiness of extreme poor, youth, and women  through increased 
opportunities for income generation.  
Therefor e, the situation in SLR affected communities cannot be ignored. Stakeholder meetings held  in 
MMA from March to April 2019  reveal ed that with affected women involved in drying and selling fish 
along the sea coast as well as men and youth involved in fishery and petty (small -scale)  trading, men 
and women are frustrated at being neglected, particularly given that the erosion caused by climate 
change rapidly le ft most of them homeless . While they do not feel protected at home,  there are social 
measures to protect them if in danger at sea.  
 
However, social protection needs for women and men may vary . Women and men face different risks 
and vulnerabilities, some specific to their gender and others exacerbated by gender inequalities and 
discrimination. The design and implementation of social protection programs in Liberia address gender -
related constraint s, including barriers to women’s economic advancement. 26 
 
In the absence of  specific data in relation to gender and social protection, it is clearly understood that  
women’s financial contribution is  more important within household survival strategies . However,  
because women are concentrated in informal and labor -intensive work where they face risks  and 
vulnerabilities (e.g. health risks, interrupted and insecure employment) , they have either  less or little -
to-no resources  to save or contribu te to pensions or be eligible to some form of a social safety net to 
tide over times of crisis. Therefore, social security measures are  restricted to the small, male -dominated 
section of the workforce employed in the formal state and private sectors. Socia l protection is limited 
for those in the very  informal employment sector  where women dominate.  
 
 
25 Report on progress on the implementation of the NGP, 1Korkoyah and Wreh  2015.   
26 Liberia Demographic Health Survey (LDHS, 2013)


---
*Page 143*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
7 
 H 
Gender and Employment  
Liberia Demographic Health Survey (2013)  provides the following figures  53% of women in contrast to 
74%  of men were employed at the time of the survey. Geographically, by county, women in Gbarpolu 
(78%) and Bong (72%), were more likely to be employed than women in other counties (40 -60%) (LDHS, 
2013). While for men, in Gbarpolu (94%), River Cess (94%) and Grand  Cape Mount (93%) were more 
likely to be employed than their female counterparts in other counties (58 -87%).  Women (59%) and 
men (82%) in the rural areas are more likely to be employed than those in the urban areas. Employed women (80%) and men (74%) in th e lowest quintile are engaged in agricultural activities (LDHS, 2013). 
The urban and rural differentials show that urban women were concentrated in sales and marketing 
(66%), compared to rural women who were mostly employed in the agricultural sector (69%) 24. Men 
(22%) in urban areas were employed in sales and marketing . In the rural areas, 69 percent of women 
and 62 percent of men were engaged in agricultural activities. 
 
By category of employment, women are mostly found  in sales and services (49%), followed by 
agriculture (42%), in contrast to men who were more likely to be employed in agriculture (40%), 
unskilled manual labor  (15%), sales and services (14%) and skilled manual labor  (14%) . In the 
professional categories, 4 per cent of women compared to 10 per cent of men had professional, 
technical or managerial occupations. According to the LDHS (2013), women and men with no education 
were more likely to be employed (65% and 91%) than their counterparts who had attended s chool (68 -
73%), since they could easily access informal employment .  
 
Education is also a hindrance  to wome n’s employment in the formal  sector,  so men are 
disproportionately clustered in the least productive sectors with 90 % employed in the informal sector 
or in agriculture, compared to 75 % of working men.  Men are more than three times likely to be 
employed by the civil service, NGOs, internation al organizations or public corporations , in mining, in 
panning,  in the manufacturing sector . It is o nly in agriculture and fisheries that  men and women are 
employed on an equal basis –  1 to 1 ratio .  
 High participation of women in the informal sector is a consequence of the care economy as the burden 
of home and family care imposed upon them through the socio -cultural allocation of gender roles. They 
are more absent in small and medium enterprises due to limited education, lack of capital, credit and 
land . 
 While all men and women in the informal sector face similar problems such as absence of social insurance scheme s, exploitation, harassment from people in authority (including at border crossings), 
unsafe work environment, limited finance and business de velopment services, women are more 
negatively affected due to their over -representation in this sector. For cross -border traders, there is 
information gap on migration and customs regulations, making women in cross border trade more 
vulnerable to exploitation, due to limited knowledge about their rights and the laws that protect them.  
 
The Civil Service Reform Strategy (2008 -2011) focused on mainstreaming gender and establishing 
mechanisms for implementing an affirmative action program, drafting and implementing a civil service -
wide sexual harassment policy, and the establishment of Gender Focal Points (GFPs) in each  Ministry, 
Agency, and Commission Corporation (MAC ). The Decent Work Law passed in 2016 assured the right 
to minimum remuneration of women domestic workers. It guarantees entitlement of women and men


---
*Page 144*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
8 
 H 
without distinction, exclusion or preference to receive equal remuneration for work of equal or comparable va lue 
27. 
 
It is hoped that the introduction of a new National Employment Policy ; the review and revis ion of the 
Liberian Labor Code , the  transform ation of  the Liberian Emergency Employment Program (LEEP) into 
the Liberian Employment Action Plan; the validati on of  the National Workplace Policy on HIV and AIDS  
the launch a Women’s Entrepreneurship Program involving MSMEs  for business skills  development , 
and provi sion of access to microfinance and functional literacy  will make a bi g difference in Gender and 
Employment in Liberia.  
 
Health  and Reproductive Rights  
Liberia faces a few  health challenges  but more specifically gender norms, roles and relations can 
influence health outcomes and affect the attainment of mental, physical and social health, and well -
being . Fortunately,  gender equity is a guiding principle of the NHSWP (2011 -21) and improving health 
outcomes among women and girls is critical to the overall goal. The three objectives of the National 
Health and Social Welfare Policy and Plan capture the MOHSW’s strategy to equitably improve gender 
equality and the health status of women and girls . To increase access and utilization of services, 
especially for women and girls at the community level, by expanding access to quality services delivered 
closer to where people live. Coupled with investments in strengthening human resources, the target is  
to increase facility -based deliveries by a skilled birth attendant from 22 to 80 percent.  
 To make services for women and girls more responsive, the cornerstone of 2011 -21 NHSWP is the 
Essential Package of Health Services (EPHS), a gender -sensitive servic e package with strong linkages to 
the community and household, as well as gender -specific health messages. The target is for 90 percent 
of facilities to be fully accredited and providing the EPHS.  To provide services that are affordable against 
a backdrop of ensuring social protection through a combination of prepayment schemes and free services for priority interventions that directly affect the health of women and girls.
28 
 Legislation does not restrict the right of women to access contraception and other reproductive health 
services.
29 Government and INGO health facilities provide free access to sexual and reproductive health 
services30 Over 25 percent of adolescents age 15 -19 have already had a child.31 Vaccination rates for 
infants are higher for girls than  boys (42.4% against 36.1%), and infant and child mortality rates in 
Liberia are slightly higher for boys than girls. The same is true of malnutrition rates.  
 High maternal mortality and systemic inequities — especially related to health service access and 
quality – have a major impact on women and girls. The high maternal mortality rate is linked to a high 
fertility rate, insufficient numbers of skilled birth a ttendants and low utilization of health facilities for 
delivery, compounding the risks associated with complications.  
 
 
27 Liberia CEDAW Report (2013).   
28 USAID. Country Development Cooperation Strategy (Liberia) –  2013 -17, p. 61  
29 US Department of State (2012) in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) 2014. Country Profiles 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/liberia  ; OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (S IGI) 
30 CEDAW (2009a) p.13 in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) 2014. Country Profiles 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/liberia  ; OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)  
31 DHS (2007) p.53 in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) 2014. Country Profiles 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/liberia  ; OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)


---
*Page 145*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
9 
 H 
Other factors which also contribute to maternal and newborn mortality are delays in diagnosing problems, deciding to seek medical care, accessibility and affordability, inadequate supply of drugs and 
equipment, poor nutritional status of pregnant women, and high fertility rates. Some women who 
survive maternal health complications develop life -long disabilities such as fistulae and seconda ry 
infertility. Teenage mortality is high among girls who develop complications during pregnancy and go 
through caesarean procedures. The situation is even more precarious in communities where there are 
no medical facilities nor skilled birth attendants to  address complications that may arise. Additionally, 
there are no facilities available to handle mental conditions, such as depression, related to the 
postpartum. The national contraceptive prevalence rate for family planning is 20% and less than 14% 
for a dolescent girls aged 15 –19 years. The unmet need for family planning has virtually remained the 
same with no significant decrease: from 36% in 2007 to 34% in 2013 (DHS 2013).  
 
In terms of family planning, there is limited participation by men. Access to an d knowledge about Sexual 
and Reproductive Health (SRH) varies between men and women. According to the LDHS (2013), 98 per 
cent women and 95 per cent of men have knowledge of at least one method of contraception. Teenagers of both sexes either are not aware of  or do not practice birth control methods, even though 
family planning is free. Some of the reasons given for this include cultural misconceptions about family planning, myths that future conception may not be possible, perceptions amongst youths o n 
promiscuity by using family planning, religious background that prohibit family planning, affordability and lack of responsibility.  If this situation is not improved, women will continue to bear the brunt of  continue to be  vulnerable to 
emerging health issues/disasters with the lack of or limited access to social protection programs  
described above .  
 
The delivery of water and sanitation services in Liberia is a key concern  in the affected communities  
visited during consultations. This process  affects women and girls ’ dignity, safety and physical and time 
burden. The insufficient number of pumps  means more time is spent gathering water, sometimes from 
far away, which  affects the well -being  of women and  girls and the way of life  in communities . The 
unavailability of safe drinking water and poor sanitation services, such as insufficient public toilets  and 
nonfunctioning  public common toilet facilities are of great concern.  Communities practice open 
defecation and pollute the beaches.  Water and sanitation -related illnesses challenge their health and  
add a burden to women ’s caretaking role. In addition, this  influence s the  economic sectors  due to the 
fact that women and child ren pay high prices from vendors in MMA.
32  
 Liberia ’s coastal communities also face several  psychosocial challenges : in addition to economic 
vulnerabi lity and stress resulting  from  the reality of living  in communities affected by climate -induced 
erosion , the uncertainty of measures that are going to be put in place by local authorities  is a burden . 
This is even worse for s ingle female -headed households . More than men, the affected women also 
revealed that the destruction of their productive assets  and their houses by the sea has led them to 
lodge with friends and relatives in the other communities  in prox imal  areas . The use of im proper and 
unsafe place s to sleep  is causing serious health problems for their families and themselves –  including  
flu, constant cold and malaria . Furthermore, this displacement is connected to t eenage pregnancy  as 
well as  drug and substance abuse by young men and women which were  also rampant phenomenon  
discussed.  
Education  
 
32 Govern ment of Liberia (2009). Water supply and sanitation policy, p. 6


---
*Page 146*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
10 
 H 
After years of civil war and the  breakout of EVD,  Liberia is still in the process of rebuilding its education 
infrastructure and workforce.  The issue of youth education is serious. Based on the Liberia Household 
Income and Expenditure Survey data collected  in 2014, the national literacy rate is estimated to be 66.7 
percent, that means, just over two thirds of Liberians can  read and write. Residents of urban areas are 
more likely to be able to read and write than those of rural areas; 76 percent versus 50.1 percent. The 
gap between men and women is even larger while 80.4 percent of males are reported as literate, only 
54.8 percent of females know how to read and write. Therefore, women lack the necessary skills and 
resources that can provide them with the typ es of opportunities of their male counterparts .  
  
Liberia Demographic Health Survey (LDHS, 2013) reveals that access to education has increased for 
both girls and boys (15 -19 year) for the population with an increase from 31  percent in 2007 to 41 
percent for girls in 2013, and from 36  percent in 2007 to 46  percent for boys in 2013 (LDHS, 2013). 
However, a gender gap in education persists  and shows geographical variations by count y, variations in 
literacy rates by ages and by completion rates, and variations in rural and urban areas. For  example,  
Grand Bassa (66%) and Bong (50%) were cited to have the highest proportion of women/girls who have never attended school . These variations persist even though  gender disparities in primary school 
enrolment have been significantly reduced. The issue of girls dropping out of schools is of concern .  
Reasons cited for these dropouts  include  sexual exploitation, rape, teenage pregnancies, forced or early 
marriages, poverty, boys to girls’ preference to education,  as well as gender roles stereotyping in 
educational curriculum and discrimination against the girl child. Discrimination  and stigma are noted in 
the expulsion of pregnant adolescents’  girls from school, while the same is not done to the  peer boys 
who have impregnated the m. At secondary school level, 10 percent of girls completed secondary school 
compared to 23 percent of boys. Poverty is also a major factor for girls  to drop  out of schools.   
 
The Government recognizes the need to close this gap and to promote a drastic and rapid increase in school attendance in rural areas , particularly for girls. This situation was alleviated by providing 
universal primary education and implementing the National Action Plan 2004 -2015: Education for All. 
The Government has also prioritized girls’ education through the National Girls Education Policy to 
ensure, encourage and support the enrolment and retention of girls in school. The Free and Compulsory Education Law is another important step towards women and girls’ equa lity in education. The Education 
Reform Act of 2011 aims to enhance access to education from a gender perspective by increasing the number of female teachers and advocating for counseling services for girls, and punitive measures 
against teachers who sexua lly abuse and assault students. There are also calls for legislation that will 
ensure that pregnant girls are not expelled from school.   
 
The situation becomes critical in the coastal communities like new Hotel community, where most adult 
women and girls are illiterate and lack many of the basic skills to meet up with the challenges of life  and 
empower themselves better . Stakeholder meetings and interviews with communities indicate d 
mothers’  worry as to how they can continue to send their c hildren to school since the sea is taking 
progressively away the public schools’  infrastructures and sea level rise and subsequent  flooding  is a 
threat to young kids  during the raining seasons .  
Political participation and governance  
Despite Liberia producing the first female president in Africa, women continue to face several  
challenges running as candidates including fear of violence and intimidation, hostility to their speaking 
in public, and a  lack of funds to run for office.  Participation of women in politics and governance remain


---
*Page 147*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
11 
 H 
low - women occupy only 2 out of 30 seats in the Senate and 10 of the 73 seats in the House of 
Representatives.33  
In local government, from general town chiefs to co unty superintendents, women account for fewer 
than 6 % of leadership positions. In the national legislature, women make up around 11.5 %. In the 
Cabinet, or executive branch, women number only 21 %. In the Supreme Court, 40 % are women with 
only 5 people on the court. In the decision- making structure in the judiciary, such as circuit court judges, 
women total just 12.5 %.34 
 
The Local Government Act enacted in 2018  “affirms the commitment of the Government of Liberia to 
further the unity of the Republic by providing equal opportunity for all of its citizens to engage in the 
governance of the state through the devolution of certain administrative, fiscal and political powers and institutions from the national government to local g overnments”.  Several  efforts to pass a bill 
mandating legislative quotas have been undertaken but  are yet to be successful. The Equal Participation 
in Politics Act, 2016 has still not been passed into law. If all these laws are passed combined with the 
will of political parties to institute affirmative action measures , this can  significantly increase the 
number of women who hold public office However, the neutrality of language and lack of incentives 
and enforcement measures fall short of achieving the desired target. The Law s and related 
dispensations need to be made explicit and enforceable.  
 
In addition, the Local Government A ct includes a gender equity measure which reserves 2 seats in every 
county council for women and women can also contest for the other seats. In addressing the structural 
inequity and marginalization of women in the public sector, the Government should deve lop and adopt 
policies in all public institutions and government agencies to address gender inequities, including codes of conduct and non -discrimination policies. Although, increasing the number of women ’s 
representation is critical, there is also needed  to develop a robust gender capacity building program for 
the different actors at national and local levels.  
 
Decision -making  
Women’s equitable participation and representation in decision -making strengthens commitments to 
women’s empowerment and gender equality. It also makes for better outcomes related to sustainable 
development, resilience and adaptation capacity, and overall wellbeing.   
The 2013 Liberia Demographic and Health Survey, covering all of Liberia, found that, “ most  currently 
married women (58 -61 percent) reported that each of three household decisions is made jointly with 
their husbands. Sixteen percent of women reported that they alone make decisions about their own 
health care; 19 percent make their own decisions to visit their fami lies and relatives, and 24 percent 
make their own decisions about major household purchases. More specifically, 30 percent of currently 
married women who receive cash earnings reported that they alone mainly decide how their earnings are used, while 54 per cent say they decided jointly with their husband. Only 15 percent of women 
reported that their husband mainly decides how their earnings will be used. Younger women are generally more likely than older women to make independent decisions on their earnings.  Further, 32 
 
33 National Election Commission , 2018 
34 63UN Women (2017). Liberia Fact Sheet: Women’s Representation in Various Branches and Levels of  
Government


---
*Page 148*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
12 
 H 
percent of urban and 26 percent of rural currently married women reported that they mainly decide how to spend their earnings.
35 
Women in coastal communities are empowered by hardship; as they are not waiting for their partners to attend to dom estic care and other family related needs, they are part of the decision in the 
households and have a say in the family decisions, even though most of the interviewed men responded 
that they are the heads of the families.  
Labor  force / Employment and livel ihoods  
Liberian employment law prohibits discrimination based on gender
36. In addition, the “Decent Work 
Bill” passed into law on June 25, 2016. The bill explicitly excludes discrimination against women in 
working conditions and wages.37 Further, pregnant women have the right to three months paid 
maternity leave,38 and employers are responsible for paying 100 percent of maternity benefits.39 But 
these regulations only apply to women working in the formal sector, and according to the 2008 re port 
issued to the Committee on the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 90 percent of women are employed in the informal sector.
40 The World Bank 
considers 67 percent of women in Liberia to be employed.41  
As of 2014, 47 percent of the total labor  force was female42 although not all those who work are 
included in the labor  force including, for example, unpaid workers, family workers, and students. The 
labor  force size also tends to change seasonally.  
Access t o resources , land tenure and p roperty rights  
According to data from the MGCSP, there are about 367 Women Entrepreneurs who are employers in the trade, commerce and industry sector  who are struggling  to have access to the capital or assets 
necessary to begin to expand their businesses.  This is in addition to  5,650 women  who are listed as 
employers  in small businesses and 1,500 women in volved in  agricultural entrepreneurship , according 
to the 2009 Liberia CEDAW report .  
Women are the key actors of Informal Cross Border Trade (ICBT), making up approximately 70 percent of the informal cross border traders.  Women operating in cross border trade  are operating under  
unbearable conditions because  exposed to f raudulent custom charges, extortion, discrimination, and 
at times sexual harassment and other forms of gender -based  violence when crossing the borders.  To 
 
35 Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo -Information Services (LISGIS), Ministry of Health and Social  
Welfare [Liberia], National AIDS Control Program [Liberia], and ICF International. 2014. Liberia Demographic and Health Surve y 2013. 
Monrovia, Liberia: Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo -Information Services (LISGIS) and ICF International.  
36 Committee on the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (2008), Consideration of 
reports submitted by States parties un der article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
Combined initial, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth periodic reports of States parties Liberia, CEDAW/C/LBR/6, New York, CEDAW 
(http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/cedaws44.htm  - accessed 17 November 2013). p.56  in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index (SIGI) (2014 data), p.7 http://www.genderindex.org/sites/default/files/datasheets/LR.pdf   
37 CEDAW (2009c) Summary record of the 902nd meeting. CEDAW/C/SR.902. New York, CEDAW 
(http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/cedaws44.htm  - accessed 17 November 2013). p.4 in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender 
Index (SIGI) (2014 data), p. 7 http://www.ge nderindex.org/sites/default/files/datasheets/LR.pdf   
38 CEDAW (2009c) p. 4 in OECD, 2014, p. 7.  
39 World Bank (2013) in OECD, 2014, p. 7.  
40 World Bank (2013)  in OECD, 2014, p. 7.  
41 World Bank (n.d.) ‘Data: labor participation rate in OECD, 2014, p. 7.  
42 World Bank Data accessed 26 September 2016. Source UNESCO 
http://data.worldbank.org/indi cator/SL.TLF.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=LR&view=chart


---
*Page 149*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
13 
 H 
improve the conditions of women in informal cross border trade (WICBT), the MGCSP has, through a joint effort with UN Women Liberia and Liberian women traders, formed the Association of Women in 
Cross Border Trade.  
In MMA women when not in fisheries are mostly involved in petty trade  which doesn’ t offer access to 
quick change in live conditions  if not exposed to other opportunities for improvement in their  
livelihoods. O ne of the ways  to support them is to offer alternatives with vocational skills for them and 
to the girls to alleviate poverty and support their resilience . 
Title 29 of Liberia’s Property  Law and Article 23 of the Constitution grant equal ownership rights to land 
and non- land assets to both men and women, discriminatory practices persist.
43 The Land Rights Policy 
approved by the Land Commission on May 21, 2013 also states that, “the Constitution gives all Liberians 
‘the right to own property alone as well as in association with others,’ which means land ownership is 
permitted for all Liberians regardless of their identity, whether based on custom, ethnicity, tribe, language, gender, or other wise. This is a fundamental constitutional principle that has informed every 
part of the Land Commission’s policy recommendation .”
44 Further, the government established a Land 
Commission in 2009 to address conflict over land sales, secure men and women’s land tenure, and modernize the country’s land law.
45  
While Liberia has a dual land tenure system, based on written law derived from statutes and case law, 
and on customary law, customary tenure systems generally prevail.46 Under customary law, women  
can only access land through their husbands; they cannot themselves inherit land so any disputes considered under customary law may be biased in favor  of men.  
It is hoped that women’s formal access to and control over farmland will increas e via the passa ge in 
2018 of the Land Rights Act which ensures women’s access to land in order to increase farming and 
other livelihoods. It is a critical step forward towards improving land security and ensuring the  
productive use of land assets to reduce poverty and vu lnerability, especially owing to its recognition of 
customary communities as owners of their land which presents a unique opportunity for disadvantaged Liberians in rural areas to be decision makers in the management of their land resources and to benefit 
from its proceeds. Accelerating the process of accession to the provisions of the Act and ensuring the 
full functionality of the Land Authority will therefore be a major focus under economic governance .
47 
The Government gives equal opportunity of owning pro perty to everyone regardless of sex and 
ownership of a house is considered a measure of women’s empowerment according to the 2013 Demographic and Health Survey. The DHS indicates that the percentage of women who do not own a 
 
43 CEDAW (2009a), ‘Responses to the list of issues and questions about the consideration of the combined initial, second, third,  fourth, fifth 
and sixth periodic reports Liberia’, CEDAW/C/LBR/Q/6/Add.1. New Y ork, CEDAW  
(http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/cedaws44.htm - accessed 17 November 2013); in OECD. Social Institutions 
and Gender Index (SIGI) (2014 data) http://www.genderindex.org/sites/default/files/datasheets/LR.pdf  
44 Government of Liberia. Land Commission. Land Rights Policy. Approved May 21, 2013  
45 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) (2014 data) http://www.genderindex.org/sites/default/files/datasheets/LR.pdf   
46 Hughes, Ailey Kaiser (February 2013) Focus on Land in Africa Brief: Liberia. World Resources Institute and Lands Rural Development 
Institute in OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) (2014 data) http://www.genderind ex.org/sites/default/files/datasheets/LR.pdf  
47 Republic of Liberia, ‘2018 -2023 Pro -Poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development’(PAPD) -  A five -year National Development Plan 
towards accelerated, inclusive, and sustainable development, September 2018, p.104. / See also Article 15: Equality before the Law and 
Article 16: Marriage and Family Life of the present report for more details on Women’s Land Rights


---
*Page 150*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
14 
 H 
house is highest in Montserrado  (81 percent) out of all the country’s counties. By county, the 
percentage of men who do not own a house is also highest in Montserrado (89 percent).48 
Women and men have equal right to access financial services, including credit and bank loans. However, 
in practice, women often have difficulty accessing credit due to low literacy rates, and/or because they cannot meet the requirements needed to take out a  loan. Microcredit programmes are provided by 
NGOs and the government and women are the main beneficiaries.  However, mo st women have found 
a different means of pulling finance together through savings clubs called, “Susu.” Susu clubs are a 
traditional form  of banking and resource mobilization system widely used in Liberia and mostly by low-
income earners, including many who have MSMEs. In these savings clubs, a group of people agree to 
pay a certain amount at the end of each period (daily, weekly or monthly ) based on needs. The total 
amount collected is given to an individual to expand his or her business or to take care of other basic 
needs. In all the visited communities,  women mostly involved in drying and selling fish, as well as those 
involved in petty trade, find daily “ Susu ” clubs to be an effective way to save towards better 
opportunities (either expanding businesses or investment).  
Gender -Based Violence  
Rates of sexual and gender -based violence (SGBV), harmful practices (HPs), female genital mutilation 
(FGM), child marriage and teenage pregnancy are all high, while access to sexual and reproductive 
health rights (SRHR) is low.  
Women and girls are the main victims of harmful traditional practices affecting their health, often to 
the point of pe rmanent physical, psychological and emotional damages, and sometimes even death. 
Some of these include boy to girl preference, nutritional taboos, early marriages, Female Genital 
Mutilation (FGM) and Gender -Based Violence (GBV). Health facilities remain in sufficiently equipped to 
deal with GBV, and  inaccessible to most  survivors. Traumatized women and children who are survivors 
of different forms of GBV are confronted with the challenge of inadequate access to appropriate counselling and psycho -social suppo rt. The prevalence of GBV including the harmful traditional practice 
such as polygamy has serious repercussions on women and girls and is also often a cause and 
consequence of HIV among women and girls.  
The Liberia EU/UN S potlight Initiative
49 provides a good situation al analysis of the SGBV and Harmful  
traditional practices in Liberia  with regards to the Legislative and Policy Framework, the capacity of 
related Institution s, Prevention and Social Norms , the current r esponse and the inaccura cy and 
insufficient data  about the nature and the extent of GBV. These are summarized in the in the following 
sections.  While Liberia has ratified key international and regional instruments50 that seek to address 
VAWG, implementation is weak or non -existent and significant legislative and regulatory gaps remain. 
For example, the Children’s Law of is not enforced nor operational ; the amendment of the Domestic 
Violence Law failed to ban FGM despite intense debate; and even though the then President iss ued 
Executive Order No. 92 prohibiting FGM in January 2018, the practice remains widespread. While the 
Penal Code criminalizes rape, there is no mention of marital rape. In addition, the sexual and 
 
48 Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo -Information Services (LISGIS) -  Ministry of Health and S ocial Welfare (MOHSW). Liberia 
Demographic and Health Survey 2013. http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2165   
49 Liberia EU/UN Spotlight Initiative, Programme against SGBV and  Harmful practices, 2018  
50 International legal instruments including CEDAW (1979), 1325 NAP (2009), Convention of the Rights of a child (1990); Internat ional 
Convention on the rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006): The Protocol on the Statute of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights, 
the Kampala Convention.


---
*Page 151*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
15 
 H 
reproductive rights of minority groups such as sex workers  and those who identify as LGBTIQ are not 
legally recognized.  
There is also an urgent need to address the structural gaps in laws and policies through legislative reforms, amendments and repeal of obsolete laws. There is also a need for expeditious enactment of 
pending bills, such as the Domestic Violence Bill, to ensure effective protection of women’s human 
rights.
51 Some of the major ongoing legal and policy interventions include the anticipated amendment 
and enactment of the Domestic Vi olence Bill; implementation of the Law Reform Policy; revision of the 
Public Health Law and National Family Planning Strategy and the Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health
52 Policy; and planned revision of the 2011 National Youth Poli cy. In addition 
to the gaps in legislation and regulatory frameworks there is little or no political will and commitment, the lack of public confidence in statutory institutions such as the judiciary and the police leads to 
underreporting of cases.  For exa mple, of the 1,511 cases of rape reported (to all sources, not only 
police) in 2014/15, only 2% resulted in conviction of the perpetrators.
53 The lack of trust in  government 
structures creates strong social pressure to resolve cases outside formal justice s ystems,  especially 
when the perpetrator is a family member of the victim or is a wealthy, powerful and  influential member 
of the community.  
Current institutional capacities and mechanisms largely remain weak and incapable of efficiently  
implementing multi sectoral programming approaches to plan, implement and monitor interventions  
to prevent and respond to SGBV, HPs and SRHR -related issues at both national and subnational levels.  
The most significant obstacle is the absence of adequate institutional budgeta ry allocation to meet the 
gender -specific needs of women and men, boys and girls. As a result, there is considerable public 
mistrust in the delivery of  appropriate services to effectively address the structural causes of the high 
incidence of SGBV and  related problems, fostering a culture of impunity.  
 
The Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (M oGCSP) has not received enough funding to 
prevent and respond to SGBV and HPs and promote realization of SRHR. Other relevant line ministries  
have also not prioritized any strategic interventions in their sector plans nor allocated budget to 
complement efforts by MGCSP .  
There are several  sociocultural factors that pose a challenge to the eradication of GBV in Liberia. In 
addition to patriarchal norm s that maintain the low social status of women and girls, the legacy of the 
Liberian civil wars – which were characterized by extremely high levels of sexual and other forms of 
violence against women, with rape being used as a weapon of war – remains. As a  result, the nature 
and level of violence has, to an extent, been ‘normalized’ in the now post- conflict circumstances,54 with 
a cultural and societal acceptance of violence against women and children, especially girls.55 Data from 
the most recent Demographic  and Health Survey (DHS) in 2013 56 show, for instance, that 43% of  
women and 24% of men agree that husbands are justified in beating their wives if they burn the food, 
neglect the children, go out without telling them or refuse sex.  
 
51 Domestic Violence Bill including the FGM Clause; Amendment of the Alien & Nationality Law; 
 
52 8https://www.dropbox.com/s/i9zpriiujpj5w2u/Liberia%20RMNCAH%20INVESTMENT%20CASE%202016%2 0- 
%202020.pdf?dl=0  
53 MoGCSP Gender -Based Violence Annual Statistical Report of 2015.  
54 Bernath, 2014, Evaluation of the Norwegian Refugee Council’s GBV Programme 2009 -2014  
55 Evaluation of the Norwegian Refugee Council’s GBV Programme 2009 -2014.  
56 Demograp hic and Health Survey (2013). Available at: https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR214/SR214.pdf .


---
*Page 152*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
16 
 H 
Child marriage, early initiation of sexual activity and teenage pregnancy are common in L iberia: 
according to the DHS 2013, 24% of women age 25– 49 had sexual intercourse by the age of 15 and 78% 
by age 18, while 37% of women have had their first child by age 18. Statistics reveal that most  girls were 
coerced into their first sexual experience.  Rates of teenage pregnancy are also much higher in rural 
communities than in urban areas. Because there is a strong correlation between child marriage and 
SGBV occurrence, these young women are at greater risk of impacts including reduced access to SRHR, 
maternal mortality and morbidity, and health issues such as fistula and uterine prolapse due to early 
pregnancy.  
The most recent UNICEF data from 2008 –2011 suggest that 44% of women and girls aged 15 –49 are 
members of a society called Sande.57 The Sande society is led by traditional leaders called Zoes. The 
Sande society is  the trusted custodian of ‘culture' in much of Liberia and has been present in the region 
for centuries.  This society is traditionally believed to inculcate values and teach s kills conducive to 
communal  harmony and to prepare children for the rigors  of adulthood. It also has a spiritual 
dimension, though it is not considered to be a religious institution as such, and most Sande and Poro 
(the male equivalent of Sande) members are also adherents of Christianity or Islam.58 In order to join 
the Sande society, which represents a rite of passage towards adulthoo d, women and girls need to 
undergo several initiation rituals, the most significant of which is FGM. Most girls who  join the Sande 
society are taken out of normal school and sent to ‘bush schools’, compromising  fulfilment of their right 
to education.  
Regio nal and national consultations revealed that FGM is not the only HP in Liberia infringing on the  
rights of women and girls. Other HPs mentioned include forced confession by women to admit crimes  
they did not commit or else face severe consequences; accusin g women of being witches and punishing 
women for any perceived wrong by undressing them in public.  
Moreover, groups that are traditionally left behind59 are discriminated against, oppressed, stigmatized  
and abused; and live in constant fear of being attacke d and beaten because of their condition,  disability 
and/or sexual orientation. In addition, people with disability, including women and girls, are  more at 
risk of violence in general, including SGBV. The attempts of CSOs and women’s groups to  advocate for 
capacity development and institutional change have yet to bear fruit and result in action,  especially 
prevention. Members of the LGBTIQ community have limited access to basic rights, services,  social 
freedom, social justice, social economic empowerment and  access to health services; and suffer  from 
denial of their fundamental rights to expression, equality and association.  have undergone FGM in 
Liberia .60  
Most cases of VAWG are reported by health facilities, NGOs and Liberia National Police (LNP)/Woman  
and Child Protection Section (WACPS). Of all cases reported by the GBV Unit of MGCSP in 2017,  medical 
treatment was provided to 56.9% of survivors. The most frequent services provided to victims  include  
treatment for sexually transmitted infections, post -exposure prophylaxis, tetanus toxoid  vaccination, 
emergency contraceptives and psychosocial counselling. There is no specialized  assistance nor services 
that are provided to women and girls with disability, refugees or displaced .  
 
57 Mgbako (2011), Penetrating the Silence in Sierra Leone: A Blueprint for the Eradication of Female Genital Mutilation.  
58 December 2015 report on traditional practices in Liberia, published by United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).  
59 Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Persons, women and girls and men and boys living with disabilities,  
60 Recalculation of DHS figure of 66% by UNICEF Divisi on of Data, Research and Policy.


---
*Page 153*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
17 
 H 
Gender and cli mate change vulnerability  
Availability of data concerning the differential impact of climate change on women and men in Liberia 
is limited. A Gender and Environment Index (GEI) case study of Liberia61 observes in 2015 that Liberia 
has made great progress in recognizing women’s role in environmental decision making, as evidenced 
by numbers of women in national level leadership positions and in civil society. However, discriminatory 
social norms and prac tices continue to constrain women’s participation and representation. There is 
need for greater gender responsiveness in policy, and  in the translation of policy into action, e.g. 
improved access to training, education and livelihood options for women as w ell as engaging men in 
the pursuit of gender equality. These sorts of actions support women’s greater decision -making and 
strengthen their resilience on climate change issues.  
A recent study on “Gender and Social impact of Climate change”62 in the sectors of  Forestry, Agriculture 
and fisheries  has demonstrated  that climate change affects women and men differently with women 
being affected mostly. The study has shown that even though both men and women rely on natural 
resources for their survival in those se ctors,  there is an existing wide disparity of the impact of climate 
change and variation in the adaptative capacities of men and women. Women rely heavily on natural 
resources for their livelihood, the subsistence of their families, communities, education of their 
children, health even for their self -empowerment.  
Coastal erosion is causing the destruction of infrastructure, loss of property, displacement  of people , 
decrease of income, rise of insecurity and of g ender -based violence  – all of which  increase the 
vulnerability of  women in Liberia and exacerbate the  challenges they are already facing.  
Nevertheless,  as small -scale entrepreneurs, informal petty traders, caretakers in families, breadwinners 
in households, educators  in communities, women play important roles by constantly  building resilient 
households and communities.  
 
In the same manner as the former  Agenda for Transformation63 of 2017, the new five- year national 
development plan called the Pro Poor Agenda for  Prosperity and Development (PAPD)  charts a path 
towards accelerated, inclusive, and sustainable development for the Republic of Liberia.  Under its Pillar 
I, “Power to the people” it also intends to improve the socio -economic and political status and capacity 
of women in Liberia, with the strategic objective s of improving women’s capacity to respond to gender -
based violence and harmful traditional practices; increase women’s participation in the community 
decision -making process; and strengthen women’s participation in income generation and employment 
opportunities in agriculture, fisheries, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), and the formal 
sector.  The PAPD pillar “Economy and Jobs” ( whose goal is to advance the macroeconomic environment 
enabling private sector -led economic growth,  greater competitiveness, and diversification of the 
economy ) pays a special attention to environmental issues and the management of natural resources. 
However, t o make th ese goals a reality , the Government needs to highlight the different gender issues 
faced by women and men in vulnerable communities to enable transformative strategic interventions.  
 
61 IUCN (2015). Women in environmental decision -making in Liberia: An environment and gender index (EGI) country case study 
http://www. conservation.org/publications/Documents/CI_Women -in-Environmental -Decision -Making -in-Liberia.pdf   
62 Gender and Social impact  of Climate change , Liberia NAP, UNDP/EPA 2018  
63 Republic of Liberia. Agenda for Transformation: Steps Towards Liberia RISING 2030,  2017 
http://allafrica.com/download/resource/main/main/idatcs/00080846:1b0f1d46c3e2c30c51658f7f64dcb7b9.pdf


---
*Page 154*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
18 
 H 
In the meantime, women and men have taken some empirical and pre -emptive actions to reduce t he 
vulnerability and build the resilience of their households and communities against s ea level rise. Most 
of the visited coastal communities that have been in an area for a long time have typically established 
coping strategies for variable climate and ex treme weather. This proposal , in identifying  and 
incorporating  gender responsive interventions , seeks to also contribute to social transformation and 
social justice by  reducing  economic inequities and existing discriminatory attitudes and practices .  
Other  kinds of vulnerabilities  
During the field visits  and consultations for this proposal , children were identified as a vulnerable group. 
There is a rampant evidence of child labor , children street sellers , beggars and many school  dropouts . 
Girls face more challenges especially within the family : they are at a higher risk of transactional sex, 
sexual and gender -based  violence and forced early marriages . This explains the phenomenon  of teen -
age pregnancies  as assessed above . 
 
Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) face discrimination in education and lack of user -friendly facilities and 
services; as well as in the job market as a result of social biases and stereotypes associated with 
disability. Women and children with disabilities suffer double  discrimination – first as women and 
children, second as persons with disabilities and therefore they need special attention.  The National 
Action Plan for Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Liberia  (2018 – 2022 ) stresses t he need to 
promote friendly  environment and inclusive education for PWDs including promoting their full 
participation in national development of the country is critical for ensuring growth with equity. It is an expression or elaboration of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in practical 
terms as reflected in the call for PWDs to have i) public accessibility, ii) inclusive education; c) access to 
employment and livelihood, d) health care, e) independent living and self -determination, and finally f) 
access to justice and social protection. The N ational Adaptation Plan (NAP) in Liberia  recognizes the 
special needs of women with disabilities who are further discriminated against because they are women calls for special attention to be given to them.    
 
People Liv ing with HIV and AIDS  are also another vulnerable group . Stigma of HIV in communities  exists 
as there is still insufficient understanding of issues related to HIV and AIDS and family members often 
abandon when those living with HIV/AIDS need their support most. Women particularly bear the brunt 
of the burden of the disease and require a multi -level support although presently the country has 
limited “safety nets” to assist and support them. There is a very small number of adolescent- friendly 
reproductive health services which are sparsely located in just few areas in Monrovia. This acute 
shortage imposes a high risk of Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) and HIV on girls. They are easily 
also exposed to the risk of unwanted pregnancies which compound the challenges. Fear of negative effects, stigma and discrimination prevent many women fro m sharing their personal experiences, which 
has serious implications in accessing treatment and controlling HIV infections.  
 
III - Legal and Administrative Framework to address G ender inequality in Liberia


---
*Page 155*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
19 
 H 
The Constitution guarantees all persons, regardless of sex, the enjoyment of fundamental rights and 
freedom. Although there is no official definition of discrimination and discriminatory practices, Liberia 
is committed to the promotion of the rights of wom en through various national laws and policies.  
Significant progress has been made in passing major legislations in ensuring gender equality and women’s empowerment. These include the Domestic Relations Law; the Inheritance Act of 1998 (which 
specifies Equ al Rights in marriage and inheritance under Customary and Statutory Laws); the Rape Law 
of 2005 (which outlaws gang rape and stipulates life -term sentence for aggressive forms of rape); and 
the Anti -Human Trafficking Act of 2005, prohibiting trafficking in  persons, although it is not explicit on 
trafficking of women and children for sexual purposes. All these policies and legislations affirm the Government ’s commitment to address gender inequality and to ensure that women are fully engaged 
in activities tha t are of benefit to them and to the nation.  
 
Gender and women empowerment policies  
 
The National Gender Policy (NGP)  of 2017 is drafted in line with the Constitution of Liberia which is the 
supreme law of the land and takes precedence in establishing a f ramework for the Government to 
promote unity, liberty, stability, equality, justice and human rights with opportunities for social, 
economic and political advancement of the whole society, irrespective of gender.  
The policy underpins some challenges for the implementation of these laws: one  of its strategic action s 
for 2018- 2022 is to “Develop new or review existing laws to eliminate gender insensitive provisions and 
to harmonize customary and civil laws in conformity with international hum an rights standards.”
64 In 
line with the NGP, the current 5 years general development plan –  the 2018- 2023 Pro -poor Agenda for 
Prosperity and Development -  provides to harmonize the 2 systems of law in its short term and mid -
term interventions.65 Customary L aw applies mainly to issues of marriage and inheritance and is 
generally blamed for certain harmful practices, including early marriage and Female Genital Mutilation 
(FGM). Although the statutory laws prohibit discriminatory practices, they make no specifi c provisions 
for protection against discrimination in the private or domestic spheres.  
 
Even where some laws may exist ( such as the Penal Code for Rape that has a provision for extensive 
prison term)  women are still challenged with limited access to justic e, particularly in the counties and 
rural areas. Inadequate poor court infrastructure in counties and rural areas, which is further hindered 
by the destruction of courts during the conflict, inadequate staffing both in law enforcement and adjudication, ina dequate capacity of the existing justice system to process caseloads, as well as limited 
knowledge of rights and negative attitudes of law enforcers. The demand side of justice also needs to 
be capacitated to understand the law, know their rights, and be p ositioned to claim and exercise those 
rights. There is a pressing need for a comprehensive law review and a plan for reform and drafting of 
new laws. Such efforts could include, among others, the enactment of equality laws to address some 
existing gaps, re view of existing laws and the removal of any discriminatory and contradictory laws in 
the protection of women’s fundamental freedom and rights as enshrined in the Constitution.  
 
64 Revised National Gender Policy (2018 -2022), Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection, 2017, Liberia.  
65 Republic of Liberia, ‘2018 -2023 Pro -Poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development’(PAPD) - A five- year National 
Development Plan towards accelerated, inclusive, and sustainable development, September 2018, pp.108 -110.


---
*Page 156*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
20 
 H 
 
Liberia is also a party to various international instruments on the promotion  of gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. At the global level, treaties, declarations commitments applicable to Liberia 
include:  
• Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) 1979;  
• Optional Protocol on CEDAW;  
• Conv ention on the Rights of Child (CRC) (1990);  
• Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the Child (CRC);  
• Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006);  
• International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966);  
• International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (1966);  
• UN Security Council Resolution 1325;  
• UN Security Council Resolution 1820;  
• UN Security Council Resolution 1612 (Children and Armed Conflict);  
• Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995);  
• International Conference on Population and Development (1994);  
• United Nations Declaration on Violence Against Women (1993);  
• Millenniu m Declaration and MDGs (2000);  
• Universal Declaration on Human Rights (1948);  
• Vienna Declaration and the Plan of Action (1993);  
• Sustainable Development Goals 2030.  
 
At the regional level, Liberia is a party to the following instruments (See Annex 2 for detailed description 
of the commitments and provisions):  
• The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa  
• AU Women’s Decade  
• African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child  
• New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD)  
• Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa (2004)  
• The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Gender Policy  
• The Mano River Declaration,  
• Maputo Declaration and the Beijing +10 Commitment.  
 
The M oGCSP  is the national machinery for promoting gender equality, women’s advancement and 
children’s welfare in Liberia. The Ministry also supports  the policy and legal landscape to:  
• Advise the Government on all matters affecting the development and welfare of women and 
children;  
• Coordinate the Government’s gender mainstreaming efforts to ensure that both women’s and men’s perspectives are central to policy formulation, legislation, r esource allocation, planning 
and outcomes of policies and programs, focusing on gender equality, empowerment of women 
and development of children; and


---
*Page 157*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
21 
 H 
• Monitor and report back the impact of national policies and programs on women and children 
as well as re commend appropriate measures to be taken in mobilizing and integrating women 
as equal partners with men in the economic, social, political, and cultural development of the 
country.  
 
The NGP will pay attention  to domestication of national, regional, and gl obal development frameworks. 
The NGP will also ensure that the gender considerations promoted in the international gender equality 
and women’s empowerment instruments are mainstreamed into all sectoral programs. For example, 
the overarching principle of le ave no one behind of the SDGs will be followed through in the same way 
as the requirements of CEDAW.  
 
On its page 35, the revised policy highlights climate change and degradation of the environment and 
the grave social and gender implications of ecosystem breakdown should there be a lack of rapidly and 
adequate action. The gender policy views women as major players . 
 
Liberia Climate Change and gender Action Plan (ccGAP)  
 In 2012, Liberia put in place a climate change Gender Action Plan (GAP)  that is due for  revis ion. Its aim 
is to ensur e that gender equality, is mainstreamed into climate change policies, programmes, and 
interventions agriculture, coasts, forestry, health, water and sanitation and energy  sectors that they 
are gaps to be filled.  It stresses the importance of the fact that it is of upmost importance to deeply 
understand and analyze men and women’s needs, priorities and challenges regarding  climate change, 
and subsequently, draw  interventions that are really tailored to both groups .  
Consultations with men and women have shown that around 70% of the population living in the 
identified six hotpots  along the coastline of MMA, without any further actions, sea level rise will affect 
a significant number them and will have a significant impact on their lives and livelihoods especially 
those identified as the poorest and  the most vulnerable groups.  
The National Environmental Policy and Response Strategy on Climate change acknowledges the vital 
role that women play in conservation and the sustainable management of the environment.  and aims 
to ensure their participation in decision making on the implementation of the environmental policy and 
its activities. It further states that gender mainstreaming shall form an integral part of the basic training, 
social development, environmental and natural resource management.
66 
 
The National Policy for Disaster M anagement  
 
The Go vernment  of Liberia has recognized  the importance of having measures for the prevention of 
disasters, or the mitigation of their effects, for preparedness and capacity building to effectively 
respond to any threatening disaster, and roles and responsibilities of ministries and agencies.  To that 
 
66 The National Environmental Policy and R esponse Strategy on Climate change, EPA, 2018


---
*Page 158*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
22 
 H 
effect, an Act establish ing the National Disaster  Management Agency  and a The National Policy for 
Disaster Management was developed.67 The policy establishes an institutional and operational 
framework that will drive successful implementation.  Because DRR is multidisciplinary and multi -
dimensional, all our development and humanitarian partners are called upon to work with Government 
in building national and community resilience to disasters within the context of sustainable 
development.  The National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) is currently developing a  National 
Disaster Management Strategy  for Disaster Risk Management in Liberia as well as a Guide for 
Emergency Response and Preparedness . Gender  equality is a strong  planning principle .   
This policy recognizes the important role played by women in development and the burden they carry 
and suffer during disasters.  Consequently, all activities implemented by the government and all its 
partners before, during and after disasters, will proactively and consciously include participation of women and other  vulnerable groups  namely women, children, People Living With HIV/AIDS, the elderly, 
disabled and other vulnerable people at national, county, district and community/chiefdom levels.  . The 
policy further stresses that  all DRR plans including contingency/pr eparedness plans shall have a gender 
strategy for emergency response informed by differentiated needs.   
The pro posed actions are :  
- Strengthen Women’s Security in Crisis:  
- Expand Women’s Participation , representation and Leadership and Build their  skills and 
confidenc e individually and within networks.  
- Promote Gender Equality in DRR  by Incorporate gender analysis in the assessment of 
disaster risks, impacts and needs.  
- Ensure Gender -Responsive Recovery  by providing  equal economic opportunities for 
women including access to assets, such as land and credit,  social protection and sustainable 
livelihoods , transportation, shelter and health care during and after disasters.  
- Develop Capacities and skills of men and women for Social Change before, during an d after 
disasters  reduce vulnerability to natural hazards , achieve equitable post -disaster 
reconstruction , build social cohesion  and ban norms that are against.  
 
IV – Lessons learned from climate resilience and gender programmes in Liberia  
Liberia is  still in the process of investing significant human and financial resources to both mitigation 
and adaptation priorities and  continues to improve in programmatic design and practice  for climate 
change . In parallel, the New Revised Gender and PWD policies to tackle  gender inequality and social 
exclusion are led by the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (Mo GCSP) , which are  
relevant to addressing the needs and priorities of marginalized communities in the country . These 
policies and its related programmes still need to integrate climate change adaptation programmes for 
the country’s most vulnerable.  
At the same time , financing is still to be mobilized to address the climate change adaptation needs of 
vulnerable ho useholds, and the existing one are more oriented in financing  infrastructure s 
development  and research . There is also  an urgent need for better coordination of stakeholders and 
 
67 The National D isaster Management Agency, 2012


---
*Page 159*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
23 
 H 
integration of efforts addressing multiple facets of resilience  and many social factors . The MMCRP seeks  
to allevia te gender inequality, as well as focus  on building climate resilience,  women’s economic 
empowerment,  improvement of gender  norms and  relationship at the family and community levels . In 
order to achieve a transformative impact,  the interventions  of this project  must carefully incorporate  
these elements  and lessons learned that consultations with officials of key entities , and stakeholders’  
consultations have brought  forward:   
•  Capacity building of community members  (men, women, youth ) living in in the MMA  hotspots 
is critical to minimize risk s.  
• Motivation and awareness raising activities should continue for project ownership and success.  
Communities should understand that capacity building and abst aining from developing 
aggravating  factors, such as sand mining  should be the prime objective of adaptation and 
disaster management strategies, rather than relief and response.  
• Capacity building of the institutions working on climate change adaptation should continue   
• The generation of knowledge, knowhow,  resources (material and money through savings, 
emergency funds and emergency plans and emergency response units) at the community level, 
and maintenance of community assets are essential to address immediate emergency needs.  
• Indeed  preparedness, the capac ity to respond in emergencies by communities themselves  
should be promoted because  as early response from external actors during disasters is most of 
the time, inadequate or slow, and their strategies  are not sustainable.   
• Partnerships  and coordination bet ween Government Ministries, as well as between 
Government agencies,  Non-Governmental Organizations, local authorities  and community 
leaders should be reinforced.  
• Ensuring the participation of women, girls, youth, religious leaders, opinion leaders , minorities , 
and persons with disabilities in planning and implementation of climate resilience is critical.  
• Adaptive economic opportunities for year -round employment and earning opportunities for 
community men and women , especially for the youth , are critical for their awareness and 
livelihood adaptability.  
• Livelihood support to vulnerable women , especially widows, single mothers, women heads  of 
households  and their family’s needs  is necessary to be followed up to ensure retention of assets 
and their productive use  
• The social issues discussed during stakeholders’  consultations also form development 
challenges , this project it is critical to support initiatives  that will improve the social well -being .  
• From a gender perspective, the fo llowing recommendations could be made:  
• Ensure women’s voices as well as men’s voices are heard at all stages of adaptation and disaster management (from preparedness to recovery) planning.  
• Increase access to training for economic activities, which are floo d/drought/salinity resilient (as 
appropriate in the area).  
• Maximize the diversification of livelihoods options to increase economic security.  
• Promote equal access for women and men to the benefits and opportunities  of the project.  
• Increase training in financial skills to plan for crisis and maximize marketing of goods before 
crisis.


---
*Page 160*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
24 
 H 
• Ensure women’s safety in shelters, latrines and public spaces.  
• Ensure access to women’s specific and gender sensitive accessible medical care.  
• Champi on men in the communities and households to r educe women’s burden of unpaid work  
and assist in some domestic chores  
• Ensure new livelihoods for women do not involve a huge increase in time unless other 
household members take on other time burdens for respo nsibilities women currently hold.  
It has been proved that providing  livelihood resilience support to poor women  
• brings positive impact on their status within the household and in the community at large , 
• helped to develop their confidence to move around t he community and network with other 
women ,  
• yields  greater levels of respect for women in the community , and   
• selection brings  pride  for women  within their family and  improves intra -household 
relationships  as well as community harmony.  
Therefore,  in such a complex setting , the main challenge in this project design is to holistically address 
the different needs challenges  and aspirations of women and men  and capture them in the action plan .  
 
V - Recommendations  
5.1 – Gender  mainstreaming  
 
In preparation of this project, UNDP conducted stakeholder consultations with a wide range of men 
and women  in April 2019 . These consultations were held  in 22 coastal  communities in MMA  and the 
focus group discussions are included as part of the feasibility study. One of the key aspects of the 
feasibility study was to better understand the current gender relationships at the household and 
community levels. the gendered vulnerabilities to  coastal hazards . This has clearly demonstrate d that 
addressing gender inequality at the household and community levels is essential for building resilience. 
A compilation of the results of the 6 focus group discussion ( FGD) findings is form part of  an additional 
annex to this proposal.  
The different roles, priorities, aspirations  and needs of men and women, and the ways in which both 
perspectives are valuable must be  recognize and effectively utilized these gender -in designing the 
project interventions. It  is also important to recognize the invaluable role that women can pay in 
resource management and tap on their strengths and capabilities, to shift the perception from “ victims“ 
to agents of change. By so doing, gender dimensions will be integrated for gender responsiveness in 
implementation and to obtain gender transformative results.  
The gender analysis, through document review, stakeholder engagement, and consultation showed the 
need for :  
• Engagement  for the different  stakeholders to consider gender Equality and women 
empowerment  as a factor for success , 
• Assessment of gender relations, roles and responsibilities, resource use and management, 
decision making and power relations in targeted communities  in order to have r elevant  gender -


---
*Page 161*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
25 
 H 
related project activities, capable to respond  to the growing threats of coastal erosion and 
extreme climate events,  
• Gender  mainstreaming  the Monrovia Metropolitan Climate Resilient Project (MMCRP) and 
constantly adopting an inclusive, participatory and right- based approach in its implementation;  
• Integration of sex and age disaggregated data and indicators to establish a baseline by which  
areas of focus are made relevant and progress measured;   
• Consideration  of both gender and women specific interventions  to incorporate into the coasted 
Gender Action Plan .  
 
5.2 - Project design  
The project intends to propose some components and actions to create a paradigm shift that 
transforms vulnerable communities i n the MMA  suffering from SLR , to agents of change in climate 
change adaptation, with greater access to improved services, resources and productive assets.  
Men and women are targeted  but including women as specific  beneficiaries of the intervention s, will 
address  challenges of unequal  gender  relations, gender disparities, inequalities and women 
empowerment. It will contribute  to change of norms and behavior  change through gender responsive 
training. The project also presents many advantages: ensuring equitable access to resources, services 
and technologies for climate -smart  livelihoods, improve coordination and institutional capacity building 
at the intersection of gender -transformative climate change adaptation. Overall, the strategy and 
action areas are based on an empo werment approach for women and consistent with the GoL’s G ender 
Strategy and A ction plan, aiming to transform gender relations in the target communities.  
Furthermore, livelihood interventions supported by the project are not only climate resilient, chosen 
based on their resistance to increasingly SLR and vulnerability to extreme weather, but also able to 
provide significant economic gains, as well as the op portunity to better integrate women into existing 
value chains in the light of changing environmental conditions.   
From the gender analysis these are the key approaches  that should be  accounted for : 
 1 - Creating an enabling environment for women’s advancement:  The consultations have identified 
norms and social constraints which may contribute to more gendered vulnerability in a changing 
climate . Bring ing men and women together in this project at all stages  may contribute to shift 
community attitudes , perceptions and behavior towards women’s status and roles, eventually creates 
an enabling environment for women to thrive  better . This will be done through sensitization, partnering  
with men ’s collective work , and letting women and girls raise their voice  against discrimination and 
violence .  
2 - Increasing women’s voice and agency:  The project will attempt to improve women’s participation 
and provide more opportunities to their social empowerment . This will be achieved  by helping women 
participate  in the identification  of needs and gaps in coping with climatic conditions  as well as  
identification of coping mechanisms  and solutions for  better management of climate impact.  By 
strengthening  women’s voices and incre asing their agency  the project can  bring extensive resilience 
dividends  - not only for  the women themselves, bu t also  for their families and  contributing towards the  
communities ’ overall wellbeing.  It is expected that gender -responsive training and interventions and 
women and adolescent girls ’ active engagement will ensure the effectiveness of the programme.


---
*Page 162*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
26 
 H 
3 - Proactively addressing challenges:  If the project intends  to positively shift power relations, social 
norms , and stereotypes  it is clear that it will raise resistance from the community . There may be social 
conflict and  perhaps  SGBV, especially when women are the primary beneficiaries of the project.  In the 
design of interventions, scrutiny must be observed to select opportunities tha t would be considered 
socially suitable for, appropriate , and preferred by women.  Strong  transformative change could then 
be achieved if it is accompanied by community sensitization activities in addressing norms and 
accompanied  by advocacy around acceptan ce of  what could be considered as  “appropriate” alternative 
livelihoods and  skills for women.  
4 - Increasing women’s skills and capacities:  This project is designed to improve women’s climate 
resilience  and intends to use a  comprehensive adaptation strategy that engages women directly in 
decision -making , in the management of resources, and in capacity building  for the successful pursuit of 
climate -resilient livelihoods . The project  includes components on sustainable alternative livelihoods  
support and market linkages  as well as  management of costal defense options . This will be 
accomplished  by developing women’s  awareness, technical skills, and resource management capacities 
regarding various facets of adaptation.  This will in turn contribute to the improved health and wellbeing 
of women and their families, resulting in lower occurrence  of diseases and improved f ood security . 
Additionally, women  will be trained in the management of coastal defence  solutions, choice of 
economic options, contingency planning for livelihoods and disaster management as far as  climate 
resilience  is concerned.  
5 - Increasing women’s economic opportunities:  Promoting women’s capacity and resilience in the 
context of a changing climate i ncludes  diversify ing their economic opportunities . This can be 
accomplished  in the vulnerable communities through provision of necessary assets a nd infrastructure, 
capital, skills and linkage to markets . By so doing,  women will be able to  manage critical resources, gain 
access to assets and increase their savings in the short and long terms.  
6 - Beneficiary Selection:  In the hotspots of MMA, the  project targets the most vulnerable  beneficiaries , 
particularly women and , where appropriate, adolescent girls . These are the groups  who are particularly  
affected by the loss of productivity or livelihoods due to  sea level rise  and other  observed and projected 
climate impacts. Among these  hotspots,  the beneficiary selection was refined through consultations 
with targeted communities and local government ins titutions,  and households  that face intersectional 
marginalization  were identified. These includ e the poorest households with the least capital and assets 
to pursue adaptive livelihoods, female -headed households, households headed by adolescent girls  
marri ed early and are solely responsible for household income, households with disabilities or chronic 
illness, and households with other marginalized groups. O rientation meetings in the project areas on 
its objectives, importance and role of women and marginal ized groups in community -based  climate 
change adaptation will ensure clarity and transparency. In this process  a tiered grievance mechanism 
will be established and available to target communities, to signal issues with beneficiary selection if 
they arise.  
6 - Establishment of  gender -responsive grievance mechanism:  The purpose of a grievance  mechanism  
is to minimize possible conflict and to address it, if it occurs. For the implementation of this project,  a 
robust, gender -sensitive grievance mechanism will be put in place which will allow women beneficiaries 
to report any incidences of social conflict, discrimination  or possible increase of GBV arising from their 
involvement in project activities.  The grievance mechanisms facilitate  demand -driven accountability of 
social protection programmes and call for the civil society organizations to play  a clear and distinctive


---
*Page 163*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
27 
 H 
role for the communities’ benefit. The GRM is described in detail in Annex 6 of this project -  
Environmental and Social Management Framework .  
Additionally, there are pre -existing mechanisms regarding GBV in  the MMA , including a Gender Unit in 
local police stations and a referral path mecha nism to UN Women, UNFPA, and UNICEF. Additionally,  
the Spotlight initiative , sponsored by UN and EU,  is focused on addressing GBV . There focus includes  
institutional work and providing support to survivors.  
5.3 - Project implementation  
For the project implementation, the collaborative relationship between UNDP, EPA, NDMA , Ministry of 
Gender and well -screened local NGOs selected through a rigorous process is necessary. This will create , 
under the supervision of gender professionals,  valuable experience, country ownership  at national and 
community levels  and the cross -sectoral technical perspective s required to ensure the success of this 
approach.  
5.4 - Effective project management  
For the operationalization of these recommendations , there is need to include  a Gender A dvisor  in the 
Project Support Unit  to provide advice , quality assurance oversight, capacity building  and monitor the 
right implementation of  gender related activities. Other elements to take into consider ation are:  
• At least 20% of project management unit staff will be women involved in effective management 
and implementation.  
• The Project Steering Committee and other management bodies will comprise at least 30% 
women. Gender Officers will  be international P3 or P4.  
• Initial gender -specific workshops will be conducted to introduce Gender Action Plan to 
stakeholders at national and community / local level.  
• The project management unit will monitor the impact of the p roject on women  and 
adolescents’ girls , reporting resu lts through collection and analysis of sex and age 
disaggregated data as baseline and  this on a regular basis.  
• Gender sensitive training s will be conducted for all management and implementation staff.  
 
5.5 - Monitoring and evaluation  
Through onset analysis, data have been collated to establish a baseline. These data shall be monitored 
against throughout implementation and evaluation. The analysis identified the differences between 
men and women within at- risk populations. Also, as duri ng the feasibility study, during project 
implementation, qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender -specific benefits that can be 
directly associated to the project.  This will be incorporated in the annual Project Implementation 
Report, Mid -Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. In order to monitor and evaluate progress of the 
project, the quantitative and qualitative  indicators c ould be used and measured as such:   
Quantitative outcomes: 
• Number of men and women employed from the jobs created by the project . 
• Number of men and women benefiting from training  opportunities  and awareness raising 
sessions .


---
*Page 164*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
28 
 H 
• Number of men and women benefiting from knowledge management and information 
dissemination . 
• Number of men f emale -headed households and other vulnerable groups as beneficiaries . 
• Number of men and women benefiting from i mproved or alternative livelihoods . 
• Number of b usiness development services component targeting coastal women 
entrepreneur groups .  
• Number of opportunities to generate additional income to all affected communities.  
• Number of incentives given to women to respond to address their family’s basic needs, 
such as better health and nutrition, linking to response to climate induced disasters (sea 
erosio n) and sea level rise . 
• Number of training and educational activities related to climate change, adaptative 
strategies, fish conservation , entrepreneurship skills .  
N.B.:  These figures will be disaggregated by sex and age.   
Qualitative outcomes:  
• Satisfaction for i nclusive management of the coastal defence options .  
• Existence of capacities at national, local and community level for ICZM . 
• Exist ence of efficient  coordination mechanisms  for ICZM  both at national, local and 
community levels . 
• Perception on increase of  income for men and women in the communities . 
• Perception of improved wellbeing  and health in the families and communities .  
• Level of appreciation of improved self -esteem , empowerment and security of women in 
the communit ies as a result of training opportunities for women in decision -making and 
leadership . 
• Increase of women  involvement and participation of women in public and project decision -
making as a result of initiation  of women economic empowerment . 
• Level of awareness -raising  and improved perception of gender equality .  
• Degree of change of social norms in favor  of women and girls ’ empowerment.


---
*Page 165*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
29 
 H 
VI – Proposed Gender Action Plan  
The purpose of a Gender Action Plan, tailored to the Liberia Monrovia Metropolitan Area (MMA) context, is to operationalize the constraints and opportunities for women and men that were identified during the gender analysis at national and at MMA community  level, towards fully integrating them 
into the project design, providing the framework for a gender -responsive and socially inclusive project.  
 This section is an overview of some proposed interventions that seek to address the gender -
differentiated vuln erabilities and resilience in the coastal communities in the Monrovia Metropolitan 
Area (MMA) to ensure a gender -responsive project.  
 
For each of the activities of the project an amount to support gender specific interventions  has been 
allocated, as a sub set of the overall project budget. In all UNDP and GCF projects, at least 15 % of the 
total amount of the budget should be dedicated to gender equality and women empowerment.   
 These are the approaches that are recommended  to make the project a gender -resp onsive:  
 
Overall  
• Awareness raising of all stakeholders on sea level rise issues for the success of the MMCRP and 
institutional support,   
• Encouraging gender -responsive opportunities for improved livelihoods , 
• Increase of women’s participation in decision -making  in all the ICZM institutions  
• Consideration of  differentiated needs of women and other marginalized groups in building 
climate resilience ,  
• Filling the gap of the absence of sex and age disaggregated data,  
• Organization of  dialogue with all stakeholders on aspects of  climate resilience adaptation , social 
inclusion and gender equality ,  
• Devoting  gender technical expertise for  guidance in implementation an d monitoring of gender 
results to hold individuals and institutions acco untable for gender equality related outcomes: 
this means i nclusion  or 01 or  02 Gender positions in the PMU team .  
 
1 - For institutional strengthening  and awareness  raising of all stakeholders on ICZM :  
• Improve institutional capacity, coordination,  accountability and oversight (capacity of project 
executing and implementing agencies in addressing gender issues in climate change 
programming).  
• Developing the capacity of all stakeholders  (institutions and communities) on inclusive, 
participatory and sustainable development and integrated coastal zone management .  
• Raise awareness of women and youth in the  existence and use of early warning weather 
systems . 
• Finding ways of empowering communities for the sustainable managemen t of integrated 
coastal zone . 
• Build on the projects, structures and initiatives being rolled out by the GoL and other 
development partners, in order to maximize the use of resources, and for greatest efficiency and effectiveness.  
• Assess how gender is curr ently being mainstreamed in differing Ministries and sectors, to most 
effectively develop needs assessments, enable planning, and be effective in monitoring and evaluation.


---
*Page 166*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
30 
 H 
 
2 - Awareness raising on gender equality and women empowerment issues  
The following  form  the gender  mainstreaming  components of  the project  under this awareness -raising 
approach :  
• Organi se gender trainings for all relevant stakeholders . 
• Improv e active participation, equitable representation, and voice (being heard) of women, 
youth, people living with disabilities, as well as men in all areas of decision -making related to 
building more resilient coastal communities (including technical, economic, social, accessibility 
etc.) . 
• Engag e men and boys in community discussions to develop “gender champions” who can 
support efforts to address gender -based violence in the household and communities (including 
workplaces, sch ools, etc.) and who can act as peer mentors for others in the community . 
• Support  women’s access to literacy , services, information, finances, and enjoyment of benefits 
from the eco -stove production included in t he project equally as men (with men, boys 
understanding value of sharing tasks such as childcare, etc.).  
3 – Working towards  a change of norms and of negative perceptions on gender  
Discussing climate change related issues with communities  is a good opportunity to:   
• Hold d ialogue s with community  heads, religious leaders and female activists  to identify  the 
norms and harmful traditional attitudes/practices and barriers that restrict women’s 
participation with the purpose to establish an environment conducive to participation (commit tees involving men and women, girls and boys).  
• Raise awareness on  responsible parenthood and shared responsibilities  in households’ 
activities, which encourage family members to help reduce the mothers and girls’  unpaid 
burden of work, and  childcare .  
• Promote positive social norms (community awareness and orientation on role of women and 
girls in general and in climate adaptation in particular) through training sessions and separate 
community theatre -based activities.  
• Engage the communities in activities promoting safety, security for women and fight against 
SGBV . 
 4 - For Targeting and selection of  beneficiaries  
• Women head  of households are the primary beneficiaries . 
• Targeting other groups suffering other intersectional marginalization  will be a priority .  
• Ensur ing women have  proposed livelihoods options that relieve the burdens  and reduce the 
time of unpaid care work  is a priority .  
 
5 - Targeted initiatives and trainings  for women ’s economic empowerment.  
This can be achieved via the following:  
• Analysis of the gendered division of labor (gender -differentiated responsibilities and needs).  
• Ensuring that working conditions are gender responsive at the homestead and community 
levels .  
• Ensuring equal pay for e qual work, and access to the administrative, technical and managerial 
positions in the project .  
• Promot ing advocacy and awareness regarding gender -based violence . This may be done via 
partnering with  the local Gender Unit (s) at the police station (s) and through raising awareness


---
*Page 167*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
31 
 H 
about the  referral path  to UN Women, UNFPA, and UNICEF. Additionally, the project can 
partner with the Spotlight Initiative  Project , sponsored by UN and EU, which is focused on 
addressing GBV through institutional work and pr oviding support to survivors.  
• Provid ing gender ombudsmen for complaints related to sexual harassment and other forms of 
GBV.  
• Improving and  providing access to livelihoods and improvement of basic social facilities . 
• Developing/adapting financial and other community/business organizations (cooperatives, 
fisher associations, conservation and rehabilitation committees, etc.) that provide women as 
well as men with access to productive resources, services, and information (including credit) to maintain that they need to contribute to cleaning, rehabilitating, and conserving the wetlands 
and mangroves.  
• Developing livelihood options that build on the different interests and needs as well as address the different challenges f acing women, men and youth in the coastal communities (either same 
livelihoods they are doing now including fisheries or skilling up for new economic 
opportunities).  
• Ensuring any location for resettlement also include s a hospital or health facility as wel l as 
community  school and playground for children. These are important to women, men, boys, and 
girls and to the community.  
• Provi ding  women trainers and women -exclusive training sessions, including flexible times, and 
provision of household training for women- headed households as required.  
• Integrat ing of men and community elders in community trainings that addresses women’s 
participati on, rights and norms around equal access to arising opportunities.  
 
6 - For continuous learning:  
• Take a continuous learning approach that incorporated the perspectives and experiences of 
women and refined interventions with the collection of sex -disaggregated data.  
• Research on the underlying gender -based social dynamics and preferences related to 
technology adoption (for both water and livelihoods) to avoid project failure and to ensure that 
women can benefit from resources/assets made available to them.  
• Monitoring of changing power dynamics and attitudes at the intra -household and community 
levels a nd monitoring possible increase in conflict as a result of project interventions.  
 
7 - Encouraging gender -responsive opportunities for improved livelihoods  
• Improving and  providing access to livelihoods and improvement of basic social facilities  
• Developing /adapting financial and other community/business organizations (cooperatives, 
fisher associations, conservation and rehabilitation committees, etc.) that provide women as 
well as men with access to productive resources, services, and information (including  credit) 
that they need to contribute to cleaning, rehabilitating, and conserving the wetlands and 
mangroves.  
• Developing livelihood options that build on the different interests and needs as well as address 
the different challenges facing women, men and youth in the coastal communities (either same livelihoods they are doing now including fisheries or skilling up for new economic 
opportunities).


---
*Page 168*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
32 
 H 
• Ensuring any location for resettlement also include a hospital or health facility as well as 
community  school and playground for children. These are important to women, men, boys, and 
girls and to the community.  
 
8 - For ownership of assets:  
• Encourage women to have better  control over their  productive assets (finance, productive 
skills, and technology) through women led groups.  
• Facilitate  training in rights, fair working conditions and negotiation.  
• Conduct monit oring of productive assets and revenues, to ensure that revenues are kept in the 
hands of women and targeted beneficiaries.  
 
9 - For market integration:  
As women are key players in fisheries, agriculture, and informal sector activities (petty trade), thi s 
proposal seeks to address the impacts of climate change on women’s livelihoods as well as those of men as well as identify enhanced livelihood opportunities  
• Link with financial institutions to inform women on access to finance, financial management training, and market prices for women.  
• Provide conservation trainings on alternatives to mangrove fuel wood, given mangrove is  fuel 
wood for drying fish  
• Give preference for employment in fishery activities.  
• Partner with relevant institutions/ NGOs to propose  TOT training opportunities for women in  
skills they might not otherwise consider.  
 
10 - For gender -responsive grievance mechanism:  
• Support the development of gender sensitive (and marginalized group sensitive) grievance 
mechanism, which allows women easy and unrestricted access, including provision of female GRM focal points in communities.  
• Ensure that the  Grievance mechanism is accessible to everyone and  ensure that the 
mechanism is full responsive to gender in Liberia . Those operating mechanisms must be 
gender aware and gender sensitive .  
• Ensure that t here are defined SOPs for addressing concerns of women and the relevant 
persons will be trained on these SOPs. The grievance mechanism must be  project specific and  
therefore focused on employment in construction, for example. It must be  operational from 
the beginni ng of the project.  
• Integrate the  sex-disaggregated data and gender -sensitive information collected during this  
proposed  project into regular  updat es of  this gender sensitive (and marginalized group 
sensitive)  grievance mechanism  to ensure it is as gender -responsive  and as accessible  as 
possible.  
• Results from the survey included in 1.2.1 of the GAP (to assess all stakeholder’s satisfaction with the project) may highlight unsatisfied stakeholders. These  unsatisfied persons may 
submit concerns via the grievance mechanisms,  and this should be made explicitly clear such 
that this feedback  is used to appropriately adjust  project design and implementation.


---
*Page 169*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
33 
 H 
The Gender Action Plan (GAP) below  is aligned to the activities of the LogFrame of the project application. It  suggests actions to arrive at  a gender -responsive, 
inclusive (Leaving No One Behind)  and sustainable implementation of the MMCRP projecfic indicators are proposed to measure and track progress on gender 
responsiveness at relevant activity level.  These  should be  incorporated into the deta iled M&E plan which will be developed at the start of implementation. 
These indicators will contribute to  the regular collection of  age and sex -disaggregated data and will help to measure gender progress throughout the project’s 
implementation. A table showing the timeline for the activities and milestones in th is GAP is provided below.  The total budget for GAP activities is 
US$1,763,210, which is ~7% of the total project budget.  
 
Objective  Sub activities  Indicator  Responsible 
Institutions  Proposed Budget  
Output 1.  Protection of coastal communities and structure at West Point against erosion caused by sea -level rise and increasingly frequent high -
intensity storms  
Activity 1.1:  
Prepare construction plan and finalise technical design 
specifications for 
coastal defence 
structure at West 
Point.  1.1.2 Conduct 1 stakeholder 
consultations to present the final designs to all relevant stakeholders, including communities, NGOs, 
development organizations and 
government.  
 
   
 
   
 
  
 Base line: 0  
Target: 1 
Indicator: Number of stakeholder consultations conducted  that 
include  women leaders 
participation in validating the final 
technical designs and construction 
plan for the installation and 
management of coastal defence solution or engineering options for West Point considering youth, people living with disabilities, etc.  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: at least 50%  
Indicator:  
Percentage of women (including 
by age group), youth, elderly and  
UNDP, EPA and the MME, MPW, NMDA, and the MoGCSP  
Monrovia City Council.   
Cost included under 
Activity 1.1  
 
$ 5,000


---
*Page 170*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
34 
 H 
 people living with disability 
participating mobilized in / being represented in community consultations/studies on coastal 
defences in terms of opportunity 
to speak, voice heard on coastal defence for West point  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 
Indicato r: Number of meetings 
with women and men in the communities to understand the 
potentially different gender -based 
needs and challenges around 
coastal defense  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 data collection survey  
Indicator:  Data collected on sex 
and age-disaggregated information 
about women -run businesses and 
wom en’s groups in MM A 
Activity 1.2: 
Construct coastal 
defence structure to 
protect West Point 
against climate 
change -induced 
coastal erosion.   1.2.1. Include in the TORs of the 
construction company the 
requirements to be in conformity with 
a socially -sensitive design 
incorporating the needs of all inhabitants an als o conduct a 
satisfaction survey after Y2.  Baseline: No  
Target: Yes   
Indicator:  
A gender and social responsive 
final design of the coastal defence 
structures considering gender UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and 
the MoGCSP  
Monrovia City Council 
 
The contracted 
construction company  Cost included under 
Activity 1.2   
 $ 7,000


---
*Page 171*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
35 
 H 
 
68 Project- related activities that women may engage in apart engineering, are supervision, security, unskilled labor, catering to feed t he workers, etc.  
69 Equal pa y for equal work will be required  at all times.  
70 Aged 18- 24.   needs and constraints for social 
inclusion  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1  survey  
Indicator:  
A perception survey report on satisfaction of the installation of coastal defence solutions and enjoyment of benefits , 
disaggregated by sex  and age 
group . 
  
   
No cost for the survey 
(done by the company)  
Ensure equitable opportunities for 
men, women, youth –  selected by the 
communities - to participate in, and 
benefit from, income -earning 
opportunities during the construction of the coastal defence infrastructure.  Baseline: 0%  
Target:  at least  40%  
Indica tor(s):  
Women to constitute at least 40% 
of waged labor on project -related 
activities. 6869 
 
Baseline: 0%  
Target: at least 40%  
Indicator(s):  
 Youth
70 constitu te at least 40% of 
waged labour on project -related 
activities.   UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP.  
Leaders of the 4 areas of the project  
Work force in targeted communities  
  
 No cost


---
*Page 172*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
36 
 H 
 
71 Safety and security training will be included in the employment contracts. Safety monitoring will be part of contractor’s wor k SOPs and safety equipment should be 
women -specific and women -friendly.   
Baseline: 0%  
Target: at least 30%  
Indicator(s)  
At least 30% of waged labour on project -related activities are from 
female -headed households.  
 
 
Provide training to casual workers 
employed under Activity 1.2. on safety and security during the construction and operational phases in West Point
71. (Yr. 3, Yr. 4)  Baseline: 0%  
Target: at least 4 0% 
Indicator: Percentage of women nominated by the communities and trained for casual work   Baseline: 0 %  
Target: 100%  
Indicator:  
Percentage of women trainees involved in safety, security, surveillance, maintenance and 
protection activities  
 MME, MPW, EPA 
The contracted 
construction company.   Monrovia City Council  Technical team of 
relevant institutions  
 Cost included under 
Activity 1.2  
 
 $ 14,600  
 Provide support  for community 
gender -responsive initiatives that 
support childcare and domestic duties  
for women wage labourers to Baseline: 0 %  
Target: 100%  
Indicator: Percentage of women 
engage d in wage labour supported   Cost included under 
Activity 1.2  
$ 25,000


---
*Page 173*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
37 
 H 
 
72 Reference i s made of the Liberia Gender and Climate Cha nge Strategy, the MoGCSP National Gender Strategy, the EPA National Policy and Response Strategy Gender etc.  participate in construction of 
revetment for duration  of the 
construction.  (in their additional domestic 
duties , for example) during their 
project-related labour.  
 
 
Output 2: Institutional capacity building and policy support for the implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM)  across Liberia . 
 
Activity 2.1. Develop  
an Integrated Coastal Zone Management  
Plan for Liberia  
 Activity 2.1.1 Develop ICZM Plan for 
Mon rovia Metropolitan Area and 
establish an ICZM committee and 
CSWG to mainstream ICZM across 
relevant government ministries  
 
   
 Baseline: 3 72 
Target: 5   
 
Indicator:  
Number of additional 
policy/programs in relevant sectors with evidence of integrating  gender in climate 
vulnerability assessment  and 
promoting gender equality in 
climate finance  UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA,  
 
Monrovia City Council  
 
MoGCSP.  
Technical sub -units in 
concerned Ministries  
  
Cost already included in Activity 2.1  
 
 
$ 379,100 
 
2.1.2. Contract a national Gender and 
Social impact service provider to  
support the trainer -of-trainers, collect 
sex and age disaggregated data,  
coordinate with relevant ministries  
gender issues in developing the ICZMP  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1  
Indictor:  Evidence brought by the 
gender and social provider,  that 
the future  coastal zone 
management plan  and investment 
process is gender responsive and 
socially inclusive  
 UNDP, EPA and th e 
MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP.  
 Cost already included 
under Activity 2.1  
(Cost for one expert:  
$150,000 / 2)  
 
$ 75,000


---
*Page 174*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
38 
 H 
 
73 This target will be increased if there are more women in the MAC.  2.1.3 The national Gender and Social 
impact provider will develop ToT  
training material, train and mentor staff in MACs  and disseminate  policies 
and actions  on ‘Gender Sensitive 
Climate Change Action’  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 ToT training material 
compiled  
Indicator(s):  
Evidence of inclusion in the curricula of modules on “Gender 
and household methodologies” for sustainable Integrated Coastal Zone Management and climate resilience  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: at least 30% of MAC staff
73 
Indicator: percentage of women 
staff by  sex and age in institutions,  
including the MoGCSP,  that were 
capacitated and  had received 
information to effectively monitor, 
implement, coordinate  and 
enforce climate resilient ICZM within their mandate (evidence 
brought by the national Gender 
and Social impact service provider)  
  
UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP.  
   
Cost already included in Activity 2.1  
 
$ 4,500  
 
Activity 2.2. 
Capacitate the Cross -
Sectoral Working 
group to mainstream 2.2.3 Facilitate the collaboration 
between the gender and social impact 
provider and the MoGCSP to  develop a 
TOT training curriculum to include Baseline: 0  
Target: 1  
  
  
Cost already included in Activity 2.2


---
*Page 175*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
39 
 H 
ICZM into relevant 
government sectors through a T raining -
of-Trainers approach.  
   social and gender dimensions in 
addition to technical, administrative and operational elements for training of trainers.  
  .  
 Indicator:  Availability of a multi -
disciplinary  training curricula for 
members of CSWG to use across sectors key institutions  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1  
Indicator:   
Availability of sex and age disaggregated data on trainees in institutions  that were capacitated 
and had received information on 
how to mains tream ICZM in their 
daily work  UNDP, EPA, MPW and 
the MME, NMDA, MSD 
and the MoGCSP  
 
Technical units of 
relevant entities    
$ 116,360


---
*Page 176*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
40 
 H 
2.3. Strengthen the 
asset base and technical  capacity of 
the ICZMU for  the 
collection of  spatial 
and biophysical 
coastal information to support the implementation of the ICZMP  
     
 2.3.2 Request the contracted specialist 
firm in the Tors, to organis e 2 
information sessions on the process  of 
buoy -based data collection and 
knowledge generation for EWS in the 4 areas  
      Baseline: 0  
Target: 2  information sessions  
 
Indicator:  Attendance lists with sex 
and age disaggregated data of technicians that were capacitated 
and had received information on 
ICZM and using existing early 
warning system and weather 
Baseline: 0  
Target: at least 30%  
Indicator: Percentage of women technici ans recorded via 
attendance lists above.   
EPA, NDMA, LMS and ICZMU Technical staff  
EPA 
UNDP  
NGOs  
   
 Cost already included   
 
Activity 2.4. 
Strengthen the existing  
Environmental Knowledge Management System (EKMS) to act as a 
platform for 
awareness -raising 
and sharing of climate -risk informed 
ICZM approach  2.4.3.  Include in the TORs of the 
contracted national service provider to  
develop, print and disseminate gender sensitive and socially inclusive knowledge products on ICZM and the EKMS targeting the 10 implementing ministries for ICZM as well as 
municipalities  
 Baseline:  0 % 
Target:  100 %  
 
Indicator:  
The design and pictures in all posters, flyers and brochures do not foster exclusion, 
discrimination, gender -bias and 
stereotypes  
  
UNDP, EPA and the MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP.  Cost already included 
in Activity 2.4  
 $ 35,000


---
*Page 177*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
41 
 H 
 
74 Some awareness raising activities are already on -going  
75 Other climate chan ge induced issues such as water salinity, sand mining, sanitation, SGBV, safety and security, etc. could be discussed in the radio talk shows  Activity 2.5. Conduct 
an awareness -raising 
campaign for coastal communities in focus 
areas on climate 
change impacts and adaptation practices.  2.5.1 Contract a national media firm  
with expertise in communications, climate change and gender to design awaren ess-raising campaigns on 
climate change impacts and adaptation practices (to be included in the TORs)  Baseline: 40%74 
Target: 80% of targeted populations  
 
Indicator:  
Percentage of population 
disaggregated  by sex and age in 
coastal communities with awareness in climate change impacts and adaptation practices  
 
Baseline: 40%  
Target: at least 80% of female -
headed households in the areas  
Indicator:  
Percentage of female -headed 
households where at least one 
member of the household has 
awareness on climate change 
impacts and adaptation practices  
 UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and 
the MoGCSP.  Cost already included 
in Activity 2.5  
 
 
$ 125,000  
2.5.2  Host  quarterly radio 
programmes on climate change 
impacts, vulnerability and gender-responsive adaptation practices in coastal areas.
 Baseline: 10 %  
Target: 04 per year  
Indicator:  Total number of 
broadcasts that include women’s experiences, their LEK and 
adapt ation .75  
UNDP, EPA  
Contracted consultant  
NGOs  
Local radios   Cost already included 
in Activity 2.5  
  $ 9,600


---
*Page 178*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
42 
 H 
2.5.3 Establish, train and employ 
community -based knowledge sharing 
groups in each of the 4 communities targeted under the project for 5 years 
(beginning in year 2)  Baseline: 0  
Target  1: at least 50% of trainers 
are women  
Target  2: at least 50 % of 
employees are women   
 
Indicator  1: Percentage of trainers 
in project -supported activities are 
women . 
Indicator  2: 8 women employed 
for the 4 communities.  
 UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP  
Contracted consultant  
NGOs.  Cost already included 
in Activity 2.5  
 $ 100, 800 
2.5.5 Host 3 community meetings per 
year in each of the 4 areas to raise awareness and share information on social and gender dimensions of 
climate change as well as sustainable 
and innovative adaption strategies to support ongoing awareness -raising 
activities,  one of which will be on  
social protection, the rights of women and girls as well as SGBV in addition to climate change vulnerability and adaptive strategies.  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: at least 90 % of 
populations in the areas  
Indicator:  
Percentage of women and men with figures disaggregated by age and sex having participated in sharing their experiences in sustainable and innovative adaption strategies and are aware of the impact of negative gender norms and  SGBV  
 UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA  and the 
MoGCSP  
Contracted consultant  
NGOs.  
CSC members.  
  
Cost already included in Activity 2.5  
 
 
$ 210,000 
  
Output 3. Protecting mangroves and strengthening gender - and climate -sensitive livelihoods to build local resilience in Monrovia


---
*Page 179*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
43 
 H 
 
76 The Centre will include gender -sensitive facilities such as separate toilets for men and women, spaces for children to sleep to facilitate attendance of women. It will 
include youth- sensitive facilities such as a small kitchen for child’s food preparation. It will also include facilities –  such as ramps and guides –  for wheelchair -bound and 
partially -sighted pe ople.  Activity 3.1:  Establish 
a community education and innovation centre to 
function as a 
community knowledge generation and learning hub, repository on climate change adaptation practices and to host 
community activities 
under Output 3.  
 3.1.1.  Locate, renovate and equip 
existing structure situated on 
community or municipal -owned land in 
West Point  to act as education and 
innovation cent res to upskill 
communities on climate -resilient 
livelihoods and good adaptation practices.  Baseline: 0  
Target: 1  
Indicator:   
1 operational Education and 
Innovation Cent re that are gender -
friendly and accessible by PWD76 UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, and the MoGCSP  
CSC members   
Cost already included in Activity 3.1  
 
$ 200,000  
3.1.1 Equip the buildings with robust 
furniture and facilities, considering 
access for people with disabilities 
(PWD) and the needs of vulnerable 
people and women.  Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 
Indicator:  01 infrastructures  
Gender and PWD friendly equipment procured and are 
available   
Contracted companies and suppliers,  
UNDP, and MoGCSP   
Cost already included in Activity 3.1  
 
$ 100,000 
3.1.2.  Establish and commission the 
ten-person Community Stewardship 
Committee (CSC) with representatives 
from each of the four areas.  Baseline: 0  
Target:  5 
Indicator:  Number of nominated 
women (out of 10 people on the 
CSC) and effectively seating in the 
4 elected bodies and receiving 
stipends  UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and the MoGCSP  
Community leaders  
 
 Cost already included 
in Activity 3.1  
 $ 30,000 
Activity 3.2. Establish 
community -led co -
management 
agreements to ease 3.2.3 Organi se awareness -raising 
campaign designed and rolled out on 
sustainable Community -based Natural Baseline:  0 
Target:  1 eco-stove startup  
Indicator:   The contracted 
company   
 Cost already included 
in Activity 3.2  
 
$ 82,000


---
*Page 180*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
44 
 H 
 
77 EPA h as been supporting local initiatives on this . 
78 The project will provide resources for 640 eco -friendly cookstoves to be manufactured, split evenly over Year 2 and Year 4 .  anthropogenic 
pressure on 
mangroves  in the 
MMA . Resource Management (CBNRM) and 
the co -management agreements.  The knowledge products are 
gender sensitive in thei r design 
and depict the use of mangroves 
by different social groups and 
sectors  UNDP, EPA  the 
MoGCSP  
NGOs and CBOs.  
Activity 3.3. Conduct 
annual assessments 
to evaluate the 
project -induced 
changes in mangrove 
degradation, 
community 
perceptions and 
awareness of climate 
change impacts, 
adaptation options 
and mangrove 
ecosystems 
throughout the 
project 
implementation 
period.  3.3.2. Contract a national service 
provider with expertise in the 
development of alternative, climate-
resilient livelihoods to assess and 
establish  a baseline of existing 
livelihood strategies as well as  
investigating and developing 
livelihoods for the benefit of women 
and other vulnerable people  in the 
four t arget communities . 
 
 Baseline:  0 
Target:  1 
 
Indicator:  A comprehensive survey 
report that describes existing 
livelihood  adaptative strategies 
used by men and women and 
other vulnerable  in the 4 areas  in 
the use of mangroves for 
livelihood .  This survey will include 
considerations beyond eco -stoves 
and cold storage. Any useful 
findings from the survey will be 
integrated into training. This will 
fall under the role of the 
Community Stewardship 
Committee and feed into the 
Education and Innovation Centre 
after the project.  UNDP, EPA and the 
MME, NMDA, MSD and 
the MoGCSP,  
Consultant.  Cost already included 
in Activity 3.3  
 
$ 80,000  
Activity 3.4 . Establish 
small -scale 
manufacturing 3.4.1. Contract a national firm or 
service provider to pro vide equipment 
(such as moulds) and initial material Baseline: 10077 
Target: at least 7 4078 eco-stoves  
Indicator:  UNDP, EPA and the and 
the MoGCSP  
Firm / Service provider  Cost already included 
in Activity 3.4


---
*Page 181*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
45 
 H 
 
79 Reference to Liberia NDC  the number is eco -stoves to be distributed in urban areas is 280,583 by 2030.  facilities and develop 
training material to 
capacitate 
community members 
to manufacture and 
sell eco-stoves to 
support alternative 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  inputs as well as training on the 
construction of energy efficient stoves 
through a training -of-trainers 
approach.  Number of eco -stoves 
manufactured by community 
members trained at the education 
and innovation centre . 
 
Baseline: 2%  
Target: 60% -  79  
Indicator: Percentage increase in 
the number of households using 
eco-stoves in urban MMA  US$ 70,000  
 
 
3.4.2 Request the national firm to 
organised 01 training per year at the  
Education and I nnovation Centre  for 
women to engage in entrepreneurial 
development in financing, marketing 
and selling eco -friendly products to 
support the uptake of energy efficient 
products and climate -resilient 
diversified livelihoods.  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 training per year  
Indicator(s): Number of trainings 
per year at the Education and 
Innovation Centre.  
 
Baseline: 0  
Target: 125 (50% of total)  
Indicator(s):  
Increase in the number of women 
trained with improved income, 
access to markets after producing 
eco-stoves and to finance /credit 
facility that is socially accessible.  
 
Baseline: 0  
Target: 40%  
Indicator:  UNDP, EPA and the 
MoGCSP  
CSC members  
NGOs  
Micro -finance 
institutions.  Cost already included 
in Activity 3.4  
$14,750


---
*Page 182*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
46 
 H 
Proportion of people involved in 
training at the Edu cation and 
Innovation Centre who are youth 
(ages 18 -24). 
 
Baseline: 0  
Target: at least 30%  
Indicator:  
Proportion of people involved in 
training at the Education and 
Innovation Centre who are from 
female -headed households.  
 
Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 starter ki t and set of 
equipment provided to each 
woman trained  
Indicator(s): Number of starter  kits 
and equipment provided by the 
selected national firm/service 
provider.  
 
Activity 3.5.  Purchase 
and install low -
maintenance eco -
friendly cold storage 
facilities near fish 
processing sites to 
reduce pressure on 3.5.1 Include in the TORs of the  
national consultant with expertise on 
gender and livelihoo ds to conduct an 
assessment on the differentiated use 
and impact of the cold stores by 
fishmongers in West Point.  Baseline: 0  
Target: 4 2% women, 28% men of 
the total 70% of fishmongers  
Indicator:  Percentage of men and 
women fishmongers in the 
communities  that were able to 
engage in  innovative ways  of fish UNDP, EPA, NAFFA  and 
the MoGCSP  
Consultant  Cost already included  
$ 9,500


---
*Page 183*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
47 
 H 
 
 
Timeline indicating activities, targets and milestones for the proposed activities in the GAP. This timeline is aligned with the implementation timetable of 
the project.  
 
Sub-activity  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  
 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
1.1.2 Conduct 1 stakeholder 
consultations to present the final                         mangroves and 
increase market 
efficiency.  processing because of the cold  
storage  facility.  
 
3.5.2 Include in the T ORs of the firm in 
charge of developing the cold storage  
to organise trainings for the members 
of the Community Stewardship 
Committee (CSC) in West  Point  to 
operate and manage the solar 
powered cold facilities, cold chain and 
fish conservat ion after the 
construction of  eco-friendly cold 
storage facilities  Baseline: 0 %  
Target: 70% of the fishmongers  
(42% women and 28% men)  
Indicator:  
Number of women fishmongers  in 
the community  that uses the  
affordable cold store facility, for 
conservation and that have 
increased their income . 
  
UNDP, EPA,  
NAFFA and the 
MoGCSP  
The contracted firm    
Cost already included  
$ 70,000


---
*Page 184*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
48 
 H 
designs to all relevant stakeholders, 
including communities, NGOs, 
development organizations and 
government.  
1.2.1. Include in the TORs of the 
construction company the 
requirements to be in conformity 
with a socially -sensitive design 
incorporating the needs of all 
inhabitants an also conduct a 
satisfaction survey after Y2.                          
1.2.1. Ensure equitable opportunities 
for men, women, youth –  selected 
by the communities - to participate 
in, and benefit from, income -earning 
opportunities during the 
construction of the coastal defence infrastructure.                          
1.2.1. Provide training to casual 
workers employed under Activity 1.2. on safety and security during the construction and operational phases 
in West Point
80. (Yr. 3, Yr. 4)                          
 
80 Safety and security training will be included in the employment contracts. Safety monitoring will be part of contractor’s wor k SOPs and safety equipment should be 
women -specific and women -friendly.


---
*Page 185*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
49 
 H 
1.2.1 Provide support for community 
gender -responsive initiatives that 
support childcare and domestic 
duties for women wage labourers to 
participate in construction of revetment for duration of the construction.
                         
Activity 2.1.1 Develop ICZM Plan for 
Monrovia Metropolitan Area and 
establish an ICZM committee and CSWG to mainstream ICZM across 
relevant government ministries                          
2.1.2. Contract a national Gender 
and Social impact service provider to 
support the trainer -of-trainers, 
collect sex and age disaggregated 
data, coordinate with relevant ministries gender issues in 
developing the ICZMP                          
2.1.3 The national Gender and Social 
impact provider will develop ToT training material, train and mentor staff in MACs and disseminate policies and actions on ‘Gender 
Sensitive Climate Change Action’                          
2.2.3 Facilitate the collaboration 
between the gender and social 
impact provider and the MoGCSP 
to develop a TOT training


---
*Page 186*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
50 
 H 
curriculum to include social and 
gender dimensions in addition to 
technical, administrative and 
operational elements for training 
of trainers.  
 
2.3.2 Request the contracted 
specialist firm in the Tors, to 
organise 2 information sessions 
on the process of buoy -based 
data collection and knowledge 
generation for EWS in the 4 areas  
                         
2.4.3. Include in the TORs of the 
contracted national service 
provider to develop, print and 
disseminate gender sensitive and 
socially inclusive knowledge 
products on ICZM and the EKMS 
targeting the 10 implementing 
ministries for ICZM as well as 
municipalities                          
2.5.1 Contract a national media 
firm with expertise in 
communications, climate change and gender to design awareness -
raising campaigns on climate 
change impacts and adaptation


---
*Page 187*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
51 
 H 
practices (to be included in the 
TORs)  
2.5.2  Host quarterly radio 
programmes on climate change 
impacts, vulnerability and gender -
responsive adaptation practices 
in coastal areas.                          
2.5.3 Establish, train and employ 
community -based knowledge 
sharing groups in each of the 4 
communities targeted under the project for 5 years (beginning in 
year 2)                          
2.5.5 Host 3 community meetings 
per year in each of the 4 areas to 
raise awareness and share 
information on social and gender 
dimensions of climate change as 
well as sustainable and 
innovative adaption strategies to 
support ongoing awareness -
raising activities, one of which will 
be on social protection, the rights 
of women and girls as well as 
SGBV in addition to climate 
change vulnerability and adaptive 
strategies.


---
*Page 188*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
52 
 H 
3.1.1.  Locate, renovate and equip 
existing structure situated on 
community or municipal -owned land 
in West Point  to act as education 
and innovation centres  to upskill 
communities on climate -resilient 
livelihoods and good adaptation 
practices.                          
3.1.1 Equip the buildings with 
robust furniture and facilities, 
considering access for people 
with disabilities (PWD) and the needs of vulnerable people and 
women.
                         
3.1.2.  Establish and commission the 
ten-person Community Stewardship 
Committee (CSC) with 
representatives from each of the 
four areas.                          
3.2.3 Organise awareness -raising 
campaign designed and rolled out 
on sustainable Community -based 
Natural Resource Management 
(CBNRM) and the co -
management agreements.                          
3.3.2. Contract a national service 
provider with expertise in the


---
*Page 189*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
53 
 H 
development of alternative, 
climate -resilient livelihoods to 
assess and establish a baseline 
of existing livelihood strategies as 
well as investigating and 
developing livelihoods for the benefit of women and other 
vulnerable people in the four 
target communities.  
 
 
3.4.1. Contract a national firm or 
service provider to provide 
equipment (such as moulds) and initial material inputs as well as training on the construction of 
energy efficient stoves through a training- of-trainers approach.
                         
3.4.2 Request the national firm to 
organised 01 training per year at 
the Education and Innovation 
Centre  for  women to engage in 
entrepreneurial development in 
financing, marketing and selling 
eco-friendly products to support 
the uptake of energy efficient products and climate -resilient 
diversified livelihoods.                          
3.5.2 Include in the TORs of the 
firm in charge of developing the


---
*Page 190*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
  
54 
 H 
cold storage to organise  trainings 
for the members of the 
Community Stewardship 
Committee (CSC) in West Point  
to operate and manage the solar powered cold facilities, cold chain 
and fish conservation after the 
construction of eco- friendly cold 
storage facilities


---
*Page 191*
---

Annex VIII Gender - Assessment & Action Plan 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
55 H 
Agency:  United Nations Development Programme - Liberia Country Office  
UNDP -Liberia, Pan African Plaza, 1st Street,  
Sinkor, Tubman Boulevard,  
 P. O. Box 10 -274 
Liberia, West Africa.  
___________________________________________________________________________  
A
uthor: Chantal Kingue Ekambi (Mrs.)  
 Gender Specialist/ Consultant  
Date:   September 2019  
___________________________________________________________________________  
C
ontact de tails:  
Email: chantal.ekambi@undp.org  
Telephone Number: +2310770003965  
Skype: priso.ndine  
_____________________________