=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20201021170527+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/ModDate: D:20201021170638+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  XI 
Funding proposal package for FP151  
 GCF/B. 27/02/Add.11 
21 October  2020  Meeting of the Board  
9 – 13 November  2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional Agenda Item 11 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled  “Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global)” 
submitted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN ); 
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled  “Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global)” 
submitted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) S is being circulated on a 
limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure 
confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the 
entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/Add.11  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                            1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)                   78 
Environmental and soc ial report(s) disclosure                                                                                        137 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           140  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                150 
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                    1 52


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Technical Assistance (TA) Facility for the Global Subnational 
Climate Fund (SnCF Global - Equity; submitted separately)  
Country(ies): Africa :  Burkina Faso ; Cameroon ; Côte d’Ivoire ; Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; Gabon;  Guinea; Kenya; Mali, 
Mozambique; Nigeria; Rwanda; Senegal; South Africa; Togo; 
Uganda.  
Asia- Pacific : Cambodia; Fiji; Indonesia; Myanmar. 
Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas; Brazil;  Chile; 
Costa Rica; Dominica; Dominican Republic; Ecuador; El 
Salvador; Guatemala; Haiti; Honduras, Jamaica; Mexico; 
Panama; Uruguay.  
Mediterranean: Albania; Jordan; Lebanon, Mauritania; 
Montenegro; Morocco; North Macedonia; Tunisia. 
 
 
Accredited Entity:  International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural 
Resources (IUCN)  
Date of first submission:  [2019/12/30 ]  
Date of current submission  [2020/10/21]   
Version number  V.3


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 77 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP SnCF TA - IUCN Global – 2020/03/20


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 77 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Private   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals ( RFP) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Mobilizing Funds  at Scale (MFS)   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☒ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☒ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:      
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
35% 
 
40% 
25% 
 
 
 
A.5. Expected m itigation 
impact  77’634’432 t CO2 eq A.6. Expected a daptation 
impact   20’072  jobs created   
17’000’000 citizens 
positively impacted with 
better public services  
 
NA 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  28 M USD for Technical 
Assistance  
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  18.5 M USD  
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant  18.5 M USD  
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  Minimum 2 0 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.   
4/30/2020  A.14. ESS category  Project under this 
program will be limited to 
E&S category B and C  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PAF support  been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 77 
 A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/ programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.   
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  If not the A ccredited Entity, please i ndicate the full legal name of the Executing 
Entity (ies) and provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there 
can be more than one Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the 
National Designated Authority. Refer to the definition of Executing Entity in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement.  
 
Executing Entities:  
- R20 Regions of Climate Action (R20) a Swiss association based in 
Geneva, Switzerland under the swiss association laws.  
- Gold Standard Foundation (GS) a non-profit association based in 
Geneva, Switzerland under the swiss association laws.  
- International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), an international 
organization registered in Switzerland, and Accredited Entity by the GCF.  
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 77 
 Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:  
1. Climate change problem  
2. Proposed interventions   
3. Climate impacts/benefits  
 
The Paris Agreement, in which signatory countries pledge to keep global warming “well below” 2°C relative 
to pre-industrial levels and ideally to no more than 1.5° C, marked international political recognition of the 
urgent threat posed by global climate change. In the world’s developing countries, political progress and climate action are tied closely to sustainable economic transition, representing an investment opportunity of 
tens of trillions of dollars. Public development finance alone will not be sufficient to achieve the Paris 
Agreement’s objectives and the SDGs. Impact investing from the private sector is n eeded.  
Subnational authorities have local responsibilities and local power. Indeed, decisions about renewable 
energy generation and energy efficiency retrofits , climate smart urban/rural design and solutions related to 
water and sanitation; restorative agriculture/aquaculture with the potential of adding nature based 
solutions are mostly taken at the sub national level. Such projects have clear c limate mitigation effects , with 
adaptation as co-benefits . It is also locally that the social and environmental impacts of policies and 
programmes are first felt and where the greatest opportunity lies to create employment, stimulate the 
economy, and from the investor point of view, to manage risk.  
Unless well -planned, even infrastructure projects that reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can also 
negatively impact ecosystems, habitats and biodiversity in ways that reduce resilience to climate change 
(see Annex 22 for illustrations on negative impacts of renewable energy on biodiversity), as well as 
sustainability co-benefits. In order to reconcile infrastructure design and implementation, investment 
projects need to be as sessed in regard to reduced GHG emissions, rigorous safeguards, and ensure that 
the surrounding ecosystems where infrastructure is built enables the communities to increase their resilience , and the resilience of the infrastructure itself, in the face of c limate change impacts. Ecosystem 
integrity must be maintained for climate resilience to be ensured.  
The Global Subnational Climate Fund (“SnCF Global” or the “Fund”), and jointly with the Technical 
Assistance, herewith the SnCF programme, seek to achieve a paradigm shift in the model for demand-led 
climate finance. SnCF Global believes the anchor investment by the GCF together with technical assistance 
provided through IUCN (through a separate funding proposal ) will unlock capital commitments to the Fund 
from private investors that will allow the Fund to invest through privately owned special purpose vehicles in 
a multitude of climate-resilient projects while providing a market rate of return to the private investors. The 
Fund will make equity investments i nto special purpose vehicles that manage projects at the sub-national 
level, where the Fund believes there is a significant investment gap, and therefore an opportunity to realize 
both impact and economic returns. GCF and other third-party investors will m ake equity commitments to the 
Fund, with a total target size of $750 -900 M USD, with GCF’s commitment representing 20% of the total. 
The Fund believes this target size is optimal to allow the Fund to invest in projects that address a broad 
array of the 8 i mpact areas identified by the GCF pursuant to Decision B.07/04. 
The dedicated Technical Assistance  part of the programme constitutes this project. It is designed to f irst, 
establis h proof of concept in the form of investment projects structured in ways that build clear  mitigation 
action, alongside climate resilience (blue prints) so that they can be used by investment actors (in the linked 
project led by Pegasus Capital in the programme) to promote replicability and scalability. Second, this 
project, in tandem with these proof of concept models, will develop  distinct methods and granular tools to 
trace results so that they can be used by investment actors to track impact and synergies  between 
mitigation adaptation co -benefits  incorporating livelihood improvement and habitat protection 
considerations . The third part of the Technical Assistance is on capacity building, to ensure the relevant 
stakeholders (project developers, subnational authorities and regional investors) can participate in the 
necessary trainings and outreach activities of the project, thus further promoting replicability and scalability . 
The premise of the project is to go beyond standard environment and social safeguard screening to 
purposely design infrastructure investments to have clear mitigation results while enhanc ing climate 
resilience and be highly additional  as part of countries’ climate targets under the Paris Agreement. Other  
positive impacts are also key an d include social1 as well as environmental benefits such as gender equality,


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 5 OF 77 
 livelihoods, access to services, and ecos ystem health. The project thus certifies project impacts towards 
climate mitigation as well as co-benefits relating to resilience, SDGs, and uses Nature -based Solutions  
(NbS ) in infrastructure to pro-actively protect ecosystems and habitats (see definition and list of examples in 
section B1).  
The project therefore entails the designing, developing and implementing of a complete value chain around 
infrastructure that seeks to: i.) Allow sub-national actors to identify low carbon and climate resilient 
infrastructure projects , linked to NbS where feasible ii.) Enable technical assistance to get the project to 
bankability (technical, legal, economic, environmental and social) in order to be attractive for public and private investors and iii.) Structure with impact fund managers blended finance vehicles permitting through 
the linked Pegasus Capital project, public investors to de-risk the project and therefore secure private 
inves tors, the first vehicle being the SnCF Global. SnCF Global has been selected by the Global Innovation 
Lab for Climate Finance as the best city track project of 2020. The project thus is structured around three 
components:  
1. Feasibility Studies: Development of feasibility studies on investment opportunities that enhance 
countries’ climate mitigation as well as co-benefits relating to climate change adaptation : Those 
studies shall serve as the basis for SnCF Global’s investment decision making.  
2. Capacity building: Capacity building to enable countries build bankable projects that are centred 
around climate mitigation (as well as adaptation co-benefits) : On a programmatic level for  various  
stakeholders in need of knowledge transfer. 
3. Tools and Metrics: Development foremost of climate change mitigation metrics as well as related 
Sustainable Development Goals (“SDG”) and Nature-based Solutions  (“Nature-based Solutions ”) 
metrics, tools and indicators. Those shall be applied to identify, decide on, and monitor  investment 
opportunities. 
IUCN will have the oversight functions for the technical assistance programme . R20 will be the main 
Executing Entity (EE), run the Project Management Unit (PMU), and be responsible for the implementation of Component 1. The Gold Standard will lead Component 3 and focus on the development of climate 
mitigation tools and indicators as well as related SDG and resilience related tools and indicators and apply 
related metrics into screening criteria for investment deal identification, selection and monitoring. These 
metrics shall go beyond “do no harm” and actively ensure that  climate m itigation as well as safeguarding, 
resilience, SDG targets, and nature become an integral part of climate smart infrastructure investments to 
create additional climate mitigation, social, ecosystem and resilience gains. IUCN will also, via its regional 
offices, take responsibility for the implementation of Component 2, on capacity building.  
The TA Component of the overall  programme   is critical for  the feasibility and capacity building to make all 
projects bankable and allow for the equity injections and co-financing to be effectively implemented. 
Pegasus Capital will have overall responsibility for implementing, overseeing, and coordinating the SnC F 
programme. Pegasus Capital will also function as an observer to the project selection process of the TA  
(Component 1). Pegasus Capital’s positive support will be central to TA intervention decision making. This 
is to ensure that the Technical Assistance will not invest in projects that are of no interest to the SnCF 
Fund. 
The linked Pegasus Capital project, operates through an investment vehicle— the Global Subnational 
Climate Fund (SnCF Global)  to blend public (MDBs, DFIs, Sovereign Funds …) and even more 
importantly , private (philanthropies, private banks, private equities, pension funds, insurances funds, family 
offices …..) finance. The aim is to catalyze climate resilient, low carbon infrastructure as a new asset class 
in mid -size, infrastructure for private capital.   
The Fund, as part of the linked Pegasus Capital led project, will complement this T echnical Assistance 
project, to complete the infrastructure value chain by investing , in up to 45 sub national middle class (5 – 75 
 
 
 
1  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2468312418300270?dgcid=author#fn1


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 6 OF 77 
 MUSD Project total financing) low carbon and climate resilient infrastructure projects . It will do so , across 
max 20 countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America including the Caribbean and the Mediterranean basi n.  
The SnCF is a multi -country Fund that is set to invest in up to 20 countries. Substantial effort has been 
dedicated to meet more than 40 NDAs, who have sent their NOLs already and some who will try to send the 
NOLs before the Board discussion; however, due to COVI D-19 many NDAs have forwarded letter explaining 
that their processes are running slower than usual. Based on several positive feedback from these NDAs, it 
is reasonable to expect that more NOLs will be received before or shortly after the Board considers the FP. 
Ultimately, c limate finance will deliver win-win solutions  that make for incorporate low carbon infrastructure 
into a climate resilient future, driven by country climate mitigation priorities and delivered by aligned 
subnational authorities.


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
2 Global States and Regions Annual Disclosure, 2019. CDP and The Cl imate Group  
3 IPCC 2018 Special Report  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages ) 
Climate change problem : Describe  the climate change problem  the pro posal  is expected  to addres s. Describe the  
mitigation  needs (GHG emissions profile)  and/or  adaptation needs  (climate hazards and associates risks based on 
impacts, exposure, and vulnerabilities)  that the proposed  interventions  are expected  to address . Also d escribe the 
most likely scenario ( prevailing conditions  or other alternative) that would remain or continue i n the absence of the 
proposed intervention s. Include baseline information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including 
the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be included in the feasibility study .  
Context : In describing the mitigation and/or  adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/ area of the proposed 
intervention s including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.  
Related projects/interventions : Also d escribe any recent or ongoing projects /interventions that are related to the  
proposal  from other domestic or international sources of funding,  such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation 
Fund, Climate Investment Funds , etc.,  and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling 
up, replication, etc.) . Please identify current gaps  and barriers  regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate 
further how this project/programme complements or addresses these 
Climate change is expected to increase risks to infrastructure at the subnational level given that extreme 
weather events , from hurricanes , droughts, flooding for instance are already negatively affecting 
infrastructure and li velihoods. The World Economic Forum, for instance, has recorded that infrastructure in 
most developing country contexts is not robust enough to withstand such climate impacts . In addition, 
infrastructure investments can also push up emissions of greenhouse gases . Cities , and other subnational 
actors, around the world are struggling to fund even basic infrastructure projects, let alone more complex 
investments in climate resilient systems or infrastructure investments that either increase energy efficiency 
or take advantage of renewable resources to reduce emissions further than originally envisaged. Cities, 
and other local actors have the potential to be at the front line of this transition, with estimated subnational  
mitigation potential in the range of 2 -4 gigatons of CO 2e2. The IPCC emphasizes the role of subnational 
actors in climate action.3  
The sectors at subnational level targeted for bringing about more low carbon infrastructure are:  
1. Water and sanitation;  
2. Restorative agriculture/aquaculture;  
3. Urban development solutions;  
4. Waste optimization;  
5. Renewable energy generation; 
6. Energy efficiency retrofits. 
This project aims to work within each of these categories of infrastructure to bring in climate mitigation 
measures , with adaptation as a co- benefit. These sectors are targeted on the basis that they offer the most 
opportunities for climate proofing and low carbon infrastructure to meet the needs of local authorities. The 
Funding Proposal of the Global Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF Global) –  Equity elaborates on the 
climate mitigation and adaptation co -benefit needs that the proposed infrastructure interventions are 
expected to address.


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 77 
 
 The potential climate mitigation benefits of nature in its different contexts is shown in Figure 1 below.  
 
 
Figure 1. Climate Mitigation Potential of Nature (Griscom et al., 2017)  
 
The following information of this Funding Proposal Technical Assistance  Facility  to the SnCF Global 
focuses specifically on the role and contribution of Nature-based Solutions  as part of climate smart, low 
carbon infrastructure investments.  
Investing in ways to make infrastructure less carbon intensive and more energy efficient can be enhanced 
through N bS, thus by making sure they become more climate resilien t and thus have the potential  for more 
sustainability in the long -term. There are already cases where Nature-based Solutions  can make 
infrastructure more low carbon as well as long- term climate resilient. .  
Figure 2 below illustrates the integration of Nature-based Solutions  into the design of infrastructure in a 
coastal zone. The design takes on a systems perspective, integrating the bro ader land and seascape to 
integrate nature based considerations to optimize low carbon green-grey infrastructure. Nature-based 
Solutions  to protect the shoreline from extreme weather events in the illustration protect infrastructure 
inland, while also draw ing in a return from the investment itself.


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
4 IPCC (2012) Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A 
Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. New York: IPCC.  
5 Numerous case studies show that communities that are protected by mangroves suffer a lower death toll (e.g. 
Das et al., 2009), lower damage of assets and less loss in income value after the incidence of floods and 
tropical storms (e.g. Badola et al., 2005). Mangroves help to reduce coastal erosion by slowing water currents 
and holding sediments in place (UNEP, 2010). By building up sediments, some areas of mangroves have kept 
pace with moderate rates of sea level rise over thousands of years (Beitl, 2012).   
Figure 1. Blue Infrastructure Finance: A new approach, integrating Nature -based Solutions  for coastal resilience. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland (Thiele 
et. al, 2020) . 
 
These interventions, often perceived as bringing only c onservation benefits, are 
used to reduce climate risks such as from hurricane or flood impacts , thus 
protecting the climate mitigation actions from other sectors .  
While  SnCF  focuses  on mitigation action, the  adaptation co-benefits , here 
illustrated with coastal  zone example above include: 
a. Low-cost approaches to risk reduction in the face of rising sea levels, flooding 
and changes in storm frequency and intensity;4, 5


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
6 Bresch, D., Müller, L. (2014) Economics of Climate Adaptation – Shaping climate- resilient development: A 
global overview on case studies with a focus on fast -growing communities. Zurich: Swiss Reinsurance 
Company Ltd  
7 Wave height can be reduced by 13- 66% over a 100 meter wide mangrove belt, and by 50 -100% over a 500 
meter wide belt.  
8 Coral reefs 70%, salt marshes 72%, mangroves 31%, sea grass beds 36%  
9 UNEP (2006) In the Front Line: Shoreline Protection and Other Ecosystem Services from Mangroves and 
Coral Reefs. Cambridge: United Nations Environment Programme World conservation Monitoring Center.  
10 However, threshold rates of sea level rise are also likely to exist, beyond which mangrove surfaces are no 
longer able to keep up  
11 McIvor, A.L., Spencer, T. , Möller, I. and Spalding. M. (2013) The response of mangrove soil surface elevation 
to sea level rise. Natural Coastal Protection Series: Report 3. Cambridge Coastal Research Unit Working Paper 
42. The Nature Conservancy and Wetlands International.  b. Reduction of expected damage from storms and flooding (40-60%);6 
c. Reduction of wave heights7 from storm surges and waves, on average 35-71% varying by habitat and 
site.8 Mangrove replanting has been reported leading to a 70-90% reduction in energy from wind-
generated waves in coastal areas.9 
d. Shoreline stabilization and reduction of damage from erosion. Erosion protection is partly also due to the 
ability of mangroves to rise at similar rates as sea level rises10, referred to mangrove surface elevation.11 
e. Protection of freshwater reservoirs close to the shor eline from saltwater intrusion.  
They also create the opportunity for generating income generating opportunities  for local communities. If 
planned adequately, these can then create  new i nvestment opportunities  for the private sector.  
Other examples  of using Nature-based Solutions  to enhance the climate resilience of infrastructure are:  
• Wetlands, including mangroves, help reduce the impacts from tidal surges that have become more 
prevalent in many coastal zones in the face of climate change, thus protecting nearby physical 
infrastructure/assets such as ports and roads.  
• Lakes and wetlands regulate flows and store water, and thus critical for reducing the impact of 
droughts exacerbated by climate change. Using lakes and wetlands for this water holding capacity 
can thus reduce the need for having higher water storage capacity in built reservoirs in the face of 
prolonged drought, hence cutting the cost of additional built water storage investments  that would 
be needed over and above what would normally be required in a ‘without- climate change’ scenario.  
Wetland protection is used to avoid the risk of limited water supplies in the face of climate change 
in Kenya in the GCF approved project entitled ‘project entitled ‘ TWENDE Towards Ending Drought 
Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi -Arid Rangelands’ ; 
• Dams benefit from forests that stabilize soils and hold back erosion upstream  where rainfall 
intensity and duration has increased in the face of climate change, thus protecting infrastructure 
and decreasing maintenance costs. This is being done in the GCF approved project for Sri Lanka  
entitled ‘ Strengthening Climate Resilience of Subsistence Farmers and Agricultural Plantation 
Communities residing in the vulnerable river basins, watershed areas and downstream of the 
Knuckles  Mountain Range Catchment of Sri Lanka’;  
• Decreased re-insurance costs for coastal infrastructure for which Nature-based Solutions  such as 
coral reef restoration, has decreased the risks of damage from climate-induced flooding impacts . 
• Big cities are making substantial payments to upstream land managers in their watersheds  to 
improve land-use practices and thereby ensure the provision of water  for consumptive uses 
especially with a more rapid dwindling of water supplies than was being seen from poor land us e 
practices in a ‘without-climate change’ scenario; Using such Nature-based Solutions  have the 
added benefit of carbon sequestration.


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
12 Seddon, N., Sengupta, S., García- Espinosa, M., Hauler, I., Herr, D. and Rizvi, A.R. (2019). Nature -based 
Solutions in Nationally Determined Contributions: Synthesis and recommendations for enhancing climate 
ambition and action by 2020. Gland, Switzerland and Oxford, UK: IUCN and University of Oxford.  
13 IUCN and Climate Focus (2017).  The Bonn Challenge and the Paris Agreement: How can forest landscape 
restoration advance Nationally Determined Contributions?  
14 Herr and Landis (2017) . Coastal blue carbon ecosystems Opportunities for Nationally Determined 
Contributions. Policy brief.  Some mitigation oriented NbS  measures , including in the coastal zone, such as restoration of natural 
ecosystems and soil carbon sequestration provide co-benefits such as improved biodiversity, soil quality, 
and local food security.  
The majority of NDCs include Nature-based Solutions  in one form or another. At least 66% of Paris 
Agreement signatories include Nature-based Solutions  in some form to help achieve their  climate change 
mitigation and/or adaptation goals12. In acknowledgement of the significance of ecosystems for climate 
change mitigation and adaptation, as well as their broader societal value in general, the Paris Agreement 
explicitly recognises ‘the importance of the conservation and enhancement, as  appropriate, of sinks and 
reservoirs of the greenhouse gases referred to in the Convention’ (Preamble). These include ‘biomass, 
forests and oceans as well as  other terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems’ (UNFCCC Article 4.1 (d)). 
Based on the review of the first round of NDC, one study concluded that 77% of NDCs reference current or 
planned efforts in the forest sector, including FLR. 74% of NDCs include forest-related mitigation targets, 
20% of which are quantifiable, 8% expressed in tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. 55% of NDCs include 
forests as  part of economy -wide mitigation targets. 65% of NDCs with forest targets have those that are 
conditional upon international  support.13 More specifically for the coastal zone, 19% of Parties with coastal  
ecosystems include these habitats in the climate mitigation component of their  NDCs, 39% in their 
adaptation component 32% of NDCs include conservation and restoration of coastal ecosystems as an 
adaptation strategy, 7% recognising mitigation co-benefits. 13% of NDCs reference planning or zoning-
related efforts (i.e. integrated coastal zone management)  while  9% of NDCs recognize coastal habitats as 
opportunities to enhance carbon sequestration and/or protect carbon sinks  as climate mitigation effort.14 
Box 1 provides examples of climate- proofed infrastructure that have the potential for wider replication and 
upscaling.  
 
Box 1. Examples of climate -proofed infrastructure  
 
Coastal hazards will be exacerbated by an increase in the average intensity, magnitude of storm surge and 
precipitation rates of tropical cyclones  in the face of climate change, as the IPCC SROCC reports. 
Sustainable management of ecosystems can play an important role in integrated adaptation responses  by 
local actors (IPCC SROCC).  
 
Breakwater oyster reefs, Kutubdia Island, Bangladesh: Over four seasons, it was found that the 
0.6metre high reefs attenuated wave energy by 95-100% when water levels were elevated up to 0.5m, 
whilst wave energy was partially dissipated with water levels of 0.5-1.0m depending on water level and 
wave height. Sediment accumulated on the landward side of the reefs, with erosion levels 54% lower than 
control sites.  The protection of the reef to dissipate the higher than normal wave intensity enabled 
thecoastal salt marshes  to flourish, which further stabilised adjacent sediment.  Sea level rise is projected 
to continue beyond 2100 in all RCP scenarios for the IPCC (IPCC SROCC) . These reefs are thus serving 
to reduce the risks of coastal infrastructure from tidal surges and flooding. In addition the oyster 
reefs provided the additional benefit of species habitat, enabling more availability also of food. The reef 
also served to purify water. S tudies have shown each one can filter 50 gallons of water each day ( Naturally 
Resilient Communities ) – in addition to the protection from storms .


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 77 
 
    
The North-East Kalimantan coastal area is increasingly vulnerable to sea-level rise and the more severe 
weather events exacerbated by climate change that are eroding embankments and caus ing flooding. The 
Tarakan area’s Selva Shrimp Indonesia project, an IUCN supported initiative of its Blue Natural Capital 
Finance Facility, is changing the way shrimp is produced, using Nature-based Solutions . Instead of 
clearing mangroves, it is protecting the mangrove ecosystem in the shrimp farming area. The result is 
more climate resilient shrimp farm alongside carbon sequestration. S uccess at the 100ha test plot is 
paving the way for a roll -out in the enti re region covering 150,000ha of mangrove forests. The c limate 
change mitigation potential is estimated at 7,180t CO 2 within 3 years.  
 
A risk assessment & geological survey of Haiti’s coastline  identifies as greatest climate risks (1) rising sea 
levels from climate change/extreme weather events, (2) cyclonic events & flooding and (3) severe 
droughts. The adjacent mangrove forests spreading over 8,000ha, protect the critical infrastruc ture that will 
require 35.8 MUSD  of investments to be set-up. Bioénergie Haiti is protecting a part of the Caribbean’s 
largest mangrove forest , which in turn, protects its greenfield waste-to -energy infrastructure 
project from climate exacerbated weather events, a project led by M ontreal based engineering firm 
“Biothermica” , thus also creating new income opportunities for local communities engaged in the mangrove 
restoration work.  
 
The mangroves have long been a lifeline for Colombia’s coastal communities, protecting them from storm 
surges and providing food and wood supplies t o families. However , pressures from illegal farming, fishing 
and logging combined with climate change are threatening their existence. Conservation International's 
project is among the first globally to fully quantify blue carbon credits in both trees and soil, and is 
expected to sequester 1 million tons of CO 2 over the project’s lifetime. It will be a model for scaling 
carbon sequestration in global mangrove ecosystems and curbing emissions caused by 
deforestation in these areas , while concurrently the mangrove ecosystem protects the nearby 
infrastructure from storm surges.  
 
In Phewa Lake watershed, Nepal,  there were 179 erosion events recorded along 129 km of rural  roads, 
amounting to 1.5 erosion events recorded per kilometer of earthen roads or 70,133 m3 soil released in the 
watershed, higher than the rates of erosion seen in the past.  Climate change is considered to be 
increasing the impacts of more intense precipitation and flooding events, although difficult to quantify the 
impacts of climate change over and above those caused from poor land-use practices alone.  In Tilahar 
village, the bio-engineering works  by the IUCN implemented Ecosystems Protecting Infrastructure and 
Communities  project reduced soil losses from 30 m3 in 2014 to less  than 2 m3 in 2016, thus making the 
road infrastructure more climate resilient.  
 
While Box 1 illustrates a few examples of using Nature-based Solutions  to climate proof infrastructure, 
there are a wider number of such investment opportunities for harnessing climate or conservation finance. 
For instance, the Conservation Finance Initiative (CFI), a conservation investment incubator, managed by 
IUCN uses G EF-financed non-grant funding to invest in deals with significant conservation benefits (e.g., 
biodiversity, land degradation, climate mitigation and adaptation, ecosystem and community resiliency 
etc.). The Initiative is to leverage at least an additional  USD 50 million in private sector finance and serve 
as a unique learning opportunity for  conservation finance through a Coalition for Private Investment in 
Conservation (CPIC). CFI also aims to improve knowledge, metrics, and recognition for conservation 
finance. In the long term, the Initiative will improve the management of 10,000,000 ha of terrestrial, marine 
and coastal habitat.  
Other related initiatives include the Andgreen Fund (andgreen.fund), led by IDH, the sustainable trade initiative, to invest in deforestation-free commodity production with a focus on tropical forests and peat in 
Brazil, Indonesia and Liberia. NatureVest, the impact investing arm of The Nature Conservancy, has since 
2014 closed six conservation investment deals totaling 200 M US D. The Conservation Finance Alliance 
has focused on the creation of fiduciary funds that bring public investment to priority areas to cover the 
recurrent costs of conservation, for instance in protected areas. The Althelia Climate Fund catalyzes 
investment s in land use projects that deliver  reduction in carbon emissions.  Gold Standard has been


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
15 Thiele, T., Alleng, G., Biermann, A., Corwin, E., Crooks, S., Fieldhouse, P., Herr, D., Matthews, N., Roth, N., 
Shrivastava, A., von Unger, M. and Zeitlberger, J. (2020). Blue Infrastructure Finance: A new approach, 
integrating Nature -based Solutions for coastal resilience. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.  
16 Subnational here implies an administrative division, unit, entity, area or region, also referred to as a 
subnational ent ity, constituent unit, or country subdivision, is a portion of a country or other region delineated for 
the purpose of administration.  certifying  projects that bring about greenhouse gas emission reductions  for 15 years in 80 countries  (see 
Table in the Fund Proposal for the Global Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF Global) - Equity , Illustration of 
Gold Standard certified projects ). 
The movement towards increased investment in nature is gaining momentum. However, many of these 
initiatives focus on leveraging conservation finance with biodiversity conserv ation as the main focus. For 
those that do tap into climate finance the emphasis has tended to be on renewable energy and energy 
efficiency . Investment opportunities  that harness Nature-based Solutions  to climate proof low carbon 
infrastructure (such as in Box 1 above), are not at a scale that can bring a paradigm shift.  
A recent World Bank cost-benefit analysis showed that, based on 3,000 scenarios, that the cost of 
inaction, with respect to better land- use planning, climate-resilient coastal infrastructure and 
sustainable management of natural infrastructure, exceeds USD 2 trillion in 75 percent of the 
scenarios and that climate change makes the strengthening of infrastructure assets even more important, 
doubling the median benefi t-cost ratio (World Bank 2019).  Other analyses also show similar conclusions 
that nature-based infrastructure is not only possible and desirable, but feasible and ultimately more 
financially attractive15. 
Zurich Flood Resilience Alliance is a multi -sectoral partnership focusing on finding practical ways to help 
communities in developed and developing countries strengthen their resilience to flood risk , especially 
given the additional risks of increased flooding in a ‘with-climate change’ scenario. They recommend that 
the first consideration when addressing flood risk is to consider Nature-based Solutions  and green and 
blue infrastructure approaches, which emerging evidence suggests outperform grey -only infrastructure 
measures. They urge decision-makers to factor in the co-benefits beyond flood risk reduction which 
green/blue infrastructure provides but also advise avoiding creating new risk s associated with building 
more assets in hazard-prone areas . 
The potential thus exists to scale up the experiences of using Nature-based Solutions  to climate proof low -
carbon infrastructure, while also growing the pipeline of investable deals that can mitigate greenhouse gas 
emissions. This project will fill this ga p. Its objective is thus to integrate climate mitigation solutions into 
infrastructure projects at the subnational level  and where possible with adaptation co -benefits16.   
While each sector of focus carries unique barriers (for the full list of barrier, please see the Fund Proposal 
for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) –  Equity ) to implementation and access to 
finance, which prior projects demonstrate can be overcome, and serve as models for wider scale -up and 
adoption. Specific barriers for securing adequate resources to finance integrated Nature-based Solutions  
and infrastructure projects include:  
• Lack of evidence to demonstrate how ecology and infrastructure interact or can interact (flooding 
and walls, wetlands and roads, and so on) to achieve synergistic outcomes; 
• Lack of experience, standards and sufficient examples to overcome institutional emphasis in favour 
of purely conventional or ‘proven’ grey infrastructure; linked to 
o Confidence based on historic data globally that grey infrastructure will deliver required benefits;  
o Failure to recognize or tendency to underestimate long term maintenance or decommission 
costs and responsibilities, and


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 77 
 
 o Higher design tolerances of grey infrastructure potentially leadi ng to long term project failure 
or unforeseen upgrade costs (e.g. reduced flood protection benefits of levees with higher 
rates of sea level rise or reservoir storage capacity driven by upstream water or sediment 
management); 
• Lack of granular, site-specifi c knowledge of specific infrastructure risks and nature based risk 
mitigation strategies (such as to reduce flooding and the exposure to sea -level rise);  
• Lack of confidence within the broader audience and the finance community in particular that Nature-bas ed Solutions  will provide the predicted protection and ecosystem benefits; 
• Lack of dedicated finance facilities focusing on developing integrated Nature-based Solutions  and 
infrastructure projects and offering blended finance solutions;  
• Lack of institutional models and arrangements capable of channeling finance to stakeholders concerned; and 
• Lack of partnership models for delivering those projects.  
These barriers to investment in low carbon, climate resilient infrastructure at the subnational level can vary 
across countries, depending on their status of development.  
Addressing these barriers c alls for a number of measures  to be supported from technical assistance 
funding:  
• First, establishing proof of concept in the form of investment projects designed f or clear  mitigation 
action, alongside climate resilience (blue prints) so that they can be used by investment actors to 
promote replicability and scalability.  
• Second, in tandem with these proof of concept models, the development of distinct methods and 
granular tools to trace results so that they can be used by investment actors to track measurable 
climate mitigation impact as wellas  climate resilience /adaptation co-benefits , , between digital 
solutions and early warning systems and between livelihood improvement and habitat protection.  
Proof of concept from actual deals resulting from the technical assistance from this project are expected to 
showcase a better cost-benefit value for projects. This will change perceptions of investors and investees 
on what they now see as high cost, high risk and low benefit infrastructure deals. Actual  investments will 
not only be a result of an analysis of return rates but also depend on the enabling environment for investment, there may be a situation where the enabling environment.  Thus, the identification of adequate 
institutional support as well as  public policies, regulatory frameworks and incentive mechani sms to 
promote integrated Nature-based Solutions  and climate-resilient infrastructure investments are key and 
hence the project’s engagement with local authorities is key. The project will also e ngage beneficiaries of 
inclusive measures in the wider society to ensure that project deals are indeed in line with societal needs. 
Ultimately, the project will create the momentum to scale the ability to grow investable deals to a level to 
which climate r esilient, low carbon infrastructure becomes mainstream among local authorities in the 
participating countries, globally. 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages  plus diagram ) 
The goal of the Global Sub -national Climate Fund  (SnCF Global or the “Fund”) is to catalyze climate 
mitigation and adaptation solutions at the subnational level through a transformative finance model. The model is designed to attract public and private investment and to deliver certified C limate and Sus tainable 
Development impacts and Nature -based Solutions at global scale ( climate, SDGs, NbS). The subnational


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
17 2009, June. United Nations Development Programme. “Charting a New Low -Carbon Route to Development”. 
A Primer on integrated Climate Change Planning for Regional Governments. Issued for COP 15  
2019, December. European Committee of the Regions .  Political messages of the European Committee of the 
Regions for the UNFCCC, COP25  level is key: 70% of known climate solutions are located within the remit of subnational authorities17. 
Significant additional investment is needed in this sector to achieve the climate goals of the Paris 
Agreement. The SnCF Global presents a positive disruption on how subnational climate projects should be 
structured, de-risked, and funded by both public and private investors, while monitored and benchmarked 
at the highest level of rigou r and quality.  
The Fund is designed to overcome private investment and project-level barriers that lead to chronic 
underfunding of bankable mitigation and adaptation projects at the sub-national level, at the deal si ze of 
$5-$75 million project funding. Thousands of high merit sub-national projects are bypassed by commercial financing because investors prefer perceived safer investments. The Fund believes anchor funding from 
the GCF will unlock both public investors ( MDBs, DFIs, Sovereign Funds …) and even more important, 
private investors (pension funds, insurance funds, family offices, private banks, philanthropies, high net worth individuals, and other institutional investors) which are willing to invest in green fi nance products but 
do not have access to attractive investment vehicles to invest at sub-national level. This is the first time an 
impact equity fund mobilizes together public (20 %) and private sector (80%) funding at scale to de-risk 
sub-national middle scale infrastructure projects.  
The Fund is designed to unlock significant new climate solutions and create scalable models for public and 
private capital, linking climate resilient technology with NbS. Especially the latter has become an area of 
increasing interest for capital investors for some time, but has yet to achieve its full potential. The 
readiness shown by the financiers of the SnCF Global (GCF, BNP Paribas, and other non-disclosed 
investors) to engage on NbS, and partner with IUCN as the global lead institution on NbS, shows the 
willingness and eagerness to ensure innovative finance solutions for NbS don’t just remain limited to pilot 
projects. The Fund will be managed by Pegasus Capital Advisors, a GCF-accredited alternative 
investment manager. The consortium of the SnCF Global is completed by R20, engaged at cities and 
regions level to strengthen their role in the fight against climate change as well as the Gold Standard, a lead certifier to ensure project impacts achieve the highest levels of environmental integrity and 
sustainable development. 
The SnCF Global creates additionality both at fund level and at project level. At Fund level, the use of a 
blended finance model s, fund impact certification, exclusive sub-national and mid-size project focus are all 
designed to direct private capital to projects that otherwise would not receive investment. At project level, the standard inclusion of rigorous safeguarding and Climate, SDG and NbS impact in project design and 
selection will ensure that other wise technically sound projects become bankable.  
The ultimate beneficiaries of the SnCF are the citizens living in the subnational jurisdictions where 
investments will occur. They  will gain access to improved services while benefiting from measurable 
positive impacts due to climate resilient infrastructure and improved ecosystems, in terms of waste management, air and water quality, as well as access to clean energy and energy efficiency.  
Immediate beneficiaries are the sub- national authorities controlling procurement and project development. 
These stakeholders will also benefit from improved conditions and enabling environment that can attract 
long-term and stable green investments. The positive Climate and SDG impacts will link to and directly


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 77 
 
 support host  country Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), amplifying impact beyond the sub-national level.  
Secondary beneficiaries will be the project developers (primarily private sector entities, thus encouraging 
and empowering local developers) in terms of finance and technical support to advance sustainable, green 
infrastructure projects. Compliance with the SnCF ESMS criteria, rigorous safeguarding, gender 
framework, and climate, NbS and SDG impact design will build their capacity to engage other Funds. 
Other stakeholders engaged in the process are regional actors, such as regional banks, national banks 
and sovereign funds which have the means and opportunities to leverage more funding into projects such 
as targeted by the SnCF Global.  
Inputs:  
Public -private consortium : The Fund will be managed by GCF-accredited Pegasus Capital Advisors. The 
Technical Assistance (TA) will be managed by GCF-accredited IUCN. The TA will provide financial and 
technical support to i.) the international community with the project methodologi es, indicators and tools to 
Measure, Report and Verify green sub national projects’ impacts, thus helping NDC; ii.) national and sub-national governments to better understand the conditions to identify, design, develop and implement 
proper portfolio of projects and iii.) project developers to ensure their projects become commercially viable, 
adhere to strong environment and social safeguards, and integrate NbS where possible. R20 Regions of 
Climate Action will lead overall coordination. Gold Standard will l ead Climate, SDG and NbS impact 
certification. BNP Paribas will be the depositary / Custodian Bank as well the distributor of the Fund. The 
Fund will have its first closing with the GCF as the anchor investor as soon as possible, and the remainder 
of the Fund will be capitalized by BNP Paribas and other private investors over the course approximately 
one year after the initial closing with GCF.  
Together, the consortium members bring diverse and relevant expertise to achieve the Fund’s objectives. 
Working together, the consortium can accelerate the development of projects: streamlining the length of 
the project development and financing value-chain, bringing together finance, engineering and conservation expertise, financial resources and cutting-edge knowledge, coordinating efforts of major 
players, and building capacity, understanding and trust.  
Blended finance model to de-risk for private capital : Investment risk is greatly reduced with GCF becoming 
a public investor providing first-loss position on the Fund. There is a lack of development vehicles to de-risk projects, notably those that “blend” capital in such a way to match the risk and return that can be 
expected at each stage in the project development and investment value chain with the expectations of 
different categories of funding and investment capital. This is especially true for private finance into NbS. 
The lower risk profile is needed to attract private capital. Doing so is essential to achieve the Paris 
Agreement climate target of 2°C, and repr esents a 23 trillion USD investment opportunity up to 2030. 
Additional worldwide annual investments of 4 trillion USD will be needed to achieve the SDGs by 2030. 
The annual investment gap in developing countries is expected to remain high at around 2.5 tri llion USD 
and public development finance alone will not be sufficient to achieve either the Paris Agreement Objectives or the SDGs.  
Exclusive sub -national focus: There is an urgent need to scale climate and development finance at the 
sub-national level where there is pervasive underfunding of bankable mitigation and adaptation projects in cities, counties, regions and states. 50% -80% of needed climate mitigation opportunities are however at 
sub-national level. Decisions about water and sanitation, waste management, energy generation, energy efficient street lighting and local nature-based projects are mostly taken at local level. It is also at this level 
that positive social and environmental impacts are first felt. SnCF Global believes the greatest 
opportunities lie at the sub-national level to create employment, to stimulate the economy and, from the 
investor point of view, to manage project risk. The Fund will only invest in public –  private sub-national 
climate projects for which there is a clear pathway  to financial, social and environmental viability, alignment


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 77 
 
 and reportable impacts in support of country -driven priorities and can be integrated into national reporting 
on Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and SDG. From a TA perspective, awarenes s, training and 
capacity building of public authorities will ensure that enabling conditions for green infrastructure 
investments are being advanced. They will also provide the sub-national authorities insight knowledge and 
tools to fast-track procurement and project development. This should create a longer, and more stable 
investment environment and conditions for other financiers to follow suit to the SnCF Global. 
Mid-size project investment criteria: The Fund targets projects with a total cost of $5-$75 million dollars, 
the investment window for many sub-national projects. Too often, local green infrastructure projects fall 
below the $100 million threshold of most public (MDB and DFIs) and most private climate finance, or are 
too large for the $5 million grant threshold of most public funding. The transaction cost is considered too 
high compared to return on investment. The Fund fills this critical gap. The Fund is demand-driven; climate 
resilient infr astructure  projects are highly requested by sub-national governments and investors, especially 
for “mid -size” projects, as well as making a tangible link to NbS  
ESMS and global standards will backstop Fund design, project selection and impact: The Fund is  designed 
from the outset to deliver, measure, and uniquely –  to certify –  climate mitigation, adaptation, and 
sustainability co-benefits. The Fund’s rigorous ESMS and certified design incorporate best-practice 
international standards for climate, SDGs, and safeguards including non-discrimination, decent work 
conditions, gender equality, anti -corruption, etc. These same criteria will be applied to project selection and 
investment decisions in addition to local registration, key financial data at company lev el, key 
competencies and liabilities at company level, policies, etc. Compliance and reporting will be accomplished 
ex-ante through certified project design documents, and ex -post. The Fund will limit itself to projects with 
ES B categorization.  
Technical  support to ensure high-integrity, bankable projects: Sub -national authorities and even project 
developers often lack the skills to design and implement green infrastructure projects with sufficient safeguarding, design for climate mitigation, resilience, and sustainable development and NbS impact, and 
other alignment with the real demands of the local population and investor requirements. The SnCF, grounded in the ESMS, via the work of the TA, will develop the tools, resources, and training to help 
stakeholders develop bankable projects from an investment standpoint, high-impact climate mitigation 
(SDG 13), and high-integrity projects with respect to mandatory safeguards and certified impact towards other SDGs (minimum 3 per project). TA materials will be public goods to ensure uptake by other 
investment funds. Capacity transfer will be sustained through the initial support in setting-up Technical 
Assistance Hubs.  
Activities:  
Investment: The main investment activities include fund raising for private capital investors into the Fund, deal sourcing through the project pipeline (supported via the TA), and investment decisions and 
management once deals are selected. Specific tasks may include:  
• Develop dedicated blended finance allowing both public finance insti tutions such as sovereign funds, 
DFIs and MDBs and private investors such as philanthropies, family offices, pensions funds and 
private banks to invest according to their interest and risk -taking profile.   
• Identify the proper portfolio of infrastructure projects, through bottom up approach directly with sub 
national, which maximize positive climate and SDG impact.  
• Conduct feasibility studies to make sure proposed infrastructure projects meet the investors’ 
requirements so that they become bankable;  
• Measur e, Report and Verify the environmental, social and economic impacts thanks to Gold 
Standard, the Fund’s third-party climate and SDG certification partner. 
Capacity Development: The SnCF will leverage the extensive expertise and resources of the consortium 
members to develop tools, awareness, training and other means of capacity transfer. TA resources will


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 77 
 
 target all but one of the eight GCF focus areas: AFOLU, buildings and cities, ecosystems and ecosystem 
services, energy mitigation, health productivity an d water security, infrastructure adaptation, livelihoods 
and vulnerable communities adaptation. In-country awareness and training will be supported through the 
regional networks of IUCN and regional offices and UNITAR’s CIFAL network centers. All materials  and 
final reports will be public goods.  
Impact - Certification : The Gold Standard, an international market standard used by 1,700 projects in 80 
countries, will be used to support Fund and project design.  The use of the standard, which is aligned with 
the Fund’s ESMS, will ensure project safeguards, mitigation, and adaptation impacts (SDG) are 
incorporated into project design and selection. An independent, third-party will certify that safeguards were implemented, and that projected mitigation and adaptation/resilience impacts (SDGs 3, 5 ,6 ,7 ,8 ,11 ,13, 
14 ,15) were achieved.   
Scale – Sustained capacity transfer : The SnCF Program within the Technical Assistance will incubate 3-5 
regional capacity centres in line with the geographic scope of the Fund. A lready, the SnCF Global is 
positioned to engage regionally, through an active network of Latin America capital cities and regions 
committed to climate change, in the Caribbean, Africa, Mediterranean, the ASEAN and the 53-member 
Commonwealth, and in particular with southern national and regional certified GCF entities within which 
regional hubs for TA facilities are likely to be created. R20, Afrochampions and Fonerwa are already 
working, within the framework of the African Union with AfDB, Afreximbank, Afri can Trade Development 
Bank, African Corporate Bank and other national foreign Funds to this end. The hubs will function as part of existing regional centres, rather than as stand-alone entities. The objective is to develop capacity for 
each region to independently develop bankable, high-integrity projects and to attract global climate 
finance.  
SnCF Initiative Target High-Level Outputs:  
1. Investment: $750 million in blended public/private capital is invested in approx. 35  subnational projects 
in 20-25 countri es. 
2. Capacity : $28  million is invested in Technical Assistance to support 35-50 high-integrity, bankable  
projects, integrating NbS, where feasible. Note that this aspect of the SnCF will be undertaken as part 
of the separate TA funding proposal.  
3. Impact: Certified mitigation impacts of 76 MT CO
2e and adaptation/resilience through SDGs 3, 5, 6, 7, 
8, 11, 13, 14, 15: 
4. Scale : Measurable contribution towards host country NDCs and SDGs and 3-5 regional capacity hubs 
are established to sustain capacity transfer tailored to local regions.  
SnCF Initiative Target High-Level Outcomes:  
Financial: The SnCF blended finance model catalyzes  private investment in new, subnational climate 
projects, integrating NbS. This creates an urgently needed pathway for private capital to support additional, 
high-impact projects linked to ecosystem conservation.  
Technological: The SnCF shared approach and open-source resources and training build bankable, high-
integrity sub -national projects, including IUCN’s expertise and emphasis in NbS. 
Climatic and Ecological: CO 2e, and water, soil, ecosystem and related NbS are achieved at scale.  Impacts 
are certified to provide assurance for donors and proof of concept for future investors.  
Gender and Social : Every SnCF project must implement, at minimum, a gender sensitivity framework 
(SDG 5) and rigorous safeguards into project design leading to climate impacts (SD G13), and at least two 
additional resilience / adaptation measures (SDGs 1,2,3,6,7,8,11,12), including those related to ecosystems and natural solutions (SDGs  14,15). Impacts will be verified by an independent 3
rd party.


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 77 
 
 Institutional and Regulatory : Subnational projects support country priorities and regional capacity is 
sustained through dedicated hubs. The TA and hubs provide an opportunity for SnCF capacity transfer on 
technical elements, standards, policies and other best practice, and to learn about the same from regional 
and subnational partners.   
 
 
 
Goal  
 Catalyse climate mitigation and adaptation solutions at the subnational level through a transformative finance model designed  to attract public and private investment 
and to deliver certified climate and SDG impacts and NbS at global scale.  
Goal Statement  
 By demonstrating how to de -risk investment (blended finance, rigorous safeguards, bankable projects, and certified impact) the SnCF achieves a transform ative level 
where private capital will reach additional, high -integrity subnational projects thereby reducing the barriers to investment, rewarding investors, certifying impacts, and 
building capacity to support future investment.  
 
Outcomes  
 Investment:  a blended finance 
model to catalyse private 
investment in new, subnational 
climate projects  
 
 Capacity:  a shared approach and open -
source resources are used to build 
bankable, high -integrity sub -national 
projects  
 Impact:  fund design as well as project 
safeguards, mitigation, and adaptation 
impacts are all certified to global 
standard.  Scale:  subnational projects support 
country priorities and regional capacity is 
sustained through dedicated hubs  
Outputs  
 Investment: $750 million in 
blended public/privat e capital is 
invested in approx. 35 
subnational projects in 10 -15 
countries : 
o $750M capital raised  
o Sourcing, feasibility, risk 
analysis and due 
diligence  
o Deals structured and 
investments managed  
o Full compliance with best 
practice safeguards and international standards  
 Capacity:  $28 million invested in 
Technical Assistance to support 35 -50 
high -integrity, bankable projects:  
o TA anchored in ESMS that reflects best international safeguards and 
standards  
o Training and capacity building 
leads to robust  portfolio of 
projects leading to bankable, high -integrity projects  
o TA tools and resources become a 
public good and could thus 
become standards  Impact:  certified mitigation impacts of 
76 MT CO 2e and adaptation/resilience 
through SDGs 3,5,6,7,8,11,13, 14,15 :  
o Global standard applied at Fund 
and at project level  
o Independent third -party 
certification of project 
safeguards, mitigation, and 
adaptation impacts (SDG)  
o Long -term resilience and SDG 
relevance enhance through 
complimentary NBS component  Scale:  measurable contribution towards 
host country NDCs and SDGs and initiation of 3-5 regional capacity hubs:  
o Create integrated reporting 
pathways from subnational projects 
to national level  
o Strengthen regulatory and institutional capacity via methods 
and tools  
o Sustain N/S and S/S capacity 
transfer via regional hubs  
Key drivers  • Growing market demand: 
Investors are ready to invest 
in climate -resilient • Project developers are 
sufficiently incentivized to adopt • Standard setting companies are 
able to cost -effectively certify 
SDG and NbS positive impacts  • Sub-national authorities are willing 
and able to provide the conditions 
and incentives mechanisms to


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 77 
 
  infrastructure linked to SDG 
and NbS impacts  
• Corporate banks are 
engaging directly  strong ESMS as well as NbS 
approaches  attract investments, based on 
strong ESMS criteria, impact 
measurements and reasonable 
Return on Investments  
Barriers and Risks  
 • Transaction cost too high to 
manage such assets with a 
case by case approach at 
this level o f CAPEX  
• De-risking project per 
project at subnational level 
is too complex for private 
capital  
• Global economic slowdown  
• Innovative Clean Tech are 
still considered at risk for 
developing countries  
• Currency fluctuations  
• Socialize fund with 
investors  • Projects development without 
proper coordination with future 
investors ultimately doesn’t deliver 
impact  
• Lack of bankability and safeguards 
prevent sub - national projects from 
attracting climate finance 
 • Indicators developed needs to be 
pragmatic  and usable by project 
proponents.  
• Maintenance of standard to evolving global best practice  • Coordination and capacity challenges  
• Unwillingness to undertake necessary conditions changes to address long -
term  environmental friendly technologies and investments  
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
Define the project /programme. Describe the proposed set of components , outputs and activities that lead 
to the expected Fund-level impact and outcome results . Components should reflect the project/programme 
level outcomes.  
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance 
indicators provided in section E .5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5 . 
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative 
solutions and how the project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner . 
Also identify trade-offs  of the selected interventions , if applicable. 
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/ programmes with financial intermediation 
(loans  or on -granting) , describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types.  
The SnCF programme comprises  both the SnCF Fund project and the technical assistance project . Its 
main outcome is to enable the implementation of approximately 30-35 low carbon and resilient 
infrastructure projects through a direct equity investment via a dedicated blended investment vehicle, the 
SnCF Global. The programme’s overall activities are focused on delivering the project pipeline (including 
via the Technical Assistance), de-risking investments through the structure of the Fund, measuring impacts (via metrics, tools and indicators developed via the Technical Assistance ) and enable further replication at 
scale . This Technical A ssistance project delivers the pipeline, whic h will include bankable projects that 
have climate resilience integrated into the project designs  of measurable climate mitigation impact .


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 77 
 
  
For further details regarding the process, actors and responsibilities between Fund and Technical Assistance 
in Annex 26 of the Funding Proposal for the SnCF Global –  Equity. The Technical Assistance will distribute 
at the approx. same ratio as the Fund. 
Project results framework:  
Component TA1: Feasibility Studies 
Development of feasibility studies on infrastructure investment opportunities that enhance countries’ climate 
mitigation action, with adaptation co-benefits : Those studies shall serve as the basis for SnCF Global’s 
investment decision making.  
Outcome TA1. Climate mitigation infrastructure projects are additional, commercially viable, screened, 
and selected for a high level s of SDG impacts, ES safeguards and, where possible, include a Nature-
based Solutions  component. Work to deliver this outcome is  led by R 20. 
Component TA2: Capacity Building 
Capacity building to enable countries build bankable projects that are centred aroundclimate change 
mitigation action, with adaptation co -benefits  : On a programmatic level for various stakeholders in need of 
knowledge transfer. 
Outcome TA2. Relevant stakeholders have the information and guidance needed to support the 
development of sound policy and incentive schemes that enable and fast-track green infrastructure 
projects on a subnational  level, as well as to foster up-scaling and replication of investment deals . Work to 
deliver this outcome is  led by IUCN. 
Component TA3: Tools and Metrics 
Development of Climate  Mitigation, Sustainable Development Goals (“SDG”) and Nature-based Solutions  
(“Nature-based Solutions ”) metrics, tools and indicators that promote climate resilience and mitigation. 
Those shall be applied to identify and support the design and development of bankable projects for 
component 1 and eventually by the SnCF Fund project to monitor investment results.


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
18 See FP SnCF Equity  Outcome TA3. A MRV system for the monitoring of the SnCF Fund investment results is in place and 
integrates climate change mitigation as well as other benefits such as climate adaptation benefits and 
IUCN’s standard on nature based solutions, led by Gold Standard. 
 
In order to ensure clear responsibilities regarding  implementation and deliverables, each outcome has a 
lead organization assigned to it. However, the technical expertise available throughout the three 
organization s will inform the different outcomes. E.g. IUCN will lend its technical Nature-based Solutions  
expertise to the feasibility work (Component 1) as well as for the development of a MRV system 
(Comp onent 3). The Gold Standard will be instrumental in assuring that beneficiaries are trained 
(Comp onent 2) on climate change, ES safeguard screening proces ses as well as SDG and Nature-based 
Solutions  positive impact measuring. R20 will equally be responsible to ensure engineering and financial 
experts provide adequate input into the training materials. 
Details on the outputs and activities to deliver the outcomes of each component are provided 
below (for further details, please refer to the Annex 26 of the SnCF Global –  Equity Funding Proposal ): 
Component TA1: Feasibility Studies 
Outcome TA1. Climate mitigation infrastructure projects are additional, commercially viable, screened, and 
selected for a high levels of SDG impacts, ES safeguards and, where possible, include a Nature-based 
Solutions  component.  
Output TA1: Project feasibility work has been conducted and project development supported 
Output TA1.1 Projects are screened and early lessons learned incorporated into deal sourcing 
design  
Activity TA1.1.1: Develop and agree on SnCF Technical A ssistance selection criteria based on of existing 
Project Accelerator  Facilities’ work, investor needs18, compliance with safeguarding and other ESMS 
guidance, and related best practice and standards. 
Activity TA1.1.2: Conduct market stud ies, strategies to remove barriers to efficient implementation of 
investment, and devel op tools to simplify project submission from authorities and project developers. 
Activity TA1.1.3: Select projects for technical assistance support, and get PA Committee approval for 
spending funds. 
Activity TA1.1.4: Strengthen and streamline selection cri teria based on early submissions and lesson learned 
Output TA1.2 Conduct pre-feasibility assessments, studies and contractual arrangement  
Activity TA1.2.1: Perform on site evaluation, stakeholders’ meetings and pre-feasibility studies of selected 
projects  
Activity TA1.2.2: Pre-feasibility studies are screened to evaluate further technical assistance support, 
additional project development support is identified, ToR of additional studies are drafted. 
Activity TA1.2.3: Draft and negotiate contracts w ith project developer/owner for the technical assistance 
support  
Output TA1.3 Perform technical, legal or economic feasibility assessment  and studies


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
19 Any structuring done for the Fund is covered by Pegasus, general structuration done for the project 
development are done by the TA, or in other words the deal is developed with its technical elements , such as 
integrating NBS into the deal, by the TA, while financial structuring is part of the Fund.  Activity TA1.3.1: Procure and assign service contracts to technical/legal/relevant experts and evaluate 
results of commissioned feasibility studies  
Activity TA1.3.2: Conduct ad-hoc working groups between the technical assistance team, the project 
developer/owner and contracted parties.  
Output TA1.4 Perform additional ESIA and other related ESS asses sment to comply with SnCF ESMS  
Activity TA1.4.1: Support, were applicable, contracted parties to ensure stakeholders meeting and other ESS 
activities are performed according to Gold Standard best practices.  
Activity TA1.4.2: Monitor the ESS work performed and consult between ad-hoc working groups between the 
technical assistance  team, the project developer/owner and contracted parties.  
Output TA1.5 Support deal finalization during SnCF due diligence 
Activity TA1.5.1: Submit screened projects to SnCF Global to continue with deal structuring phase and 
support Due Diligence  
Activity TA1.5.2 Assist, when applicable, project owner and SnCF with key contracts (Off-takers, EPC, OM, 
concessions ….)  
In terms of project  feasibility and development work, the T echnical Assistance foresees the assess and 
support up to 50 projects. This project aims to have 70% of the projects (approximately  35) to make it from 
the feasibility stage into the deal structuring phase19 (led by Pegasus Capital for the SnCF Global ). The 
feasibility work falls primarily into the two first phases of the project development stages, namely early -
stage sourcing and project development.


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 77 
 
  
 
a. Early stage sourcing  
Main output: first-order screening and revised list of potential projects  
The Technical Assistance team will screen project proposals (Screening Stage / Stage 1) to identify 
potential investments that fit the Fund’s investment objectives , meeting first and foremost climate 
mitigation and adaptation co-benefits, and as well, bankability and, also include the rigorous ESMS,


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 77 
 
 safeguarding, SDG impact, and NbS criteria . Those  screening indicators have been elaborated by the 
Funding Proposal of the SnCF Global Equity (section B3).  
For the allocation and sign-off of actual funds from the Technical Assistance to conduct technical 
assistance support to subnational projects  the selection criteria for the SnCF Technical Assistance support 
(short TA criteria)  will be used. The TA criteria will be based to a large degree on the SnCF Global 
investment criteria (for details on the investment criteria, kindly refer to the Funding Proposal of the SnCF 
Global Equity B3) but as well meeting the ownership of benefici ary communities at local level. The 
selection criteria will be finalized latest in Q2 of the first year (see Annex 5).  
A market study including potential country and sectoral barriers will be conducted. This effort will ensure 
that such a study is  done in consultation with governments and other stakeholders (also related to 
Component 2 Capacity building) to ensure that barriers can be removed and that the enabling environment 
is made as optimal as possible to allow more efficient implementation of infrastructure deals and further 
scaling up of such deals in the countries.  
The sourcing will rely mostly on communities with city and regions through existing networks and local 
offices of the partners. R20 will regularly organise a project identification campaign (the “100 Climate 
Solutions Projects Campaign”) in partnership with city and regional networks. The first edition identified more than 650 projects in 2016. IUCN is using its growing portfolio of Nature-based Solutions  projects 
through efforts such as the Blue Natural Capital Financing Facility (BNCFF) as well as the Coalition for Private Investment in Conservation (CPIC). A first technical and legal screening is performed alongside the 
first Environmental and Soci al Impact Assessment. 
R20 has developed a strong network of corporates partners and has since its inception partnered with 
several private project developers , both international and local. In addition, Gold Standard has worked in 
over 80 countries with 350 different project developers, both local and international . Please find a few 
examples bellow : 
The SNCF programme collaborating partners will work with: 
§ GASCA: A global alliance dedicated to develop smart city projects in Africa comprising large multinationals  
such as Signify, JC Decaux, Société Générale and ADS  Solektra.  
§ Akuo Energy: Akuo is the largest French independent renewable energy producer  and partnered with R20 
for the Kita project. The company is developing a por tfolio and is willing to provide access vàv the TA. 
Projects will further be originated via the consortium existing network, including with:  
§ ORU Fogar: Global network of geographical associations  of Regions: Assembly of European Regions, 
Network of Regional G overnments. 
§ Global Covenant of Mayors: Initiated by the European Commission, Gcom  is a worldwide network of 
municipalities  committed for Climate Action in order them to develop Action Plans  
§ 100 Resilient Cities : Network initiated by Rockefeller Foundat ion supported 100 cities  to develop resilient 
infrastructure planning, this activity resulted in a project portfolio that can be accessed by the TA . 
§ C40: Network of Capital Cities. C40 produce a portfolio of projects  which has been shared with R20. 
§ ICLEI: Historically the first network of sub national  authorities  dedicated to environment. They produce 
their own portfolio of projects which has been shared with R20. 
For further information, kindly also consult the FP for the SnCF Global. None of the above listed partners 
will act as EE for the Technical Assistance. The se partners will be engaged, free of charge, for activities 
such as dissemination of information. If these entities were to qualify to perform  specific tasks  beyond these 
activities , they would be  subject to the Technical Assistance’ s procurement rules .


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 77 
 
 Initial  “Know Your Customer” (KYC) review s are performed on project stakeholders at this stage.   
Gold Standard will review project design to ensure rigorous s afeguarding and alignment with 
methodologies will result in impact re climate mitigation, as well as adaptation and sustainability co-
benefits. Projects will also be assessed for alignment of reporting with NDCs and SDGs, and compliance / 
integration with national climate and development strategies and associated reporting. 
IUCN will support the early sourcing efforts through technical advice and screening of the project pipeline 
including possible Nature-based Solutions  components.  
A Project Accelerator Committee will decide on how the funds from the Technical Assistance will be spent. 
It is composed of R20 and IUCN, as voting members. A representative from the SnCF (legal entity to be 
confirmed) as well as Gold Standard will act as non-voting members, yet their recommendations will be 
captured  in the proceedings for the PAF Committee meetings. Technical ad-hoc experts (guarantors of the 
technical know -how) will advise the decision-making process but not have any decision powers. They will 
join the respective technical discussions, e.g. waste expert(s) will join discussions on waste project 
proposals, etc. Terms of references and rules of procedures for the Project Accelerator Facilities (PAF) as 
well as Committee will be drafted.  
The PAFs do not have decision power on what funds from the Technical Assistance will be spent on the 
project, but are pre-selecting (as per Activity TA1.1.3: Select projects for technical assistance support, and 
get PA Committee approval for spending funds) and then further conduct technical assessments, such as, 
for example related to Activity TA1.2.1: Perform on site evaluation, stakeholders’ meetings and pre-
feasibility studies of selected projects . The  
 
The Project Accelerator Committee will review and provide final approval regarding fund from the Technical 
Assistance on projects that have been originated and technically reviewed by  the following (yet not exclusive 
list of) Project Accelerator Facilities (PAFs) : 
§ The WASTE Project Facilit y: works with EGIS, (a Public Caisse des Dépôts  et Consigna0on company 
specialized in infrastructure projects). 
§ The ENERGY Project Facility : works with BG and Alpiq Swiss engineer  companies specialised on 
renewable 
§ The WATER Project Facilit y: with Waterpreneur which has a unique network of water developers  
§ IUCN managed Blue Natural Capital  Financing Facility (BNCFF) as well as the newly emerging 
Conservation Finance Initiative (CFI)  
§ Similar Facility for Eco Smart Agriculture is being considered and designed 
These are not legal entities in themselves , but merely technical groups which provide technical assessments 
of projects in their respective fields/sectors .


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 77 
 
  
b. Development 
Main output: second-order  screening, feasibility studies and further narrowed down list of potential projects  
R20’s initially established Project Accelerator  Facilities (P AFs) will be expanded on to ensure that identified 
projects meet bankability criteria and, thanks to Gold Standard’s criteria, meet all safeguarding and ESMS 
criteria of the Fund. In 2017, R20 already launched the ‘Waste Project Facilitator’ a Project Accelerator  
Platform focused on waste optimisation projects (including recycling, compost, waste to energy etc.) in 
partnership with multinational engineering firm EGIS (75% owned by the French sovereign investor Caisse 
Des Dépôts et Consignation). R20 is further partnering with Swiss firms Alpiq (international energy utility) 
and BG Group (international energy engineering firm), to create the Energy Project Facility (EPF) a 
renewable energy and energy efficiency PAF. The Technical Assistance envisions to have 7 PAFs, one for 
each of the seven selected investment sectors.  
PAFs will prioritise projects and deliver feasibility studies, presenting bankable projects to the SnCF Fund. 
The PA Committee s elects  the projects and provide technical guidance. They authorize the use of 
technical assistance funds for project development. It is important to note that EGIS, Alpiq, and BG hav e 
jointly with R20 financed the existing PAFs in the total amount of 2 MUSD  to successfully develop project 
in the past years.  
The technical assessment process of the PAFs has been designed to mitigate the risks of non-completion 
at every stage of the feasibility study. A funnel process with defined TA criteria for the selection of projects 
for the feasibility work  – agreed upon on the one hand by R20 –  Pegasus, IUCN and Gold Standard, and 
on the other hand by policy -makers, engineers and investors involved by the portfolio of projects –  and 
regular screening from the PAF Committee ensure a best use of resources and selection of projects. Th is 
projects’ partners will also ensure engagement with the SnCF Global Environmental and Social 
Management System ( ESMS) to ensure proper implementation of the ESMS to the entire ‘value chain’ 
from the project concept through investment and asset management. This will meet the requirements of


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 77 
 
 public and private investors who invest in the SnCF Global for maximizing imp act (environmental/social) in 
addition to seeking financial returns and provide investors with ESG ratings of the investment process.  
The project team  screens the project proposal, signs an exclusivity agreement for the feasibility study and 
accompanies the applicant to ensure the proposal meets all the requirements. Once it does, the team 
submits a request for feasibility to the respective PAF Committee who evaluates the project. If accepted, 
the PAF Committee sets up a field mission for technical experts to assess the situation on the ground and 
determine Terms of References for the feasibility study. A mission report is presented to the PAF 
Committee who re-evaluates the project and approves (or decl ines) the undertaking of the feasibility study 
and signs a contract agreement with the applicant. Experts and local consultants perform the feasibility study, which includes elements such as the technical -economic analysis, the pre-PPA, pre -concession, 
the EIA, identification of Nature-based Solutions  components, land rights and detailed LOI from all 
stakeholders.
 
Strong focus is  given to stakeholder’s meetings, including civil society ensuring local acceptance. The 
PAFs use Gold Standard’s consultation and engagement requirement guidel ines to perform such 
meetings. Critically, each project will be assessed against GS safeguarding methodology. This ensures 
that project design includes gender sensitivity, water assessment, and SDG impact pathways, mandatory 
stakeholder consultation, assessment of community Health, Safety and Working Conditions, anti -
corruption.  
 
The two remaining stages of the project development cycle are: 
c. Investing  
This project  is not engaged in the investment stages of the SnCF programme. However , technical 
assistance will still support, where needed, SnCF and the developer to ensure a smooth transition into 
SnCF Due Diligence.  
This project  could, when applicable, provide support for the off-takers contracts, EPC and OM agreements , 
especially ensuring proper procurement has been performed. 
d. Reporting 
This project  is not engaged in the reporting stages of the SnCF programme.  This project will however , in its 
early years, support the development of SDG and Nature-based Solutions  impact metrics, tools and 
indicators , to be used and applied in the reporting stage of the Fund. (see Component 3 and related 
activities ). Given also the shorter duration of the Technical Assistance with respect to the actual Fund, the 
Technical Assistance (this project) will not be active anymore once the Fund goes into the reporting stage.  
Given the set-up of the whole programme, the actual SDG verification of the projects and the Fund, will be 
outside of the purview of the Technical Assistance.  The verification will be paid by the projects budgets or 
by the Fund, and completed by a certified, third-party verification organisation.  
 
Component TA2: Capacity Building 
Outcome TA2. Relevant stakeholders have the information and guidance needed to support the 
development of sound policy and incentive schemes that enable and fast-track low-carbon infrastructure 
projects on a subnational  level, as well as to foster up-scaling and replication of investment deals .  
Output TA2: Stakeholders are informed and trained to implement and incentivize ES sound green 
infrastructure, incorporating Nature-based Solutions 
Output TA2.1: Various stakeholders are trained fit -for-purpose to fast -track project investments


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 77 
 
 Activity TA2.1.1: Training of project developers to increase understanding of safeguard requirements, 
ESMS requirements, SDG and Nature-based Solutions  criteria, and other investment requirements  for 
high-integrity, bankable project design and delivery . 
Activity TA 2.1.2: Training of public authorities to, raise awareness, help identify potential projects and 
provide for enabling conditions for green infrastructure investments  
Activity TA2.1.3: Training of regional financial actors to expand know how of the value chain and blended 
finance vehicles for large scale replication  
Output TA2.2: Best practices, guidelines and tools are developed, disseminated and applied 
Activity TA2.2.1: Production of bes t practices, guidelines and tools for replication and upscaling  
A core component of the SnCF programme, implemented v ia its TA, is capacity building. It will focus on 
three hands -on activities: 
1. Clustered technical workshops with project developers  and i ntermediaries  
2. Subnational  workshop with local authorities  
3. Regional workshops with regional financial actors  
Capacity -building is at the center of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Sustainable 
Development Goal Target 17.9 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is the dedicated target to 
capacity - building and aims to "Enhance international support for implementing effective and targeted 
capacity -building in developing countries to support national plans to implement all the sustainable 
development goals, including through North-South, South- South and triangular cooperation”. Within the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, capacity -building is also mentioned by target 17.8 in the context 
of ensuring full operationalization of the “technology bank and science, technology and innovation capacity -
building mechanism for least developed countries by 2017”.  
Furthermore, the 2030 Agenda deals with the means required for implementation of the Goals and targets. As reported in paragraph 41, these include the mobilization of financial resources as well as capacity -building 
and the transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable terms, 
including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed.  
Projects for the SnCF Global will need to adhere to specific environmental, social and commercial standards. Proj ects as envisioned by the SnCF programme will not be trivial, and will need dedicated 
support. In combination, the pre-requisite to adhere to high ES safeguards as well as to show financial 
viability will put a weight on project developers, that the technical assistance plans to accelerate project de-
risking and scale up. This projectwill conduct training workshops targeted at project developers (PD) to 
ensure ES safeguard requirements and the potential to engage with ESMS requirements, SDG and 
Nature-based Solutions  are understood. These trainings will also focus on key investment parameters, 
such as project structuring, financing, implementing and monitoring process. The location of the workshops will be selected based on geographical and thematical aggregation of project developers. These workshops are envisioned through the first years of the SnCF programme. When talking about trainings, 
this includes face-to-f ace training (short to medium -term trainings, w orkshops, courses) , E-Learning 
courses  or blended courses . The methods will include c oncept learning (presentations by practitioners, 
lectures, etc.) , real world exposure (field visits)  as well as experience sharing (discussion groups, expert’s  
panels, etc) . 
The Technical Assistance, with the support from UNITAR, will administer a questionnaire at the conclusion 
of each activity to obtain participant reactions on a number of key measures, including job relevance, 
newness of information, intent to use, overall usefulness and the degree to which learning objectives have 
been met. Results from the monitoring and evaluation of the project will be communicated to all parties 
involved and in the form of a project completion report which will record findings, conclusions, and recommendations.  
A second set of training workshops will be conducted with subnational  actors, primarily with local 
authorities. Subnational  workshops will be held to ensure an increased understanding of the SnCF


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
20 UNITAR manages a Global Network of International Training Centres for Authorities and Leaders (CIFAL), to 
provide innovative training throughout the world. Each CIFAL Centre is a regional hub for capacity development 
bringing together pu blic sector, private sector and civil society. They are located across Asia, Africa, Australia, 
Europe, the Americas and the Caribbean . 
21 The metrics to be developed in Component 3 will ensure environmental integrity issues in relation to 
use/MRV of NbS.  programme, its project pipeline and its overall approach. The goal is to work jointly with the local 
authorities to identify challenges, but primarily find means and solutions to create an enabling environment 
(e.g. laws and regulation, financial incentives etc) for new green, low carbon infrastructure investments. 
Workshop participants will learn how the SnCF programme applies a strong ES approach, how SDG and 
Nature-based Solutions  fits into sustainable infrastructure projects and how positive impacts will be 
measured, reported and verified. As lessons learned become available through the programme, exchange 
learning will be included. UNITAR’s CIFAL training centers20, will be used for the knowledge sharing 
process to prepare cities and regions to replicate and scale up. As intermediary actors  contracting with the 
PDs, the training with subnational  actors will also include aspects of the PD training content. As stated in 
the TOC, one of the outcomes aims to help initiate 3-5 regional capacity hubs  to continue and fast -track 
up-take and implementation. Ongoing collaboration by IUCN and other partners with, for example, 
FORNEWA, will be capitalized on.  
§ The Case of FORNEWA in Rwanda. 
With a number of African Public and Private Banks (IFC, AfDB, Afreximbank, ATDB, DBSA) and African 
Na0onal Sovereign Fund), R20, Afrochampions and FONERWA are working on establishing an African 
based Technical Assistance facility, based in Africa, with African experts, to be able to iden0fy pipelines of 
projects, make them bankable and structure them with African public and private Investors.  
The third set of knowledge exc hange targets regional actors, primary financial institutions  including local 
banks . The goal is to ensure the know -how on the value chain and blended finance vehicles for large scale 
replication become mainstreamed, beyond the lifetime of the SnC. In order to find uptake knowledge, 
capacity and trust into the SnCF value-ch ain approach needs to be build. ES safeguard, SDG and Nature-
based Solutions  impact measurement will be equally part of such outreach measures. The overall lead for 
the implementation of the output 2 will be taken onboard by IUCN (regional). R20 will provide technical 
input via its network in engineering and financial experts. Gold Standard will provide content and training 
on methodology, particularly on the linking between climate mi tigation, adaptation and SDGs. IUCN 
(technical) will contribute on Nature-based Solutions . 
In order to ensure stakeholders are informed and trained to implement and incentivize ES sound green 
infrastructure, based on SDG and Nature-based Solutions , a second component of output 2 focuses on the 
write up of lessons learned during this project’s  implementation phase. These will be turned into blue 
prints, available for public use, with the goal to fostering upscaling and replication. The lessons learned from the actual investments into the projects will be provided by the SnCF Global. 
Component TA3: Tools and Metrics 
Outcome TA3. A MRV system for the monitoring of the SnCF Fund investment results is in place 
and integrates climate change mitigation as well as other co-benefits such as climate adaptation 
benefits and IUCN’s standard on nature based solutions, led by Gold Standard
21.  
Output TA3: Climate, SDG and Nature -based Solutions impact metrics, tools and indicators are 
developed and applied 
The Fund is designed from the outset to deliver, measure, and uniquely –  to certify –  climate mitigation, 
adaptation, and sustainability co-benefits including impacts derived from Nature-based Solutions  (Nature-
based Solutions ). Quantified fund impacts will  align with national priorities and can be integrated into


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 77 
 
 national NDC and SDG reporting. Impact certification also becomes an added catalyst to attract private 
investment.  
Output TA3.1 Standardised metrics, tools, indicators and methodologies are deployed to raise 
ambition in project design and contribute to maximum  project impact.  
Activity TA3.1.1: Ensure Gold Standard Climate Change indicators are fully aligned with SnCF ESMS, SDGs, 
international best practices (IFC, EIB, ….), investor, and host country criteria 
Activity TA3.1.2: Incorporate Gold Standard Climate Change indicators and methodologies in ex -ante project 
design/selection, including for SDGs and Nature-based Solutions  (as co -benefits)  
Activity TA3.1.3: Support projects with clear implementation, compliance, and reporting pathways of SDG 
and Nature-based Solutions  impact (as co -benefits)  
Activity TA3.1.4: Develop additional methodologies , monitoring, and impact criteria as needed, including to 
evaluate health impact of sustainable infras tructure and Nature-based Solutions  opportunities  
Output TA3.2: Process is in place to ensure t ransparent and robust project indicators and 
methodologies support subnational and national policies.  
Activity TA3.2.1: Align project design elements and outputs with NDC climate mitigation targets and related 
SDGs and national policy frameworks  
Activity TA3.2.2: Align project design elements and outputs with prevailing subnational  policies and 
regulations  
Output TA3.3 Project  Climate, SDG and Nature -based Solutions impacts are certified 
Activity TA3.3.1: Ensure robust measurement and verification (MRV) process and infrastructure are 
developed and implemented 
Activity TA3.3.2: Develop monitoring and reporting tools at project level.  
Gold Standard will lead the development and deployment of standard metrics, tools, indicators and 
methodologies  to raise ambition in project design and to lead to certified climate and SDG impact. IUCN 
will support Gold Standard to ensure adequate Nature-based Solutions  considerations are taken into 
account. Based on best- in-class methodologies and adapted for each host country context, Gold Standard 
for the Global Goals  will be used to guide project design, selection, and impact reporting for climate 
(SDG13) and additional SDG  impacts  (minimum two per project) , including those derived from Nature-
based Solutions . While this project will finance the development of the tools, and its use in identification 
and ensuring that bankable projects are put forward that integrate climate resilience and low carbon 
considerations, no grant funding will be provided to certify projects upon implementation. Certification will 
be remunerated from management fees  from investments.  
Additional guidance in the Standard, to be reinforced through the training and capacity building noted 
previously, includes  support on sound GHG and SDG impact accounting, stakeholder consultation, 
environmental and social safeguards, etc.  
National and su bnational  climate and development priorities , as defined by each host country, must inform 
the selection of SnCF projects. Projects must be designed to ensure they comply with and support these broader targets and objectives. The funds’ high integrity, ban kable project impacts can be directly 
integrated into host country NDC and SDG reporting while also ensuring compliance with investor 
requirements. 
Gold Standard will ensure that projects are supported with adequate MRV and impact registry 
infrastructure. Project SDG impacts, including those derived from Nature -based Solutions , will be certified 
by independent third party SustainCERT (not funded by the Technical Assistance –  kindly refer to details in


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 77 
 
 Annex 26 of the Funding Proposal for the SnCF Global – Equity, for process, actors and responsibilities 
between Fund and Technical Assistance) . The project activities will provide a set of measured impact on 
the climate, SDGs and Nature-based Solutions  of the project portfolio aggregated at Fund level. The 
impacts will be publicly reported.  
Cross -cutting activity: Communication to foster  replication  
The programme as a whole, and this project in particular, seeks to ensure overall visibility of its activities 
(web, conferences and others). Thanks to its network of VIP s it seeks to actively showcase successful 
projects; lessons learned and encourage replications in other locations via development of investment 
blueprints. Blueprints will be published and lessons learned publicly shared.  
Ultimately the SnCF programme can be replicated leading to the creation of other similar blended Funds 
for subnational  investment with specific geogra phies or technologies. Similar, the technical assistance set-
up can be replicated.  
This Technical Assistance project is being implemented within 7 years and does not follow the same 
timeline as the broader programme because of the need to deliver bankable projects and associated 
feasibility studies, technical assistance and capacity building support in the earlier life of the programme. 
The SnCF Fund, on the other hand, will kick in its investments , once bankable projects are designed and 
structured for inv estment so its life is more important in the latter years of the broader programme. In this 
Technical A ssistance project, pre- and full feasibility work will be done years 1 to 5, as well as capacity 
building. The work of Component 3 on MRV will be developed by year 7, so that the Fund and relevant partners, in the final years (beyond year 7) can properly apply the indicators and methodologies for 
reporting, verification, and certification, the application of these being funded from management fees from 
the Fund, rather than the Technical A ssistance grant funding from this project.  
B.4. Implementation arra ngements (max.  1500  words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams ) 
This technical assistance project will encompass the following governance arrangements : 
- The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as the Accredited Entity  (AE). IUCN is a 
membership Union uniquely composed of both government and civil society organisations. It provides public, private and non-governmental organisations with the k nowledge and tools that enable human 
progress, economic development and nature conservation to take place together. Created in 1948, IUCN has evolved into the world’s largest and most diverse environmental network. It harnesses the experience, 
resources and reach of its 1,300 Member organisations and the input of over 10,000 experts. IUCN is the global authority on the status of the natural world and the measures needed to safeguard it. 
The project’s Executing Entities ( EEs) are R20, IUCN and Gold Standard. Pegasus Capital will not receive 
funds from the Technical Assistance. R20 and Gold Standard will be engaged by IUCN under Subsidiary 
Agreements in the form of IUCN’s  standard implementing agreements .  
- R20 Regions of Climate Action (R20)  is a not-for -profit international organization started by Arnold 
Schwarzenegger who as Governor of California, was encouraged at COP 15 by UNSG Ban Ki Moon, by President Obama and many Heads of regions from around the world, to replicate world-wide what he was 
able to implement in California: pro climate policies, regulations, programmes and investment.  
Inspired by the environmental history of California, R20 was founded in 2011 as an Alliance of a number of 
leading Regions, the United Nations, Development Banks, Clean-Tech companies, Academia and a 
number of NGOs to support subnational  authorities around the world to develop green infrastructure 
projects. R20 will coordinate the execution of the project and lead Component 1.


---
*Page 36*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 77 
 
 - Gold Standard (GS) – a not -for-profit that, since. Since 2003, GS has been the assessment benchmark 
for over 1,700 high-impact climate and development programmes in 80 countries. Their flagship standard, 
Gold Standard for the Global Goals, sets a clear path from initial project design through final reporting. 
Best-in-class MRV quantifies high-integrity climate and sustainable development impacts which can be 
verified or certified, per client requirements. Gold Standard methodology can be used to assess fund/project climate mitigation potential and contribution to climate finance, NDCs, and the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), including alignment with reference frameworks required by investors, such as 
IFC safeguards or Article 9 of the Paris Agreement. Gold Standard will lead C omponent 3 of the project.  
- IUCN will also play a role in leading the execution of Component 2 of the project.  
Implementation arrangement  
Oversight Unit  
IUCN is the GCF AE and will take on the oversight role of the funds received for the TA. IUCN will further 
administer the GCF technical assistance funds and provide for the appropriate implementing arrangements 
with the EEs. The designated IUCN Task Manager (TM) will review project progress as reported by the Project Manager (PM), based in R20, to determine how best to maximize project performance. The TM will 
carry out a desk analysis that involves reviewing project progress against work plans, procurement and 
disbursement plans as submitted by the PM. The TM and team will use this review to lay the groundwork 
for supervisory missions involving a team with requisite skills that further analyse technical and financial 
issues. The TM will also serve as a support and resource function to the PM and the EE  to discuss ways to 
strengthen implementation and ensure its direction enhances likelihood of achievi ng outcomes and impact, 
and efficiency. Finally, the TM clears progress reports.  
Project Management Unit  
The project will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU), coordinated and managed by R20. The PMU will be responsible for the coordination of all project activities funded by the project and 
undertaken by the executing entities on the ground. The PMU is comprised of technical experts and will be 
constituted to perform the following functions:  
1. Consolidate the annual work plans submitted by the executing entities.  
2. Responsible for all tracking and monitoring funds flow as well as managing procurement 
3. Ensure coordinated delivery of the agreed project components and respective outputs and activities through the coordination of all partners, stakeholders and suppliers involved in project delivery.  
4. Overall monitoring, evaluation, learning and application of knowledge products with the support of 
relevant experts involved in the project delivery.  
5. Ensure that the safeguards framework is used throughout the project and raise any potential 
safeguards violations.  
6. Ensure operational staff and supervise their work programs.  
The PMU will be composed as follows:  
1. Project  Manager - Full time (1 position)   
2. Admin support - Full time ( 1 position )  
3. Project Accountant (1 Position)   
 
Technical implementation


---
*Page 37*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 77 
 
  
 
 
22 https://www.iucn.org/theme/ecosystem -management/our -work/a -global -standard- nature- based -solutions  R20 will be responsible for  executing component 1. This will include  the management of the PAFs. 
Technical engineering support has been established with the PAF s such as the Waste Project Facilitator 
with EGIS / Caisse des Dépots et consignation France and the Energy Project Facilitator with Alpiq and 
BG, two Swiss best-in -class engineering compani es.  
R20 will be contracting to third parties, both in terms of external expert consultants, as well as additional implementing partners, such as UNITAR , to execute technical feasibility work as well as ESMS screening 
for selected projects. R20 will be fol lowing IUCN procurement rules for technical assistance related 
funding.  
IUCN is undertaking a due diligence and financial capacity assessment based on IUCN policy.  
The second major EE for this project is Gold Standard. The Gold Standard will lead Component 3 to 
focusing on the development of metrics, tools and indicators for climate and sustainability impact. 
Individual project impact will be certified by a third-party accredited entity, paid for outside of this project by 
investment funds. Gold Standard br ings over 20 public methodologies that have been used to develop and 
certify 1,700 projects in 80 countries. The Gold Standard technical experts are located in Latin America, 
North America, Europe, and Asia.  
IUCN is undertaking a due diligence and financial capacity assessment based on IUCN policy.  
IUCN will also play two roles in the execution of the project, under the overall coordination of R20. Firstly , 
IUCN will lead Component 2 of the project. IUCN’s regional offices will lead and lend support to the 
capacity building and training activities. IUCN has regional offices in more than 50 countries and will 
leverage its membership to actively engage in these activities. The combination of the IUCN conservation 
networks (both governments and civil society) with R20’s outreach to leading technical experts and 
subnational  authorities on the technology and infrastructure level will create unprecedented synergies. To 
build and reinforce capacity building in targeting countries, both Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL) and the United Nations for Training and Research (UNITAR) will par ticipate to in 
knowledge sharing and training activities.  
Secondly, I UCN will act as a service provider to Components 1 and 3. In Component 1, it will lend its 
technical expertise to identify, assess and measure the climate and other environmental benefits  of 
Nature-based Solutions  as part of green infrastructure deals. In Component 3, i t will work with the Gold 
Standard (which leads Component 3)  to ensure climate mitigation, as well as adaptation co-benefits, and 
relevant SDG metrics include Nature-based S olutions  and/or (if appropriate) standalone Nature-based 
Solutions  metrics, tools and indicators will be developed. IUCN will introduce its new Global  Standard on 
Nature-based Solutions
22 into the programme. This technical work will also include the input from IUCN 
into the revision process of the ESMS.  
The IUCN entities engaged in the capacity building as well as technical work will be different from those made responsible for the oversight of the TA, and the GCF funds.  
Third parties will be primarily tec hnical experts in the field of engineering, finance and Nature-based 
Solutions /conservation, which will conduct targeted analysis towards the feasibility work.  
The selection of projects in the beneficiary countries will be the result of an extensive consultation project with the NDAs of each respective country. Inputs from NDAs will be crucial to ensure alignment of


---
*Page 38*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 77 
 
 objectives and enhance the results of the SnCF programme and the cost -effectiveness of the GCF funding 
and technical assistance provided. Regi onal networks of cities and municipalities will also be consulted in 
the screening and selection of contracting partners. 
Projects sourced, supported and implemented as described in this concept note will follow best-practice 
project-development and projec t-financing processes and standards, including climate, development and 
safeguarding guidelines. This also includes government licenses and concessions, tax and foreign 
exchange issues, project and sovereign insurance, transparency in industrial contracts, auditing and other.  
Processes and procedures followed in the support of projects by the funds of the Technical Assistance are 
clearly defined and decision-making and the related governance is enshrined in distinct legal and fully 
audited entities.  
Project Accelerator Committee  
A Project Accelerator  Committee will select projects and be guided by the technical assessments of the 
PAFs. The PA  Committee  will authorize the use of technical assistance funds to be spent on project 
development. Voting Members of the PA  Committee are R20 and IUCN.  Decision will be taken by 
unanimity. Gold Standard and SnCF (legally entity to be confirmed) will be  (non-voting) observer s. The 
sectoral experts of the Project Accelerator Facilities (e.g. waste: EGIS; energy: BG, Alpiq; Water: 
Waterpreneurs) will inform the decision making of the PAC. 
Programme Steering Committee  
A Programme Steering C ommittee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic -level project guidance, 
technical and policy advice to the Project Management Unit (PMU). This Committee will serve to steer both 
the grant project (with IUCN as AE) and the linked project with Pegasus Capital as AE  to ensure that both 
projects are working in the most effective as well as in a timely and coordinated fashion.  
The PSC will meet once per year and ad-hoc if and when needed. Meetings of the PSC will be convened 
by the Chief of Party who heads the PMU , housed by R20. 
The PSC will review and advise on annual w ork plans and budgets submitted by the PMU . The PSC  is 
responsible for making recommendations to strengthen project execution and the achievement of results 
targeted. PSC recommendations will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure 
managemen t for development results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective 
competition. The PSC will also monitor progress at the end of each agreed period based on annual project 
reports that the PMU  submits to the PSC. The PSC  is consulted on the planning of evaluations, and will 
receive the outputs from the mid-term evaluation. It will also be informed of the outcomes of annual 
supervision visits.  
The PSC will be composed as follows:  
- R20 as PMU, acting as the secretariat to the PS C, and executing entity for component 1 of this 
project  
- IUCN (HQ/Global Marine Programme) in its role as AE for this p roject  
- Pegasus Capital, in its role as AE for the linked project in this programme  
- IUCN ( technical department) in its role as executing entity for component 2 of this project 
- Gold Standard, in its role as executing entity for component 3 of this p roject  
- BNP Paribas as  the depositary / Custodian Bank as well the distributor of the Fund. 
The duties of the PSC will include (but are not limited to):


---
*Page 39*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 77 
 
 1. Provide advice to the AEs of the two projects of this programme  ensure coherence and 
complementarity during implementation;  
2. Provide advice to the PMU  and project partners of the two interlinked projects (the technical 
assistance project and the linked SnC F Fund project) to help ensure project progress towards 
outcomes and impacts;  
3. Consider and recommend approval of annual work  plans and budgets;  
4. Monitor progress through the review of progress reports by PMUs at the end of each agreed project 
period (yearly); 
5. Monitor status of co-financing secured;  
6. Receive the outputs from, periodic evaluations and outcomes of annual supervisory and the mid-
term evaluations; and  
7. Approve annual reports by respective PMU.  
 
 
 
Financial flows  
IUCN, as the project’s Accredited Entity  (AE), will request funds to be transferred from the GCF based on 
the project disbursement plan. All Executing Entities (EE) will prepare project disbursement requests to the 
Project Management Unit (PMU), which is not an independent entity but rather a unit to manage the 
project within R20  at its headquarters in Switzerland. Other than the IUCN teams engaged in execution of 
the capacity  building component (Component 2), each of the other Executing Entities (R20, Gold 
Standard) will have a Subsidiary  Agreement w ith IUCN as the AE. It should be noted that neither the SnCF 
Fund Manager nor General Partner will receive funds from this project for execution of activities.  
Each Executing Entity will enter into service agreements with service providers to be procured during the 
project implementation phase.


---
*Page 40*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 77 
 
 There will be three models of funds flow: fund flow through  
a) Subsidiary Agreements to R20 (in its project coordination role and lead for component 1 and to Gold 
Standard (as lead for component 3 ) by IUCN in its role as an AE. All these institutions have been assessed 
and screened for financial and technical capacity. Once the project is approved, contractual arrangements 
with these institutions will be developed. 
b) Direct disbursement to IUCN Technical and Regional , as lead for component 2) by IUCN (AE) and as 
service provider for parts of components 1 and 3 .  
c) Service agreements between EEs and service providers, which will be selected on competitive basis 
based on IUCN’s procurement policy and under the overs ight of IUCN. Some service providers have 
already been identified. These service providers include the following:  
           i) UNITAR.  
 
Other partnerships and visibility  
R20 and Pegasus  Capital  have developed both a value chain to identify, design, structure and invest in the 
portfolio of project (see Annex 26 of the SnCF Global – Equity Funding Proposal) but as well develop a 
consor tium of various important stakeholders at political and technic al level. This is result is a double level 
governance system.  
At political level, IUCN and R20 is teaming up with regional organizations such as i.) the African Union and Afrochampions for Africa; ii.) ASEAN  for Asia; iii.) COP 26 Presidency and CC35 for LATAM / LAC; iv.) 
The Union for Mediterranean for MED and; v.) the Commonwealth for Blue Economy. These organizations will not intervene at a technical level but will provide political support and promote the opportunities 
provided by this technical assistance project.


---
*Page 41*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 77 
 
 In addition to intergovernmental organizations, R20 will liaise with most important networks of cities and 
regions (C40, ICLEI, 100 Resilient cities, CC35, UCLG, ORU FOGAR, AER, FMDV …). The objectives are 
to access their membership portfolio; to share best practices and knowledge from the SnCF programme 
and to fast track replication and scale-up. 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)  
Explain why the project/ programme requires GCF fund ing, i.e. Why is the project/programme  not currently being 
financed by public and/or private sector ? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any 
other domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing 
package. i.e. What  is the coherence between activities financed by grant s and those financed by reimbursable funds? 
How were co -financing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare 
to that of the co- financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial 
markets for similar projects/programmes.  
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument (s) is the minimum required to make the 
investment viable.  Additionally , how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of 
minimum concessionality? Who benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public  and private sector s, the barriers to 
investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, 
economic analysis or financial analysis when appropriate.  
 
This program needs GCF support for three primary reasons: 
• The geographies  and the Subnational scope where these projects will be built represent emerging 
economies where many institutional capital providers will not operate (or will not operate without 
partners like GCF, which provide policy and programmatic validation along with financial risk mitigation)  
• From a climate risk perspective, the world cannot wait for low -carbon development projects to scale 
up/out. GCF support allows these types of projects to be completed many years sooner. For example, 
retrofit of streetlights to energy -saving LEDs will happen worldwide in the decades to come, but by 
accelerating the timeline in developing countries, thanks to innovative finance vehicles that are supported by  GCF, that transition (and the resulting pollution and GHG reductions) will take place at 
least a decade sooner.  
• The GCF funding will help to support sustainable project design, including safeguarding, climate and sustainability impact MRV leading to new benchmark for such infrastructure.  
 
Moreover, these projects are not currently being financed by the public and/or private sector because of 
several key dynamics and market failures:  
• Uncertainties about the returns of investments, inadequate access to fina nce Investments in, for 
example, irrigation equipment, water -efficient technologies, stress -resilient plants or infrastructural 
improvements that could help to strengthen climate resilience, may be disproportionate to businesses’ 
financial capacity, or hav e unattractive risk/return profiles. Benefits associated with such climate-
resilient investments may only manifest over longer time frames, and the extent dependent on 
uncertain climate impacts. They may also be complex to evaluate when part of broader inv estments. 
Financial institutions may also be reluctant to lend to such investments, often due to incomplete 
information or higher perceived risks because of the lack of track record, borrowers’ inadequate 
collateral, or lack of capacity in appraising and f inancing non -traditional technologies (and NbS). 
• In the case of waste optimization, government policies have been slow to recognize the value in 
“waste” feedstocks and therefore allocated no funding for collection, sorting, recycling, and conversion; 
and/or the system found in developed countries has been adopted, i.e. awarding contracts to haulers 
and landfill operators, thereby incentivizing "out of sight, out of mind” burying or dumping.


---
*Page 42*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 77 
 
 • In the case of renewable energy  generation , market and technologic al barriers have delayed project 
development, including cost (which only in recent years has become lower than fossil -fuel energy 
production) and base-load needs (i.e. solar and wind are intermittent compared to conventional fossil -
fueled generation methods) and related unfamiliarity with harmonizing grid access of clean energy. 
• In the case of energy efficiency retrofit, each building being upgraded requires an investment grade 
energy audit and bespoke retrofit technology solutions and contracting, for whic h contractors are not as 
numerous and experienced in developing countries. In addition, even when such retrofits pay for themselves with savings over time, access to finance has been challenging. For example, cities may 
want to retrofit streetlights with m ore efficient LED technology, but don’t have capital to do so all at 
once, nor a willing partner to finance and fund a “repay from savings” capital model.  
• In all of these cases, the lack of a significant price on carbon slows stakeholder prioritization of these projects and/or makes them less financially rewarding. 
• Knowledge gaps: Understanding climate vulnerability and risks and opportunities is essential to integrating climate change risks (or opportunities) into investment or financing decision-making.  
• Behavioral biases such as the tendency to apply short-term investment horizons (i.e. short payback periods) can also affect business appetite to invest in climate resilience and low carbon investments, 
as well as their ability to develop products or servic es that could help mitigate climate -related impacts. 
High discount rates dominate investment decision-making 
 
Development finance institutions and conventional investors may be willing to finance projects in these 
categories, but there has been a lack of project developers to create the special purpose finance vehicles 
(SPVs) or other methods to effectuate such opportunities. For example, R20 and Pegasus Capital 
Advisors worked together on creating such an SPV in Brazil for cities to retrofit streetlights with LEDs and 
repay the loans from savings on energy and maintenance costs, guaranteed by each municipality’s utility 
tax (a portion of which, by law, was allocated to operation of public streetlights). No public or private entity 
had initiated a similar financing mechanism; meaning investors had no opportunity to deploy capital in a 
sufficiently attractive risk -adjusted manner. 
These dynamics also highlight the need for a mixture of grant funding via the TA  and investment capital. In 
the Brazil streetlight retrofit example, grant funding was needed by R20 to work with stakeholders in 
government, technology, and finance to evaluate the cost-benefit opportunity; to train municipal asset 
managers in selection of technology providers; and to design the SPV before it could be offered to 
investors. In the case of utility -scale solar projects in Mali, grant funding was needed to support the work to 
train government stakeholders in the power purchase agreement (PPA) and procurement processes. 
Moreover, in each case, even well -understood policies and technologies require a feasibility study to 
evaluate whether the proposed project makes policy, technology, and financial sense. 
One thing that becomes clear in these types of projects is the importance of concessionary finance in the 
capital structure. Energy efficiency retrofits, for example, typically generate financial returns below 10%, 
which make it a challenge to attract market capital without a first-loss investment partner and/or a credit 
enhancement partner. This  dynamic also restricts the level of ambition of such projects. For example, 
retrofit of some energy uses in buildings might yield returns in 3 to 5 years and be very attractive to investors, but other uses might need up to 10 years or longer to repay the costs and be unattractive. The 
addition of concessionary capital ensures that more energy efficiency retrofits will be adopted and thus the 
co-benefit of more rapid GHG reduction. 
Finally, when estimating the level of concessional finance needed in these types of projects it becomes 
clear that at least 20% of total committed capital is the most effective minimum contribution, because that 
level:  
• Provides first-loss risk (junior to conventional investors) that is the minimum requirement to attract 
conventional investors;  
• Provides a practical blended cost of capital to make these types of projects viable;


---
*Page 43*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 77 
 
 • The primary beneficiary of the concessionary capital is the municipality and its citizens, because these 
projects could not be undertaken without it or, at m inimum, would not be undertaken for many years  
• Investors also benefit, because every capital source today is looking for “green”, “sustainable, “impact”, 
and “climate” finance opportunities, but are constrained by stakeholder limits on risk and other 
inves tment criteria, which are reasonable considering the capital often comes from pensions and other 
socially beneficial sources. 
 
Moreover, the Global Sub-national Climate Fund is committed to additional climate and financial impacts 
within its own operations  and in the projects in which it invests. SnCF projects will only be forwarded to the 
investment committee for their consideration after first being assessed for additionality of their climate 
mitigation, adaptation, and sustainable development impacts. Pl ease refer to Annex 30 for a 
comprehensive summary of the climate and financial additionality elements of the Fund.  
 
In summary, the Fund is designed to deliver USD $750 million to new climate mitigation and adaptation 
projects that to date have not been funded. Financial additionality is driven by the blended finance model in 
which GCF position at junior tranche level to reduce risk and leverage finance from private investors; the 
Fund’s focus at the subnational level that is often bypassed by conven tional climate finance; and the 
Fund’s target project size ($5-$75 million) for which it is often difficult to attract climate finance.  For each project, Gold Standard provides financial additionality tools developed by CDM and widely used across the 
carbon markets to assess if each project would be financially viable without investment revenue.  
 
The Fund is likewise designed to create additional climate mitigation and adaptation impacts that go 
beyond business as usual in a credible, measurable way. Climate additionality is driven by use of 
ambitious reference benchmark standards for equipment, waste, energy, etc.; ex -ante quantification of 
project impacts for climate (SDG 13) and a minimum two other SDGs in which additionality must be quantified; ex -post certification of these impacts by an independent third party; the focus to Nature based 
Solution (NbS) with their vast potential to deliver additional climate mitigation and support adaptation / 
resilience; and by capacity -building and methodologies offered through Technical Assistance to projects 
that would not otherwise be available.  
 
. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Explain how the project/programme sustainability  (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will 
be ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.   
 
Include information pertaining to the longer -term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and 
maintenance of investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements ). In case of private sector, 
please describe the GCF’s financi al exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.  
 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a 
consequence of the project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
The goal of the SnCF programme is to ensure that sustainable projects developed by it are financially self-
sustaining  and generate enough revenues regardless of potential additional environmental and social 
revenue (e.g. carbon credits) even after the Fund exit. Moreover, the strong stakeholder’s engagement 
embedded in the process is intended to ensure local appropriation safeguarding the Environmental and 
Social positive impact of the projects. The ESMS of the Fund also assumes that project SPV have their 
own compatible ESMS and ES manager allowing c apacity building in that field.


---
*Page 44*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 77 
 
  
 Moreover, these projects will be undertaken with the build -own-operate -transfer (BOOT) model, conveying 
ownership and operation of the asset to local municipalities or other stakeholders : 
• For renewable energy generation projects, the power purchase agreement (PPA) will include post-
completion requirements concerning long-term ownership and operational requirements to ensure the 
facility continues to operate as designed (from technical, fina ncial and social perspectives).  
• For waste optimization projects, land and feedstock agreements with municipalities will include 
contractual obligations to maintain operations consistent with technical, financial, and social design 
goals.  
• For energy efficiency retrofits, asset owners will be trained and provide assurances that projects are maintained to design specifications that include technical, financial and social goals.  
• For all projects, the engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contracts wi ll be awarded to 
credit-worthy contractors providing industry -leading performance guarantees and insurance wraps 
(around technology providers’ individual warranties).  
• Finally, our partnership with Gold Standard will ensure that project standards and goals are met through transparent measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) processes.


---
*Page 45*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 77 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
 
Please see the last page of this Proposal for important information about the Fund’s risks and objectives.  
There can be no guaranty that the target rate of return will be achieved.  This is not an offering to sell any 
security.  Any offering will only be made pursuant to a private placement memorandum, which should be 
read carefully and in its entirety before investing.  
 
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
18,500,000  million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(vi) Grants  18,500,000  7    
(vii) Result s-based  payments  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
18,500, 000 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
UK (DEFRA )/France (AFD)  Grant  1.500.000  million 
USD ($)     
Germany (BMU/IKI)  Grant  500.000  million 
USD ($)     
IUCN  In kind  1.000.000  million 
USD ($)     
Gold Standard  Grant  100.000  million 
USD ($)     
Gold Standard  In kind  400.000  million 
USD ($)     
R20 Grants  6.000.000  million 
USD ($)     
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
28,000,000 plus  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max . 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee) .  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.


---
*Page 46*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 77 
   
 One of the three work pillar of IUCN is on Nature -based Solutions , thus  a 
suite of projects qualify as parallel financing. The most pertinent are listed 
here:  
Blue Natural Capital Financing Facility , funded by the Government of 
Luxembourg, 2 M EUR  
ADAPT: Nature-based Solutions  for resilient societies in the Western 
Balkans , funded by the Swedish SIDA, 2.4 M E UR 
Mangrove PAPBio C1, European Union, 9.9 M EUR  
PREE, Partenariat Régional sur l'Eau et l'Environnement en Afrique de 
l’Ouest et du Centre; funded by the Swedish SIDA 5.1 M CHF 
EbA Facility , 20 M EUR, IKI Germany  
Friends of EbA  (FEBA), IKI Germany  
 
The SnCF programme will also collaborate closely with the newly 
announced Conservation Finance Initiative (CFI) , a conservation 
investment incubator, managed by IUCN. As a GEF-funded non-grant mechanism, the CFI will make blended public and private finance and invest 
in early deals with significant conservation benefits (e.g., biodiv ersity, land 
degradation, climate mitigation and adaptation, ecosystem and community resiliency etc.), to create and accelerate a pipeline of projects mature 
enough for more risk -averse private capital and larger ticket size 
investment. A portion of this project portfolio of the CFI is open for other 
Funds to invest in, and thus also accessible to the SnCF Fund. This will be 
of particular interest regarding investment sector 2 of the SnCF Global, namely restorative agriculture/aquaculture. 
 
 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component  and output  as outlined in section B. 3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing.  More than one co -financing institution can fund a single component  or output.  
Provide the summari sed cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget  plan as annex 4. 
 
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Feasibility  Output TA1.1 
Projects are 
screened and 
early lessons 
learned 
incorporated 
into deal 
sourcing design 2,777,900  2,495,900  Grant  282,000  Grant  Government  
Output TA1.2 
Conduct pre -3,153,800  2,086,300  Grant  1,067,500  Grant  Government


---
*Page 47*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 77 
   
 feasibility 
assessments, 
studies and 
contractual 
arrangement  
Output TA1.3 
Perform 
technical, legal 
or economic 
feasibility 
assessment 
and studies  9,206,500  4,533,177  Grant  4,673,323  Grant  Government  
Output TA1.4 
Perform 
additional ESIA 
and other 
related ESS 
assessment to 
comply with 
SnCF ESMS 2,241,930  1,390,930  Grant  851,000  Grant  Government  
Output TA1.5 
Support deal 
finalization 
during SnCF 
due dilligence  440,492  374,492  Grant  66,000  Grant  Government  
Capacity building  Output TA2.1 
Various 
stakeholders 
are trained fit -
for-purpose to 
fast-track 
project 
investments  5,162,500  3,796,056  Grant  1,366,444  Grant /In-kind  Government  
Output TA2.2: 
Best practices, 
guidelines and 
tools are 
developed, 
disseminated 
and applied  1,252,800  702,500  Grant  550,300  Grant /In-kind  Government  
Metrics Output TA3.1: 
Standardised 
metrics, tools, 
indicators and 
methodologies 
are deployed to 
raise ambition 
in project 
design and 
contribute to 
maximum 
project impact.  1,474,800  1,394,800  Grant  80,000  Grant /In-kind  Government  
Output TA3.2: 
Process is in 
place to ensure 
transparent and 
robust project 
indicators and 
methodologies 516,600  476,100  Grant  40,500  Grant /In-kind  Government


---
*Page 48*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 77 
   
 support 
subnational and 
national 
policies.  
Output TA3.3 
An MRV 
system for the 
monitoring of 
the SnCF Fund 
investment 
results is in 
place and 
integrates 
climate change 
mitigation as  
well as other  
benefits such 
as climate 
adaptation 
benefits and  
IUCN’s 
standard on 
nature based 
solutions  380,700  351,200  Grant  29,500  Grant /In-kind  Government  
PMU  1,391,978  898,545  Grant  493,433  Grant  Government/
Private  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  28 MUSD  18.5 MUSD  9.5 MUSD  
 
 
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information  presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
In case of a multi -country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country  in 
annex 17 , if available . 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer,  please 
provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities , 
to the extent possible.  
 
This Technical Assistance project has a dedicated component on capacity building: Relevant stakeholders 
have the information and guidance needed to support the development of sound policy and incentives 
schemes that enable and fast-track green infrastructure projects on a subnational  level, as well as to foster 
up-scaling and replication of investment deals. Kindly refer to details in B.3. 
 
With respect to technology development/transfer , this project intends to ensure that its work provides input 
into the UNFCCC’s work in this area, none the least related to countries technology needs assessments


---
*Page 49*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 77 
   
 (TNA)23. Many of the technologies needed to address climate change include renewable energies such as 
wind energy and solar power, projects to be invested in via the SnCF Global. The project will also address 
topics such as drought-resistant crops  (via its restorative agriculture/aquaculture area), early warning 
systems and coastal resilience technologies (from seawalls to mangrove replanting). Overlaps between 
capacity building and technology  development/transfer exist when as energy -efficient practices and 
training for using equipment is conducted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 https://unfccc.int/ttclear/tna


---
*Page 50*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 77 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the p erformance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria 
and assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework . 
 
For the purposes of this estimation, we assumed that 35 projects will be invested in by the SnCF Global, 
and delivering the expected Climate and SDG impacts, with the following theoretical  breakdown. The 
projects are all limited to ES B and C  categorisation:  
 
• 7 water and sanitation projects (each with a SnCF ticket of USD 20 million) 
• 7 restorative agriculture projects (each with a SnCF ticket of USD 20 million) 
• 7 solid waste optimisation projects (each with a SnCF ticket of USD 20 million) 
• 7 renewable energy generation projects (each with a SnCF ticket of USD 2 0 million)  
• 7 energy efficiency retrofit projects (each with a SnCF ticket of USD 20 million)  
 
Additional assumption can be found on Annex 22.  
 
SnCF expects to deliver multiple impacts, thereby contributing to several SDGs through its fully invested 
portfolio. This includes SDG 3 (improved health), SDG 5 (Gender mainstreaming), SDG 6 (Clean water 
and sanitation), SDG 7 ( access to clean energy), SDG 8 ( job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) 
and SDG 13 (climate action). Moreover, SnCF Global is looking to apply best in class screening system to 
ensure resilience of the infrastructure deployed. On that end, R20 is working actively with Rockefeller  
Foundation to incorporate the resilience infrastructure tool developed by the Foundation in its screening 
methodology and is seeking to promote NbS  when applicable. Uniquely, the SnCF will measure, report 
and certify impact for both climate mitigation, adaptation and sustainability co-benefits (SDGs) using Gold 
Standard methodology. Reportable outcomes will be aligned with and support national level NDCs and 
SDGs.  
 
Refer to figure below for a summary of total impacts.  
 
The preliminary findings, estimated that the Fund will reduce 4  million tons of CO2e per annum over the 
minimum 20 -year life of the built infrastructure leading to a conservative reduction estimate of 81  million 
tones for the life of the infrastructure (understanding that for such long period baseline needs to be 
reassessed every 5 years) . Furthermore, the SnCF will create up to 20’ 000 jobs  (with a set minimum of 
4’000 female employees for a target of 10’ 000) and provide 2.5 million people with access to clean energy. 
The SnCF will also enable up to 1,8 billion kWh of renewable power production per year  (from waste-to-
energy plus solar PV projects), as well as 406 million kWh saved per year (from LED street lighting 
projects  and smarter urban services ). Through these 35 projects we also expect over 17 million people in 
urban areas to have improved access to basic services (waste collection, access to energy , better urban 
services and street lighting).  
 
The impact potential of this programme, via the Technical Assistance, is strengthened by using the 
capacities of IUCN as well as the EEs R20 and Gold Standard who have long standing experience in 
implementing climate change mitigation and adaptation subnational projects. It is these agencies working 
together that will bring in the support to develop bankable deals that bring mitigation benefits and 
adaptation co-benefits. Combined with the experience of Pegasus Capital as a manager of an investment


---
*Page 51*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 77 
   
 fund, this novel partnership harnesses what can be truly transformational by taking advantage of very 
different AE capacities combined with EE capacities. In addition, the EE Gold Standard will be helping to 
integrate climate mitigation and adaptation benefits in the certification of mitigation and adaptation results 
from investment deals thus adding to the capacity needed for this programme to run efficiently and with 
effectiveness. Climate change is indeed the core element in the project and within the programme, 
Pegasus is already in advanced discussions with senior investment professionals with extensive 
experience in mitigation and adaptation to climate change investment to join its team to ensure effective 
implementation. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or 
programme investment. Describe the following, if applicable:  
• Potential for scaling up and replication  
• Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
• Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national 
climate change adaptation strategies and plans  
 
• Potential for scaling-up and replication (e.g. multiples of initial impact size)  
Successful implementation in Beneficiary Countries will make it easier to replicate in the Beneficiary 
country and ultimately in other countries. Pegasus  and R20 have already reached out to a number of 
regional DFIs and there is high interest for the concept to be replicated with regional specific Sub- Funds. 
As well, existing southern accredited entities have been approached and are working with R20 to work on 
appropriation and mastering and the value chain and the blended finance impact vehicles as to be able to 
replicate and scale up.  
Once we have proven a first operational model of the SnCF , we will begin to replicate the concept in other 
geographies. This means that lessons learned and key success factors will be shared with relevant 
governments and financial institutions in order to share best practices and to help the SnCF concept to 
widely proliferate. In terms of the SnCF’s impacts, a first- in-class Measuring, Reporting and Verification 
(MRV) system will allow for impact reporting at both fund and project level, and will be linked to a new 
global online platform being set up by the UNFCC C and Gold Standard to publicly track SDG impacts. 
The added market studies in the project enables the countries and sectors’ market situation to be reviewed 
in consultation with each Government with the view to engaging with the Government to see how best to 
improve the enabling environment for investment s that would benefit national and local authorities’ 
priorities to take advantage of private sector interest and investment capabilities.  
 
 
• Potential for knowledge and learning  
There is a huge potential for knowledge and learning with this programme. 
First of all, R20,  Pegasus and IUCN  plan to set up a first-of -its-kind impact measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) system that will be applied to the projects under the umbrella of the SnCF  in partnership 
with Gold Standard. This MRV system will be l inked to a new global platform being set up by the UNFCCC 
and Gold Standard for reporting project impacts towards climate change targets and related SDGs. 
Therefore, projects that get implemented under this programme may be publicly reporting their SDG 
impacts on a global, public platform that will foster knowledge exchange, high-level recognition and 
comparability, and inspire others to do the same.  
Second, the infrastructure project undertaken by the Fund will be showcased and serve as blueprint for 
local replication, moreover as the p roject capacity will intensively include local consultants the technical, 
legal and financial know -how will remain in Beneficiary countries allowing further replication.  
 
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environme nt


---
*Page 52*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 77 
   
 The R20 value chain in itself is an enabling environment which seeks to eliminate barriers to low -carbon 
and climate-resilient project solutions. By working directly with local authorities R20 assists with project 
identification and formulation. Afterw ards, R20 works with the most promising of those identified projects 
through ‘project capacity ’ training workshops to help projects become more bankable. R20 also works with 
technology partners to fund the feasibility studies needed to make the projects in vestment ready. Even if 
projects are not immediately financed by the fund, the opportunity to attend a Source training, for example, 
is a golden opportunity for a public -sector user to dramatically improve his or her chances of accessing 
project finance by  preparing their project in a way that is fully endorsed by the MDBs. This is knowledge 
that can have impact well beyond the preliminary targets of our programme.  
 
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
Objective is to create an enabling environment, demonstrate it is doable and encourage scaling-up through 
example (+ education / training). This is important to reduce implementation and operating risk, rendering 
the projects more attractive to the SnCF . The R20 value chain includes “training and capacity building” 
across all the different value-chain stages.  
 
• Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national 
climate change adaptation strategies and plans  
Private investments in NbS have so far been limited. With the SnCF programme, and IUCN as a partner, 
the programme aims to ensure that nature can contribute to the broader goals of climate adaptation, as 
well as mitigation. NbS is already part of many countries first round of NDCs and there is a growing 
interest to ensure NbS are part of the climate solutions (e.g. UN Climate Summit special track on NbS).  
 
Preparation of detailed feasibility studies for climate change adaptation/mitigation projects is  the direct 
scope of activities of many i nternational financial institutions. This programme is however not creating the 
same type of project preparation facility. Rather, what makes this project unique is its focus on 
infrastructure deals at the subnational level, including those that bring in nature based solutions to protect 
infrastructure from climate change impacts and that bring mitigation benefits.  While other preparation 
facilities exist, this preparation work’s inclusion of nature based solutions for infrastructure offers a unique 
propos ition in the climate mitigation and adaptation arena. It is also unique in how it brings into this space, 
actors such as BNP Paribas, Rockefeller Foundation, Edmond de Rothschild bank, whose engagement 
will create a paradigm shift in the way the infrastruc ture deals that receive technical support can be 
promoted. These players while using this Fund as a first will use it as a model for future large scale 
replication by Convergence and DFID, OECD DAC Countries with the Gates Foundation and Rockefeller 
Foundation as they seek to develop a multi billion umbrella blended climate finance initiative for COP 26. 
This is what is a key element in the paradigm shift that the technical facility will do as GCF’s grant 
financing will leverage a shift in the way such deal s are developed for future investment with actors that we 
aim to have mainstream this approach into their regular operations.  
This approach has already gained some recognition, being selected as best climate finance city project of 
2020 by the climate lab and selected by Convergence for their blended finance best- practice platform. 
Intergovernmental  bodies such as the Commonwealth and the Union for Mediterranean and some national 
GCF -accredited Fund managers (such as FONERWA - Rwanda, FYNSA –  Chile - …) already expressed 
their interest in joining the consortium to learn and be able to replicate this unique strategy for respectively 
SnCF Islands, SnCF Med, SnCF sub Saharan Africa and SnCF LATAM, as they also recognise the great 
importance and opportunity for Subnational Climate Infrastructure on the one hand and blended finance 
mechanism such unlocking private investors which are looking for secured climate finance vehicles in 
emerging market. Thus, another difference from other preparation facilities is the w ay in which preparation 
of deals will take place as the aim is to have these institutions in the region sustain the approach and


---
*Page 53*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 77 
   
 replicate successful designs of deals, thus creating replication beyond a one -off preparation facility as is 
the case with many  others that are in effect today.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals 
and provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
• Environmental co- benefits  
• Social co -benefits including health impacts  
• Econ omic co -benefits  
• Gender -sensitive development impact  
 
As described in section D.1 we expect the SnCF  (based on 35  projects) to contribute to several SDGs, 
notably SDG 3 (improved health), SDG 5 (Gender mainstreaming), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), 
SDG 7 (access to clean energy), SDG 8 (job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) , SDG 13 
(climate action)  and SDG 14/15 (biodiversity) . 
 
Beyond the SDG related impacts mentioned above, the SnCF  will also generate wider co-benefits for 
which it is difficult to quantify at this stage. In terms of the broader economy, we know that energy, lighting 
and improved waste management practices enabled by projects provide the contexts necessary for the 
creation of local employment through small businesses, local associations and other informal means of 
generating economic activity and employment. For education, we know that access to energy and in 
particular LED city lighting can increase average s chool -leaving ages, attendance in schools and improve 
educational results by lengthening study -time for children after dark, in addition to making adult 
professional education an option for many parents. Regarding public health, we know that appropriate 
waste collection and treatment solutions can create multiple areas of positive impact, including reducing 
exposure of the wider public to air pollutants and water pollutants and reducing the exposure of those living 
close to waste or indeed coming into direc t contact with it, to disease, toxins and other often fatal and/or 
debilitating effects (including for example malformation of children whose mothers are exposed to 
electronic waste during pregnancy).  
 
Access to clean, reliable, safe water has a multitude of development co-benefits in addition to GHG 
reduction, including agricultural co-benefits (germination, erosion), health and well -being improvements, 
and particular gender -related co-benefits since the majority of water retrieval in the developing world is 
done by women and girls. Gold Standard has certified water project impacts against SDG 1, no poverty; 
SDG 3, good health; SDG 5, gender equity; and SDG 6, clean water. This year in the first ever Gold 
Standard certified “gender responsive” water projec t, women and children saved  more than 2 hours a day 
on water collection, with 40% reporting that time saved was used for income-generation, leisure, religious 
and empowerment focused activities within the community . The project also measured –  and approached 
– gender parity, with its Water Resource Committees comprised of 46% female to 54% male. Since the 
project started, no women have reported incidents of domestic violence related to water collection, 
compared to 35% prior to the project. And borehole users have reported an 85% reduction in incidents of 
bullying, intimidation and assault during water collection since the borehole was rehabilitated.


---
*Page 54*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 77 
   
 As for gender sensitive development, there is research showing that women and girls would benefit the 
most from access to improved energy services in developing countries.24 Due to their traditional 
responsibilities for collecting fuel and water, which is time-consuming and physically exhausting, women 
and girls are seriously limited in their ability to engage in educational and income-generating activities. It is 
well known that in many developing countries, much of women’s time is taken up with difficult and time-
consuming chores related to producing and processing food without mechanical or electrical equipment, 
and in cooking with dirty fuels. A 2015 World Bank study, whic h focuses primarily on rural electrification, 
states that access to electricity can also reduce gender -based violence. For example, increased lighting 
increases women’s sense of security and grants women increased mobility at night, which could help 
female-led small businesses to operate in the evenings. Television could also help reduce violence, 
particularly at the household level, by changing women’s and men’s perceptions of gender roles and 
relations and giving women a greater understanding of their legal rights.25 In short, reduced drudgery for 
women and increased access to non-polluting power for lighting, cooking, household and productive 
purposes can have dramatic effects on women’s levels of empowerment, education, literacy, nutrition, 
health, economic opportunities, and involvement in community activities.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc.) . Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government 
from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening ins titutions and implementation capacity  
 
 
In general, least D eveloped Countries, Developing C ountries  andCountries in transition face a significant 
demand in terms of access to basic services, such as health, education, energy, water and sanitation.  
The strongest demand amongst cities and regions is for energy, waste optimization and energy efficient 
city lighting services.  
However, the low carbon, c limate resilient infrastructure projects that must be implemented to meet this 
demand is far below the level that one might expect,  primarily  for two reasons.   
 
Project Bankability  
Projects are not being conceived, from the outset, to be “bankable” – i.e., projects that are:  
• Properly structured in technical and financial terms: (amongst other) using appropriate reliable 
technologies, benefitting from the required permits and concessions, operated and serviced by 
reliable counterparties, appropriately ins ured and generating profits for investors;  
• Conceived in full alignment with their operating context: (amongst other) the local community and 
its interests, local political and regulatory environments, national laws regulations and incentive 
schemes, and the international financial and political context.  
 
 
 
 
24 http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment - 
energy/sustainable_energy/energy_and_genderforsustainabledevelopmentatoolkitandresourcegui.html   
25 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/732581468194079700/pdf/940390ESM0P1490shop0Report0940390SN.pdf


---
*Page 55*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 77 
   
 The challenge lies with the “project development value chain” and the limited degree of collaboration, 
understanding and interconnection of the different social, economic, political and regulatory, technology 
and financial players involved in project development and implementation. Almost invariably, key players 
do not fully understand what makes a project bankable, they do not understand each other’s’ interests, 
how their decisions can impact negatively on each other, and therefore on the bankability of projects.  
 
Access to finance  
There is also a lack of appropriate financing instruments to fund the development and implementation of 
appropriate projects, at scale.  
If needs are to be met, this will over whelmingly be by green infrastructure projects of an intermediate size, 
of between 5 and 75 MUSD, located near user -communities, and that can most easily be replicated by 
leveraging local experience and expertise. These projects represent the largest part of the potential market 
for green infrastructure in terms of number, aggregate investment opportunity and of potential for climate 
and SDG impact.  
For projects of this size however, there is a significant “funding gap”, a lack of appropriate financial 
instruments to finance project identification development and implementation, that deliver upon the 
expectations of investors while ensuring that projects remain affordable and financially viable. The situation 
is distinct from that of smaller projects that have less difficulty in finding donor capital and local sources of 
funding, and from larger projects that tend to attract development finance investors and smaller institutional 
capital.  
The 100 campaign: 
This need has been strongly highlighted during the 100 Climate Solutions Projects Campaign undertaken 
by initially in 2016, with its latest update in 2019. Working through R20’s networks of cities and regions - 
approximately 5000 cities and regions globall y -and through partner networks and associations of 
local/regional governments and private companies, the campaign consisted of an open call to submit 
potential projects for support. The accepted submissions included letters of mandate and support from 
municipal, regional or national government authorities, as well as high- level descriptions of the projects 
outlining basic market data. The inaugural edition of the campaign identified more than 650 potential 
projects, 450 of which submitted formal letters of mandate and political support.  
 
Alignment with ND Cs 
 
The SnCF prioritizes the integration of sub-national climate and sustainability priorities with those at a 
national level, including but not limited to Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and Sustainable 
Development Goal targets (SDGs). The fund will make use of a number of in-country tools to ensure that 
this alignment occurs. First is engagement with the relevant federal line Ministries, and participation where 
possible with their established agencies or working groups already established to ensure alignment 
between sub and national levels of climate action. In support of these public sector bodies, in-country 
delivery agencies regularly facilitate multi -level committees to identify, align, and flag any potential areas of 
potential misalignment. SnCF will participate directly or via partners as part of such bodies to ensure there 
is alignment and a clear reporting path between sub-national investment opportunities an national 
priorities. Finall y, R20, IUCN and Gold Standard have extensive networks of project developers and in-
country delivery agencies. SnCF will leverage this network in each host country to ensure contact is made 
and coordination occurs between subnational and national levels.  
  
Gold Standard will play a particular supporting role as an implementing partner in the NDC -P. Through 
NDC- P, Gold Standard has access to government agencies and to the specific contacts responsible for 
each host country NDC development and implementation.  In addition, every Gold Standard certified 
project must make a measurable contribution to climate (SDG 13 –  Climate Action) and a minimum of two 
other SDGs (ex: SDG3 - Health and Well Being, SDG5 –  Gender Equality, SDG6 –  Clean Water and 
Sanitation, etc.). Project -level impacts are reported and can be rolled up into regional targets or national 
level SDG and NDC reporting.


---
*Page 56*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 77 
   
 The Annex 24  provide an analysis of the beneficiary countries’ NDC with the scope of SNCF Global.  
 
Barrier Analysis  
 
The key barriers  to financing mid- scale Subnational Climate Infrastructure have been analyzed in the 
beneficiary countries in the sector targeted by the SnCF. The analysis includes Pegasus, IUCN, Gold 
Standard, BNP and R20 field experience; inputs from countries NDAs and CSOs; and Multilateral 
Institutions. Further analysis will be conducted at both the TA stage and the due diligence stage of any 
potential equity investment.  
Key barriers are summarized in the table bellow  
 
Key barriers  Baseline  Alternative with the SnCF and GCF  
Mid – Size (5 -7 
MUSD) Subnational 
Climate 
Infrastructure is 
underfunded. • Philanthropy and city to city 
cooperation usually does not 
fund projects with cost greater 
that 5 MUSD  
• Traditional MDBs and DFIs 
ticket size does not cover 
projects with cost lower than 
75 MUSD  
• Many project developers 
struggle to find Equity 
partners and potential Debt 
providers request high Equity 
ratio due to the perceived 
risks.  
• Transaction cost for such 
projects are critical and high 
transaction cost dramatically 
reduce bankability  • SnCF ticket size is dedicated to 
this type of high impact 
investments  
• The SnCF will invest in Equity 
thus leveraging additional Debt 
at project level and filling the 
most needed capital for 
developers.  
• The systemic approach of the 
SnCF initiative lowers 
transaction costs  
• The GCF first loss provides a 
de-risking mechanism at fund 
level allowing a more suited risk 
management at project level 
thus reducing transaction costs.  
  
Climate 
Infrastructure is 
underfunded by 
private capital  • Risk for this type of asset is 
often perceived to high and 
therefore the risk/return ratio 
is often lower than private 
investor expectations  
• Private investors are wary  of 
greenwashing and many 
investment products have 
historically failed at delivering 
real positive impacts  
• There is a general opinion that 
the issue is not a lack of 
capital but a lack of bankable 
projects   • The GCF First loss improves the 
risk/return ratio and provides 
conditions to crowd- in private 
investment.  
• The Climate and SDG impacts 
will be certified. 
• Most Fund are seeking larger 
deals size and competition 
among investors in those larger 
deals has led to excess capital 
offer than demand. However, for 
smaller transaction the exact 
opposite holds, and field 
experience has shown us that 
many smaller projects, even 
bankable, struggle to find Equity 
investors.  
• The TA will support the creation 
of a bankable pipeline


---
*Page 57*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 77 
   
 Projects are poorly 
designed and 
implemented • Projects are designed by an 
equipment provider and not 
always adapted to the exact 
needs of the territory  
• Participatory processes are 
often performed after the 
project design is completed and 
leaves low flexibility to citizens 
and local authority’s inputs  
• ESIA are performed after 
project design and leaves low 
flexibility to design 
improvements. 
• Projects fails to be effectively 
implemented 
• Construction, Operation and 
Maintenance is challenging   • The TA allows better project 
design and seeks solutions 
adapted to a given problematic. 
• The SnCF funnel process 
includes Environmental and 
Social safeguarding’s at all 
steps and stakeholder 
engagement at early stage 
before the project is fully 
designed.  
• The SnCF is partnering with 
experienced private local 
projects developers. SnCF is 
also providing additional support 
thanks  to the TA. 
• EPC and OM are performed with 
local partners selected for their 
robust experience, additional 
trainings and support will be 
provided by SnCF  
Specific barriers to 
Energy Efficiency 
projects  • ESCOs models are not always 
compliant with public sector 
regulation  
• ESCOs models are not known 
and perceived as complex 
financial mechanisms  
• Energy prices are often 
subsidised  
• By nature, EE projects are often 
smaller that the 75MUSD 
threshold.  • TA can support creation of 
adapted ESCO models and 
adapted ESCO contracts  
• The deal size is more adapted to 
these types of projects  
Specific barriers to 
Renewable Energy 
projects  • Often lack of appropriate 
regulation  
• Often lack of clarity for IPP 
schemes  
• Often lack of bankable off-
takers  • The TA can support the 
authorities in designing a 
scheme for IPP and negotiate 
appropriate PPAs. 
• The counterparty risk is partially 
covered by the First Loss in the 
capital structure of SnCF 
• Project “smaller” size reduce 
counterparty risk as electricity 
needs and specific situation can 
be analysed in the DD. 
Specific barriers to 
Waste Optimisation 
projects  • Lack of financial resources of 
municipalities  
• Weak regulation in the sector  
• Existing informal sector  
• Scattered cities and low waste 
volumes for traditional waste 
infrastructure in more “rural” 
areas  • Smaller decentralised 
infrastructure can lower 
transport costs and is more 
adapted to generate value out of 
the recovered/transformed 
material rather than paying to 
get rid of it.


---
*Page 58*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 77 
   
 • Transport costs to heavy to be 
supported by traditional 
business models  
• Difficulties to identify suitable 
land plots with heavy 
reluctance from neighbours  • Stakeholder engagement 
includes the informal sector in 
the project design.  
• Smaller decentralised projects 
need less land and recycling and 
valorisation is more accepted 
than final disposal.  
Specific barriers to 
Water and 
Sanitation projects  • Business models of wastewater 
mostly exclusively depending 
on municipalities and perceived 
expensive.  • Nature -based Solutions and 
smaller decentralised 
infrastructure for wastewater are 
less capital intensive and reduce 
cost of treatment. 
Specific barriers to 
Sustainable 
Agriculture projects  • Sector traditionally dominated 
by small enterprises with low 
creditworthiness.  
• Underdeveloped values chains 
and consumer demand for 
healthier food 
• Low local capacities and 
understanding of modern and 
environmentally friendly 
approach to agriculture  • The TA can provide capacity 
building  
• The smaller deal size allows 
SnCF to invest in this sector 
dominated by SMEs  
• The solution driven approach 
will identify the most suitable 
crops for the local conditions and 
will be driven by the local 
demand. 
  
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. 
Describe the following:  
• Existing national climate strategy  
• Existing GCF country programme  
• Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
• Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
• Role of National Designated Authority  
• Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, 
women and other vulnerable groups  
 
Every SnCF project will be undertaken with an official mandate from the relevant subnational authorities, 
and must also demonstrate alignment with country -driven priorities. Ensuring such alignment is a key 
element of project selection and due diligence, with specific focus on Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs), national targets for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), NAMAs, prevailing gender policies, 
sustainability standards, and related national policies. As an NDC -P Associate, Gold  Standard has 
contacts with all relevant Ministries related to national NDCs. Similarly, with 55 country offices, IUCN has 
direct access to relevant Conservation and Finance Ministries. For each host country from which SnCF 
receives an NOL, GCF will be consulted to ensure engagement and alignment with other GCF country 
programmes. 
  
Country priorities will be reflected in the work of the regional Project Accelerator Facilities. The facility 
training programs will target sub -national stakeholders but  will also provide training for regional and


---
*Page 59*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 77 
   
 national financial institutions and Accred ited Entities to ensure capacity transfer. For example, Fonerwa is 
already working with the R20 on this specific model.  
  
Training and project selection include safeguards, gender equity, stakeholder engagement, and 
environmental protection. This is mandatory for all projects. Please refer to the Gender Framework Annex 
and the detailed safeguarding elements in the Climate Rationale and Additionality section. These elements 
are compulsory, as stated in the ESMS, and reviewed by the Fund ES manager.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers , and providing the minimum concessionality  to ensure the 
project is viable  without crowding out private and other public investment s. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of 
GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness  of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total 
financing and mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to 
an appropriate benchmark.  
 
Please specify the expected economic  rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support  to illustrate the need for GCF 
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.  
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, 
specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
GCF participation goes well beyond only increasing the ROI (return on investment) of the Fund as its 
focus is first and foremost to deliver climate mitigation and adaptation benefits. In addition, it will be 
monitored to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of the fund, an issue to be taken up in each 
steering committee meeting, to ensure the project is managed in ways that continue to improve its 
efficiency and effectiveness throughout its implementation. Part of Component 3 on development and 
use of metrics and tools will focus on ensuring that efficiency and effectiveness are part of the 
subproject designs and also a key cri teria for monitoring progress. Component 3 has also been 
clarified to show that its primary focus is on monitoring climate mitigat ion and adaptation benefits, 
thus aligning with GCF’s primary focus with additional benefits, as requested by Governments on 
sustainable development goals.


---
*Page 60*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 77 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including  in respect of any  co-financing .  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select  the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
E.2. C ore indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project /programme . 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
 
This section is made for the SnCF global  Fund and doesn’t include the Technical Assistance which has a 
marginal effect on the ra tios. 
 
E.2.1. Expected tonne s of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation  
and cross -cutting only)  Annual   3’881’722 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime   77’634’432 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lif etime emission 
reductions (m itigation  and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project  financing  750’000’000  USD  
(b) Requested GCF amount  150’000’000  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  77’634’432  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  9,661   USD  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed  
(e = b / c)  1,932   USD  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross -cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  600’000’000   USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  _____   Choose an item.  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  600’000’000   USD  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b)  4   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  _____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 4  
  
In addition, each individual projected funded by the Fund is expected to have 
2-4x leverage (whether by debt or third- party equity), which would result in a 
total leverage ratio of 8- 16x GCF’s investment.  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  20’000 jobs created  
50 % of female  
Indirect  17’000’000 citizens with improved living conditions  
50 % of female  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  Not relevant   (Expressed as % ) of country(ies)  
Indirect  Not relevant   (Expressed as % ) of country(ies)  
For a multi -country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.


---
*Page 61*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 77


---
*Page 62*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 77 
   
 E.3. Fund- level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and  corresponding  
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above.  Add rows 
as needed.  
 
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided - gender -sensitive 
energy access power 
generation  Certified reduction at 
projects 
levels 
(tCO2eq)  0 2’997’32
2 8’991’965 7 projects of 
renewable energy  
Only 1/3 of 
impact will be 
archived at mid 
term due to 
construction times 
See Annex 22  for 
further 
assumptions  
M3.0 Reduced emissions 
from buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances  M3.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or avoided -  
buildings, cities, industries, and appliances  Certified 
reduction at 
projects 
levels(tCO2e
q) 0 12’529’5
65 37’588’694  
See Annex 22  for 
further 
assumptions  
 
 
 Social and economic co -
benefits in terms of 
citizens benefiting from 
better public services 
(energy access, street 
lighting and better 
sanitation) (Linked to 
outcomes M5, M6 and 
M7) 
 
 Number of 
citizens 
benefiting from better 
public 
services 
(energy 
access, 
street 
lighting and 
better 
sanitation)   0  5’700’000   17’000
’000  On average 
480’000 citizens 
affected per 
projects   
35 projects   
 Social and economic co -
benefits in terms of 
citizens benefiting from 
better waste management 
systems, access to water 
and local sustainable 
agriculture   (Linked to Number of 
citizens 
benefiting 
from better 
waste 
managemen0  3’360’000   10’080’000  On average 
480’000 citizens 
affected per 
projects   
7 waste projects, 
7 water projects


---
*Page 63*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 77 
   
 outcomes M5, M6 and 
M7) 
 
 t systems , 
access to 
water and 
local 
sustainable 
agriculture   and 7 agriculture 
projects   
       
Social and economic 
co-benefits in terms of 
solid waste facility, 
sewage treatment plant and restorative 
agriculture projects 
built  
(Linked to outcomes 
M5, M6 and M7)  Number of 
solid waste facility, sewage treatment 
plant and 
restorative 
agriculture 
projects 
built  0 21 21 
7 solid waste 
projects, 7 water 
projects,7 
agricultural 
projects  
  E.4. Fund -level  outcomes  
 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome.  
Add rows as needed.  
 
 
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term)  Final  
M 5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for low -emission 
planning and development 
(stemming from the training 
and capacity building)  M5.2 Number and level 
of effective coordination 
mechanisms   Survey 
after 
trainings to 
National 
AE 
 0 2 4  
Existing regional 
investment 
structure similar 
to SnCF  
 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low -emission 
power suppliers  M6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a result 
of GCF support   Direct 
monitoring 
of 
renewable 
power 
capacity 
commissio
ned 
 0 140 MW  140 
MW In average 20 
MW per projects  
7 RE projects  
M 7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, cities, 
industries, and appliances  M7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances as a result of 
Fund support.  
 #Kw/h saved  0 1’927’63
2’000  4’882’
896’0
00 In average 
406’908’000 
kwh/y saved


---
*Page 64*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 77 
   
 E.5. Project/programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Climate mitigation 
infrastructure projects are 
additional, commercially 
viable, screened, and 
selected for a high levels of 
SDG impacts, ES 
safeguards and, where 
possible, include a NbS 
component  Number of viable climate 
mitigation infrastructure 
projects  Submissions 
from project 
developers, 
TA 
assessment
s, Feasibility 
studies, 
Decisions 
made by the 
PA 
Committee  0 15 40  
Relevant stakeholders have 
the information and 
guidance needed to 
support the development of 
sound policy and incentives 
schemes that enable and 
fast-track green 
infrastructure projects on a 
subnational level, as well 
as to foster up-scaling and 
replication of investment 
deals  Number of stakeholders  List of 
participants 
of trainings 
and 
workshops  0 100 360  
A standard certification and 
MRV methodology and 
system are in place to raise 
ambition and to monitor the 
impact of SnCF Fund 
investment, integrating 
IUCN’s standard on NbS  Number of MRV system 
(including SnCF MRV 
criteria, reporting 
pathways, and impact 
registry)  Project -level 
impact data  0 1 1  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
 
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity TA1.1.1:  Develop and 
agree on SnCF Technical 
Assistance selection criteria 
based on of existing Project 
Accelerator Facilities’ work, 
investor needs, compliance 
with safeguarding and other 
ESMS guidance, and related 
best practice and standards.  Perform gap analysis on 
existing criteria's and develop 
an adapted set for the type of 
projects we are doing  * Gather relevant background 
documentation  
* Convene consultations with relevant SnCF core team 
partners  
* Review input  
* Finalize criteria  * Final set of criteria  
Activity TA1.1.2:  
Conduct market studies, 
strategies to remove barriers 
to efficient implementation 
of investment deals, and Conduct market studies, strategy development for 
barrier removal;  
Develop an IT tool and * Conduct market stud ies and 
develop country strategies for barrier removal 
* Develop guiding material 
(print version)  * Available market study  
* Printed guiding material  
* IT tool


---
*Page 65*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 77 
   
 develop tools to simplify 
project submission from 
authorities and project 
developers. guideline to support project 
submission  * Develop user friendly IT 
tool with easy -to-reference 
dashboard  
* Support the update by 
project developers  
Activity TA1.1.3: Select 
projects for TA support, and 
get PA Committee approval 
for spending funds.  The sourcing will rely mostly 
on communities with city and 
regions through existing 
networks and local offices of 
the partners  * Review project submissions  
* Conduct committee review 
meetings  
* Announce results and set -
up next steps  * List of screened projects  
* Evaluation reports  
Activity TA1.1.4: Strengthen 
and streamline selection 
criteria based on early 
submissions and lesson 
learned  Issues that will arise in later 
stages are analyzed and 
criteria's that could have 
avoided the late issue are 
added/ refined to ensure 
such issue won’t  happen in 
the future  * Gather new background 
documentation  
* Convene consultations with 
relevant SnCF co re team 
partners  
* Review input  
* Update criteria , if needed  * Final set of criteria (revised)  
Activity TA1.2.1: Perform on 
site evaluation, stakeholders’ 
meetings and pre -feasibility 
studies of selected projects  Teams are sent on the project 
site to asse s if the project is 
viable and if stakeholder are 
favorable to the proposed 
project.  * Field visits & local 
consultations  
* Conduct technical pre -
feasibility work  
* Hold additional consultations with relevant 
subnational stakeholders  * Field visit reports * Feasibility studies  
* Outcome stakeholder consultations  
Activity TA1.2.2: Pre -
feasibility studies are screened to evaluate further 
TA support, additional project 
development support is 
identified, ToR of additional 
studies are drafted.
 Gold Standard wil l review 
project design to ensure 
alignment with 
methodologies will result in 
impact re climate mitigation, 
adaptation and sustainability 
co-benefits. Projects will also 
be assessed for alignment of 
reporting with NDCs and 
SDGs, and compliance / integratio n with national 
climate and development strategies and associated 
reporting. IUCN will support 
the early sourcing efforts 
through technical advice and 
screening of the project 
pipeline vàv possible NbS 
components. Project 
Accelerator Facilities are 
taking selection and 
disbursement decisions.
 * Review exercise and convening of group for 
consolidation  
* Convening of Committees  
* Drafting of ToRs  * Assessment reports  
* Committee reports  
* ToRs  
Activity TA1.2.3: Draft and 
negotiate contracts with 
project developer/owner for 
the technical assistance support
 The TA signs an exclusivity 
agreement and ensure right 
of first offer for SnCF 
investment in the finalized 
deal.  
The TA team screens the * Work with the respective 
project developers to finalize 
agreements  * Contracts


---
*Page 66*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 77 
   
 project proposal, and 
accompanies the applicant to 
ensure the proposal meets all 
the requirements. Once it 
does, the team submits a 
request for feasibility to the 
respective PA Committee 
who evaluates the project.  
Activity TA1.3.1: Procure and 
assign service contracts to 
technical/legal/relevant 
experts and evaluate results 
of commissioned feasibility 
studies  Experts and local consultants 
perform the feasibility study, 
which includes elements such 
as the technical -economic 
analysis, the pre -PPA, pre -
concession, the EIA, 
identification of NbS 
components, land rights and 
detailed LOI from all 
stakeholders.  * Hire additional technical 
experts  
* Assess and combine reports 
on a project by project basis  * Feasibility studies  
Activ ity TA1.3.2: Conduct ad -
hoc working groups between 
the TA team, the project 
developer/owner and 
contracted parties.  The TA team screens the 
results of the feasibility 
studies. And closely 
communicates with the PDs.  * Review of the feasibility 
studies  
* Com munication with the PD 
and other relevant parties  * Assessment of the 
feasibility studies 
Activity TA1.4.1: Support, 
were applicable, contracted 
parties to ensure 
stakeholders meeting and 
other ESS activities are 
performed according to Gold 
Standard best practices.  The SnCF Global 
Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS) 
is designed to ensure proper 
implementation of the ESMS 
to the entire ‘value chain’ 
from the project concept 
through investment and asset 
management.  * PDs are supported, using 
available tools (see above) 
and best practices (see below) to ensure project 
requirements  are met  * Draft ESMS documentation  
Activity TA1.4.2: Monitor the 
ESS work performed and 
consult between ad- hoc 
working groups between the 
TA team, the project 
developer/owner and 
contracted parties.  Each project will be assessed 
against GS safeguarding methodology. This ensures 
that project design includes 
in addition to core climate 
indicators, gender sensitivity, 
water assessment, and SDG 
impact pathways, mandatory 
stakeholder consultation, 
assessment of community Health, Safety and Working 
Conditions, anti -corruption.  * Evaluation of documentation received, one 
project at a time  
* Input from technical 
experts on climate change 
and as well  including on SDG 
and NbS  * ESMS documentation  
Activity TA1.5.1: Submit 
screened projects to SnCF 
Global to continue with deal 
structuring phase and 
support Due Diligence  Each project developed will 
be submitted to SnCF and the 
TA teams will ensure a 
smoo th transition with the 
Due Diligence teams answering theory questions.
 * Provide screened documentation to SnCF team  * Final project documentation  
Activity TA1.5.2 Assist, when 
applicable, project owner and Some projects owner may 
have difficulties in the legal * Identify  TA appropriate 
activities that may still need * Additional activities that 
needs TA support, if any


---
*Page 67*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 77 
   
 SnCF with key contracts (Off -
takers, EPC, OM, concessions 
….) structuration of the projects, 
the TA teams will provide ad -
hoc support to ensure the 
legal setting is robust and will 
be considered as bankable  "hand -holding" to get 
accepted by SnCF Global to 
start their due diligence 
process  
Activity TA2.1.1: Training of project developers to 
increase understanding of 
safeguard requirements, 
ESMS requirements, SDG and 
NbS criteria, and other investment requirements for 
high- integrity, bankable 
project design and delivery of 
climate change results.
 The TA will conduct training workshops targeted at 
project developers (PD) to 
ensure ES safeguard 
requirements and the 
potential to engage with 
ESMS requirements, SDG and 
NbS are understood  
alongside the core climate 
change focus . These trainings 
will also focus on key investment parameters, such 
as project structuring, 
financing, implementing and 
moni toring process.  * Background research and 
collection of available 
information  
* Adjusting/drafting relevant 
CVs for the training, identify 
content etc  
* Identify  appropriate experts  
to help on technical topics  
* Identify  the groupings for 
the workshop (reg ional or 
theme based)  
* Organize logistics (online 
course, webinar, face -to-face, 
field visit etc)  
* Document outcomes and 
collection lessons learned for 
next workshop  
* Communication and 
outreach  * Training CVs  
* Workshop documentation  
Activity TA2.1.2: Training of 
public authorities to provide for enabling conditions for 
green infrastructure 
investments
 Sub- national workshops will 
be held to ensure an 
increased understanding of 
the SnCF programme, its 
project pipeline and its 
overall approach. The goal is 
to work jointly with the local 
authorities to identify 
challenges, but primarily find 
means and solutions to 
create an enabling 
environment (e.g. laws and 
regulation, financial 
incentives etc) for new green 
infrastructure investments.  * Background research and 
collection of available 
information  
* Adjusting/drafting relevant 
CVs for the training, identify 
content etc  
* Identify  appropriate 
express  to help on technical 
topics  
* Identify  the groupings for 
the workshop (regional or 
theme based)  
* Organ ize logistics (online 
course, webinar, face -to-face, 
field visit etc)  
* Document outcomes and collection lessons learned for 
next workshop  
* Communication and 
outreach  * Training CVs  
* Workshop documentation  
Activity TA2.1.3: Training of 
regional actors to expand 
know how of the value chain 
and blended finance vehicles 
for large scale replication  The third set of knowledge 
exchange targets regional 
actors, primary financial 
institutions. The goal is to 
ensure the know -how on the 
value chain and ble nded 
finance vehicles for large 
scale replication become * Background research and 
collection of available 
information  
* Adjusting/drafting relevant 
CVs for the training, identify content etc  
* Identifiy appropriate expers 
to help on technical topics  * Training CVs  
* Workshop documentation


---
*Page 68*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 77 
   
 mainstreamed. In addition to 
core climate change 
indicators, ES safeguard, SDG 
and NbS impact 
measurement will be equally 
part of the workshops.  * Identifiy the groupings for 
the workshop (regional or 
theme based)  
* Organize logistics (online 
course, webinar, f ace-to-face, 
field visit etc)  
* Document outcomes and 
collection lessons learned for 
next workshop  
* Communication and outreach
 
Activity TA2.2.1: Production 
of best practices, guidelines 
and tools for replication an d 
upscaling  In order to ensure scale -up 
and wider application, best 
practies, blue prints and 
other tools are being 
produced and made publically available. They will 
be promoted at international 
events or other (online) fora.  * Work with technical experts 
and TA team to develop draft 
documentation  
* Engage in review process  
* Finalization of documents, 
including layout etc  
* Dissemination through 
various means and channels  * Blue prints  
* Best practices  
* Other tools  
Activity TA3.1.1: Ensure Gold 
Standard indicators are fully 
aligned with SnCF Climate 
Change  focus , as well as 
ESMS,  international best 
practices (IFC, EIB, ….), 
investor, and host country 
criteria  In the consortium, Gold 
Standard will lead the 
development and 
deployment of standard 
metrics, to ols, indicators and 
methodologies to raise ambition in project design 
and to lead to certified SDG 
impact. 
 * Work with technical experts 
and TA team to develop draft 
metrics, tools, indicators and 
methodologies  
* Engage in review process  
* Finalization o f documents, 
including layout etc  
* Dissemination through 
various means and channels  * metrics  
* tools  
* indicators  
* methodologies  
Activity TA3.1.2: Incorporate 
Gold Standard climate change 
indicators and methodologies 
in ex- ante project 
design/selection, including 
for Nature -based Solutions  
and SDGs  ESMS -anchored Gold 
Standard safeguards - 
stakeholder consultation, 
gender sensitivity, SDG 
impact forecasting, 
ecosystem and water 
framework, cultural and 
heritage assessment, etc. 
checklists - ensure inclusion 
in project design, along with NbS
 * Engage with the project 
developer  
* Support project documentation  * Revised project 
documentation  
Activity TA3.1.3: Support 
projects with c lear 
implementation, compliance, 
and reporting pathways of climate,  as well as co -benefits 
relating to  SDG and NbS 
impact
 Additional guidance in the 
Standard, to be reinforced 
through the training and 
capacity building noted previously, includes support 
on sound GHG and SDG 
impact accounting, stakeholder consultation, 
environmental and social 
safeguards, etc.  * Engage with the project developer  
* Support project 
documentation  * Guidance documentation  
Activity TA3.1.4: Develop 
additional methodologies, 
monitoring, and impact new methodologies require 
stakeholder consultation, 
scoping, developing, capacity * Engage with technical 
experts to draft new 
methodologies  * New Methodologies


---
*Page 69*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 77 
   
 criteria as needed, including 
to evaluate health impact of 
sustainable infrastructure 
and NbS opportunities  building, testing and sign off 
from an independent technical body  * Review and consultation 
process  
* Publishing and 
dissemination  
Activity TA3.2.1: Align project 
design elements and outputs 
with climate change 
(particularly NDC targets) as 
well as SDG targets and 
related national policy 
frameworks  In SnCF project countries 
align subnational impacts and 
reporting with national and 
regional climate change 
targets partic ularly NDCs but 
also SDG s and policy targets  * Advice on NDC aligment 
and reporting  
* Review project documentation  * Revised project 
documentation  
Activity TA3.2.2: Align project design elements and outputs 
with prevailing sub -national 
policies and regulations
 In SnCF project countries 
align subnational impacts and 
reporting with national 
climate change targets 
(particularly NDCs) as well as 
SDG, and policy targets  * Advice on sub- national 
policies * Review project 
documentation  * Revised project 
documentation  
Activity TA3.3.1: Ensure 
robust measurement and 
verification (MRV) process 
and infrastructure are 
developed and implemented  Establish minimum SnCF MRV criteria, reporting pathways, 
and impact registry (domestic 
or offshore)  * Engagement with MRV 
experts  
* Review  
* Finalization of criteria  * MRV critiera and overall 
reporting system  
Activity TA3.3.2: Develop 
monitoring and reporting 
tools at project level.  Support stakeholders 
regarding MRV criteria, 
reporting pathways, and 
impact registry (dome stic or 
offshore)  * Engage with the PD and 
other project stakeholder vàv 
the SnCF MRV systems  
* Consult on and develop 
tools * MRV reprorting tool(s)  
E.7. Monitoring,  reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the  
project/programme specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final 
evaluations. Describe Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and 
between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as relevant , identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. This 
should relate to the frequency of reporting on project indicators, implementation challenges and financial status . 
 
The monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements of the Technical Assistance project is as follows:  
 
Project level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the IUCN 2015 Monitoring and 
Evaluation Policy, Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between GCF and IUCN and the IUCN Access to 
Information Policy.  
 
Project monitoring will measure achievement of the performance indicators and report on the implementation 
progress of GCF project while it is being implemented. Performance indicators are identified according to the 
principles established in the GCF Initial Result s Management Framework linking t ime-bound sets of activities to a set 
of agreed results. IUCN maintains a standard list of technically well -informed indicators aligned to its donors core 
indicators, including GCF. IUCN aims to develop its standard indicators for each programmati c area with afferent 
measurement tools to ensure effective data collection and harmonized reporting. IUCN’s Programme and Project 
Portal allows efficient and timely data management and project information disclosure.  
 
A project inception workshop will be h eld after the project document is signed by all relevant parties to: a) re- orient 
project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project 
implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication 
lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re- assess baselines as needed, and 
discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the  M&E plan; d) review financial


---
*Page 70*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 77 
   
 reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and 
schedule SnCF Steering Committee  meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. R20 will prepare the 
inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. A final inception report will be submitted to the 
GCF Secretariat.  
 
Project mid -term (MTE) and final (FE) evaluations will be commissioned and managed by the IUCN Planning, 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Risk Unit – IUCN’s independent evaluation office. Independent evaluators under the 
oversight of PMER will be contracted to c onduct these evaluations. The evaluation criteria are aligned to the GCF 
IEU Evaluation Criteria. The MTE will assess (1) the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and likelihood of impact and 
sustainability, (2) the coherence in climate finance delivery, ( 3) gender equity and social inclusion (minorities), (3) and 
country ownership. The FE will assess (1) the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and likelihood of impact and 
sustainability, (2) the coherence in climate finance delivery, (3) gender equity and social inclusion (minorities), (3) and 
country ownership, (4) innovativeness in result areas, and (6) replication and scalability. The evaluation will apply a 
process tracing methodology. Data collection will include stakeholder interviews, site visits an d documentary reviews. 
The IUCN management response will be reviewed by the SnCF Steering Committee. Evaluation reports and 
management responses will be made available to the public through the IUCN Evaluations Database.  
 
IUCN will retain all M&E records f or this project for up to six years after project financial closure in order to support 
ex-post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the proposal and 
ESM S framework.  
 
The Executive Entities , which are R20, Gold Standard and IUCN,  will be responsible to lead the presentati ons of the 
progress for the out puts and activities they are responsible for. Under the facilitation of the EE the contracted 
organizations for each sub -activities (that are in line with the project TOC and the budget) will be presented the 
progress. Any bottlenecks will be exposed and discussed at the SnCF Steering Committee.  
 
For the monitoring, reporting and evaluat ion of the SnCF Global, kindly refer Funding Proposal of the SnCF Global – 
Equity.


---
*Page 71*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 77 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages )  
Please describe financial, technical , operational , macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices,  and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, co nflict of i nterest, c orruption, r etaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, c oercive, 
collusive, and obstructive practices  
 
 
Each project in the Fund portfolio will have its own Risk Assessment and Management performed at 
feasibility stage. At Due Diligence stage, the Fund teams will toughly review and asses the risk and take 
appropriate mitigation measures before submitting any project to the Investment Committee.  
 
Main Risks and Risks at Fund level may be summarized as following  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor : Cost / Delay of construction  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
They are inherent risks to constructions among which the most common are unforeseen additional costs 
and delay in the process. Such risks can ultimately reduce the Return On Investment of a project and 
ultimately affect the financial performance of the Fund  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In its Due Diligence, the Fund will put a strong emphasis on the selection process of the EPC partner and 
even assist with its Technical Assi stance project sponsors in the procurement process and the ToR review 
of the EPC selection. Moreover, the Fund will ensure that EPC contracts have proper clauses for financial 
compensations for such risks.  
 
Selected Risk Factor : Low technical performance of the infrastructure  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low       
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
The projects may not be performing as planned in the feasibility studies. Poor performance may lead to 
decrease of production and treatment capacities, ultimately leading to lower income as planned.


---
*Page 72*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 77 
   
  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The technological risk mitigation is key in the Fund Technical Assistance design. The purpose of the 
Technical Assistance is to ensure technology neutral feasibility studies providing best in class expertise.  
Furthermore, asset allocation is setting caps by type of technology mitigating global technological risk.  
  
Selected Risk Factor : Operations not performing as planned  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Operations are critical for the smooth ruing of the projects. Poor operation management, employees’ qualifications, knowledge transfer can lead to low performance reducing incomes and misconducts against 
the ESMS policies.
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In its Due Diligence, the Fund will assess the operation teams and, when applicable, promote c ontracting 
an OM partner. The Technical Assistance will assist the project sponsor in the procurement process and 
the ToR review of the OM selection. Moreover, again, the Fund will ensure that OM contracts have proper 
clauses for financial compensations covering operational risks.  
 
Selected Risk Factor : Currency risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  High Low 
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Given the geographical scope of the  Fund, incomes of the projects will be generated in various local 
currencies. Incomes will subsequently be affected by different exchange rates.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The Fund is promoting sources of incomes in hard currencies, for its assets under management. The Fund 
strategy is favorizing off -taker agreements signed in USD. Moreover currencies  risks are evaluated for 
each project in the portfolio and if estimated to high, specific mitigation insurances will be subscribed by the Fund.


---
*Page 73*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 77 
   
  
Selected Risk Factor : Climate Change mitigation benefits and other co -benefits such as resilience and SDG 
impacts lower than expected  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low       
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
If the Climate change mitigation, and other co-benefit relating to adaptation, SDG impacts foreseen are not 
reached, it would result in a lower “impact per invested dollar” result. Lower impact result could affect 
investor confidence and slow the replication process  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
As stated in the ESMS specific Environmental and Social Monitoring, Reporting and Verification are set up 
with dedicated staff. Gold Standard methodologies and the robust monitoring will support the Fund 
decision to ensure proper impact are meet. 
  
Selected Risk Factor: Population acceptance of the projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low       
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
The primary environmental and social risks faced by the Fund is associated with the degree of acceptance 
and support for projects by local populations and stakeholders. By way of example, should a solar PV 
power project that may connect to the national electricity grid, not also meet the needs of a local 
population, t he risk to the project could result in either no investment (and therefore no implementation of 
the projects) or even financial failure of the project (undermining the sustainability of the overall Programme).  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The SnCF Global  will focus on “inclusive” sustainable projects building upon a bottom -up approach wher e 
communities at sub-national level are the initiators of the projects. The Programme further mitigates such 
risks by integrating sustainable impact criteria into the entire value chain from project conception, through 
implementation and operation, applying a best-in -class impact measurement, reporting and verification tool 
developed in partnership with the Gold Standard foundations.


---
*Page 74*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 77 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale 
for assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments 
developed for the proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc .). Provide 
a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. P resent  the key environmental and social risks and i mpacts 
and the measures on how t he project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage 
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF ’s ESS standards . If the proposed project or 
programme involve s investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management 
plans by the Executing Entities  (EEs)  and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe t he capacity of the 
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. 
Include a description of the project/programme- level grievance redress mechanism , a summary of the extent of multi -
stakeholder consultation s under taken f or the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to 
continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of 
the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy  and 
Environmental and Social Policy.  
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the 
development of  an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy .  
 
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the 
environmental and social risk  category as annex  6.  
 
 
As part of its commitment to sound E&S risk management, responsible operations and sustainable 
development, the SnCF  will operate an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in 
conformity with the requirements and standards of Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and in particular those of the Green Climate Fund and IFC Performance Standards. The SnCF Global  will aim to 
be certified compatible with climate change mitigation targets, including as well  the SDGs, developing 
projects in- line with the Gold Standard for Global Goals (GS4GG), and reporting performance against 
project-specific impact criteria. The Fund will thus contribute to several Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”), in particular SDG 13, (Climate Action), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), SDG 7 (access to 
clean energy), SDG 8 (job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) and SDG 3 (good health and well -
being)  
 
SnCF  is committed to maintaining, implementing and continuously improving its ESMS to ensure 
implementation of this policy  throughout the value chain ( project identification, development, investment, 
monitoring and reporting) . The ESMS includes an E&S categorization system that is consistent with the 
equivalent practices of the GCG, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the European Investment 
Bank (EIB) and other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).  
The framework of the ESMS  includes the following elements:  
• E&S Policy  
• Procedures, which are fully integrated with the fund’s overall investment cycle  
o Transaction screening (incl. exclusion list)  
o Risk categorization  
o E&S due diligence  
• Tools  
• Guidance materials and reporting protocols


---
*Page 75*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 77 
   
 The full  set of procedures that will be fo llowed includes a process for screening of potential investments 
against the Exclusion List prior to a Go/No Go decision, to ensure that no investment is made in projects or 
companies that are operating with excluded activities. The screening process permi ts the provisional 
categorization of proposed projects into higher, medium and lower risk (Category A, B or C respectively) 
projects and that then determines the level of E&S due diligence required and the actions to be taken to 
minimize potential impacts. All projects financed by SnCF  shall comply with host country regulatory 
requirements, the relevant IFC Performance Standards and good industry practice, respectively the EHS 
Guidelines of the World Bank Group. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page )  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme -level gender action plan that is aligned with 
the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy . Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process 
used to develop both documents . Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key 
recommendations (how to address t he vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment . Indicate if stakeholder 
consultations have taken place and describe  the key inputs integrated into the action plan,  including:  how addressing 
the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from funds investment ; key gender -related results to be 
expected from the project /programme with targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to 
ensure acti vities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.  
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan as annex 8.  
 
The main objective of the SnCF Gender Policy is to strengthen the project’s responsiveness to the multiple, 
culturally -derived principles of gender equality and women’s empowerment and to address and account for 
the links between gender equality, natural r esources management and environmental sustainability. Global 
literature makes clear that women’s participation in design, distribution, management and production of 
environmental solutions and in access to and management of financial resources is (a) under represented 
and (b) recognised as indispensable to realising the climate change targets as well as sustainable 
development goals (SDGs).  
The SNCF Gender Policy applies to the fund itself and to all projects participating in the SnCF. The policy outlines the principles for achieving gender responsiveness, and through supporting technical guidance on 
gender, solidifies the operational requirements for stakeholder involvement and partnership in the design, 
implementation, and evaluation of projects. Gender mainstreaming will be considered in all stages of the 
project cycle (design, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation) by integrating ‘gender 
mainstreaming’ procedures, checklists and forms throughout the Environmental & Social Management 
System (ESMS). This includes the following:   
- Gender questions in the E&S screening checklists in initial project screening stage, and in monitoring 
forms  
- Inclusion of a ‘gender assessment’ as part of ESIA (Environmental & Social Impact Assessment) for 
each pr oject  
- Use of gender -specific stakeholder consultation requirements and safeguards, based on Gold 
Standard Gender Equality Guidelines & Requirements. Specifically designed for project 
implementation, the requirements form the body of this policy document.  
 
The SnCF will put in place processes to ensure that projects align with prevailing national gender strategy 
(if host country has one) or other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment, and will seek 
to align the project with other national  development strategies that promote equal opportunities, whether in 
the intervention region or the sector. The policy incorporates elements of several gender frameworks (see Definitions and Resources section, immediately following). The framework incorpor ates many elements from 
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).


---
*Page 76*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 77 
   
 Gender -related outputs  SnCF Targets  
Gender and social inclusion policy at fund 
level Endorsement of gender and social inclusion policy by fund 
management c ommittee  
Gender procedures and checklists 
incorporated in fund’s Environmental and 
Social Management System (ESMS)  Comprehensive ESMS with updated gender procedures  
Engagement and consultation of women 
in all stages of project cycle  At least 40% represe ntation of women in all stakeholder 
consultations, with separate meetings for women if 
necessary  
Recruitment of women in projects  At least 20% of employees will be female  
Creation of community -based women’s 
empowerment initiatives  At least 1 empowerment initiative per project (eg. women 
attending skills -based training programme related to project 
technology)  
Recruitment of women in monitoring 
teams  At least 20% of project  monitoring teams will be female  
 
DEFINITIONS*  
Term  Definition  
Agency  The capacity to make decisions about one’s own life and act on them to achieve a 
desired outcome, free of violence, retribution, or fear.  
Empowerment  The ability and agency of every woman to shape her own destiny, exercise her 
rights and make her own choices. Women's empowerment has five components: 
women's sense of self- worth; their right to have and to determine choices; their 
right to have access to opportunities and resources; their right to have the power 
to control their own lives, both within and outside the home; and their ability to influence the direction of social change to create a more just social and economic 
order, nationally and internationally.  
Gender  Gender refers to the social, behavioural, and cultural attributes, expectations, and 
norms associated with being male or female.  
Gender equality  As enshrined in international and national constitutions and other human rights 
agreements, refers to equal rights, power, responsibilities and opportunities for 
women and men, as well as equal consideration of the interests, needs and 
priorities of women and men. Gender  
Gender equity  Refers to the process of being fair to women and men. To ensure equity, 
measures often need to be taken to compensate (or reduce) disparity for historical and social disadvantages that prevent women and men from otherwise operating 
on an equitable basis. Equity leads to equality.(UNDP 2017)  
Gender 
responsive Refers to the consideration of gender norms, roles and relations and to addressing 
inequality generated by unequal norms, roles and relations through remedial 
action beyond creating gender awareness.  
Gender 
sensitive Refers to raising awareness and consideration of gender norms, roles and 
relations but does not necessarily address inequality generated by unequal norms, 
roles or relations through remedial action beyond creating gender awareness.  
Social Inclusion  Refers to the process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to take part 
in society, and the process of improving the ability, opportuni ty, and dignity of 
those disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part in society.(World 
Bank)  
 
* If not otherwise indicated, relevant definitions are drawn and adapted from the GCF gender policy or the 
Annex to the GEF Gender Equality Action Plan (GEAP)


---
*Page 77*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 77 
   
  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including  the financial monitoring systems,  financial 
accounting,  auditing, and disbursement structure and methods . Refer to section  B.4 on implementation arrangements 
as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention,  e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the 
role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that 
will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex  10.   
The financial management and procurement of the Technical Assistance project is as follows:  
1. The financial management of the Technical Assistance  project to the SnCF programme will be guided by IUCN’s 
internal financial rules and regulations which are part of the IUCN Finance Manual. In situations where the 
government rules give clear cost advantages, they will take precedence over the IUCN rules. To ensure that project 
funds a re used effectively and efficiently in accordance with the approved budget, monthly review of project 
expenditures will be conducted. The project will apply IUCN financial reporting template that caters to provide 
information of “actual versus budget” data for desired period of reporting. The report can also group and present 
expenses/transactions pertaining to the activities described in project budget.  
 
2. The procurement aspects of this project will be guided by IUCN’s, ‘Policy and Procedure on Procurement of Goods 
and Services’ ( https://www.iucn.org/procurement ), that is a standard professional procurement policy and elaborate 
standard procedures which ensure that IUCN obtains value for money in all its procurement activities and that 
procurement is conducted in an efficient and cost effective manner that respects sustainability, the environment and 
ethical principles.  
 
3. The project will be audited in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing (ISA). This project will form 
part of the annual statutory audit undertaken by IUCN’s corporate auditor, Price Waterhouse Coopers. In terms of the 
project specific audit, R20, with cleared Terms of References by IUCN in its capacity of EA (over sight) will appoint the 
auditors and the audit will be scheduled around end of the project and conducted in line with ISA. To supplement 
these audits, periodic financial reviews will be conducted as part of regular monitoring.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The I nformation Disclosure Policy (IDP)  provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submi ssion to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclos ure polic y, and 
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.


---
*Page 78*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 77 
   
 The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 79*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 76 OF 77 
   
 
 
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
 
Annexes marked in yellow below are specific for this funding proposal whereas other annexes are relevant 
to the broader programme . 
☐ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☐ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☐ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 
TA only  Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 
TA only  Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☐ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):    I3) 
(ESS dis closure form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’ s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☐ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☐ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 
TA only  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☐ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 
TA only  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 
TA only  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 
TA only  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☐ Annex  14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☐ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 1 7 Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity


---
*Page 80*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 77 OF 77 
   
 
 
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22 
TA only   Other references; Negative impacts of renewable energy on biodiversity  
 
☒ Annex 23 
TA only  Log Frame  
 
☒ Annex 24  
TA only  Explanation regarding SnCF TA feasibility costs  
 
☒ Annex 25  
TA only  Explanation regarding SnCF TA feasibility costs


---
*Page 81*
---

11■�U■LIC OP: ALaANtA 
11 ·1�TR' OF IO RISl\1 -� D ENVIRONMEN"I 
01-.rtrn 'IINIS n• R 
Tirana. on:j2Q '1 ��C 
Re. Funding propos.nls for the GCF by (I) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global Sub 
nanonal Climate Fund lSnCF Global) and b} (2) Intemauonal Uruon for Conservation of Na1ure 
regarding the Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) 
(101:"ether. the ··Funding Pmpo:.ah") 
Dear 111\r ',' anmck G teinarec 
\\ e refl?T' to the prognimme Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and the Tecbnt<.:al 
.�::.1si.ance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) fanned by tbe two Funding 
Propo,;.ah subtruned b) Pe,gasus Capital Advisors and International Union for Conservation of �ature 
respecth,el� to us on [date] (the -Proh>ramme-). 
The undersigned is the duly aulhorued representative of PhD Omela �uc;:i. the National Design at<.-d 
Authonty focal point of Albania. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B .08/ I 0, the content of which we acl..-nowledge to have reviewed. we bereb) 
communicate our no-obJect1on to the Programme as mcluded in the two Funding Proposals. 
By commumcaung our no-objection, 11 1s implied that: 
(a) TilC go,emment of Albania has no-obJection lo the Programme as included m the two Funding 
P.r�ls, 
(b) Inc Programme as 1ncludcd rn the two r undmg, Pru[K>s,,I,, 1s in confonnit:-, ,,ith Albania':. 
n.auonal pn,,nll<--<a, s1r,.tr.a1es and plans: rand 
lCJ In accord:uicc v. ith the GCl"'s en, in,nmentul and ,ociul satcguanb. the Prog.ran1me n:. included 
m lhc ,,.,o J'undmg Propo,-.1I:. 1s m i.:nnformlly "11h relcvunl national laws and regulauom,. 
v.·c abo canfinn tha1 our national proccS.'i tor 111;.<:cnn111111g no-ob11..-..:11on to the Pmgrnntnu: as mclud<."'1 
in the two I undmg l'roposnb hns been duly lollov. cd 
78


---
*Page 82*
---

79


---
*Page 83*
---

MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT 
AND HOUSING 
Charlotte House 
2nd Floor North Wing 
Charlotte & Shirley Streets 
P.O. Box N-4849 
Nassau, The Bahamas 
Telephone: (242) 322-6005/6 
Facsimile: (242) 326-4687 or (242) 322-6064 
Ref.: MTE&H/E.U/7 July 20, 2020 
To: The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Re: Funding proposals for the GCF by (l) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global 
Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and by (2) International Union for Conservation of 
Nature regarding the Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund 
(SnCF Global) (together, the "Funding Proposals") 
Dear Mr Yannick Glemarec, 
We refer to the programme Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and the Technical 
Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed by the two 
Funding Proposals submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors and International Union for Conservation 
of Nature respectively to us (the "Programme"). 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of the Environment and 
Housing, the National Designated Authority/focal point of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas has no-objection to the Programme
as included in the two Funding Proposals;
(b)The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with the
Commonwealth of The Bahamas' national priorities, strategies and plans; and
(c)1n accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the Programme as
included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as 
included in the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the Programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
� 
Mr. David Cates 
PERMANENT SECRETARY 
DC\rmnm 
80


---
*Page 84*
---

27/04/2020 SEI/ME - 7704147 - Carta
https://sei.fazenda.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=8886777&infra_sistema=1000 … 1/2
MINISTRY OF ECONOMY
Special Secretariat for Foreign Trade and International Affairs
Secretariat for International Economic Affairs
National Designated Authority for the Green Climate Fund
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco K, 8º andar, sala 874 - Bairro Zona Cívico-Administrativa
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF - e-mail: and.gcf@economia.gov.br
Carta SEI nº 1103/2020/ME
The Green Climate Fund
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu Incheon City
Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposals for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global Sub national
Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and by (2) International Union for Conservation of Nature regarding the
Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) (together, the
“Funding Proposals”) 
Refer ence: In answering this letter, please indicate Process n. 12120.100254/2020-00.
Dear Mr Glemarec,
1. We refer to the programme Global Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and the Technical
Assistance Facility for the Global Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed by the two Funding
Proposals submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors and International Union for Conservation of Nature,
respectively to us on 30 March 2020 (the “ Programme ”).
2. The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Economy, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3. Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals..
4. By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
a. The government of Brazil has no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding
Proposals;
b. The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans; and
c. In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the Programme as included in the
two Funding Proposals, is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
5. W
e also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as
included in the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed.
81


---
*Page 85*
---

27/04/2020 SEI/ME - 7704147 - Carta
https://sei.fazenda.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=8886777&infra_sistema=1000 … 2/26. We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the Programme.
7. W e acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Best regards,
Documento assinado eletronicamente
ERIV ALDO ALFREDO GOMES
Secretary for International EconomicAffairs
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Erivaldo Alfredo Gomes , Secretário(a) de Assuntos
Econômicos Internacionais, em 27/04/2020, às 15:17, conforme horário oﬁcial de Brasília, com
fundamento no art. 6º, § 1º, do Decreto nº 8.539, de 8 de outubro de 2015.
A auten cidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
h p://sei.fazenda.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código veriﬁcador 7704147  e
o código CRC 18489D90.
Processo nº 12120.100254/2020-00. SEI nº 7704147
82


---
*Page 86*
---

83


---
*Page 87*
---

84


---
*Page 88*
---

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
Nation Religion King 
Ministry of Environment 
NQ : ........ G~~ ............... MoE 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund Secretariat 
G-Tower 175 Art Center-daero 
Y eonsu-gu, Inch eon 22004 
The Republic ofKorea -~ =:~· i--11>---
Phnom Penh ... ~ .. M.9.\y .~~~9 
Re: Funding proposals for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global 
Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and by (2) International Union for 
Conservation of Nature regarding the Technical Assistance ·Facility for the Global Sob 
national Climate Fund 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
· We refer to the programme Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and the Technical 
Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed hy the two 
Funding Proposal~ submitted by Pegasus Caeital_ ~?visors and International Union for Conservation 
ufNalure, re~peeuvely, to us on February 28 h' 1ULU. · 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment, the National 
Designated Authority/focal point of Cambodia. 
Pur~u11nt to thf.' GCF deciEion B .08/1 O, thil oont0nt of -..vhioh wo aolrno\vlodgo to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Cambodia has no-objection to the Programme as included in the two 
Funding Proposals; 
(b) The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with Cambodia's 
national priorities, strategies, and plans; and 
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the Prograinme as 
included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
We also confirm· that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as 
included in the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed. 
Morodok Techo Building (Lot 503) Tonie Bassac, Chamkarmom, Phnom Penh, CAMBODIA, Phone: 023 235 004 I 023 235 006 
•. 
85


---
*Page 89*
---

 REPUBLIQUE DU CAMEROUN  
Paix - Travail – Patrie  
----------   
 REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON  
Peace – Work – Fatherland  
----------   
MINISTERE  DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT,               
 DE LA PROTECTION DE LA NATURE ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT 
DURABLE  
------  THE MINISTRY  OF  ENVIRONMENT, PROTECTION OF NATURE 
AND  SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  
------  
CABINET DU MINISTRE  
------  
POINT FOCAL FONDS VERT POUR LE CLIMAT   
------  MINISTER’S CABINET  
------  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FOCAL POINT   
To: The Green Climate Fund (“ GCF”) 
       Yaoundé, 03/04/2020 
Re:  Funding proposals for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global Sub 
national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and by (2) International Union for Conservation of 
Nature regarding the Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund 
(SnCF Global) (together, the “ Funding Proposals ”) 
 
Dear Mr Yannick Glemarec 
We refer to the programme “Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) -Equity  and the Technical Assistance 
Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund  (SnCF Global) ” formed by the two Funding Proposals submitted 
by Pegasus Capital Advisors and International Union for Conservation of Nature respective ly to us on 23 of march 
2020. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of National Designated Authority (NDA), the Focal Point of 
Cameroon. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Cameroon has no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals; 
(b) The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with Cameroon ’s national 
priorities, strategies and plans; and 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, t he Programme as included in the two 
Funding Proposals is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the Programme as included in  the two 
Funding Proposals has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the scope of 
the Programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
________________ 
Name: GOUNES TOUGOULOU John 
Title: Cameroon GCF Focal Point 
86


---
*Page 90*
---

87


---
*Page 91*
---

    
         República de Costa Rica  
Ministerio de Ambiente y Energía  
         Despacho del Ministro                                                                
                San José , May 29th 2020         
                                                                                                                  DM-0551-2020  
 
Mr.  
Yannick Glemarec  
Executive Director  
Green Climate Fund  
       
Re:  Funding proposals for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the 
Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) an d by (2) International Union 
for Conservation of Nature regarding the Technical Assistance Facility for the 
Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) (together, the “Funding 
Proposals”)  
Dear Mr. Glemarec,  
We refer to the programme Global Sub nationa l Climate Fund (SnCF Global) and the 
Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) 
formed by the two Funding Proposals submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors and 
International Union for Conservation of Nature respectiv ely to us. As included in the funding 
proposal, submitted by IUCN to us on March 25th. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy, the National Designated Authority/focal point of the Republic of Costa R ica. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no -objection to the Programme Global Sub national Climate 
Fund (SnCF Global) and the Technical Assistance Facility for the Global Sub nat ional 
Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed by the two Funding Proposals submitted by Pegasus 
Capital Advisors and International Union for Conservation of Nature as included in the 
funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The go vernment of the Republic of Costa Rica has no -objection to the Programme 
as included in the two Funding Proposals;  
(b) The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with Costa 
Rica’s national priorities, strategies and plans; and  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the Programme 
as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with relevant national laws 
and regulations.  
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the Programme 
as included in the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed.  
88


---
*Page 92*
---

We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the Prog ramme.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website as public 
disclosure and transparency is a key element of GCF’s operating principles.  
Kind regards,  
 
 
MSc. Carlos Manuel Rodríguez  
Minister  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teléfono (506) 2233 -4533 o 2257 -0922 Ext. 8502  o 8503  o 2257 -1417  Apdo. Postal : 10104 -1000 
San José, Costa Rica  
Correo electrónico: ministrominae@minae.go.cr  
89


---
*Page 93*
---

90


---
*Page 94*
---

 
91


---
*Page 95*
---

92


---
*Page 96*
---

93


---
*Page 97*
---

94


---
*Page 98*
---

Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525  /  Quito - Ecuador  Teléfono:   (593 2) 398-7600 ●
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2020-0321-O
Quito, D.M., 28 de abril de 2020
Asunto: Funding proposals for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP and
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) regarding
"Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) Equity" and "Technical
Assistance(TA) Facility for the Global Subnational Climate Fund"
 
 
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
 
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
I extend a warm salutation to you, in these troubled times. I would like to take this
opportunity to introduce myself as the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of
the Environment of Ecuador, thus acting as National Designated Authority FOR THEXX.
 I write in reference to the projects “Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global)
Equity” and “Technical Assistance (TA) Facility for the Global Subnational Climate
Fund”. These funding proposals were submitted to us on March 24 2020 by Pegasus
Capital Advisors LP and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (IUCN), respectively. 
  
In regards to the GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which have thoroughly reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the projects as included in the funding
proposals. By which we assert: 
1.  The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the projects as included in the
funding proposals; 
2.  The projects as included in the funding proposals are in conformity with Ecuador’s
national priorities, and plans; 
3.  In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the projects as
included in the funding proposals is in conformity with relevant legislation 
and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the projects as
included in the funding proposals has been duly followed. 
 
We confirm our interest so that projects implemented under both financing proposals
respond to the needs identified by sub-national governments, and therefore, are
aligned with Ecuador´s National Determined Contribution (NDC). 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
95


---
*Page 99*
---

Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525  /  Quito - Ecuador  Teléfono:   (593 2) 398-7600 ●
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2020-0321-O
Quito, D.M., 28 de abril de 2020
  
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Atentamente, 
 
 
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Paulo Arturo Proaño Andrade
MINISTRO DEL AMBIENTE, ENCARGADO  
Copia: 
Señor Abogado
Steven Augusto Petersen Rojas
Viceministro del Ambiente
 
Señor Magíster
Carlos Arturo Espinosa Gallegos Anda
Subsecretario de Cambio Climático
 
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
 
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
 
Señorita Bióloga
Karina Patricia Salinas Heredia
Directora Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
 
Señor Ingeniero
Ricardo Mauricio Proaño Cardenas
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático
gv/ks/gm/ce
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
96


---
*Page 100*
---

97


---
*Page 101*
---

98


---
*Page 102*
---

99


---
*Page 103*
---

100


---
*Page 104*
---

101


---
*Page 105*
---

102


---
*Page 106*
---

103


---
*Page 107*
---

104


---
*Page 108*
---

105


---
*Page 109*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2th FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.depkeu.go.id
Ref :S-74/KF/2020 23 Mei 2020
Sifat : Sangat Segera
Lampiran : satu berkas
Mr. Yannic Glemarec
Green Climate Fund Secretariat
Songdo Business District 175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea
Subject :Funding Proposals for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the 
Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF  Global) and by (2) International 
Union for Conservation of Nature regarding the Technical Assistance Facility 
for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF  Global) (together, the Funding
Proposals)
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
Werefer totheProgramme Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) andtheTechnical
Assistance Facility fortheGlobal Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed bythetwo
Funding Proposals submitted byPegasus Capital Advisors and International Union for
Conservation of Nature  respectively to us on 27th April 2020 (the "Programme").
Theundersigned istheduly authorized representative ofFiscal Policy Agency, Ministry ofFinance
of Indonesia, the National Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant toGCF decision B.08/10, thecontent ofwhich weacknowledge tohave reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the Funding Proposals.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a)The government ofIndonesia has no-objection totheProgramme asincluded inthe
Funding Proposals;
(b)The Programme asincluded inthetwoFunding Proposals isinconformity with
Indonesia's national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c)Inaccordance with theGCF 'senvironmental and social safeguards, theProgramme as
included inthetwoFunding Proposals isinconformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
Wealso confirm that ournational process forascertaining no-objection totheProgramme as
included in the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed.
Wealso confirm thatourno-objection applies toallprojects oractivities tobeimplemented within
the scope of the Programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 Yours Faithfully,
Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman
106


---
*Page 110*
---

107


---
*Page 111*
---

108


---
*Page 112*
---

109


---
*Page 113*
---

110


---
*Page 114*
---

111


---
*Page 115*
---

112


---
*Page 116*
---

113


---
*Page 117*
---

République Islamique de Mauritanie  
Honneur - Fraternité – Justice  
_____________  
Ministère de l’Environnement et du 
Développement Durable  
  الجمهورية اإلسالمية الموريتانية 
شــــــــــــرف  –  إخـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ اء  –  عــــــــــــــدل   
وزارة البيئة  والتنمية المستدامة  
 
 
Cellule de Coordination du Programme 
National Changement Climatique  
(CCPNCC)  
     
 خلية تنسيق البرنامج الوطني لتغير المناخ  
 
 
N°  : …005………………  Nouakchott, le  03/04/2020.. أنواكشوط  في  
 
 
LE CHARGE DE MISSION  
COORDINATEUR CCPNCC  
  
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)  
Yannick GLEMAREC , DEPUTY  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
G24- 4 SANGDO DONG YEONSU GU - INCHEON CITY, REPUBLIC OF COREA  
 
Object :  Funding proposal s for the GCF by (1) Pegasus Capital Advisors  regarding the Global Sub national Climate Fund 
(SnCF  Global ) and by (2) International Union for Conservation of Nature  regarding the Technical Assistance Facility  for the 
Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global)  (together, the “ Funding Proposals ”) 
 
Dear , 
 
We refer to the programme Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF  Global ) and the Technical Ass istance Facility for the 
Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed by  the two Funding Proposals submitted by Pegasus Capital 
Advisors  and International Union for Conservation of Nature  respective ly to us on 03/04/20 20 (the “ Programme ”). 
 
The undersi gned is the duly authorized representative of Mr. Sidi Mohamed EL WAVI , the National Designated 
Authority/focal point of Mauritania . 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10 , the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed , we hereby communicate our 
no-objection  to the Programme as included in  the two Funding Proposals.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
 
(a) The government of Mauritania  has no -objection to the Programme as included in  the two Funding Proposals;  
(b) The Programme as included in  the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with Mauritania ’s national priorities, 
strategies and plans;  and 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, t he Programme as included in  the two Funding 
Proposals is in conformity with relev ant national laws and regulations . 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the Programme as included in  the two Funding 
Proposals has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or ac tivities to be implemented within the scope of the  
Programme . 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Kind regards,  
        
 
CC : MEDD  
                                                                                                 Sidi Mohamed EL WAVI  
                                              NFP/  AND - Mauritania  
 
114


---
*Page 118*
---

Subsecretaría de Hacienda 
 y Crédito Público 
Unidad de Crédito Público  
 
  
Insurgentes Sur 1971 Torre III, Piso 7, Colonia Guadalupe Inn, Álvaro Obregón, Ciudad de México, C.P. 01020. T: +52 (55) 3688 1410 
www.gob.mx/shcp 
 
 
347.B.- 043 
Mexico City, April 3nd, 2020 
MR. YANNICK GLEMAREC 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND 
SONGDO, REPUBLIC OF KOREA      
Funding proposals for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global Subnational 
Climate Fund and by International Union for Conservation of Nature regarding the Technical 
Assistance Facility for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (together, the Funding Proposals) 
I refer to the programme Global Sub national Climate Fund and the Technical Assistance Facility 
for the Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) formed by the two Funding Proposals 
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors and the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
respective ly, to us on March 17th 2020, (the Programme ). 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative Maria Fernanda Montero Lara, the focal 
point of the United Mexican States. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the two Funding 
Proposals. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of the United Mexican States has no-objection to the Programme as 
included in the two Funding Proposals; 
(b) The Programme as included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with the United 
Mexican States ’ national priorities, strategies and plans;  and 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, t he Programme as 
included in the two Funding Proposals is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the Programme as 
included in  the two Funding Proposals has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the Programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
KIND REGARDS, 
 
 
FERNANDA MONTERO LARA 
DIRECTOR FOR SUSTAINABLE FINANCE 
115


---
*Page 119*
---

116


---
*Page 120*
---

117


---
*Page 121*
---

118


---
*Page 122*
---

119


---
*Page 123*
---

120


---
*Page 124*
---

121


---
*Page 125*
---

122


---
*Page 126*
---

123


---
*Page 127*
---

124


---
*Page 128*
---

125


---
*Page 129*
---

Scanned with CamScanner
126


---
*Page 130*
---

Scanned with CamScanner
127


---
*Page 131*
---

128


---
*Page 132*
---

129


---
*Page 133*
---

130


---
*Page 134*
---

131


---
*Page 135*
---

132


---
*Page 136*
---

133


---
*Page 137*
---

134


---
*Page 138*
---

135


---
*Page 139*
---

136


---
*Page 140*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Technical Assistance (TA) Facility for the Global  
Subnational Climate Fund  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Africa:  Burkina Faso , Cameroon , Côte d’Ivoire , Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Gabon , Guinea, Kenya , Mali, 
Mozambique , Nigeria, Rwanda , Senegal, South Africa, Togo, 
and Uganda. 
Asia -Pacific: Cambodia , Fiji, Indonesia, and Myanmar . 
Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas, Brazil , Chile , 
Costa Rica , Dominica, Dominican Republic , Ecuador , El 
Salvador , Guatemala, Haiti , Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico , 
Panama, and Uruguay . 
Mediterranean: Albania, Jordan, Lebanon , Mauritania , 
Montenegro, Morocco , North Macedonia, and Tunisia.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, May 20, 2020 ;  
Monday, October 5, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Albanian, Arabic, French, Khmer, Portuguese,  
Spanish ,  
and Dutch  
Explanation on language These are the official languages of most of the target 
countries.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/esms -english.pdf  Page 137


---
*Page 141*
---

Albanian:  
https://www.iucn.org/sites/d ev/files/esms- in-
albanian.pdf  
Arab
ic:  
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/esms -arabic.pdf  
Dutch:  
https://www.pcalp.com/wp -
content/uploads/2020/10/ESMS -Dutch.pdf  
Fren
ch:  
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/file s/esms- french.pdf   
Khmer
: 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/esms -in-khmer.pdf  
Portug
uese:  
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/esms -
portuguese.pdf  
Span
ish: 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/esms -spanis h.pdf  
Other link(s) PCA website:  
http://www.pcalp.com/our -esms/  
R20 web
site:  
https://regions20.org/sub -national -climate -fund -sncf-2/ 
IUCN
 website:   
https://www.iucn.org/gcf -iucn -partn ership/projects   
Remarks  An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS).  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, May 19, 2020;   
Friday, October 9, 2020  
Place  All National Designated Authoritie s have been informed  and 
provided the link to the disclosure . 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  Page 138


---
*Page 142*
---

Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, November 9, 2020  
Note:
 This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
____
____ Page 139


---
*Page 143*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 140  
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP151  
Proposal name:  Global Sub- national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) – Equity ; 
Technical Assistance (TA) Facility for the Global Subnational 
Climate Fund (submitted separately)  
Accredited entit ies: Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus);  
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN)  
Project/programme size:  Medium  and Small  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Uncertain 
1. This assessment  considers  the medium- scale programme submitted to GCF through two 
independent funding proposals by two independent accredited entities (AEs ). The programme 
has an equity fund establishment component  (equity component) , for which Pegasus Capital 
Advisors LP  (Pegasus ) is the AE to GCF , and a technical assistance  (TA) component ( grant ), for 
which the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources  (IUCN ) is the 
AE to GCF. C onceptually,  the equity component of the programme is the leading  component of  
the entire programme , and the grant component is a supplementary component mainly to 
ensur e TA  to the equity fund , the Global Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF Global ), which will be 
established within this programme through the  equity component .  
2. The program me will be implemented t hrough two different funded activity agreement s: 
one between GCF and Pegasus ; and one between GCF and IUCN. The reason for this 
implementati on arrangement is the accreditation agreements between GCF and these two AEs. 
As clarified to the independent Technical Advisory Panel  (TAP) by the Secretariat , Pegasus is 
accredited for the management of equity- related funding proposal s but is not authori zed for 
grant management , while  IUCN is accredited for grant management but is not authorized for 
management of non- grant proceed s from GCF. Accordingly, t he proposed arrangement was 
developed to overcome the limitations imposed by the accreditation status of the two AEs.  
3. The program me will be overseen and implemented by a consortium of GCF AEs and 
program executing entities  (EEs) , each with diverse expertis e and a long track record of operating 
success:  
(a) Pegasus ,1 a GCF A E, will oversee management of SnCF Global  and investment of the 
commitments of SnCF Global  in individual projects ;  
(b) R20 – Regions of Action  (R20)2 will be an advis er to SnCF Global , and bring extensive 
experience partnering with subnational  authorities in the field of low carbon and 
 
1 Pegasus is an investment adviser based in the United States of America and registered with the United States 
Securities and Exchange Commission. Pegasus has been managing private funds since 1996, and has been investing in 
sustainability -focused investment s for over 18 years.  
2 R20 is a  non- profit environmental organization founded in 2011 with the support of the  United Nations. It is a 
coalition of subnational governments, private companies, international organizations, non- governmental


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 141  
 
 
climate -resilient infrastructure projects. R20 will manage the project implementing unit 
of the TA component;  
(c) Gold Standard3 will advise SnCF Global  on monit oring and reporting tools and metrics 
on climate change mitigation and adaptation impact, environmental and social 
management systems,  and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG ). In addition, Gold 
Standard will ensure establishment of all necessary procedures for third- party 
certif ication of the impact of SnCF Global  throughout the investment value chain in 
terms of climate mitigation, adaptation, ecosystem integrity, local rights, gender and the 
SDGs;  and 
(d) IUCN, a GCF AE, will oversee and implement a TA facility established by a separate GCF 
grant (through a separate funding proposal). The TA facility is intended to facilitate a robust pipeline of bankable projects for SnCF Global . 
4. SnCF Global will be established by the equity component  of the programme submitted  
through a medium- sized funding proposal. It  will consist of GCF equity at 20 per  cent  (USD 150 
million, junior ) of the total fund size , as planned in the funding proposal . The re maining  80 per  
cent  (USD 600 million , senior ) will be leveraged by SnCF Global from private  (80 per cent  share)  
and public investors  (20 per cent  share) . In the final structure of SnCF Global , the private sector 
share will be about 64 per  cent , and the re maining  34 per  cent  will be public money,  including 
the GCF share. It is expecte d that the size of SnCF Global could be increase d to up to USD 900 
million after the fund start s full operation and is succe ssful.4 The GCF share will be delivered to 
SnCF Global through Pegasus ,5 a GCF AE. The equity funding proposal  does  not have co -
financing , but the term  sheet states that Pegasus will be co -investing 1  per cent  of the 
commitments  of SnCF Global , at all closings.6  
5. Pegasus will be the fund manager responsible for: proper use of the resources of SnCF 
Global; ensur ing compliance of SnCF Global activities with the funded activity agreement  with 
GCF; ensur ing that  investments performed by SnCF Global  respect GCF policies ; reporting and 
accounting of SnCF Global ; and ensur ing proper alignment of TA  activities with the interests  of 
SnCF Global . BNP Paribas, also a GCF AE, will serve as fund custodian and depositary, provide 
fund administration services , and assist SnCF Global  in its marketing and distribution efforts.  
6. Past experience of the consortium members (in particular R20) shows that there is a 
significant investment gap at the subnational level , and an opportunity to realize climate change 
mitigation impact and economic returns as well. The programme aims to overcome the project -
level barriers that lead to chronic underfunding of bankable mitigation projects at the subnational  level through facilitat ing private sector involvement in the implementat ion process 
of GCF funding proposals. The AE s believe that anchor funding from GCF will unlock both public 
investors ( multilateral development banks , development finance institutions , sovereign funds, 
etc.) and , even more important ly, private investors (pension funds, insurance funds, family 
 
organizations (NGOs ), and academic and financial institutions. Its mission is to accelerate subnational infrastructure 
investments in the  green economy  to meaningfully contribute to the  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
3 Gold Standard was established in 2003 by WWF and other international NGOs to ensure projects that reduced 
carbon emissions featured the highest levels of environmental integrity and also contributed to sustainable 
development. With the adoption of the Paris Agreement and the SDGs, Gold Standard launched a best practice 
standard for climate and sustainable development interventions. See <https://www.goldstandard.org/about -
us/vision -and- mission>.  
4 The GCF amount will stay the same. 
5 The GCF investment in SnCF Global will be held through a newly formed holding company managed by Pegasus on 
behalf of GCF. The holding company will be the 100 percent shareholder of GCF finance and will contribute the funds 
to SnCF Global per the terms of the funded activity agreement . For details, see  the structure chart in annex 29 and 
term sheet in annex 14.  
6 The general partner (to be determined by Pegasus) and its affiliates, partners and employees will commit to 
investing in SnCF Global at least 1 pe r cent of the total commitments of SnCF Global. For details, see the Pegasus 
commitment in the term sheet in annex 14.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 142  
 
 
offices, private banks, philanthropies, high net worth individuals, and other institutional 
investors) that  are willing to invest in green finance products but lack  access to attractive 
investment  vehicles to invest in at the subnational  level. The AE  (PCA) plans to mobilize public 
(20 per  cent ) and private sector (80 per  cent ) funding , in addition to the 20 per  cent  from GCF , 
at scale to de -risk sub national , mid -scale , infrastructure projects. The programme plans to cover 
all greenhouse gas ( GHG)  mitigation results areas , except transport.  
7. For each individual project , SnCF Global  will make equity investments into special 
purpose vehicles that manage the project. Each of the individual subnational projects in which 
SnCF Global invests will have its own capital structure . However,  as a general structure , a 16 per  
cent  share will be from leveraged private  and public  investments, a 4 per  cent  share will be from 
GCF, debt at the project level should be 60 per  cent  of the project cost , and the re maining  20 per  
cent  should be co- financing from the project  as equity. According to the fundi ng proposal , such a 
partnership will contribute to mitigat ing the deficit in public development finance , which on its 
own is not sufficient to achieve the Paris Agreement’s objectives and the SDGs  – and investing 
from the private sector is needed.  According to this general structure , USD  1 from GCF will 
leverage USD 25.  
8. The equity funding proposal  has four EEs: 
(a) Pegasus , a limited partnership  registered in Delaware, the United States of America ; 
(b)  SnCF  Global, not yet formed but expected to be a n investment company in risk capital  
(known as an SICAR ) and reserved alternative investment fund (known as an RAIF) 
registered in Luxembourg with a designated alternative investment fund manager ; 
(c)  R20,  an association based in Geneva, Switzerland , under Swiss association laws;  and  
(d) Gold Standard , a non- profit association based in Geneva, Switzerland , under Swiss 
association laws.   
9. The TA component of the p rogramme is to establish the pipeline of subnational -level , 
climate change mitigation investment projects for further financ ing from  the equity component, 
SnCF Global . An additional function of this component is to develop special tools/protocols and 
methodologies for measurement, reporting and verification  (MRV) and third -party certification 
for different sectors and different activities  at the project  and fund level . These tools will be 
used by investment actors to track  the project ’s impact on infrastructure , synergies between 
mitigation  results , and contribution to SDG targets. Another  activity to be performed by the TA 
component is that of s trengthening the capacity of the relevant stakeholders (project 
developer s, subnational authorities and regional investors) to ensure their active participation 
in their respective projects ’ outreach activities, thus further promoting replicability and 
scalability.  
10. The TA component of the programme is a small- scale funding proposal with a total cost 
of USD 28 million – with USD18.5 million from GCF , and USD 9.5 million in co-financing , with a 
significant share (USD 6 ) million from R20.   
11. The TA funding proposal  has three EEs: IUCN , R20 and Gold Stand ard.  
12. The programme implementation period is 15 years , with a minimum whole programme 
lifetime of 20 years. The p lanned  mitigation impact  reported in the equity funding proposal  is 
3,881,722 tCO 2eq annually , and 77,634,432 tCO 2eq in total for the 20 years of the programme ’s 
lifespan . The programme does  not plan to invest only in direct adaptation impact , but 
adaptation co -benefits of invested GHGs mitigation projects are anticipated  and will be 
monitored . As an independent funding proposal , the TA component of the programme may  not 
have any mitigation or adaptation impact , but it is crucial for successful implementation of the 
programme.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 143  
 
 
13. TAP considers that targeting currently underfunded subnational -level projects is an 
important activity , and support s this sector be ing a  special focus  for GCF . However, based on the 
information provided , TAP is not in a position to assess and confirm the final impact of the 
programme. In particular , the following barriers to assessment have been  identified :  
(a) The programme is submitted through  two independent funding proposals : one is 
responsible for the TA component , and the other is  responsible for  the investment 
component  (establishment of SnCF  Global ). It is the understanding  of TAP that the 
proposed structure contradicts the guidelines that the draft decision contemplates as 
effective for programmatic approaches. Further details on this issue are provided in the 
section o n efficiency and effectiveness . The opinion of TAP is that , with such an 
implementation arrangement , the level of risk is high and the anticipated impact may 
not be high ; 
(b) The programme does  not have any legal regulatory mechanism  defining the 
responsibilities and accountability between the two AEs  and the GCF Secretariat ;  
(c) Because the fund, at this stage, has been submitted as a “blind pool”, the GHG mitigation 
potential is estimated through theoretical funding proposals by sector ; and 
(d) The re maining  impediments are highlighted throughout the assessment in different 
sections.  
1.2 Paradigm -shift potential               Scale:  High  
14. The c oncept of the programme should be considered as  decentralization of  the GCF 
investment  process.  Establish ment of  SnCF Global  (equity) , which could leverage additional 
private and public capital (according to the funding proposal,  USD 1 from GCF will leverage USD 
25) and will target  underfunded subnational public and private projects,  is quite attractive , 
considering that sub national  authorities/ mayors in many developing countries worldwide have 
announced voluntary commitments for reducing GHGs from the territories under their 
authority . Such an approach , targeting sub national  projects worldwide, could accelerate the 
remov al of  the existing barriers to subnational projects  and facilitate the scaling up of 
underfunded high -risk activities  at the subnational level through offering to the private sector 
maximum de -risking mechanisms  with public money.  
15. GCF has already approved several funding proposals from public investors ( Asian 
Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , etc.) targeting 
subnational infrastructur e projects. However,  the added value of SnCF Global  is to increase the 
participation of private investors  and ensur e the monitoring and third -party  certification of the 
results achieved.   
16. The TA component of the programme will contribute to mak ing subnational  processes 
more proactive , which is one of the key barriers in the underfunding of these projects.  
17. TAP considers that the paradigm -shift potential at the global level could be high in the 
event  of successful implementation of the programme.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale:  High  
18. In the event  of successful implementation  of the p rogramme , the contribution of 
subnational project s (waste management, street lighting, renewable energy, energy efficiency, 
etc.) to the sustainable development of regions will be significant,  also considering the 
strengthened  monitoring and certification the results .


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 144  
 
 
19. Ensur ing and strengthen ing the sustainable development potential of the programme 
and SnCF Global  is the direct responsibility of the TA component of the programme , which 
should  be implemented through  a separate funding proposal  led by IUCN  as the AE. I n 
particular, the third subcomponent  of the TA  component  (tools and metrics ) is responsible for  
development of the MRV system and for establishing the third -party certification process for the 
projects and monitoring  the results of SnCF Global . 
20. In particular, Gold Standard , which is an EE in both funding proposal s (TA and SnCF 
Global ), is responsible for the  development of sector -related general monitoring tools and 
indicators for monitoring climate mitigation  results and adaptation co -benefits as well as 
related SDG s. Moreover , the same will be done for each  project taking into consider ation  the 
project ’s specificities. These metrics will be also applied for the initial screening of subnational  
projects as criteria for investment deal identification, selection and , later , for monitoring  of 
results. Accordin g to the funding proposal,  these metrics will go beyond “do no harm” and 
actively ensure that safeguarding, resilience, SDG targets, and nature become integral part s of 
climate -friendly  infrastructure investments in order to create social, ecosystem and resilience 
gains in addition to GHG mitigation  results .  
21. In addition to climate change mitigation and adaptation co-benefits  (SDG 13) , these 
subnational projects  should  contribut e to several SDG s. In particular, the sample projects 
provided as examples will contribute to:  
(a) SDG 3  – good health and well -being. Results from the implementation of waste and 
wastewater treatment projects should reduce the number of illnesses from hazardous 
chemicals and those from air, water and soil pollution and contamination ;  
(b) SDG 7 –  affordable and clean energy.  Planning investments in renewable energy and 
energy efficiency should facilitate substantial increase s in the share of renewable energy 
in the global energy mix, improve the global rate of energy efficiency, and promote 
investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy technology;  and 
(c) SDG 11 – make cities inclusive, safe , resilient and sustainable: Subnational  projects could 
enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization,  increase the capacity of 
local/subnational authorities in sustainable planning and management of human 
settlement, and reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including 
by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and othe r waste management . 
22. Activity E6.4 and outcome G3 of the equity funding proposal are  dedicated to the MRV  of 
results in terms of climate change, SDG s and nature -based solutions .  
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
23.  Based on its experience and knowledge of barriers to the implementation of 
subnational projects,  TAP confirms that the needs of developing countries to activate 
underfinanced subnational projects  are very high . Despite formal ly decentraliz ed processes , 
subnational infrastructure development activities have not always secure d the financial and 
regulatory support of national/central governments , and so have stalled in many developing 
countries. In this process,  intensive cons ultations with nati onal governments on country-
/region- specific barriers and potential projects are crucial. However, a  consultation process  
with national governments is  not sufficiently  evidenced from the funding proposal  or the n o-
objection letter s (NOLs) submitted . 
24. The alignment of this programme with nationally determined contributions (NDCs ) is 
briefly described for about 30 countries in annex 24  to the funding proposal . TAP fully 
recogni zes the importance of intended nationally determined contributions (ND Cs) in climate 
change decision- making process . However , NDCs are more national or federal strategies, which


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 145  
 
 
are not necessarily relevant and comprehensive enough for investors to  analyse countries’ 
needs and barriers to climate change  investments  at the subnational, sectoral and project level.  
For such a detailed assessment  of the alignment of activities with  INDC s, the  implementation 
plans should be used . These  are currently being developed but are not yet ready for most 
countries . 
25. The non -bankability  of projects  and limited access to financ ial sources due to the  small 
size of subnational activities were  identified as key barrier s to investing in subnational projects  
in the first submission of the funding proposal for B.26. TAP expressed concern that , without a 
preliminary market  stud y (demand and barriers)  at the countr y and sector  level , it would not be 
possible to determine  the needs of the recipients . During the a ssessment process,  TAP shared its 
concern with the AEs regarding barrier analysis. The above- mentioned two barriers are valid , 
but there are several other barriers that  prevent  projects from  becoming  bankable (affordability  
for the population , enabling environment wi th relevant regulations that  usually are decided at 
the national level, etc.) . Before the B.27 submission,  the AE conducted a preliminary barrier 
analysis of key sectors that SnCF Global  would plan to consider for investing in 40 cou ntries ( in 
4 regions).  
26. Some of the k ey barriers identified at this stage of the preliminary assessment, reported 
by the AEs , are listed below. TAP recognizes that some of these barriers exist not only at the 
subnational  level but at the national level as well:   
(a) Transaction cost s for relatively small subnational  projects are critical,  and high 
transaction cost s dramatically reduce their bankability . The programme targets this 
barrier through the TA component ; 
(b) In most cases, projects are designed by an equipment provider and not always adapted 
to the local circumstances. Comprehensive feasibility studies will be conducted by the 
TA component for the projects in which it is decided to invest ; 
(c) Participatory processes are often pe rformed after the project design has been  
completed . This leaves l ittle  flexibility regarding inputs from  citizens and local 
authorit ies. Intensive consultations with national and local authorities and other 
stakeholders , as well as capacity -building of subnational  capacities in the planning and 
establishment of an enabling environment for implementation of subnational  projects,  is 
the responsibility of the grant component (TA) ; 
(d) Most public grant programmes and city- to-city cooperation initiatives do not usually 
fund projects with a cost greater tha n USD 5 million . SnCF Global  will be limited to 
invest ing in subnational projects with a total cost of from USD 5  million to USD 75  
million;  
(e) Many project developers struggle to find equity partners , and potential debt providers 
request high equity ratio s due to the perceived risks . The programme mainly targets 
overcoming  this barrier ; 
(f) Regarding renewable energy,  key barriers identified are : lack of appropriate regulation, 
lack of clarity for independent power producer  schemes, and lack of bankable off -takers; 
(g) For the municipal waste management sector , key barriers identified are : lack of financial 
resources in local/municipal  budgets; absence of regulations ; existing informal sector ; 
scattered cities and low waste volumes for traditional waste infrastructure in more 
“rural” areas ; and transportation cost s that are  too great  to be supported by traditional 
business models;  and 
(h) For energy efficiency projects and the energy service company approach , key barriers 
identified are : energy service company models are not always compliant with public


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 146  
 
 
sector regulations ; energy prices are often subsidized ; EE projects are often smaller  and 
not attractive for private investors . 
27. It is the opinion of TAP that the needs of the recipients (sub national  authorities, private 
sector, citizens, etc.)  regarding subnational projects are high , and that the programme is well 
aware of these needs . 
1.5 Country ownership                Scale:  Uncertain 
28. TAP was not able to assess the country ownership of th is programme due to the 
following reasons:  
(a) Actual participant countries have  not been identified at this stage , and the  country 
allocations  provided in an annex are theoretical . Regional -level preliminary allocations 
are provided in section C.1 , which are also theoretical;  
(b) The programme app lies the “blind pool” concept , which means that  final recipient 
countries , sectors and particular projects are not identified at th e stage  of programme 
submission and assessment  by TAP . Thus,  the only way to assess country ownership is 
to obtain  more information from NOLs  provided by countries . NOL s from 40 countries 
have been  submitted by the AEs  to the GCF Secretariat and TAP. The NOLs have  
provided by countries from four regions : Asia -Pacific, Latin America  and the Caribbean, 
Mediterranean, and sub-Saharan Africa;  
(c) The observation by TAP is that the format of the NOL is fully standardized at the level of 
three  or four obligatory requirement s, and the countr y’s attitude to the project  or 
opinion why the project is important for the country is either  not expressed  or is 
expressed  only in very exceptional cases . After  reviewing all 4 0 of these NOL s, TAP is  
not in a position to identify whether countries support the concept of the creation of this 
equity fund as such or see any significant benefit for their own countries . Moreover, this 
programme is not reflected in countries’  programmes and not registered in the AEs’ 
working programmes ; and  
(d) The maximum number of project s that  could be financed by SnCF Global  is 35, and, of 
relevance,  not all countries that provide an NOL  will ultimately receive an investment 
from SnCF Global  (due to uncertainties and limitations imposed by markets, sponsors, 
timing, economic developments, etc.), although  the programme guarantees that  all 
countries will receive TA financing to build their c apacity and improve the market for 
future investments . 
29. At this stage of the assessment , TAP could  not assess country ownership . However , 
among the criteria  of SnCF Global  for project selection is the request for a supporting  letter from 
subnational  authorit ies. This  could strengthen the country ownership process . It is the opinion 
of TAP that SnCF Global  should request  letters from both national and subnational authorities  
for the implementation of each particular project . 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                Scale:  Low  
30. The e fficiency and effectiveness  of this programme depend significantly on the 
implementation arrangement s. As described in the section on  impact potential , the programme 
is submitted through two independent funding proposal s and by two independent AEs. Such an 
implementation modality , with unclear legal responsibilities of these AEs to each other and the 
absence of one AE responsible to GCF,  would be  the first of its kind fo r GCF . This  has raised 
concerns  on the potential risk of failure  of the p rogramme in the event  of low liability  or not 
enough experience on the part of  one of the partner s of the AEs. As this implementation


---
*Page 150*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 147  
 
 
arrangement would be the first of its kind in  GCF  practice ( at least, as known to TAP) , TAP  
decided to make a review of the  available Board policy documents and decisions  in order to 
make an appropriate decision.   
31. TAP carefully studied the options offered to the Board by the Secretariat in the 
docume nt “Policy on programmatic approach es”, which is pending  (not yet discussed by the 
Board ). TAP found that , for all options considered within this policy paper , there is always one 
entity that  is responsible and accountable to GCF . Moreover,  in the option “ Modality 3: M ultiple 
accredited entities modality ”, the document  offers the consideration that : 
(a) “under this modality while there will be separate project -related roles and 
responsibilities f or each AE that is co -implementing parts of the project or programme, 
there is also a need for a coordinating AE to be responsible for the overall management 
of the programme, including coordination between programme partners and holistic 
reporting on the project or programme progress, results and learning .” 
32. Taking in to consideration the options provided within the afore -mentioned document , 
including recommendations for strengthening and financial support of the coordination process, 
TAP concludes that the proposed implementation modality is high risk. This is  because the two 
proposals do  not have a clearly identified coordinating AE and are not in lin e with the options 
that  could be considered by the Board in future.  
33. The afore -mentioned document also formulates elements  that  should be considered  for 
a GCF  programmatic approach.  TAP has assessed the p rogramme against these elements  and 
concludes that the programme satisfie s most of elements . but that two elements are still not 
fully satisfied by the programme : 
(a) Programmes should be country -driven through observance of NOL procedures and 
alignment with national priorities . The programme has NOLs from 40 countries . 
However , TAP is not sure that such standardized NOLs could be enough for supporting  
multi -country programmes where countries do not see the particular sector and project 
that  will be implemented on the country’s territory (see also the section on country 
ownership) . It is the opinion of TAP that , in addition to this general NOL supporting the 
establishment of SnCF Global,  a project support letter for each individual project should 
be provide d by countries at th is late stage ; and 
(b) Programmatic approach modalities should be developed to foster collaboration among 
multiple AEs and to promote scale and maximize impact, but at the same time the 
modalities should address issues that are likely to impede outcomes, performance, 
efficiency and management. Notably, programmes should incentivize an AE to play a  
coordinating role for multi -agency initiatives . The programme as submitted satisfies the 
first part of these requirement s but not the requirement on coordination (one AE being  
responsible) . 
34. In initial  submission to B.26, the concept of SnCF Global  was presented as a “blind pool” 
without preliminary market and barrier analysis . The GHG reduction potential was calculated 
on the basis of  theoretical projects.  At that time , the programme was q uite unclear and planned 
to cover all result s areas of GCF programmes  without preliminary assessment of market 
demand, barriers , potential projects and priority countries for starting the programme. TAP ha s 
taken into consideration the fact that this concept of “blind pool” is new  and has a high risk 
(including an implementation modality through  two individual funding proposal s), and has 
decided not to recommend  this programme  to the Board for approval , also having in mind the 
elements of the programmatic approach from the document “P olicy  on programm atic 
approach es”.  
35. In this submission  to B.27 , the “pool” is not fully “blind”, the AEs have provided demand 
analysis of subnational projects’ market s and relevantly revised  priority results area s. It was


---
*Page 151*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 148  
 
 
found by the AEs that market deman d at the subnational level is not equal for all GCF result s 
areas . Thus , the previous approach of consider ing “all results areas” was re vised accordingly to 
the consider those result s areas where demand for equity investment is clear er. In its 
resubmitted version,  the programme focuses mainly on sectors related to GHG mitigation , as 
listed above. Adaptation co -benefits of mitigation projects and contribution to the SDGs will be 
monitored and certified at the project and programme levels. In addition, the preliminary 
barrier analysis conducted by the AEs demonstrates to the programme management the 
barriers that are most critical to subnational activities,  and also demonstrate s that limitation in 
required investment s because of the medium or small size of subnational projects  is not the 
only barrier that  makes this sector un attractive for private investors . These studies have 
contribute d to formulat ing the project selection criteria , for which further due diligence will be 
conducted and feasibility studies prepared by the TA component.  
36. As mentioned above, a long with the “blind pool ” concept , another concern for TAP was , 
and still is, the implementation arrangement . Practically, this modality does  not have an entity 
that is clear ly responsible to GCF , one  that  will fully coordinate and control the programme. 
Although it is said in the funding proposal s that the equity funding proposal is the leading one, 
this statement is not supported by a  relevant legal  design of the implementation process . It is 
the opinion of TAP that the TA funding proposal  is a component of the programme , which 
should be led by the management  of the equity funding proposal . As already mentioned above , 
the TA proposal  may  not have any impact and reach any results independently and, therefore , 
could not be and has not been independently assessed by TAP.  
37. In the current arrangement , the liaison  parties between these two funding proposal s are 
two entities (R20 and Gold Standard) with very clear EE functions in each  funding proposal , and 
the “consortium” facilitating cooperation among all AEs and EEs. The  “consortium” is a common 
platform  for both of the funding proposal s, but it is not a legal entity that  could be responsible to 
GCF.  As reported above , the consortium provides SnCF Global  with diverse expertise  through 
these AEs and EEs.  
38. In response to the enquiry  by TAP , the AE s provided a document , “Implementation 
Arrangement”, that  confirms that these two AEs are fully independent and are responsible to 
the GCF Secretariat only for their own funding proposal . 
39. It is the opinion of TAP that , in order to reduc e the implementation complexity and 
increa se the efficiency and effectiveness of the whole programme and SnCF Global , the AE for 
the TA funding proposal  (IUCN)  should also be part of the equity funding proposal  and 
accountable to the AE of the equity funding proposal. In particular, IUCN should be included in 
the equity proposal as an EE that executes, carries out or implements a funded activity  with a 
clear reporting function to the AE of the equity funding proposal (functions other  than reporting 
could also be defined). Reports on the  TA component should be submitted to the AE of the 
equity funding proposal and  should be cleared by this entity for disbursements from GCF . An 
exception could be only the first disbursement. Such an implementation arrangement cou ld 
reduce the risk that the TA component would produce feasibility studies that  would not have 
investors  and reduce the risk of SnCF Global  facing a  lack of bankable projects.


---
*Page 152*
---

GC
F/B.2 7/02/ Add. 11 
Page 149  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
40. TAP recogni zes that implementation of two components (TA  and equity fund) of one
programme  by two independent AEs through two independent funding proposals without a
p
arty  that is  clearly  responsible to GCF entails  high risk , and that the proposed structure is not
in line with  the guidelines that the draft decision “Policy on programmatic approa ches”
co
ntemplates as effective for programmatic approaches.  TAP also considers that this
submission is the first of its kind with a  programmati c approac h using a  “blind pool” , which ,
practically , could not be assessed against all six investment criteria. However,  at the same time ,
T
AP confirms the urgency of the need for a proactiv e approach for financing subnational
activities , and considers the added value of the programme to establish results monitoring and a
third- party certification process for the private sector investments . In view of the foregoing,
TAP recommends the programme to the  Board  for consideration.
41. In the event of a positive decision, TAP would make the following recom mend ation s to
t
he Board :
(a) Make approval conditional on the revision of the implementation arrangements . In
particular, IUCN should be included in the equity funding proposal as an EE with a clear
reporting function to the AE of the equity funding proposal ( functions other than
reporting could also be defined as necessary). Reports on the TA component should be
submitted to the AE of the equity funding proposal , and should be cleared by this e ntity
f
or disbursements from GCF, a sole exception could be the first disbursement ; and
(b) Before the first disbursement :
(i) S nCF Global  should be legal ly established ,
(ii) A ll EEs should provide operational manuals  including :
•for Pegasus , updated sections on the structure and operation  of SnCF Global , and
on participation conditions for the private sector and for the public sector ,
•for IUCN and R20, methodologies for a market /demand study,  secto ral barrier
analysis, establishment of final criteria for selection of subnational projects an d
f
or conducting feasibility studies;  and
•for Gold Standard , sectoral tools and methodologies for monitoring, reporting
and third -party certification  by priority sectors of SnCF Global .
42. TAP recogni zes that the conditions recommended to the Board in the event  of a positive
decision might be  more particular than usual , due to the uncertainty contained  in a “blind pool ”
fund structure and approach  of the p rogramme.  Nevertheless, to enhance the clari ty of the
programme ’s operation, TAP agrees it would be critical for the AEs to seek Board considerati on
of
 the proposed two AEs ’ implementation arrangements prior to undertak ing further
investment.


---
*Page 153*
---

GC
F/B.27/ 02/Add. 11 
Page 150  
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel 
assessment findings  (FP151 ) 
Proposal  name : Global Sub national Climate Fund (SnCF Global) – Equity ; Technical 
Assistance (TA) Facility for the Global Subnational Climate Fund . 
(submitted separately)  
Accre dited entity: Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus); 
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources 
(IUCN)  
Impact potential 
As noted by iTAP, t argeted climate finance for subnational level projects  is a gap that needs to be 
addre ssed for countries to reach their targets under their NDCs.  The AEs have taken on a novel approach 
with the GCF by bringing together needed abilities from the  network of very different entities that are 
accredited to the GCF —IUCN for the technical assista nce work and Pegasus Capital for the equity fund.  
These AEs will be working with a consortium of agencies as noted in the funding proposals and, in line  
with lessons learned, experiences and guidance for achieving impact,  coordination arrangements 
between  the AEs is formalized through an Implementation Framework Agreement.   This agreement 
ensures that both Pegasus Capital and IUCN partake in the Steering Committee of the proposed structure 
as well as engage in the selection of subnational projects that look likely to receive investment financing and that would be nefit most from technical assistance. This implementation arrangement is designed to 
ensure that the anticipated impact is indeed achieved as targeted in the results framework, and will be 
monitore d and reported to the GCF Secretariat in accordance with GC F’s monitoring and evaluation 
framework.  
F
urthermore, Pegasus, IUCN and the other consortium members have been working collaboratively for 
almost a year to prepare and refine the two funding proposals, including responding to numerous comments from the Se cretariat and iTAP, prepar ing for the fundraise, obtain ing NOLs, host ing webinars, 
develop ing the pipeline and otherwise prepar ing SnCF for success pending Board approval.  This 
cooperative effort  has been outlined in an Implementation Framework Agreement,  and the experience 
over the past year should mitigate concerns about implementation risk.  
The pipeline is showing a strong GHG mitigation potential that will be ensured through capacity building to improve project design and pathways to results using technical assistance financing. These results will 
be certified through a standardized MRV syst em via  Gold Standard.  
Paradigm s hift potential  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and remarks.  
Sustaina ble development potential  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and remarks.  
Needs of the  recipient


---
*Page 154*
---

GCF/B.27/0 2/Add.11 
Page 151  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and re marks.  
Country ownership  
Country ownership is not only evidenced from the 40+ countries that have endorsed th e pro posed 
structure for addressing climate finance at their subnational levels, but also from regular consultations 
via the NDAs in each country.  All countries that have endorsed the funding proposals will receive 
technical assistance support. The aim is  to ensure that all countries have the benefit of understanding 
what is needed to develop a bankable project that can receive investment.   Provision of technical 
assistance support to all countries increases the ‘bankability’ of subnational projects that would  qualify 
for investment.   Already, consultations are held on a regular basis to discuss the opportunities in the 
different sectors of focus where investment will be made available.  Engagement with subnational actors 
is envisaged throughout the imple menta tion process. Should more projects be ready for investment than 
those planned from the USD 750 million from the Fund, further engagement will be undertaken with 
those providing climate and other finance to ensure a sustained momentum for investment in subn ational 
projects delivering mitigation benefits.   
We b
elieve iTAP’s request for additional NOLs on a subproject -by-subproject basis is not necessary and 
conflicts with the fund model for SnCF that is at the core of both its paradigm shift potential and e fficiency 
and effectiveness.  The existing NOLs approve investment by SnCF in the host countries . The funding 
proposals set forth the types of projects SnCF will pursue  based on the  investment criteria for selection of 
such projects, which include, amo ng o ther things, that individual projects be aligned with host country 
priorities, including the NDCs.  Obtaining additional NOLs for each subproject would be unduly 
burdensome and delay SnCF’s ability to deploy capital.  
Effic iency a nd effectiveness  
iTAP no ted that e fficiency and effectiveness  depends on the implementation arrangement. The approach 
taken builds on the abilities of two independent AE s, yet  coordinating with each other to achieve a higher 
impact than would be possible  if each worked on their own in what they would have traditionally done .  
The implementation modality  is further strengthened following engagement with the GCF to have an 
Implem entation Framework agreement so that on a legal basis, responsibilities for delivery of results are 
clear .  iTAP has requested that this agreement shows one point of accountability across the agencies, and 
as a result of this advice and further engagement with the GCF Secretariat, Pegasus Capital is identified as 
accountable for delivery of results coordinated across the projects  with clear roles and responsibilities 
within each project .  This will also enable holistic reporting to be efficient, as advised by iTAP. This has 
now been integrated into a strengthened Implementation Framework agreement.  
Overall remarks from t he in dependent Technical Advisory Panel : 
The AEs would like to thank iTAP for recognizing the high potential of the projects in creating a paradigm shift and for sustainable development, while being rated high for respon siveness to needs of the 
recipients . This response is provided to further explain areas where ques tions were  raised  and have now 
been clarified .


---
*Page 155*
---

SnCF Gender Assessment 
Contents  
1. Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  1 
1.1 Country Ownership  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  2 
1.2 COVID As sessment ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  2 
2. Project Category Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  3 
2.1 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 3 
2.2 Waste, Water, and Sanitation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  8 
2.3 Nature -based Solutions (NbS)  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  10 
2.4 Sustainable Development Goals  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  11 
3. Fund Application  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  14 
3.1 Safeguards  and Consultation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  15 
3.2 Gender -Responsive Project Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  16 
3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  17 
4. Sources  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  17 
1.Overview
The Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF) Gender A ssessment  serves as the foundation  to strengthen the 
programme’s (Fund and Technical Assistance) responsiveness to the multiple, culturally -derived principles of 
gender equality and women’s empowerment , and to address the links between gender equality, climate 
mitigation and adaptation , and environmental sus tainability  in the context of a global climate equity fund  and 
related Technical Assistance . The Assessment informs  the accompanying Gender Action Plan , both at fund and 
project level, with indicators and targets to support SnCF  commitments to and engageme nt with women, men, 
girls and boys, including those from marginalized communitiesi, in compliance with GCF and SnCF gender 
polic ies. The Assessment and Action Plan support the SnCF Environmental Social Management System (ESMS) . 
The Assessment builds upon  quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived from field experience 
(including 1:1 household interview s), industry surveys, and desk review of existing literature and secondary 
databases, as noted in the Source s section. Like the ESMS , the SnCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan are 
living documents  and will be regularly updated to reflect key developments , including :  
1.Portfolio : The SnCF is a Fund of projects that may operate in up to 40 countries (to date SnCF has received
37 non-objection letters – NOLs ). The specific portfolio of funded project s, and indeed the countries  in
which those projects may  occur , are yet to be confirmed . Relevant country -specific , sex-disaggregated
gender data  must be assessed once the prospective project pipeline and host countries become known.
2.COVID -19: The full impact in the long ter m of the global COVID virus is unknown . In the short term ,
findings have already suggested that  it has ha d differentiate d impact s in the lives of men and women.
With respect to reproductive work, w omen and girls , already disproportionately responsible for household
duties, including water, food and fuel collection; food preparation; and taking care of children as well as
elderly and ill relatives , have experienced heightened levels of responsibility in the midst of the pandemic
and subsequent stay -at-home orders . In addition, home quarantines, market impacts and food shortages
have also been found to  increase household ten sions  and,  as a result , women have been  expose d to higher
risks of domestic violence.  The Assessment and Action Plan will be updated as virus -related development ,
people differentiated impacts  and strategies for remediation become more clear  (see Section 2 .2).
Page 152


---
*Page 156*
---

 
1.1 Country Ownership  
The Fund investment focus is sub-national climate projects . However, the SnCF fully adheres to the principle of 
country ownership . The Gender -responsive  Assessment and Action Plan s for every funded project will align 
with prevailing international ratified legal framework s, regional and national  gender policies , or other public 
policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment . The assessment and action plan  will seek also to align 
the project with other national development strategies that promote equal opportunities , poverty reduction  
and sustainable  use of natural resources  whether in the intervention region or the sector. This will include 
analysis of the gender equality landscap e and data relevant to  the host country and in the targeted sector(s) , 
including Nationally Determined Commitments (NDCs) .ii 
 
1.2 COVID Assessment  
The SnCF will begin implementation before the impacts of the global COVID -19 virus crisis are fully known. 
However, it is clear that the impacts will be felt deeply in the host countries in which the SnCF plans to invest 
(see Graphic 1, below). Of particular relevance is the SnCF subnational focus, as over 90% of COVID cases occur 
within urban settings. With respect to gender -related impacts, the Committee for the Coordination of 
Statistical Activities  (UN-CCSA) concludes that COVID -19 will disproportionately impact the vulnerable and 
compound  existing inequalities. Impacts  may include food shortages, mobility restrictions, decreased access to 
health care  and education , higher unemployment , and increases in domestic violence .”iii   
 
Graphic 1 : Confirmed cases of COVID -19, May 2020  
The COVID -19 pandemic is threatening fragile gains on gender equality and women’s rights. As  countries 
respond to the crisis, sex-disaggregated data is critical to examine the differential impact on women  and men 
towards evidence -based decision -making.  Globally,  women on average do three times as much unpaid care  
and domestic work as men – a workload that intensifies  with school closures and when health systems are  
overloaded.  Additionally, research has begun to surface in dicating that women are more vulnerable to losing 
their jobs than men in response to the crisis. Widespread job losses will have long -term impacts  for women’s 
economic independence and security . With 740 million women globally in informal  employment and a majority 
employed in services,  women are being, and will continue to be, particularly hard hit by the impacts of the 
COVID crisis.iv  Indigenous communities and specifically women and children are also more vulnerable due to 
overcrowded housing, unsafe wat er, and poor access to healthcare.v  
The SnCF  Gender -responsive  Assessment and Action Plan will be updated on a regular basis to reflect the 
impacts of COVID in host countries and related project sectors.  
Page 153


---
*Page 157*
---

2. Project  Category Assessment  
As previously noted,  the SnCF will be  a fund of projects that may operate in up to 40 countries. The specific 
portfolio of funded projects, and indeed the countries in which those projects will occur, have yet to be 
confirmed. At such time  as host countries and prospective  pipeline projects are identified , SnCF will seek 
country -specific , sex-disaggregated data  by project type to inform gender -responsive project design and 
implementation . This activity will be supported by framework guidelines on gender assessment , to ensure that 
project proposal and implementation mainstream gender .  
In th e current absence of country -specific data, the SnCF has conducted peer -project Assessments to help 
identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s project adaptation and 
mitigation goals . The SnCF will invest in the fol lowing project categories (all Category B – lower risk):  
1. Energy Efficiency  
2. Renewable energy (small scale solar and wind, no hydro)  
3. Waste optimization – biochar, compost, recycling  
4. Water and Sanitation  
5. Regenerative Agriculture / Aquaculture ( Nature based solutions )  
6. Urban design solutions  
 
SnCF has assessed each project categories beginning with the Gender -Related Vulnerabilities and Capacities for 
Change in GCF Projects.vi In addition, the Assessment is framed using the Six Domains of Gender Analysi s 
Framework Approachvii including :  
1. Access  - to resources, income, services, employment, information, and benefits , poverty rate, formal / 
informal employment, unemployment, division of labour ; 
2. Knowledge, Beliefs, and Perception  - commonly held beliefs, per ceptions, and stereotypes, mobility, 
vulnerable groups ; 
3. Practices and participation  - adult literacy rate, skills training and gaps, attendance at meetings and 
training courses, and accepting or seeking out services ;  
4. Time and Space  - how time is spent and how men and women each contribute to the welfare of the 
family, community, and their society ; 
5. Legal rights and status  – legal status of women, access to healthcare, access to and management of 
resources (economic, financial, physical,  natural, other assets), access to ownership and recourse ; 
6. Power and Decision Making – existing gender inequalities that may be exacerbated by project impacts, 
anticipated differences in vulnerability and adaptive capacityviii, use of household and individual  
economic resources, choice of employment.  
 
2.1 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy  
Table 1: - GCF Result Area Energy Access and Power Generationix 
GCF - Result Area  GCF - Vulnerabilities  GCF - Capacities for Change  
Energy access and  
Power generation  Share of women and women -
headed  households without 
energy access  
 
Impacts women are 
experiencing due to  lack of 
energy access  Roles of women in household energy  supply/use  
 
Share of women and men in the energy  labour 
market and type of occupatio n 
 
Policies and institutional framework to  promote 
gender equality in energy/power  generation  
 
 
Page 154


---
*Page 158*
---

Energy access is fundamental for women’s economic empowerment.  For example  solar water pumps, 
electrical grill, cooling, solar electricity, solar water heating all open the possibility for women micro and small 
enterprises (MSEs) to diversify livelihoods and reduce work load.  [Source: 2017, UNDP, Gender and Sustainable 
Energyx] Energy efficiency and renewable energy projects have distinct gender characteristics that  have the 
potential to  disproportionately affect women and girls.  For example, w omen and girls are often primarily 
responsible for  collecting fuel and water at the community level. Also, poor women tend to participate in the 
informal  economic sector (for example, the food sector), which relies strongly on biomass as its main energy  
source . This link and impact, however, is not recognized on a policy and programming l evel, leading to  the 
gender impact not featuring heavily in national energy policies and priorities.  
 
The project assessment below focuses on a clean cookstove example.  
Indoor pollution from the burning of solid fuels is also a serious health problem for women and girls.  Every 
year, 4.3 million people – mainly women and children , those  most likely to be near the burning or because 
indoor air pollution is linked to cooking, a role predominantly held by women  – die because  of indoor air 
pollution.  In 2012 al one, 7 million people died – representing one in eight of total global deaths – because of  
exposure to indoor air pollution, which confirms that air pollution is now the world’s largest single  
environmental health risk. Women are also exposed to other heal th risks linked  to the work of  fuelwood / 
energy collection. Much of the work requires high levels of physical energy, however their access to nutrition 
within the household is often less than other family members. Women’s poor nutrition vis -à-vis their 
workloads  increases their susceptibility to anaemia and perinatal mortality, while the heavy lift  of energy 
collection  could result in  postnatal complications and takes a toll on women’s well -being.   Moreover, gender -
differentiated roles related to land and resources can also make  women more vulnerable to gender -based 
violence (GBV)  while  carrying out daily responsibilities, as seen in firewood and water collection activities .xi 
 
Energy poverty  also affects women and girls ’ time, resulting in ‘time  poverty’ (a lack of time for rest and leisure 
after taking into account the time spent working, whether  in the labour market or at home). Women spend 
considerable time gathering biomass for energy.  Because women are often responsi ble for these activities, 
climate -induced scarcity of natural resources  can exacerbate their time poverty . As women are forced to travel 
and spend more time collecting these  resources, they  lose out on other, self -fulfilling  activities (such as 
education , when otherwise available) . A study  conducted  in India, Bangladesh and Nepal found that women in 
South Asia spend up to 20 or more hours per  week in energy collection. Better access to modern energy can 
help alleviate some of these challenges.  Research in B razil also shows that girls in rural areas with access to 
electricity are 59 percent more  likely to complete primary education by the time they are 18 years old than 
those without.   
 
Improved cookstoves can reduce cooking time by 50 percent and increase fu el efficiency  by 30 percent – high 
efficiency cookstoves lead to even larger benefits in time and energy savings, while also contributing to 
emissions reductions.  A preliminary analysis of mitigation pledges  under the Paris Agreement shows that some 
32 cou ntries have included efficient cooking initiatives  in their INDCs.  
 
In the formal sector, women generally have less access to finances and energy -related services than men.  
Studies from the Africa  region , for example, show that women -headed businesses generally face more 
impediments  than men in accessing grid electricity. Experiences in Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania and 
Zambia  suggest that women entrepreneurs also face greater discrimination than men in the form of delays in  
obtaining elec trical connections and the expectation that they will pay bribes for these services.  More broadly, 
women are often excluded from discussions about energy plans and policies across scales,  despite being 
primary household -energy managers, limit ing their entr y into the energy industry  and result ing in gender -blind 
energy project planning, financing, execution and implementation.  
 
Page 155


---
*Page 159*
---

Specific Project Assessment: Cookstoves in Brazil – Gender Responsive certification, challenges and 
opportunitiesxii 
The introduction  of the SDG framework and application of Gold Standard for the Global Goals offers new 
opportunities and tools to promote and measure outcomes in terms of gender equality. At the same time, 
achieving Gender Responsive certification requires a more comprehe nsive and precise approach to project 
monitoring. Table 1 summarizes the targets and indicators selected  for the sample project  in Brazil , together 
with the developer’s  historic activities and the new activities under SDG 5 Gender Responsive Certification.  
Table 2: Historic and proposed gender indicators from Efficient Cookstoves initiative in Rural Brazil  
Gender 
Equality area  Current Impact 
and Monitoring  Gender -Responsive Approach  
SDG 5 Target  SDG Indicator  New Impact and 
Monitoring  
  
Burden of 
domestic work 
on women  Self-reported 
impacts on time -
savings in fuel 
collection and 
housework, 
collected 
through in -home 
surveys  5.4 Recognize and 
value unpaid care 
and domestic 
work through the 
provision of 
public services, 
infrastructure and 
social protection 
policies and the 
promotion of 
shared 
responsibility 
within the 
household and 
the family as 
nationally 
appropriate  5.4.1 Pr oportion 
of time spent on 
unpaid domestic 
and care work, by 
sex, age and 
location.  
  Time savings study to 
determine quantitative 
change in time 
dedicated by women in 
fuel collection and 
cooking -related tasks 
due to adoption of new 
stove technology and 
practices and analysis of 
saved time spent  
Women in 
Leadership  Network of 
Community 
Agents, women 
identified from 
the population 
of local stove 
users in rural 
communities  5.5  Ensure  
women’s full and 
effective 
participation and 
equal 
opportunities for 
leadership at all 
levels of decision -
making in 
political, 
economic and 
public life  
  5.5.2 Proportion 
of women in 
managerial 
positions  
  Expand team to include 
new managerial 
positions and training, 
and adopt Equal Work 
Equal Pay policy  
Page 156


---
*Page 160*
---

Gender -based 
Violence  No activities 
under current 
approach; 
implementation 
contingent on 
new funding 
opportunities  5.2 Eliminate all 
forms of violence 
against all women 
and girls in the 
public and private 
spheres, including 
trafficking and 
sexual and other 
types of 
exploitatio n. 5.2.2  
Proportion of 
women and girls 
aged 15 years 
and older 
subjected to 
sexual violence 
by persons other 
than an intimate 
partner in the 
previous 12 
months, by age 
and place of 
occurrence  Launch trafficking 
awareness and 
prevention campaign in 
rural co mmunities, to 
reduce risk of rural 
women migrating to 
urban centers and 
becoming victims of 
sexual exploitation.  
Sexual and 
reproductive 
health  No activities 
under current 
approach; 
implementation 
contingent on 
new funding 
opportunities  5.6 Ensure 
universal access 
to sexual and 
reproductive 
health and 
reproductive 
rights.  5.6.1  
Proportion of 
women aged 15 -
49 years who 
make their own 
informed 
decisions 
regarding sexual 
relations, 
contraceptive use 
and reproductive 
health care  Partner with local and 
state health authorities 
to improve access to 
family planning 
information and 
resources for  young 
women in rural areas.  
Access to and 
opportunities 
regarding 
digital 
technology  
 
OR 
 
Empowering 
Women 
through Digital 
Technology  No activities 
under current 
approach; 
implementation 
contingent on 
new funding 
opportunities  5.B Enhance the 
use of enabling 
technology, in 
particular 
information and 
communications 
technology, to 
promote the 
empowerment of 
women.  5.B.1  
Proportion of 
individuals who 
own a mobile 
telephone, by sex  Harness existing mobile 
phone network to build 
connectivity and explore 
micro -enterprise 
opportunities with 
women  
 
Domestic Work  
Target 5.4 addresses the unequal burden shouldered by women throughout the world in regards to domestic 
labor. It is estimated that in Brazil women spend 2.5 times the number of hours as men  on domestic tasks  (de 
Melo, 2016). As Perene´s  cookstove model reduces wood use by half, there is significant time savings in fuel 
collection reported by the cookstove users. Prior to implementing the Gold Standard Gender Responsive 
Page 157


---
*Page 161*
---

guidelines, monitoring of project impacts was limited to in -home surv eys. Responses to survey questions are 
given in relative terms: “more/less/same” time for each activity comparing old stove to new stove.  
Monitoring surveys (Perene, 2016) reveal that 80% of users report spen t less time collect ing wood with the 
new stove. In addition, the absence of open flames to blacken cookware, and the significant reduction in 
smoke in the home also improves household environment : 89% report their homes are cleaner overall with the 
new stove. Less tangible but equally important is that owners of improved cookstoves display a new -found 
pride in their homes and in themselves. Rural women report improved self -esteem and status on par with 
urban dwellers, as they become free of the stigma and discomfort of clothes, hair and skin damaged by s moke.   
Building on the self -reported evidence of time sav ed, a Gender Responsive approach w ill capture the number 
of hours of fuel collection and improvement to household environment and how those savings translate to 
positive change. With additional inve stment, a paired -sample study of approximately 120 households to track 
time, distance and frequency of fuel collection, time spent in cleaning and cooking activities, as well as how 
time is spent, for instance in education or income -generating activities, could be carried out to determine the 
full impact of the substitution of traditional stoves by improved cookstoves. This impact data can enable 
further monetization of the outcomes beyond carbon credit income, as well as contributing to the sense of 
value placed by the women  themselves on the new practices and technology adopted.  
 
Women in Leadership  
Women have been involved as decision makers from the start of the Perene  Institute’s work. From lead 
engineer to field agents, female leadership is a pillar of the organization’s successful promotion of better 
cooking technology and practices. In the design phase, women participate d with equal access and almost equal 
numbers  as men, contributing to the cookstove specifications, features and materials. In user aspects, 
women’s voices have been the most valuable, as they represent over 85% of the cookstove users. The 
participative approach has proven to be highly effective and th e model has been well adopted and fitted to 
local cooking customs. Women continue to play a determining role when it comes to implementation: they are 
responsible for signing the Terms of Agreement, deciding with the construction team where the new stove w ill 
be located, giving feedback during household visits and surveys and sharing information with other community 
members about the project. In monitoring activities, local women are trained as Community Agents, carrying 
out annual surveys and teaching cook stove users how to best operate and maintain their stoves.  
With the adoption of Indicator 5.5.2, Perene will invest in strengthening the role of the Community Agents and 
include two new positions: Community Agent Coordinator and Training Supervisor. Increa sing the participation 
of women in managerial positions is expected to have a direct and positive effect on the long -term adoption 
rates of stove users and the overall success of the project.  
The sale of carbon credits at current market prices does not pr ovide sufficient project funding for the 
additional time -savings studies needed to monitor Indicator 5.4.1 (Time spent on domestic work), or for hiring 
additional human resources for progress on Indicator 5.5.2 (Women in managerial positions), which would be 
required for Gender Responsive Certification. This opens the opportunity for new funding and partners to 
leverage the existing project development framework for carbon offset projects - community relations, 
credibility, logistics, communications and imp lementation team - to reach numerous SDG 5 Targets. Examples 
of additional synergistic targets include:  
● Target 5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, 
including trafficking and sexual and other ty pes of exploitation . Existing monitoring activities of the 
project mean that female Community Agents visit hundreds of homes in their rural communities and 
speak one -on-one with women in the safety and privacy of their homes. With additional training and 
support, Community Agents could also raise awareness of the risk of trafficking among the population.  
 
● Target 5.6 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights.  In a 
similar way, the cookstove projects´ household visits a nd periodic community meetings have the 
Page 158


---
*Page 162*
---

potential to reach thousands of women in remote areas, connecting them with existing public family 
planning services.  
 
● Target 5.B  Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications 
technology, to promote the empowerment of women.  In recent years, mobile phone ownership in rural 
areas has become widespread and most town centers offer some access to the internet. The potential 
for supporting and addressing the additional needs of women - through connectivity platforms, online 
training courses, small business ventures - is obvious, but starting up such initiatives in remote, low -
resource settings is daunting. The existing infrastructure and operational momentum of Efficient 
Cookstoves pro jects, coupled with the relationship of trust built by years of delivering on 
commitments, offers an unparalleled context to launch such women -centered initiatives.  
 
Alignment with National Gender Policies  
The Efficient Cookstoves initiative is fully alig ned with Brazilian policies for gender equality. Brazil's national 
gender policies are spearheaded by the Ministry of Justice and Citizenship under the Special Secretariat for 
Women´s Policies. The overarching mission of the Secretariat is:  
Promoting the c apacity and participation of women in the roles of power and decision -making, based 
on the understanding that the under -representation of women has diverse causes. Therefore, changes 
must be promoted in various social spheres including: cultural, education al, legislative and institutional 
(Ministry of Justice and Citizenship, 2017).    
Two of the main actions outlined by the Secretariat, in particular, are directly promoted by the Efficient 
Cookstoves program: (1) Support the capacity -building of women leade rs and (2) Make available data, 
information and studies on the subject of gender . Since its inception, the Efficient Cookstoves program has 
invested in women leadership, from Perene´s Technical and Monitoring management and the 65 rural women 
who form the Community Agents network to the 6,500 women trained in adopting new technology and better 
practices.  
Regarding action (2) of Secretariat, all project data is gender disaggregated and made publicly available online 
through the Markit Environmental Registry . This practice contributes to the national effort of monitoring and 
evaluating impacts on a gender basis and increases project transparency.  
As the Efficient Cookstoves project demonstrates, project activities can and should be aligned with the national 
Gender agenda. In fact, adoption of the Gold Standard Gender Equality Framework ensures that projects meet 
or exceed the requirements of their host country regarding Gender Equality. Reviewing federal and local 
legislation and incorporating pertin ent aspects in project design is an essential step in the project certification 
process . 
 
2.2 Waste, Water , and Sanitation  
Table 3: - GCF Results Area Infrastructure and the Built Environmentxiii 
GCF Result Area  Vulnerabilities  Capacities for Change  
Infrastructure and 
the built 
environment  Share and number of women 
lacking access to adequate 
infrastructure (water supply,  
sanitation, flood protection, 
housing, energy access, etc.)  Roles of women in the design and maintenance of 
infrastructure and the b uilt environment  
 
Share of women and men in relevant labour 
markets and type of occupation  
 
Policies and institutional framework to promote 
equal access to adequate infrastructure  
 
Page 159


---
*Page 163*
---

Water and climate : [Source: UN-Waterxiv] Growing demand for water increases the need for energy -intensive 
water pumping, transportation, and treatment, and has contributed to the degradation of critical water -
dependent carbon sinks such as peatlands. In less developed countries, an estimated 2.5 billion still people rely 
on biomass, such as fuelwood, charcoal, agricultural waste and animal dung, to meet their energy needs for 
cooking  and water treatment . In many countries, these resources account for over 90% of household energy 
consumptionxv. Cutting trees both adds carbon dioxide to the air and removes the ability to absorb existing 
carbon dioxide. If tropical deforestation were a country, it would rank third in carbon dioxide -equivalent 
emissions, behind China and the U.S.xvi 
Gender imperative:  [World Health Organizationxvii] The right to water and sanitation is recognized as 
fundamental to attaining all other human rights. Globally, however, 2.1 billion people do not have access to 
safe drinking water at home, 2.3 billion do not have basic sanitati on and 1 billion practice open defecation. 
Women and girls are disproportionately affected by the lack of access to basic water, sanitation and hygiene 
facilities , as they play  a larger role relative to men in water, sanitation and hygiene activities, incl uding in 
agriculture and domestic labour. This situation has implications for gender equality and empowerment.  
One priority  area is that of women’s water -fetching responsibility and  its associated  time -use burden, and the 
implications for health and econom ic well -being. Women and girls are responsible for fetching water in four 
out of five households where a drinking water source is off premises . Another priority is t he growing evidence 
on sanitation -related gender -based violence faced by women and girls.  Reports from Ethiopia, India, and 
refugee or internally -displaced persons camps in Guinea, Haiti, Kenya, Liberia, the Philippines, Sierra Leone and 
Somalia document physical and sexual harassment and assault by non -partners, fear of sexual violence and 
harassment and stress faced by women and girls while they attempt to access shared sanitation facilities.  
Another  priority area is that of women’s participation in water, sanitation and hygiene decision -making and 
governance, leading to their social and poli tical empowerment.  One multi -country study found women’s 
participation in key water committee positions of leadership to be a significant predictor of functional and 
sustainable water systems. There is evidence that empowering women to make sanitation deci sions can 
enhance performance outcomes for the household and community . 
Specific Project Assessment  - The Lango Safe Water Projectxviii. The project employed a gender responsive 
approach to empower women and girls in delivering climate action  in rural Uganda . The project rehabilitates 
boreholes to provide clean water access to the local communities . In Lango, access to safe water is a major 
challenge  and boreholes often fall into disrepair due to a lack of funding or training in their maintenance. This 
forces  communities to use unsafe water sources such as streams, in which the water must be boiled. To boil 
the water, communities collect and burn firewood, which places greater pressure on dwindling forests and 
produces CO2 emissions. It also creates a burden fo r women and children, who typically spend hours every day 
collecting firewood and water. Despite these efforts, b oiling water alone still does not always guarantee that it 
is safe to drink, allowing  waterborne diseases to continue to afflict the community.  
Gender -Responsive : The Lango Safe Water Project implemented gender -responsive project design and elected 
to certify the project’s gender impacts  with a third -party auditor . The assessment and design were based on a 
comprehensive gender analysis to establish a gender baseline  through a baseline survey  and supplementary 
gender -focused local stakeholder meetings.  Through these activities, three key themes were identified:  
1. Time poverty  – the amount of time women and girls spend collecting water greatly diminishes their 
ability to engage in income -generation or education, increasing their economic dependence and 
decreasing time for rest and leisure.  
2. Individual and community empowerment  - including meaningful participation and leadership, stronger 
social n etworks and agency that enables women more of a say in decision -making on key issues 
affecting the community.  
3. Exposure to gender -based violence in water collection  – it emerged that women suffer GBV whilst 
travelling long distances to collect water and may  also face domestic violence at home as a result of 
delays in other household chores caused by the length of time it takes to collect water.  
Page 160


---
*Page 164*
---

The project used the assessment  to focus their action plan around the following project elements , in addition 
to ad dressing the issue of badly maintained boreholes :  
1. The principle of shared domestic responsibilities to instil the idea that time women save on water 
collection should be spent on empowerment -focused activities, not simply redirected to other unpaid 
domest ic tasks.  
2. Gender -parity in the Water Resource Committees and group dynamics training to ensure the 
viewpoints of all members are heard equally.  
3. Awareness raising of the harms of gender -based violence, promoting open dialogue within the 
communities to ensur e that it is understood and dispelled from the level of community leaders.  
Certified Project Impacts:  To date, the boreholes rehabilitated through the project have brought clean water 
to over 40,000 people throughout Lango. Almost 100% of people use the re habilitated boreholes for the 
majority of their water needs. For borehole users, there is no longer a need to boil water to make it safe, 
thereby eliminating  associated  CO 2 emissions. Users also benefit from reduced exposure to waterborne 
disease and women  and children save hours every day, enabling them to invest their time in other more 
productive activities.  The certified project impacts include:  
• Approximately 100,000 tonnes of CO 2 emissions reduced per year  
• 2 hours a day saved on water collection - this time saved is spent on other unpaid domestic tasks and 
income -generation, leisure, religious activities and empowerment focused activities within the 
community.  
• A male and female member of each WRC were present at the gender equality awareness raising 
meetings. These 206 members then shared the information gathered back to the local communities.  
• The ratio of male and female members in the project Water Resource Committees is approaching 
parity with 46% female to 54% male.  
• None of the women repor ted incidents of domestic violence related to water collection since the 
project started, compared to 35% prior to the project.  
• Borehole users have reported an 85% reduction in incidents of bullying, intimidation and assault during 
water collection since t he borehole was rehabilitated.  
 
2.3 Nature -based Solutions (NbS)  
Table 4: - GCF Results Area  Ecosystem and Ecosystem Servicesxix 
GCF Result Area  Vulnerabilities  Capacities for Change  
Ecosystem and 
ecosystem services  Share and number of women 
depending on ecosystem and 
ecosystem services for 
livelihoods  Roles of women in the community/ household with 
reference to natural resource use  
 
Share of women and men in the natural resources / 
agricultural labour market and type of occupation  
 
Policies and institutional framework to promote 
gender equality in access to ecosystem services  
 
 
Ecosystem s and ecosystem services are strongly linked to gender disparities, and have significant potential to 
impact the gender and social relations within communities. As discussed, women play a large role in the 
collection and use of natural resources within households, while also holding valuable roles in agriculture and 
food systems.  Conversely, by including women in nature -based solutions and efforts to  preserve ecosystems 
communities can have exponential impact in addressing ecosystem challenges and gender inequality  
simultaneously .  With ecosystems at an increased risk of destruction as a result of climate change, it is 
increasingly evident that women and men should equally be involved and included in efforts to develop these 
nature -based solutions.  
 
Page 161


---
*Page 165*
---

Specific Project Assessment - The Coastal Resilience to Climate Change Initiative : The Coastal Resilience to 
Climate Change Initiative  (CRCC)  is a four -year initiative that aims to strengthen and restore the value of coastal 
and marine ecosystem goods and services to improve social, economic and ecological resilience to climate 
change. It aims to use  nature -based and other innovative solutions t o deliver practical solutions to improve 
livelihoods and provide upstream benefits.  
 
Gender responsive  activities of the Initiative : The initiative has implemented a few activities in Mozambique 
specifically. Mozambique ranks third amongst the African coun tries most exposed to risks from multiple 
weather -related hazards, suffering from cyclic floods, cyclones and droughts. Much of this vulnerability is 
directly related to climate change.  The activities have addressed various ecosystem challenges  while 
integrating gender -responsive activities , including in dune stabilization, mangrove restoration and agriculture 
conservation  efforts .   
 
Dune restoration : In Inhassoro District Y outh (8 girls, 7 boys) have been trained in dune stabilization methods 
and techniq ues, with an emphasis on  a combination of green and grey infrastructures (combination of vegetation 
and concrete blocks). Dune restoration is an activity that is locally considered  ‘heavy duty’ thus  solely seen as a 
male  activity . The CRCC  project has changed this  mentality  by engaging girls in the training sessions, empowering 
them and allowing their meaningful and active participation in conservation and sustainability of coastal 
environment. The expected outcome is increase d resilience for the Inhassoro community , reduction in coastal 
erosion thus reducing  risk of climate change effects .   
 
Mangrove Ecosystem Restoration : The cyclone IDAI in 2019 hit Dondo District , affecting both men and women 
from coastal communities of Sengo and Farol . This resulted in a  loss of fishing gear  and destruction  of social 
infrastructures, including ecosystems such as mangroves and coastal dunes. The CRCC Project supported 50 
community members (45 m en and 5 wom en) to be  trained on ‘ Ecological Mangrove Restora tion’ method s such  
as establishing  mangrove tree nurser ies, plantation management and practicing survey techniques to determin e 
mangrove zonation in a reference forest. The expected outcome s include  conserve d and restore d mangrove 
forest s, which  provide nursery grounds for fish, ensure erosion reduction,  and increase  the awareness of 
mangrove ecosystems importance in providing environmental services.  
 
Conservation Agriculture : Inhassoro communities face different climate risk s, including  droughts , cyclones and 
erosion that threatens their livelihoods. Low rainfall affects agriculture productivity and, consequently , food 
security. At the beginning of 2020 CRCC supported 2 communities in development of conservation agriculture. 
To increase agricultu re resilience 23 members (19 women) were trained on  farming practices , such as using 
mulching to help prevent loss of water by evaporation, maintaining soil structure and promoting soil 
productivity,  and on  producing biological pesticides using certain  plants. The expected outcome is increased 
local capacity in conservation agricultur al practices and improved local livelihoods , taking advantage of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services.  
 
 
 
 
2.4 Sustainable Development Goal s  
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to gender, both as a standalone goal 
on gender equality and women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting theme across the SDGs. 
Among the 230 unique global SDG indicators, 53 exp licitly reference women, girls, gender, or sex.xx  SDG 13 on 
combating climate change aims to promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change -
related planning and management in least developed countries, including focusing on women, yo uth, and local 
and marginalised communities.  The following qualitative and quantitative gender sensitive indicators will 
inform the Action Plan. They are derived from a  preliminary  Assessment of SDG 5 and SDG 13 targets  (to 
reflect the Secretariat guidance regarding the GCF SDG 13 focus). In practice SDG 5 is cross cutting  beyond just 
SDG 13.    
Page 162


---
*Page 166*
---

SDG Targets, Category 1  - Economic :  
• Recognise and value unpaid care and domestic work t hrough the provision of public services, 
infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the 
household and the family as nationally appropriate.  
• Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal oppo rtunities for leadership at all levels of 
decision making in political, economic and public life.  
• Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership 
and control over land and other forms of property, financi al services, inheritance and natural 
resources, in accordance with national laws.  
• Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and communications technology, to 
promote the empowerment of women.  
• Adopt and strengthen sound policies and e nforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality 
and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
• By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including 
for young people and persons with disabi lities, and equal pay for work of equal value.  
• By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all (within a country), 
irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status.  
SDG Ta rgets, Category 2  - Social :  
• Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including 
trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.  
• Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation.  
• Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights in accordance with 
the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development and the 
Beijing Platform for  Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences.  
• Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including 
migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment.  
 
Table 2:  Economic Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment  
Economic 
Empowerment  
Goals  Potential Project Action  Example of gender -responsive indicators  
1) Income and 
expenditures  Closing of gender gaps in 
earnings and income 
generation opportunities  • Qualitative increase in earning and income 
generation opportunities for both women and men 
expressed as income ratio of men to women  
• Percentage change in expenditure on purchasing fuel 
/ electricity for household energy needs in women -
headed households  
2) Economic 
assets  Closing of gender gaps in 
asset access, ownership 
and control; Absolute 
increase in women’s 
relative control and 
ownership of an asset  • Number/proportion of women with improved access 
to financial mechanisms (equity investment, 
affordable loans, etc.) for low -carbon/climate -resilient 
products and services  
• Evidence of the type of financial incentives used to 
encourage women’s entry into the market for 
provision of low -carbon/climate -resilient products and 
services (e.g ., finance packages, tax benefits and 
rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes, partnerships with 
Page 163


---
*Page 167*
---

financial institutions, the private sector or women’s 
associations)  
3) Quality 
employment  Closing of gender gaps in 
labour market segregation 
and paid and unpaid 
employment  • Quantifiable increase in targeted and diversified 
employment opportunities for women and men 
(expressed as a ratio) coupled with support for 
reproductive responsibilities  
• Number and percentage of women who report time -
savings and increase d ability to engage in economic 
activities due to improvements in their own health 
care, reduced childhood illnesses, etc , including work 
in the formal sector.  
4) Education  Closing of literacy gap 
between boys and girls 
and parity in enrolment 
rates in p rimary, 
secondary and tertiary 
education  • Quantifiable increase in enrolment rates of boys and 
girls and rates of graduation with relevant skills  
 
Table 3:  Social Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment  
Social Empowerment  
Goals  Potential Project Action  Example of gender -responsive indicators  
1) Individual and 
community empowerment 
including meaningful 
participation and 
leadership, Increase in 
women networks and 
organizations  and agency  Closing of gender gaps 
in women and men’s 
participations and 
leadership and access to 
networks  
 
Closing of g ender gaps 
in leadership positions 
and decision making at 
the individual, 
household, community 
and political level  
 • Quantitative indicators that measure targets 
and quotas for women’s participation and 
leadership in community, including their access 
to soc ial networks  
•  
• Quantifiable increase in the percentage of 
women making decisions on behalf of their 
families, communities and government  
2) Applied skills and training  Closing of gender gaps 
and stereotypes in 
women’s and men’s 
access to applied skills 
and training  • Qualitative and verifiable increase in women’s 
and men’s relative confidence, skills and know -
how, e.g., on appraising investments and 
developing projects  
• Evidence of the type of incentives designed to 
recruit women, increase their capa city and 
provide career development in targeted sector 
agencies and service providers  
Page 164


---
*Page 168*
---

3) Secure access to health, 
reproductive health and 
rights  Closing of gender gaps 
in accessing health 
services and 
entitlements expressed 
as a ratio  • Quantifiable improvement in women’s overall 
health and determination of health rights and 
service delivery  
• Number of beneficiaries, i.e., people with 
improved living and occupancy conditions, 
including women and women -headed 
households  
4) Access to infras tructure 
services and technologies  Closing of gender gaps 
in access to 
infrastructure services  • Quantifiable increase in women’s control over, 
decisions in, related skills development and 
access to infrastructure services (e.g., 
transport, renewable energy supplies) and 
technologies (e.g., increased number of women 
and men passengers on trips and freight using 
low-carbon transport)  
• Time saved in collecting and carrying water, 
fuel and forest products due to 
environmentally sustainable and climate 
change mitigation/adaptation activities  
• Capacity building of both women and men to 
use, maintain and manage low -carbon and 
climate -resilient solutions and technologies  
5) Rest and leisure  Closing of gender gaps 
in women and men’s 
unpaid time poverty 
and labour burden  Quantitative indicators that measures women’s 
and men’s shift in time spent on leisure 
activities  
 
 
 
 
 
3. Fund  Application  
The Assessment provides a frame for the gender -related elements of the SnCF investment portfolio, as well as 
for the Fund itself. Specifically, the Assessment has been used to inform the following areas within the Fund :   
• Governance – including roles and r esponsibilities to achieve SnCF gender equity targets;  
• Competencies and capacity development – including ESMS Manager, gender specialist(s), SDG 
specialist, and related training;  
• Resource allocation, accessibility and budget – at both SnCF and invested pro ject level , the Gender 
Action Plan has dedicated budget allocated for its implementation ; 
• Operational procedures – at both SnCF and invested project level. This includes mandatory inclusion of 
a gender assessment as part of ESIA (Environmental & Social Imp act Assessment) for each project , and 
gender -responsive  stakeholder consultation requirements and safeguards, based on Gold Standard 
Gender Equality Guidelines & Requirements  as well as monitoring and evaluation; and  –  
• Knowledge generation and communicati ons. 
 
Page 165


---
*Page 169*
---

Gender -related output s at Fund 
levelxxi SnCF Fund -level t argets  Status 
06-2020 
Gender and social inclusion polic ies in 
place at fund level  Endorsement of gender and social 
inclusion policy by fund management 
committee  
 100%  
Gender procedures and checklists 
incorporated in fund’s ESMS  Comprehensive ESMS with updated 
gender procedures  100%  
Recruitment of women in projects  Aspire for gender parity in SnCF 
project team, a t least 40% of 
employees will be female  including 
senior and decision -making positions  
 46%  
Recruitment of women in fund 
capacity -building, field and monitoring 
teams  
 Aspire for gender parity, a t least 2 5% 
of project field / monitoring team  
members  will be female  TBD 
Ensure SnCF  internal annual reporting 
includes  requirements, targets and 
reportable progress  
 100% annual compliance with gender 
reporting at fund level  TBD 
Dedicate necessary financ es and 
human resources to implement the 
Gender Policy and Gender Strategy  
 ESMS Manager , gender specialist  and 
SDG Specialists on SnCF team   
Dedicate resources required to build 
and strengthen staff capacity related 
to knowledge management, learning  
 Line item in budget for gender -
related capacity building within SnCF 
team   
Appoint gender specialist/consultants 
as needed  
 Gender specialist av ailable to SnCF 
team as needed, additional project 
consultants hired as needed   
Audit and verification tea ms have the 
expertise to review and assess project 
gender responsiveness and impact  
 Gender training programme  for audit 
and verification teams   
Table 1 : SnCF Fund -level Assessment  
 
3.1 Safeguards and Consultation  
All projects considered by SnCF must have  mandatory gender -sensitive and gender -responsive  procedures and 
strategies that adhere to the Gold Standard Gender Equality Guidelines &  Requirementsxxii. These guidelines, 
aligned with the SnCF ESMS, require project developers to complete gender -sensitive  safeguards assessment 
and stakeholder consultatio ns as part of initial project design and feasibility. This is  a mandatory foundational 
requirement  that applies to all SnCF projects , which  include s:   
 
Social Safeguarding Principles  
3.1 Principle 1 – Human Rights  
3.2 Principle 2 – Gender Equality and Women’s Rights  
3.3 Principle 3 – Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions  
3.4 Principle 4 – Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement  (not applicable, Cat B)  
3.4.1 Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage  
3.4.2 Forced Eviction and Displacement  
Page 166


---
*Page 170*
---

3.4.3 Land Tenure and Other Rights  
3.4.4 Indigenous Peoples  
3.5 Principle 5 – Corruption  
Economic Safeguarding Principles  
3.6 Principle 6 – Economic Impacts  
3.6.1 Labour Rights  
3.6.2 Negative Economic Consequences  
 
3.2 Gender -Responsive Project Design  
It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without clearly understanding gender 
issues within the targeted population. Gender -responsive design requires a gender analysis to understand the 
social, economic and po litical factors underlying climate change -exacerbated gender inequality, and the 
potential contribution of women and men to mitigate and adapt to climate change in the project . The analysis 
also allows  project developers to identify  strategies, action and indicators to better assess how initiatives have 
engaged with or impacted different groups.  
Building on the safeguards and consultations, SnCF will require prospective projects to establish and commit to 
the following mandatory , minimum gender -responsive  requirements :xxiii 
• Collect, analys e and apply sex -disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform gender -
responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on IUCN programmatic activities.  
• Conduct gender analyses and applying key i ssues and recommendations identified to inform gender -
responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;  
• Analys e risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure activities do 
not e xacerbate existing gender -related inequalities, including gender -based violence, and seize 
opportunities to address gender gaps and support empowerment of women;  
• Structur e inclusive and gender -sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate capacitie s and 
technical expertise to support gender -responsive action;  
• Ensur e women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision -making and 
benefits, throughout the identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of 
activ ities;  
• Allocat e sufficient resources for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions to improve 
gender equality considerations, including the meaningful engagement of diverse stakeholders and 
beneficiaries;  
 
SncF  may direct and/or support should an expert stakeholder opinion (with a specific emphasis on gender and 
environment expertise) be required to support the gender safeguards assessment or project design process, 
depending on project type, scale and context.  
 
 
Gender  Claim  Certification  
In addition to climate and other SDG goals, the SnCF projects will establish gender claims that can be 
quantified, qualified and documented in support of a strong business case and investor interest in gender 
equality outcomes.  The gender claims will be verified by third party auditors, per the process in Graphic 2.  
Page 167


---
*Page 171*
---

 
Graphic 2: Certification Process  
 
3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  
The SnCF has a rigorous M&E framework, with  mandatory impact certification at both fund and project level.  
All SnCF project s must include mandatory SDG -13 impact targets, a certified gender -sensitive f ramework, 
mandatory, minimum gender -responsive elements, and a minimum of two additional SDG impact targets. The 
project’s monitoring framework includes gender -responsive targets and indicators to monitor gender equality 
results against the established baseline.  
M&E occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary design review, 
implementation a nd ongoing performance review (See Graphic 2, above). Monitoring is led by third -party 
auditors  and certification is led by an independent third -party  expert (SustainCERT) . 
 
 
 
4. Sources  
• ACDI/VOCA - Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit    
• Harvard - Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Fram ework   
• FAO - Socio -Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook   
• Gender Analysis in Natural Resource  Management | Land Portal   
• Gender Analysis for Sustainable Livelihoods and Participatory Governance in Rwanda    
• https://www.pacificclimatechange.net/document/gender -analysischecklist -food -security -and-climate -
change -within -programme -or-project    
• How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project  
• The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following sectors: Agriculture, Education, 
Energy, Health, Informat ion and Communications Technology (ICT), Transport, Water and Sanitation. See: 
http://ppp.worldbank.org/pu blic-private -partnership/ppp -sector/genderimpacts -ppps/sector -specific -
materials/sector -specific -materials     
Page 168


---
*Page 172*
---

•Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and Indicators
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool -kit-gender -equality -resultsand -indicators
•The Gender Data Portal for the latest sex -disaggregated data and gender statistics covering demography,
education, health, economic opportunities, p ublic life and decision -making, and agency, see
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/
•GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html
COVID Sources  
•UN Women (2020). COVID -19 and gender: What do we know; what do we need to know?
https://data.unwomen.org/features/covid -19-and-gender -what -do-we-know -what -do-we-need -know
•UN Women COVID -19: Emerging gender data and why it matters
https://data.unwomen.org/resources/covid -19-emerging -gender -data -and-why -it-matters
•WHO 2019, data from Na tional Health Workers Accounts for 91 countries for physician data and 61 countries for
nursing data. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/311314/WHO -HIS-HWF -Gender -WP1 -
2019.1 -eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
•UN Women (2020). Gender equality: Wom en’s rights in review 25 years after Beijing. https://www.unwomen.org/ -
•/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/gender -equality -womens -rights -in-
reviewen. pdf?la=en&vs=934
• World bank estimates based on International Labour Organ ization, ILOSTAT database. Data retrieved in March 1, 2020.
i 2019, November 6, GCF: Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020 –2023 , page 3  
ii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 24  
iii 2020, May, CCSA: How COVID -19 is changing the world: a statistical perspective, page 40  
iv 2020, May, UN Women: https://d ata.unwomen.org/women -count  
v Gender and the economy. 2020.  Primer on the gendered impacts of COVID -19.  
https://www.gendereconomy.org/primer -on-the-gendered -impacts -of-covid -19/ 
vi 2017, The Green Climate Fund: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 32  
vii 2018, IUCN: Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi -Arid 
Rangelands  
viii 2020, GCF: Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan Template  
ix 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects , page 30  
x 2017, UNDP, Gender and Sustainable Energy  
xi Castañeda Camey, I., Sabater, L., Owren, C. and Boyer, A.E. (2020). Gender -based violence and env ironment linkages: 
The violence of inequality. Wen, J. (ed.). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 272pp. https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/48969  
xii 2018, December, Gold Standard, Women / Energy / Climate:  Linking SDGs to drive finance to high -impact projects  
xiii 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 30  
xiv 2019, July, UN -Water: Policy Brief on Climate Change and Water  
xv 2006, World Energy Outlook  
xvi 2019, February: National Geographic https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global -
warming/deforestation/  
xvii 2018, WHO: Water, sanitation  and hygiene: measuring gender equality and empowerment  
xviii 2019, November, Gold Standard: https://www.goldstandard.org/our -story/project -profile -gender -certified  
xix 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 30  
xx 2017, Internati onal Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) , Achieve Gender Equality to Deliver the SDGs  
xxi 2017, Gold Standard: Gender Policy  
xxii 2017, Gold St andard: Gold Standard Gender Equality Guidelines &Requirements  
xxiii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 23  
Page 169


---
*Page 173*
---

Activities   Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  and 
Costs  
Impact Statement: The Subnational Climate Fund (SnCF) will c atalyse climate mitigation and adaptation solutions by investing  in 30 -50 subnational projects 
in 20-25 countries through a blended finance model to deliver certified climate and SDG impacts including  Nature -based Solutions , while maintaining a 
gender -respons ive framework throughout project design, implementati on, monitoring and evaluation . The model of the fund will lead  to:  
1. Improved access to clean energy and empowerment of local communities , including women, girls , and vulnerable populations , through renewable 
energy , energy services, enhanced energy efficienc y and new tech nolog ies;  
2. Improved health outcomes and i ncrease in  time -saving s, rec reation , and economic activities for women and girls through enhanced w ater and 
sanitation , access to renewable and efficien t energy technologies , and waste optimization ; 
3. Increased livelihoods and resilience of vulnerable communities, inc luding women and girls, to the negative climate impacts through  participatory 
and inclu sive urban development solution s and gender -responsive restorative agriculture/aquaculture  (Nature -based Solutions)  solutions . 
 
Outcome Statement:  By demonstrating how to de -risk investment ( through blended finance, rigorous safeguards, bankable projects, certified impact , and 
purposeful gender -responsive planning and integration ) for private capital in additional, high -integrity subnational projects, the SnCF will achie ve the 
following gender -responsive outcomes  with sex-disaggregated fund  level  impacts at or near parity by gender :  
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and v ulnerable populations  through $ 750 million in blended public/private capital in 30 -50 
subnational projects in 20-25 countries  over 7 years . 
 
• Empowerment  of local communities, including women and girls in 20-25 countries over 7 years  through $28 million inv ested in capacity building, 
resources and training to build more gender -inclusive,   bankable , high -integrity sub -national projects  with equitable distri bution of benefits .  
 
• Enhanced resilience and i mproved health for communities, including  women and children, through certified climate mitigation impacts o f 83 MT  
CO 2e (SDG 13),  and certified impacts  verified by an independent 3rd party for at least two a dditional resilience / adaptation measures (SDGs 
1,2,3,6,7,8,11,12), including those related to ecosystems and natural solutions (SDGs  14,15)  over 7 years .  
 
• Reductions in gender violen ce, increased  gender equity,  and  time -saving, recreation, and econom ic activities  for women and girls through the SnCF 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) , mandatory proj ect safeguards, third -party certified gender -responsive  project consul tation 
framework  (including expert consultation on including gender ba sed violence safeguards  throughout projects, particularly those engaging in high -
risk communities) , and ma ndatory gender -responsive project design (SDG 5)  in 30-50 subnational projects in 20-25 countries over 7 years . 
 
• Strengthened i nstitutional and regul atory  frameworks  through alignment of SnCF projects with national NDCs and prevailing gender polic ies.  
Page 170


---
*Page 174*
---

Activities   Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  and 
Costs   
 
Output (s) Statement: Establish SnCF fund -level gender equity process and out comes  
• Gender and social inclusion policies in place at fund level  
 
 
• Recruitment of women in projects ; recruitment of women in development and 
implementation of fund capacity -building,  field and monitoring teams  
 
 
• Ensure SnCF internal annual reporting in cludes indicators  with corresponding 
requirements , sex -disaggregated data  and targets to ensure  reportable progress  
 
• Dedic ate necessary finances and human resources to implement the Gend er 
Action Plan  , with allocated additional funds provided to ensure fl exibility and 
security as new learning comes up within implementation  
 
• Dedicate resources to build and s trengthen staff capacity related to knowledge 
management, learning ; Appoint gender  specialist/consultants as needed to 
respond to new capacity needs  
 
• Audit and verification teams have the expertise to review and assess project 
gender responsiveness and im pact  
 Endorsement policy by fund 
management committee , 
including a gender -responsiv e 
results framework  
 
Aspire to parity, at least 40% 
of fund  (including  project 
planning and design teams)  
and 25% of field employees 
will be female  
 
100% annual complianc e with 
gender reporting at fund level  
 
ESMS Manager , gender and 
SDG specialists in SnCF team  
 
Line item in budget for 
gender -related capacity 
building withi n SnCF team  
 
Gender training programme 
for audit teams  Years 1 -12 (the 
duration of the 
SnCF fund)  ESMS Mana ger, 
Accredited Entity , 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in SnCF 
fund level bud get 
 
 
Output(s) Statement: Implement project -level gender assessments  and action plans (NOTE : project -level assessments, and hence specific gender indicators  and targets,  
can only be  established once the SnCF host countries and projects are identified . Thus, indicators and targets are identified where known, or if not, are exemplars. ) 
 
• Collect sex -disaggregated country or regional -level data , analyse , identif y relevant 
women ’s organizations working on gender issues, and national stakeholder map  
 
• Establish  baseline data for projec t type and country  
 100% of projects under 
consideration for investment  Years 1 -5 (the 
duration of the 
investment 
cycle of p rojects  Project Developer s with 
support from EEs  
 
Costs included as pa rt of 
project budgets  
Page 171


---
*Page 175*
---

• Reference and align with country NDC and prevailing gender policy  
 
• Identify the M&E mechanism and process  
  
Support costs through 
Technical Assistance  
 
 
Output(s) Statement:  Gender -sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation  is implemented and certified, leading  to gender -responsive pro ject design . 
 
Stakeholder consultation and project safeguarding to include the following categories:  
• Human Rights  
• Gender Equality and Women’s Rights  
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions  
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacemen t and Resettlement (not applicable, Cat egory  B) 
o Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage  
o Forced Eviction and Displacement  (not applicable, Cat egory  B) 
o Land Tenure and Other Rights  
o Indigenous Peoples  
• Corruption  
• Economic Impacts  
o Labour Rights  
o Negative Econ omic Consequences  
• Climat e and Energy  
o Emissions  
o Energy Supply  
• Water  
o Impact on Natural Water Patterns/Flows  
o Erosion and/or Water Body Instability  
• Environment, ecology and land use  
o Landscape Modification and Soil  
o Vulnerability to Natural Disaster  
o Genetic Res ources  
o Release of pollut ants  
o Hazardous and Non -hazardous Waste  
o Pestici des & Fertilisers  
o Harvesting of Forests  
o Food  
o Animal husbandry  100% of projects under 
consideration for investmen t 
 
% women , indig enous peoples, 
vulnerable populations  included 
in pro ject design consultations, 
target 50%  Years 1 -5 (the 
duration of the 
investment 
cycle of projects  Project Developers with 
support from EEs  
 
Costs included as part of 
project budgets  
 
Support costs throug h 
Technical Assistance  
 
Page 172


---
*Page 176*
---

o High Conservation Value Areas and Critical Habitats  
o Endangered Species  
 
 
Output(s) Statement:  M&E a nalysis confirms  gender -responsive program design improve s health outcomes  and  time -saving  of women and girls . (NOTE : project -level 
assessments, and hence specific gender indicators  and targets,  can only be  established once the SnCF host countries and pro jects are identified . Thus , indicators and 
targets are identified where known, or if not, are exemplars. ) 
 
• Conduct t ime savings study to determine quantitative change in time dedicated by 
women in fuel collection  and cooking -related tasks due to adoption of new 
technology and practices and analysis of saved time spent , and identify (in 
consultation with stakeholders) opportunities for additional methods of support 
which  women can pick up  with the new -found time  
 
• Collect data on gender -based violence among  project stakeholders , by sex , to be 
used in comparison to baseline data collected , supported by proper safeguards and 
expert input  
 
• Collect data on access to health care among project s takeholders, by sex  
 
• Implement stakeholder outreach and engagement act ivities related to the above  
supported by proper safeguards and expert input  
 
 Number of beneficiaries , 
including women and women -
headed households  
 
Time saved in collecting and 
carrying  water, fuel and forest 
products  
 
Measurable r eduction in 
gender -base d violence  
 
Access to healthcare for women 
and chil dren, against baseline  
 
Quantitative indicators that 
measures women’s and men’s 
shift in time spent on  
 Years 1 -5 (the 
duration of the  
investment 
cycle of projects  Project Developers with 
support from EEs  
 
Costs included as part of 
project budgets  
 
Support costs through 
Technical Assistance  
 
 
 
Output(s) Statement:  M&E analysis confirms  gender -responsive program design improve s women’s community empowerment . (NOTE: project -level assessments, and 
hence spe cific indicators and targets, can only be established o nce the SnCF host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified 
where known, or if not, are exemplars.)  
 
• Provide capacity building and applied skills and tra ining for project developers and 
project stakeholders  
 
• Provide access to infrastructure services and technologies  to communities and 
stakeholders  Quantitative indicators that 
measure targets and quotas for 
women’s participation and 
leaders hip in communi ty and at 
project level.  Years 1 -5 (the 
duration of the  
investment 
cycle of projects  Executing entities  
 
Costs included as part of  
Technical Assistance  
 
Page 173


---
*Page 177*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
• Provide support for Monitoring and Eval uation framework  
 
• Demonstrate through gender -responsive program desig n and resulting data that 
improved livelihoods for women can result in environment results.   •  
Quantifiable increase in the 
percentage of women making 
decisions on behalf of their 
families and communities  
 
Number/proportion of women 
with improved access to 
financial mechanisms (equity 
investment, affordable lo ans, 
etc.) for  low-carbon/climate -
resilient products and services  
 
Quantifiable increase in 
targeted and diversified 
employment opportunities for 
women and men  
 
Qualitative increase in earning 
and income generation 
opportunities for both women 
and men exp ressed as income 
ratio of men to women  
  
Page 174


---
*Page 178*
---

 
Timeline  
 
Gender Action Plan Milestones  
 2020  Prior to Fir st Close of Fun d  
(Q1, 2021)  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  
SnCF consortium member gender and social inclusion policies  in place  X Gender  training at fun d level  
 X X X X X 
ESMS Manager and g ender framework – including safeguards  – in place  
 X ESMS revisions with IUCN, Gold S tandard  X X    
Project -level gender sensitive and gender -responsive metho dologies  X Refine methodologies as/if needed f or SnCF 
implementation  X X    
Fund -wide implement ation  of gender safeguarding methodologies  
• Human Rights  
• Grievance and redress me chani sms 
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions  
• Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage  
• Forced Eviction and Displacement  (not applicable  CAT B)  
• Land Tenure and Other Rights  
• Indigenous Peoples  
• Corruption  
• Economic Impacts  
• Labour Rig hts 
• Negative Econom ic Consequences  
 X Methodology modification, as /if needed  for 
SnCF implementation  X X X X X 
Monitori ng, Verification and Reporting (MRV)  methodologies  X Refine MRV methodology  as/if needed for 
SnCF implementation       
Technical Assistan ce gender -relate d resource devel opment  
   X X    
Technical Assistance gender -related training development  
   X X    
Sex-disaggregated project data, reporting and fund -level reporting  
     X X X 
 
Page 175


---
*Page 179*
---

 
GENDER EQUALITY REQUIREMENTS 
& GUIDELINES  
PUBLICATION DATE  1.03.2018 
VERSION  v.1.1 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Several organisations  and individuals have contributed to the development of these 
Requirements and Guidelines.  
Sincere thanks to:  
 Rachel Mahmud (Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves)  
 Allie Glinski  (International Council for Research on Women)  
 Annemarije Kooijman (HIVOS)  
 Sudha Padmanabha (Fair Climate Network)  
 Leisa Perch (Independent Consultant)  
 Inka Ivette Schomer (The World Bank Group)  
 Adriana Maria Eftimie (International Finance Corporation)  
 Elizabeth Eggerts (UN -REDD)  
 Meinrad Burer (EcoAct)  
The Author Team  
Nidhi Tandon, Shannon Pritchard, Abhishek Goyal, Sriskandh Subramanian  
Page 176


---
*Page 180*
---

We would also like to sincerely thank our funding partner The Grand Duchy of 
Luxembourg  for their support.  
TABLE OF CON TENTS   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  ________________________________ _________________________  1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ________________________________ _________________________  2 
DEFINITIONS* ________________________________ ______________________________  2 
1| CERTIFICATION PATHWAYS  ________________________________ _________________  5 
2| GENDER SENSITIVE REQUIREMENTS (STEPS 1 -3) ________________________________  7 
3| GENDER RESPONSIVE GUIDELINES (STEPS 4 -6) ________________________________  10 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS* 
 
Term  Definition  
Agency  The capacity to make decisions about 
one’s own life and act on them to 
achieve a desired outcome, free of 
violence, retribution, or fear.  
Page 177


---
*Page 181*
---

Empowerment  The ability and agency of every 
woman to shape her own destiny, 
exercise her rights and make her own 
choices. Women's empowerment has 
five components: women's s ense of 
self-worth; their right to have and to 
determine choices; their right to have 
access to opportunities and resources; 
their right to have the power to 
control their own lives, both within 
and outside the home; and their 
ability to influence the dire ction of 
social change to create a more just 
social and economic order, nationally 
and internationally.  
Gender  Gender refers to the social, 
behavioural , and cultural attributes, 
expectations, and norms associated 
with being male or female.  
Gender equality  As enshrined in international and 
national constitutions and other 
human rights agreements, refers to 
equal rights, power, responsibilities 
and oppo rtunities for women and 
men, as well as equal consideration of 
the interests, needs and priorities of 
women and men.  
Page 178


---
*Page 182*
---

Gender equity  Refers to the process of being fair to 
women and men. To ensure equity, 
measures often need to be taken to 
compensate (or reduce) disparity for 
historical and social disadvantages 
that prevent women and men from 
otherwise operating on an equitable 
basis. E quity leads to equality.(UNDP 
2017)  
Gender responsive  Refers to the consideration of gender 
norms, roles and relations and to 
addressing inequality generated by 
unequal norms, roles and relations 
through remedial action beyond 
creating gender awareness.   
Gender sensitive  Refers to raising awareness and 
consideration of gender norms, roles 
and relations but does not necessarily 
address inequality generated by 
unequal norms, roles or relations 
through remedial action bezond 
creating gender aw areness.  
Social inclusion  
 Refers to the process of improving the 
terms for individuals and groups to 
take part in society, and the process 
of improving the ability, opportunity, 
and dignity of those disadvantaged on 
the basis of their identity to take part 
in society.( World Bank )  
 
 
* If not otherwise indicated, relevant definitions are drawn and adapted from the GCF gender 
policy or the Annex to the GEF Gender Equality Action Plan (GEAP)  
 
 
Page 179


---
*Page 183*
---

1| CERTIFICATION PATHWAYS  
1.1 |  As outlined in the Gold Standard Gender Policy, gender certification is 
available at two levels. The first level is mandatory; the second level is optional.  
1) Mandatory Gender -Sensitive Requirements – These requirements  are 
mandatory for all projects (regardless of type of project) seeking Gold  Standard 
certification. They in clude compliance with the Gender  Safeguarding Principles 
and Requirements, and gender sensitive  stakeholder consultations.  
2) Optional Gender -Responsive Guidelines – These apply only to  those projects 
that fulfill all the Gender Sensitive Requirements and  further seek gender 
certification at the performance level. These projects  must proactively conduct 
gender analysis and undertake actions to  intentionally address gender gaps and 
contribute to gender equality and  women’s empowerment. Such projects are 
then el igible to obtain Gold  Standard Certified SDG ImpactsTM under SDG 5 (as 
well as other relevant SDGs).  
 
1.2 |  The Gender Equality Requirements & Guidelines will apply to all new projects 
that are seeking certification under the Gold Standard for Global Goals 
(GS4GG). These Requirements & Guidelines will not apply retroactively to 
projects registered with previous versions of Gold Standard and transitioning to 
GS4GG.  
Notes to Project Developers  
All projects submitted for Gold Standard certification must h ave GENDERSENSITIVE  
PROCEDURES/ STRATEGIES AND MUST ADHERE TO THE  
GENDER PRINCIPLES AS ESTABLISHED IN THE GOLD STANDARD  
GENDER POLICY. STEPS 1 – 3 require all project developers to complete a  
gender safeguards assessment and gender -sensitive stakeholder co nsultations  
as part of initial project design and feasibility. Meeting these requirements  Gender -sensitive 
certification
•Mandatory requirements that 
apply to all Gold Standard 
certifications at the project 
design stageGender -responsive 
certification
•Optional guidelines to 
help projects earn 
Certified SDG ImpactsTM 
under SDG 5 (and other 
relevant SDGs) at the 
project perfomance stage
Page 180


---
*Page 184*
---

 
 enables projects to claim to be ‘Gender -Sensitive’. This is a mandatory  
foundational requirement that applies to all Gold Standard certifications. This  
level of certi fication is based on adherence to process as described in Steps 1 -3. 
Project developers may further apply the optional STEPS 4 - 6 to the project  
whereby Gold Standard will determine whether these additional steps merit  
‘Gender -Responsive’ certification. I n this case project developers commit to a  
PRO-ACTIVE GENDER -RESPONSIVE APPROACH that aligns with the targets  
of SDG 5 and other relevant SDGs over and above the mandatory Gender - 
Sensitive Requirements. This level of certification requires (i) deeper gend er 
analysis; (ii) gender -targeted project goals and action; and (iii) project -specific  
gender indicators and parameters. This level of certification is based on actual  
project performance to achieve gender equality and is guided by Steps 4 -6. 
The Requireme nts and Guidelines are divided into these two categories through  
a series of six (6) steps. Project teams can apply these steps as they move  
through the design, implementation and submission stages through to Gold  
Standard for certification. The six steps supplement and complement the current  
Gold Standard principles and are an integral part of the project submission.  
 
The purpose and essence of each step is captured as notes in the green coloured 
box; the mandatory questions to be answered for that step are given in the   
outlined coloured box and the Requirements are given in the cyan  coloured box. 
Project developers ar e required to carefully look at the notes to understand the intent 
of the Step, read through the Requirements and Guidelines and submit responses in 
the Project Design Document (PDD) to all mandatory questions. Steps 1 -3 require 
four mandatory questions to  be answered; and Steps 4 -5, should a project seek 
performance certification for gender impacts, require a further six mandatory 
questions to be answered. In some of the Steps, there are also some guiding 
questions to assist the project developer in meetin g the requirements of the Step. 
Providing answers to guiding questions is not mandatory.  
 
 STEP 1 -3
Project 
ProcessSTEP 4
Gender 
AnalysisSTEP 5
Establish 
gender goals 
and measure 
changeSTEP 6
Claims 
statement
 Understandi
ng GS Gender 
Policy  
 4(a) – 
Gender analysis 
and baseline 
 5(a) 
Establish project 
gender goals  
 Describe 
how project 
delivers on  
Page 181


---
*Page 185*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2| GENDER SENSITIVE REQUIREMENTS (STEPS 1 -3) 
2.1 |  STEP 1: BASIC CONTEXT  
2.1.1 |  Provide evidence that the Project concept and design covers the overall 
societal context from a gendered perspective.  
2.1.1.1 |  Align the project to the Gold Standard Gender Policy.  
WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT?  
The main objective of the Gender Policy is to strengthen the Gold Standard and its 
stakeholders’ responsiveness to the multiple, culturally -derived principles of 
gender equality and wom en’s empowerment and to address and account for the 
links between gender equality, natural resources management and environmental 
sustainability.  
 
Page 182


---
*Page 186*
---

REQUIREMENTS  
The Gender Policy applies to all projects applying for Gold Standard certification, 
spells out the principles for achieving Gender Responsive certification at the 
performance level, and through supporting technical guidance on gender, solidifies 
the operat ional requirements for stakeholder involvement and partnership in the 
design, implementation, and evaluation of projects.  
QUESTION1  
Does the project reflect the key issues and requirements of Gender Sensitive design 
and implementation as outlined in the Gender Policy? Explain how.  
 
 
2.1.1.2 |  Conduct background gender research and align project to existing national 
policies, strategies, and be st practices.  
 
QUESTION 2  
Does the project align with existing country policies, strategies and best practices? 
Explain how.  
 
Suggestions include:  
⎯ Ensure that the project aligns with the national gender strategy (if host  country 
has one) or other public policy for gender equality and women’s  empowerment;  
⎯ Align the project with other national development strategies that promote  equal 
opportunities, whether in the intervention region or the sector;  
⎯ Refer to lessons learned from comparable development  projects or  programmes in 
the region that provide useful context on gender issues,  risks and opportunities;  
⎯ Refer to the national report to The Committee on the Elimination of D iscrimination 
against Women  (CEDAW) for data or context relevant to  the project.  
 
Page 183


---
*Page 187*
---

2.2 |  STEP 2: APPLY GOLD STANDARD SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Apply the Gold Standard Safeguarding Principles & Requirements and take note of 
the gender guidelines and examples provided in the guidance notes. Country -level 
safeguards shall supersede the Gold Standard Requirements if they go beyond Gold 
Standard Requi rements.  
QUESTION 3  
Does the project address the questions raised in the Gold Standard Safeguarding 
Principles & Requirements document? Explain how.  
 
2.2.1 |  Gold Standard may direct/support whether an expert stakeholder opinion 
(with a specific emphasis on gender and environment expertise) is required to 
support the gender safeguards assessment process depending on project 
type, scale and context.  
2.3 |  STEP 3: CONDUCT STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Apply the Gold Standard Stakeholder Consultat ion & Engagement Procedure, 
Requirements & Guidelines and take note of the gender guidelines.  
QUESTION 4 
Does the project apply the Gold Standard Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement 
Procedure, Requirements & Guidelines? Explain how.  
 
NOTE: Gold Standard may require that the Project seek the input of a Gender and 
Environment Expert/Stakeholder and to include their recommendations in the Project design.  
 
2.3.1 |  Steps 2 and 3 together provide the Project Developer with a consolidated 
assessment of the Proj ect's purpose, who the Project will engage with and 
ensures against the project contributing to any further harm.  
Page 184


---
*Page 188*
---

3| GENDER RESPONSIVE GUIDELINES (STEPS 4 -6) 
Gender -Responsive certification seeks to:  
1. Build on the first three steps to conduct a comprehensive gender analysis and 
establish a Project baseline with gender goals and indicators.  
2. Provide tangible evidence to demonstrate how the Project goes beyond Gender 
Sensitivity (reducing risks, minimising harm and recognising gender differences), 
towards innova tive ways to achieve specific Gender Responsive objectives.  
3. Distinguish the Project's results through establishment of the precise gender claims 
that can be quantified, qualified and documented in support of a strong business 
case and investor interest in  gender equality outcomes.  
REQUIREMENTS  
Gender -responsive certification requires Projects to establish and commit to the 
following as minimum requirements:  
1. The project collects and uses sex -disaggregated data and qualitative 
information to analyse and track gender issues  
2. The gender analysis of the project examines:  
⎯ The different situation of women and men  
⎯ The impacts the project will have on different group s 
3. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender -responsive targets and 
indicators to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.  
 
NOTE: Gold Standard may require that the Project seek the input of an Expert  Stakeholder  
and to include their recommendations in the Project design. For projects seeking gender -
responsive certification, the Gold Standard VVBs audit  teams shall include gender consultants 
with relevant sector expertise to verify  the gender claims of the project.  
3.1 |  STEP 4: PROJECT GENDER ANALYSIS AND BASELINE DETERMINATION  
3.1.1 |  Integrate Steps 1 -3 into the gender analysis and establish project baseline. 
Inputs from Steps 1 -3 notably the stakeholder consultations and safeguards 
assessment will feed into the Gender analysis.  
Page 185


---
*Page 189*
---

WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT?  
Gender analysis is a systematic way to identify context -specific key issues and 
factors that contribute to gender inequalities. It may consist of primary or 
secondary research, or a combination of both. It is impossible to integrate gender 
equality into pr ojects or activities without clearly understanding gender issues 
within the targeted population. A gender analysis enables project developers to 
understand the implications of gender on climate change mitigation, adaptation 
and disaster risk reduction inte rventions (and vice -versa), and design appropriate 
interventions that can benefit all members of a community. It also allows the 
project developers to develop indicators to better assess how initiatives have 
engaged with or impacted different groups.  
Gender analysis explores individual, relational and structural factors, within both 
public and private spheres, as individuals are likely to experience gender 
differently, or hold different roles, within different groups or relationships. Gender 
analysis attem pts to answer at least three key sets of questions:  
What are the gender -based inequalities, discriminations and rights denials in each 
context? How do these issues intersect with other discrimination factors such as 
age, ethnicity, disability, class, etc. ?  
How will gender relations influence the effectiveness and sustainability of the 
project activity or result? How will project processes and activities be designed to 
reduce inequalities and increase equality?  
How will the proposed results affect the rel ative status of women and men? Will 
they exacerbate or reduce inequalities?  
 
 
Step 4.a Develop an applied gender analysis to gather evidence for the  
project baseline, design and development  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Gender -responsive projects require a gender analysis to understand the social, 
economic and political factors underlying climate change -exacerbated gender 
inequality, and the potential contribution of women and men to mitigate and adapt 
to climate change.  
Conduct a gender analysis that should, at minimum, explain the following 
considerations:  
Page 186


---
*Page 190*
---

QUESTION 5 
How does the Project concept and description actively contribute to climate security 
and sustainable development in gender -responsive ways? Refer Step 4 (b) below to 
answer this question.  
QUESTION 6  
How does the Project gender analysis effectively differentiate how men and women, 
separately and together, contribute to and benefit from climate security and 
sustainable development? Towards adaptation and mitigation or both?  
QUESTION 7 
Is there a basel ine description which includes both gender equality and  
women’s economic empowerment factors? Please provide. This will help in 
identifying relevant SDG target in step 4(b) below.  
 
Examples of questions to guide Gender Analysis:  
⎯ Are there gaps in develop ment outcomes that males and females  experience in the 
areas of human endowment, formal employment,  ownership and control of assets 
and voice and agency?  
⎯ Are there design and implementation gaps relevant to the Project goals  and/ or 
key issues such as safe ty, security, employment an d entrepreneurship that affect 
men and women differently?  
⎯ Are there gaps between males and females, especially in light of the  relevant 
country and sector?  
⎯ Are the results of stakeholder consultations with men and women and/or  NGOs 
that work with these groups included in the gender analysis?  
⎯ Does the gender analysis draw on available and current quantitative and  
qualitative data?  
⎯ Does the analysis consider the potential negative/adverse impact of  Project 
activities, for instance o n women’s unpaid work, time use, access  to income or 
assets, and risk of gender -based violence?  
⎯ Does the gender analysis consider which specific measures can be or have  been 
identified to address gaps?  
⎯ Are men and women equally involved in making decisions about the  Project actions 
and goals?  
Page 187


---
*Page 191*
---

⎯ Are women and men / girls and boys taken equally into account in the  target 
group? How can it be ensured that they derive equitable benefits  from the 
interventions?  
⎯ Do measures need to be taken to ensure equit able access to resources  and 
impacts by disadvantaged groups (women or men)?  
⎯ Are the actions explicitly broken down as such (for women versus men)? How are 
they distinguished?  
 
RESOURCES:  
To help guide your Gender Analysis and development of Gender Indicators – 
consider the following:  
⎯ ACDI/VOCA - Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit  
⎯ Harvard - Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework  
⎯ FAO- Socio -Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook  
⎯ Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal  
⎯ Gender Analys is for Sustainable Livelihoods and Participatory Governance in 
Rwanda  
⎯ https://www.pacificclimatechange.net/d ocument/gender -analysischecklist -food-
security -and-climate -change -within -programme -or-project  
⎯ How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project  
 
Step 4.b Align the Project with SDG targets  
 
WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT?  
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to 
gender, both as a standalone goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment 
(SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting theme across the SDGs. SDG 13 on combating 
climate change aims to promote  mechanisms for raising capacity for effective 
climate change -related planning and management in least developed countries 
and small island developing states, including focusing on women, youth, and local 
and marginalised communities.  
 
Page 188


---
*Page 192*
---

REQUIREMENTS  
SDG 5 seeks to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. Gold 
Standard expects that SDG 5 will be one of the three SDGs that the Project aligns 
with. Projects can also consider gender related targets under SDG 8 and SDG 10:  
⎯ SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and 
productive employment and decent work for all . 
⎯ SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries . 
QUESTION  8 
Can the Project address at least one SDG target each from category 1 and category 
2? Explain how.  
 
SDG Targets, Category 1:  
Recognise and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public 
services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared 
responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate.  
⎯ Ensure wome n’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life.  
⎯ Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as 
access to ownership and con trol over land and other forms of property, financial 
services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws.  
⎯ Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and 
communications technology, to promote the empowerment o f women.  
⎯ Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion 
of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
⎯ By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women 
and men,  including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay 
for work of equal value.  
⎯ By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all 
(within a country), irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, o rigin, 
religion or economic or other status.  
Page 189


---
*Page 193*
---

SDG Targets, Category 2:  
⎯ Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private 
spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.  
⎯ Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female 
genital m utilation.  
⎯ Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights 
as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International 
Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and 
the out come documents of their review conferences.  
⎯ Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all 
workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in 
precarious employment.  
 
Step 4.c Raise the bar: gende r commitment statement  
 
WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT?  
The project design, goals and outcomes can now build on available evidence of 
the gender gaps in markets (formal and informal), institutions and households 
and apply the country -driven approach to close persis tent gender gaps. This 
raises the bar beyond limiting the assessment to re -stating key gender equality 
gaps. The Project, in understanding and articulating key gender constraints as 
well as opportunities, will seek to narrow gaps, lift constraints, support  
opportunities and feed into a more active and engaged dialogue with stakeholders 
on key levers for sustainable change. The Project goals may also go beyond 
conventional treatment of gender as pertaining to average women in the country 
to consider the full  diversity of constraints facing women and men as affected by 
their age, marital status, income levels, ethnicity, physical abilities, locations and 
mobility.  
 
 
 
Based on findings, the Project's commitment to gendered actions and Project  
outcomes shall be defined.  
 
 
Page 190


---
*Page 194*
---

QUESTION 9 
Can the Project articulate the statement on gender outcomes? This shall be further 
reflected in the final Project claim detailed in Step 6. The Project statement can 
include the following:  
⎯ Define which measures are in the ov erall Project design to achieve gender 
equality results including the mitigation of negative impacts like reinforcing 
gender inequalities of traditional perceptions of what is male and female.  
⎯ Outline whether and how the Project reduces gender inequalitie s and/or 
reinforces gender empowerment, and how this affects the achievement of overall 
Project objectives. Refer to the chosen SDG target in Step 4 (b) above.  
⎯ List gender indicators pertinent to the Project scope by which Project results will 
be measured . Refer to Step 5 (a) below to identify gender indicators.  
⎯ Examples of indicators are given under Step 5.  
 
3.2 |  STEP 5: ESTABLISH GOALS AND MEASURE CHANGE  
Step 5.a Establish Project gender goals (actions):  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
⎯ Select at least one Gender Project Action from tables below to demonstrate 
compliance to the Category 1 SDG Targets given in Step 4(B) ab ove. 
⎯ Refer to the economic Empowerment Goals and Social Empowerment Goals in 
the Tables below.  
 
The economic empowerment goals and social empowerment goals tables below  
provide guidance to Project Developers on potential gender goals, actions and  
indicators. Projects will need to demonstrate close alignment to gender goals  
and choose relevant gender indicators. The list of gender responsive indicators  
given in tables below is not exhaustive and project developers can propose their  
own indicators. Realistic project goals need to be set against baselines identified  
in Step 4 (a) above.  
 
 
Page 191


---
*Page 195*
---

Economic Empowerment Goals Table:  
ECONOMIC 
EMPOWERMENT 
GOALS  PROJECT ACTION  EXAMPLE OF GENDER -
RESPONSIVE INDICATORS  
1) Income and 
expenditures  Closing of gender gaps in 
earnings and income 
generation opportunities  ⎯ Qualitative increase in earning and 
income generation opportunities 
for both women and men 
expressed as income ratio of men 
to women  
⎯ Percentage change in expenditure 
on purchasing fuel / electricity for 
household energy needs in 
women -headed households  
2) Economic 
assets  Closing of gender gaps in 
asset access, ownership 
and control; Absolute 
increase in  women’s 
relative control  and 
ownership of an asset  ⎯ Number/proportion of women with 
improved access to financial 
mechanisms (equity investment, 
affordable loans, etc.) for low -
carbon/climate -resilient products 
and services   
⎯ Evidence of the type of financial 
incentives used to encourage 
women’s entry into the market for 
provision of low -carbon/climate -
resilient products and services 
(e.g., finance packages, tax 
benefits and rebates, subsidies, 
pilot schemes, partnerships wit h 
financial institutions, the private 
sector or women’s associations)  
3) Quality 
employment  Closing of gender gaps in 
labour market segregation 
and paid and unpaid 
employment  ⎯ Quantifiable increase in targeted 
and diversified employment 
opportunities for women and men 
(expressed as a ratio) coupled with 
Page 192


---
*Page 196*
---

support for reproductive 
responsibilities  
⎯ Number and percentage of women 
who report time -savings and 
increased ability to enga ge in 
economic activities due to 
improvements in their own health 
care, reduced childhood illnesses, 
etc.  
4) Education  Closing of literacy gap 
between boys and girls 
and parity in enrolment 
rates in primary, 
secondary and tertiary 
education  ⎯ Quantifiabl e increase in enrolment 
rates of boys and girls and rates of 
graduation with relevant skills  
 
 
Social Empowerment Goals Table  
SOCIAL 
EMPOWERMENT 
GOALS  PROJECT ACTION  EXAMPLE OF GENDER -
RESPONSIVE INDICATORS  
1) Individual and 
community 
empowerment 
including 
meaningful 
participation and 
leadership, 
stronger social 
networks and 
agency  Closing of gender gaps in 
women and men ’s 
participations and 
leadership and access to 
networks  
 
Closing of gender gaps in 
leade rship positions and 
decision making at the 
individual, household, 
community and political 
level  ⎯ Quantitative indicators that 
measure targets and quotas for 
women’s participation and 
leadership in community, including 
their access to social networks  
⎯ Quant ifiable increase in the 
percentage of women making 
decisions on behalf of their 
families, communities and 
government  
Page 193


---
*Page 197*
---

2) Applied skills 
and training  Closing of gender gaps and 
stereotypes in women and 
men’s access to applied 
skills and training  ⎯ Qualitat ive and verifiable increase 
in women’s and men’s relative 
confidence, skills and know -how, 
e.g., on appraising investments 
and developing projects  
⎯ Evidence of the type of incentives 
designed to recruit women, 
increase their capacity and provide 
career deve lopment in targeted 
sector agencies and service 
providers  
3) Secure access 
to health, 
reproductive 
health and rights  Closing of gender gaps in 
accessing health services 
and entitlements 
expressed as a ratio  ⎯ Quantifiable improvement in 
women’s overall health and 
determination of health rights and 
service delivery  
⎯ Number of beneficiaries, i.e., 
people with improved livin g and 
occupancy conditions, including 
women and women -headed 
households  
 
4) Access to 
infrastructure 
services and 
technologies  Closing of gender gaps in 
access to infrastructure 
services  ⎯ Quantifiable increase in women’s 
control over, decisions in, rela ted 
skills development and access to 
infrastructure services (e.g., 
transport, renewable energy 
supplies) and technologies (e.g., 
increased number of women and 
men passengers on trips and 
freight using low -carbon transport)  
⎯ Time saved in collecting and 
carrying water, fuel and forest 
products due to environmentally 
Page 194


---
*Page 198*
---

sustainable and climate change 
mitigation/adaptation activities  
⎯ Capacity building of both women 
and men to use, maintain and 
manage low -carbon and climate -
resilient solutions and technologies  
 
5) Rest and 
leisure  Closing of gender gaps in 
women and men’s unpaid 
time poverty and labor 
burden  ⎯ Quantitative indicators that 
measures women’s and men’s shift 
in time  
 
 
Step 5.b Establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the Project  
Gender performance indicators and sex -disaggregated targets can now be 
incorporated into the Project results framework.  
 
WHAT ARE GENDER INDICATORS ? 
Indicators play a crucial role in the gender responsive process throughout the 
policy cycle. Quanti tative and qualitative indicators must enable ongoing 
monitoring and evaluation of whether the Project’s gender equality objectives are 
being met and assessing the gender effect of Project activities. If objectives are 
not being met, it could be essential to re-assess the Project strategy and make 
amendments to ensure improvements. Gender indicators usually express how 
distant a certain situation is from gender equality and are usually expressed as 
gaps, ratios and generally as measures of ‘gender inequalit ies’. Gender -blind 
indicators are those that do not allow the evaluator to uncover gender differences 
and gender relations in a society because they are not collected or cannot be 
collected in a sex -disaggregated way. For example “community participation“ is a 
gender -blind indicator but if collected separately for men and for women, can 
become a gender indicators.  
For example, the Programa Fase de Forestación (PROFAFOR) carbon sequestration 
project in Ecuador set a minimum plot size at 50 hectares, de fact o excluding 
some smallholders, most whom are women. In Uganda, “the availability of land 
Page 195


---
*Page 199*
---

and capital” of local farmers was a determining factor for participation, forcing 
smallholders without idle land into making the difficult choice between planting 
trees for carbon forestry or cultivating food crops. This approach ensures that 
projects have equal impacts on men and women, or at least do not negatively 
impact women or reinforce gender inequalities. Gender indicators also explore the 
nuances of gendered re lationships, through things like participation in household 
decision -making. This goes beyond simple collection of sex -disaggregated data; 
rather the data point itself has a gendered component.  
 
 
Economic and social indicators framed by ecological systems need to systematically 
integrate gender -disaggregated and gender -sensitive data throughout – _from needs 
assessments and baseline indicators to program and Project outcome targets, 
process, results and impact assessments.  
⎯ Projects may co nsider how their gender indicators go beyond economic  equity and 
socio-political empowerment indicators to include climate -relevant  environmental 
and ecological factors, including access to public commons.  
⎯ Projects should indicate if any indicators were de veloped at the ground level  in 
close and continued consultation with communities and women, describing  where 
and how.  
As part of Project design, determining which indicators to use from social and 
economic empowerment goal charts above can have profound im plications for Project 
outcomes. Establishing quantitative criteria alone, for instance, can have  
the unintended effect of excluding entire constituencies of Project beneficiaries.  
The following questions can guide the Project Developer to focus on selecti ng 
appropriate indicators.  
⎯ Will the Project positively or negatively engage women and men?  
⎯ Will it impose increased time or care burdens on women relative to men?  
⎯ Is there a process in place to track and verify gender impacts? (positive and/or 
negative)  
⎯ Is there an improvement in the ratio of women to men engaging in the  Project 
decisions and on -the-ground monitoring?  
⎯ Is there an increased sense of confidence and empowerment among the  Project 
beneficiaries?  
Page 196


---
*Page 200*
---

REQUIREMENTS  
Define Monitoring Paramet ers for each of the above Gender Responsive Indicators 
chosen in Step 5(a) above.  
 
Project developers will need to identify relevant monitoring parameters to  
monitor and evaluate the progress towards equality enabled by the project as  
reflected in chosen  indicator.  
 
RESOURCES: To help guide development of Gender monitoring indicators –consider 
the following resources:  
⎯ The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following  sectors: 
Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Information and  Communications 
Technology (ICT), Transport, Water and Sanitation. 
See:http://ppp.worldbank.org/public -private-partnership/ppp -
sector/genderimpacts -ppps/sector -specific -materials/sector -specific -materials  
⎯ Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and  Indicators 
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool -kit-gender -equality -resultsand -indicators  
⎯ The Gender Data Portal for the latest sex -disaggregated data and gender  statistics 
covering demography, education, health, economic opportunities,  public life and 
decision -making, and agency, see  http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/  
⎯ GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html  
 
EXAMPLE from ADB (2013)  Gender Equality Dimension: Voice and Rights  
 
SAMPLE INDICATORS   SAMPLE MONITORIN G PARAMETERS   
Women and men participate 
equitably in decision making in the 
energy sector  
⎯ Policy making  
⎯ Utilities and energy boards  
⎯ User groups and committees  ⎯ Number and percentage of women and men 
who attend participatory planning and 
consultation meetings  
⎯ Number and percentage of women and men 
in energy user groups, cooperatives, 
committees, utilities, or energy boards; and 
in decision -making positions in these entities  
Page 197


---
*Page 201*
---

⎯ Public consultations on energy 
infrastructure, efficiency, and 
technologies  
 ⎯ Number and percentage of women involved 
in decision making on tariff arrangements 
(including identification of poor and 
vulnerable households for free or subsidised 
access)  
⎯ Number and percentage of male and female 
facilitators and field staff working with 
community groups on planning, 
consultation, or implementation  
⎯ Changes to design, implementation, cost 
recovery, or maintenance practices due to 
consultation with w omen  
⎯ Evidence of the number and type of 
awareness activities on entitlements and 
standards of energy service specifically 
targeted at poor women and men  
Women’s and men’s rights are 
protected, in relation to jobs lost 
due to the decommissioning of 
polluting and inefficient energy 
plants  
 ⎯ Number and percentage of women and men 
who lost their jobs  
⎯ Number and percentage of affected women 
and men who were retrained, restored their 
livelihood and income, or reemployed in 
renewable or clean energy generation   
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Project Developers should consider these aspects and establish the Project's key 
gender indicators.  
 
There are a few cross -cutting qualitative and quantitative issues that gender  
indicators can address:  
⎯ At the monetary level: How much money, dollar for dollar, reaches women and 
girls at the local levels of consultation and how are decisions made around 
disbursement, use, investment and reinvestments?  
Page 198


---
*Page 202*
---

⎯ At the empowerment level: How many women and how many men are actively 
involved an d engaged in reaching those decisions (about money disbursement, 
use, investment, and reinvestment) and in acting on those decisions? How many 
women participate in determining a valid indicator that best captures change for 
them?  
⎯ At the environmental/ecolo gical level: How are access points to natural resources 
that poor men and women depend protected? How are men and women involved in 
the decisions and actions around stewarding natural resources for future 
generations?  
⎯ At the gender -differentiated level: Wh at kinds of gender -differentiated evidence, 
perspectives, narratives and realities are captured, recorded and learned from as a 
direct result of their own measurements of progress?  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Track and record changes that the Project can support both in  terms of gender -
equitable processes and in terms of Gender -Responsive performance.  
 
3.3 |  STEP 6: PROJECT CLAIM - GENDER ACTIONS  
 
REQUIREMENTS  
Describe how the Project delivers on its commitment statement (end of step 4) and 
the proposed Project gender goals, actions and commitments (from step 5).  
QUESTION 10 
What gender outcomes can this project realistically claim? Describe in one or two 
succinct and clear paragraphs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 199


---
*Page 203*
---

Use the following chart to guide you  
GENDER RESPONSIVE 
CHECKLIST  
FOR PROJECT CLAIMS1 YES NO PARTIALLY  NOT 
RELEVANT  
1) The gender analysis of 
the project examines:  
 
- The different situations of 
women and men      
    
- The impacts the project 
will have on different 
groups      
2) The project collects and 
uses sex -disaggregated 
data and qualitative 
information to analyse and 
track gender issues      
3) Project is designed to 
meet the different needs 
and priorities of women 
and men      
4) The project monitoring 
framework includes 
gender -responsive targets 
and indicators (refer to 
page 19 to 22 for a list of 
sample indicators) to 
monitor gender equality     
1 https://www.unido.org/sites/default/files/2015 -
01/Guide_on_Gender_Mainstreaming_Agribusiness_Development_Projects_0.pdf  
Page 200


---
*Page 204*
---

results against the 
established baseline  
5) Women/gender focused 
groups, associati ons or 
gender units in partner 
organisations are fully 
engaged and consulted 
with.      
 
Note that providing information in this chart would aid self -assessment, Verification by the 
Gold Standard VVB, review by Gold Standard and ultimately the assignment of certification.  
Page 201