=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20201020112809+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/ModDate: D:20201021113937+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B.27/0 2/Add.03 
21 October 2020  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package f or FP 143 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the
Northeast (PCRP) ";
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.27/02 /Add.03  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  68 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  70 
Secretariat’s assessment  72 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   87 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  95 
Gender documentation  97


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project title:  Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the 
Northeast (PCR P) 
Country:  Brazil  
Accredited Entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)   
Date of first submission:  [2020/04/09 ]  
Date of current submission  [2020/ 10/19]  
Version number  [V.001]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 0 OF 62  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
  
Abbreviations and acronyms  
 
ABC   Low Carbon Agriculture Program  
AMS   Accounting Management System  
AWPB  Annual Work Plan and Budget  
BNDES   Brazilian Development Bank  
BS   Baseline Studies  
CAR   Rural Environmental Registry  
CASM  Collective Areas Sustainable 
Management  
CCVI  Climate Change Vulnerability Index  
COFIEX  External Financing Commission  
CPE Consulta prévia eletrônica or 
Consultation Letter  
CPMU   Central Project Management Unit  
CRA   Environnemental  Reserve Quota  
CRPS   Climate Resilient Productive  
  System  
EE   Executing Entity  
EFA   Economic and Financial Analysis  
EIRR   Expected Internal Rate of Return  
EMBRAPA  Brazilian Agricultural Research 
Corporation  
ENREDD+  National REDD+ Strategy  
ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment  
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization  
FC   Forest Code  
FMA  Financial Management Assessment  
GDP   Gross Domestic Product  
GEF   Global Environment Facility  
GHG   Greenhouse Gas  
GIS   Geographic Information System  
HDI   Human Development Index  
IDB  Inter-American Development Bank  
IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural 
Development  
IFR   Interim Financial Reports  
INPE  National Institute of Space Research  
INTOSAI  International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions  
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IPPF  Indigenous People’s Planning Framework  
IRPAA Regional Institute for Small 
Agriculture  
IRR   Internal rate of return  
ISA  Investments in Systems of 
Agroforestry  
KM   Knowledge Management  
LAC   Latin America and the Caribbean  LR   Legal Reserve  
LTB   Letter to the Borrower  
LULUCF  Land use, land-use change and forestry  
M&E   Monitoring & Evaluation  
MC   Ministry of Citizenship  
MDC   Ministry of Regional Development  
ME  Ministry of Economy  
MOV   Means of verification  
MRD  Ministry of Regional Development  
NAP   National Adaptation Plan  
NDA   National Designed Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contributions  
NEB  Northeast Brazil  
NGO   Non-Governmental Organization  
NPV   Net Present Values  
PCP  Procurement and Contracting Plan  
PIM  Project Implementation Manual  
PLANAVEG  Recovery of Native Vegetation  
  Plan  
PMEL  Planning, Monitoring Evaluation and Learning  
PMF  Performance Measurement Framework  
PNAPO  National Policy for Agroecology and Organic Production  
POA   Plans of Accounts  
PPA   Permanent Preservation Areas  
PROVEG  Policy for the Recovery of Native Vegetation  
R&D   Research and Development  
REDD+  Reducing emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation  
RMF   Results Management Framework  
SECAP  Social, Environmental Climate 
Assessment Procedures  
SICAR  National Rural Environmental 
Registry System  
SIU   State -level Implementing Unit  
SSC   South-South Cooperation  
SSTC  South-South and Triangular Cooperation  
TA   Technical Assistance  
TDS   Total dissolved solids  
TOR   Terms of Reference  
TPR   Technical Progress Reports  
TRIP  Territorial Resilience Investment  Plan 
WB   World Bank  
YC   Youth Communicators


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 1 OF 62 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals ( RFP) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☒ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:    
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
2% 
32% 
 
 
22% 
22% 
Enter number  % 
22% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  11 M tCO 2e A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Indicate total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries  
1,000,000 people  
 
 
4.7 %  of Semiarid Braz il 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  202,500, 000 USD  
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  99,500, 000 USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant  34,500,000   
☒ Loan   65,000,000  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  8 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  12/9/2020  A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information   
Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (BNDES) is a company wholly -owned 
by the federal government with legal personality incorporated under private law. BNDES is an 
organization linked to the Ministry of Economy.1 BNDES was accredited to the GCF at the B23 
meeting held on July, 2019.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 2 OF 62 
 A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
 
The project will take place in the semiarid region of Northeast Brazil (NEB) (annex 16),2 a region with a population of 
21.3 million people (12% of the national population).3 The states in this region are home to the poorest population in 
the country; IFAD has been supporting rural development there for the past 25 years. The Northeast region has 
experienced periodic droughts and chronic problems related to water scarcity. Nonetheless, the 2011– 2016 drought 
that affected this region is considered the worst in the past 100 years; it has exacerbated many social problems through 
farmers' indebtedness, migration, disease, and malnutrition4, 5  Estimated economic losses from the drought event in 
the agricultural sector alone are on the order of US$ 6 billion.6  
 
It is possible to identify an increase in temperature from 1901 to 2000 of about 0.8 °C in NEB.25 An analysis of drought 
events in NEB from 1981 to 20167 reveals that drought intensity has been increasing over the last 36 years, and that 
recent droughts have been more frequent, more severe and have affected a larger area  with significant impact 
on population as well as economical activities. NEB is expected to experience a further temperature increase of 0.5 –
2.0 °C in the period 2011 –2040  compared to a baseline period of 1961– 1990.8 Despite increased precipitation in the 
summer, the projected annual cycle shows an average annual reduction of precipitation in the region . Furthermore, 
an increase in number of consecutive dry days  and wide cl imate variability are common features in these and other 
simulations for NEB.9  
 
Family farmers are the most affected by climate change. There is a significant correlation between average precipitation 
and agricultural production, but statistically, the ef fect is significantly higher for crops produced by family farmers than 
average agricultural production. The  average crop area lost due to droughts from 1990 to  2016 was 221,973 
hectares per year.10 
 
It is estimated that due to climate change, subsistence foods such as cassava beans and corn can suffer productivity 
losses up to 5% by 2030 in the Northeast, and some scenarios project that cassava could even disappear from the 
region.11 From 2017 to 2030, a 10% -precipitation -reduction scenario coul d cause an average annual loss of R$ 96.7 
million in family farmers' agriculture production  value. If rainfall is reduced by 20%, the annual loss would be 
R$ 193.3 million in family farmer's agriculture production value.37  
 
The Planting Climate R esilience in rural communities of the Northeast (PCR P) project  will work towards paradigm shift: 
it is possible to transform family farmers’ productive systems in the semiarid NEB by increasing production while 
simultaneously improving farmers' capacity to face the challenges posed by ongoing climate change. The project will result in resilient and productive farming systems performing restored ecosystem functions, which, in turn, both increase 
and stabilize family income and food security while incentivizing young generations to stay active in rural activities. The 
partnerships between IFAD, GCF, the Government of Brazil (GoB), and BNDES 
will mobilize resources and 
disseminate lessons to many levels of government in other regions in Brazil and abroad.  
 
The project will consist of three components that reinforce one another to promote climate resiliency as well as emission mitigation: 1) Climate Resilient Productive Systems (CRPS); 2) Water access; and 3) Knowledge Management and 
Scaling- Up.  
 
Implementation of  diversified agroforestry systems  that will increase local water availability in the productive system -
CRPS-, as proposed under Component 1, will influence hydrological conditions across the landscape. The Caatinga is 
a rich productive area, with fertile soils, where temporary streams and wetlands exist, making up a biome with good 
 
1 The BNDES Statute can be found at:  https://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/bndes/bndes_en/Institucional/The_BNDES/BNDES_bylaws.html/   
2 The Resolution 115 of 23/11/17 from Sudene defines these features of the Semiarid: i) Average annual rainfall ≤800 mm; ii) Thornthwaite Aridity Index ≤0.50; and iii) Daily percentage of water deficit ≤60% (average of all 
days of the year).  In the case of Maranhão, it will also consider Bill (Projeto de Lei) no. 2492/2019 which enlarges the semiarid of Maranhão to additional 44 municipalities. 
https://www25.senado.leg.br/web/atividade/materias/ -/materia/136472  
3Banco do Nordeste, O Novo Perfil do Nordeste Brasileiro no CensoDemogr áfico 2010 :  https://www.bnb.gov.br/documents/88765/89729/novo_perfil_nordeste_brasileiro_censo_demografico_2010.pdf/34cfcc2e-1048-4dc1-
9342-46b13eda208b  
4 Gutiérrez APA, Engle NL, De Nys E, Molejon C, Martins ES (2014) Drought preparedness in Brazil. Weather Clim Extremes 3:95–  106. doi:10.1016/j.wace.2013.12.001  
5 Marengo, Jose A., et al. "Climatic characteristics of the 2010-2016 drought in the semiarid Northeast Brazil region." Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências 90.2 (2018): 1973-1985.  
6 Marengo, J. A., et.al, "Drought in Northeast Brazil—past, present, and future." Theoretical and Applied Climatology 129.3-4 (2017): 1189-1200.  
7 Brito, SSB; et.al. Frequency, duration and severity of drought in the Semiarid Northeast Brazil region, International Journal of Climatology, 2017.  
8 Chou, SC; et.al. Assessment of Climate Change over South America under RCP 4.5 and 8.5 Downscaling Scenarios. American Journal of Climate Change, v. 03, p. 512-527, 2014.  
9 Lacerda, FF; et.al. Long-term Temperature and Rainfall Trends over Northeast Brazil and Cape Verde. Journal of Earth Science & Climatic Change, v. 06, p. 296, 2015.  
10 Young, C.E. et. Al.. Drought in the Brazilian Semi-Arid. Study commissioned by IFAD (please see Annex 23)  
11 Machado Filho, H, et.al. Mudança do clima e os impactos na agr icultura familiar no Norte e Nordeste do Brasil. Centro Internacional de Polí ticas para o Crescimento Inclusivo (IPC- IG), Programa das Naçõ es Unidas para 
o Desenvolvimento (PNUD), Instituto de Pesquisa Econô mica Aplicada (Ipea), Fundo Internacional de Desenvolvimento Agr ícola (FIDA). 2016


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 3 OF 62 
 capacity for agricultural prod uction, provided that adapted vegetation is used, with adequate arrangements and 
techniques appropriate to the levels of humidity and solar radiation. The area has great biomass production capacity 
for multiple purposes and can afford to produce with quali ty, without use of industrial inputs. For this, it is enough to 
establish a vertically stratified system that promotes total coverage of the soil and maximizes use of sunlight.  
 
The water access solutions proposed in Component 2, such as rainwater harvest  and storage, if accompanied by the 
current agricultural model , may be temporarily palliative –  subject to severe water loss due to high evapotranspiration 
from heat and wind – but productivity would remain limited. In fact, water investments in the semiar id must be 
complemented by soil recovery practices promoted in Component 1, to allow infiltration of rainwater, increase soil 
biomass rate, create shade and wind shelters to reduce evapotranspiration (which can exceed 2,000 mm/year) . The 
specific flora and fauna in the semiarid have developed a high capacity to access and store water (in roots, trunks, stems and leaves), resulting in a biota capable of supplying more water than needed for growth and reproduction, 
adding surplus water  to the system.  
 
Knowledge management, policy dialogue, communication, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities under 
Component 3, meanwhile, will allow the investments under Components 1 and 2 to be sustainable and scaled up to 
other states in the region and dryland areas, including other countries, resulting in the intended paradigm shift in 
approaches to climate adaptation and mitigation.  
 
The project will directly benefit a total of approximately 1,000,000 people in 250,000 family farms (of which  40% are 
women and 50% youth), increase the resilience of agricultural production systems over 84,124 ha and restore degraded ecosystems of importance for the provision of environmental services. It will increase the water access to 36,000 
families, increasing their resilience to droughts. The project will mitigate between - 11 266 144 tCO2eq and - 11 797 804 
tCO2eq over a 20 years period.


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 62 
 
  
12 The Resolution 115 of 23/11/17 from Sudene defines these features of the Semiarid: i) Average annual rainfall ≤800 mm; ii) Thornthwaite Aridity Index ≤0.50; and iii) Daily percentage of water deficit ≤60% (average of all 
days of the year).  
13Banco do Nordeste, O Novo Perfil do Nordeste Brasileiro no Censo Demogr áfico 2010 :  https://www.bnb.gov.br/documents/88765/89729/novo_perfil_nordeste_brasileiro_censo_demografico_2010.pdf/34cfcc2e-1048-4dc1-
9342-46b13eda208b  
14 PNUD; IPEA; PINHEIRO, F. J. Atlas do Desenvolvimento Humano no Brasil - 2010. Brasília: PNUD, 2013. Available at: http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/.  
15 A study of the São Francisco do Sertão Territory in Bahia State shows that 90.7% of the properties are family farms (Articulação-Nacional-de-Agroecologia, 2018). In the Chapada do Vale do Itaim Territory of the Sertão in 
Piauí State, 92.7% are family farm s (SIDERSKY, 2017).  
16 Using data from the 2006 Census of Agriculture conducted by the Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics (IBGE), a study of the São Francisco do Sertão Territory in Bahia Stat e showed that 62% of the farms and 
ranches in this territory are 0– 20 hectares.  
17 In the states of Piauí, Ceará, and Rio Grande do Norte in particular, there are areas where cashew tree groves are commonly found on family farms, in addition to shifting food crop plots and livestock. In the state of Bahia, 
there is an area where almost all family farms have areas set aside for perennial sisal plantations.  
18 Agricultura familiar no Nordeste: uma análise comparativa entre dois censos agropecuários / Carlos Enrique Guanziroli, Albert o Di Sabbato, Maria de Fátima Vidal. – Fortaleza: Banco do Nordeste do Brasil, 2011. 172p.  
19 TDS – Total Dissolved Solids . 
20 MME-CPRM -SERVIÇO -GEOLÓGICO-DO -BRASIL. Projeto Cadastro da Infra-Estrutura Hídrica do Nordeste. Relatório Preliminar - 1ª Etapa - 225.000 km2 -  Versão Beta . Brasília: MME-CPRM -Serviço -Geológico-do-Brasil. 
Available at:  
www.c prm.gov.br/publique/media/hidrologia/m apas_publicacoes/cadastramento_fontes_semiarido_brasileiro.pdf . 2003.  
21 CEPED - Centro Universitário de Estudos e Pesquisas sobre Desastres. Atlas Brasileiro de Desastres Naturais 1991 A 2012. Volume Brasil. .2ª ed. rev. ampl. –  Florianópolis: CEPED UFSC, 2013. 126 p.  
22 Brito, SSB; et.al. Frequency, duration and severity of d rought in the Semiarid Northeast Brazil region, International Journal of Climatology, 2017.  
23 Gutiérrez APA, Engle NL, De Nys E, Molejon C, Martins ES (2014) Drought preparedness in Brazil. Weather Clim Extremes 3:95–  106. doi:10.1016/j.wace.2013.12.001  
24 Marengo, Jose A., et al. "Climatic characteristics of the 2010-2016 drought in the semiarid Northeast Brazil region." Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências 90.2 (2018): 1973-1985.  
25 Marengo, Jose A., Roger Rodrigues Torres, and Lincoln Muniz Alves. "Drought in Northeast Brazil—past, present, and future." Theoretical and Applied Climatology 129.3-4 (2017): 1189-1200.  
26 Wilhite, D. A.; and M. H. Glantz. Understanding the drought phenomenon: The role of definitions. Water International 10:111– 20. 1985 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate rationale and con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
Climate change problem  
 
The project will take place in the semiarid region of Northeast Brazil (NEB) (annex 16),12 a region with a population of 
21.3 million people (12% of the national population).13 The states in this region are home to the poorest population in 
the country  (average HDI 0.587)14 where IFAD has been supporting rural development for the past 25 years.  
 
Family farms account for almost all of agricultural properties in the drylands of Brazil (generally over 90%).15 These 
farms are usually smallholdings, mostly less than 20 hectares.16 Despit e some variation,17 they generally blend annual 
dryland agriculture (harvesting food crops  – mainly maize, beans and cassava  – for home consumption and sale) with 
raising livestock. Families often have backyard gardens, a few fruit trees, and poultry. A few  also have small irrigated 
areas. There are 2 million family farms employing over 6.5 million people in the Northeast, covering a total of 28 million 
hectares; these farms account for 52% of the production value and 87% of the total labour in the sector.18   
 In the Semiarid, brackish or salty groundwater is common. Approximately 25% of wells have freshwater (<500 mg/l TDS),
19 33% are brackish (501– 1,500 mg/l TDS), and 42% salty (>1,500 mg/l TDS).20 Hence,  an estimated 75% of the 
wells in the Semiarid are unf it for human consumption.  
 
In Brazil, drought is the natural disaster that affected approximately 50% of all population, and most of this population 
is in the Northeast of Brazil - NEB, about 60% of the drought events were registered in the Northeast21. The Northeast 
region has experienced periodic droughts and chronic problems related to water scarcity.  Nonetheless, it is possible to 
identify an increase in temperature from 1901 to 2000 of about 0.8 °C in NEB.25 An analysis of drought events in NEB 
from 1981 to 201622 reveals that drought intensity has been increasing over the last 36 years, and that recent droughts 
have been more frequent, more severe and have affected a larger area with significant impact on pop ulation as 
well as economical activities. For instance, the 2011– 2016 drought that affected this region is considered the worst in 
the past 100 years; it has exacerbated many social problems through farmers' indebtedness, migration, disease, and 
malnutriti on.23, 24  Estimated economic losses from the drought event in the agricultural sector alone are on the order 
of US$ 6 billion.25  
 
To identify droughts for operational purposes based upon regional climatic differences, crop water requirements, 
duration, and human interactions, they were classified in meteorological, agricultural, hydrological, and socio- economic 
drought26. Meteorological drought is usually defined based on the degree of dryness (compared to some “normal” or 
average amount) and the duration of the dry period. On the other hand, hydrological drought is associated with the 
effects of periods of precipitation, shortfalls on the surface, or subsurface water supply. While agricultural drought links 
various characteristics of meteorologica l (or hydrological) drought to agricultural impacts, focusing on precipitation 
shortages, differences between actual and potential evapotranspiration, soil water deficits, reduced groundwater, or 
reservoir levels, in other words, it reflects the deficit of  water for crops. The associated effects of these drought types 
include economic losses and large social disorders such as hunger, migration, and family breakdown leading to socio -


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 62 
 
  
27 Howard, A.; Biettio, L.; Hayes, M.; Kleschenko, A.; Caiña, K.; Susnik, A. Expert Team 3.1 Report on Drought. World Meteorological Organization; Commission on Agrometeorology. 2018.  
28 IPEA - Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada. Sobre a Agricultura Irrigada no Semiárido: uma análise histórica e atual de diferentes opções de política: Texto para Discussão: 2369. Rio de Janeiro.  2018.  
29 The definition by the Brazilian Family Farming Act (Law n. 11.326) is that it is an agricultural producer which is directly responsible for farm management, using mainly family labor and earn a substantial part of the total 
family’s income from agricultural activities.  
30 Martins, M. A.; Tomasella, J.; Dias, C. G. Maize yield under a changing climate in the Brazilian Northeast: impacts and adapt ation. Agricultural Water Management. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2019.02.011  
31 Available areas for agriculture consider ed environmental restrictions, infrastructure and logistics, land tenure, and agricultural aptitude based on soil and topography. The current irrigated area in NEB is approximately 1.3 
million ha, and the potential irrigated agricultural expansion is approximately 11% (ANA, 2017).  economic drought status. So, socio -economic drought aggregates the consequen ce of other drought types. This occurs 
when physical water shortage starts to affect people, individually and collectively. In more abstract terms, most socio-
economic definitions of drought are associated with the supply and demand of an economic good. In general, 
meteorological drought onset is first, followed by agricultural, then hydrological. The sequence is similar for recovery27.  
 
One of the economic activities most affected by droughts in NEB is agriculture. A large part of the population depends 
on agriculture in the classic model of subsistence agriculture28. In this context, agricultural production in NEB is a 
significant source of income, especially for family farming29, responsible for 82.6% of the jobs in rural areas and 50% 
of the value of marke d production. This segment is the one that is most affected by drought events, partly because of 
their few resources for adaptation.  
 
Besides the recurrent drought events affecting the region in the past years, as shown by Brito et al. (2017) and Marengo 
et al. (2017), in the context of climate change, NEB is considered to be one of the most vulnerable regions in the country 
(Marengo et al., 2016; Simões et al., 2010) due to its high population exposure, high poverty rates, and low adaptive 
capacity.  
 
In order to find a suitable adaptation measure to cope with the effects of climate change on maize yield, Martins et al. 
(2019)30 estimated the attainable total production based on 2015 planted and irrigation areas for the baseline scenarios 
and the variation i n the total production for the future scenarios31 considering the estimates for irrigation areas for 2030. 
(See Figure 1 and Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 1 Total maize production estimated using 2015 rainfed planted and irrigated areas for the baseline scenario for the five subregions 
of the study area (left panel); changes in each future scenario relative to the baseline (right panel). Source: Martins et al . (2019).  
 
The South part of Northeast, represented in Figure 1 by R5, is t he more promising region in terms of the expansion of 
irrigated areas. The RCP4.5 scenarios increased production, although those gains gradually decreased for the most 
distant future. In the other subregions, there was a slight variation, plus or minus wit hin 10% of the baseline scenario, 
for all future scenarios except for subregion R3, where the drop in productivity is approximately - 16% after 2072. In the 
worst emission scenarios, such as in RCP8.5, gains in production due to the expansion of irrigated areas were not 
enough to compensate for the adverse effects of climate change. Since the use of irrigation at a large scale has 
substantial implications in water availability, Fig. 2 shows the water demand of each of the scenarios, as shown in Fig. 
1.


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 62 
 
  
32 Follador, M. Potential impacts of climate change on Brazilian agriculture and economy. 10.13140/RG.2.2.17781.99040. Technical Report, July 2016, CEPAL (ECLAC) Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean - UN 
33 Chou, SC; et.al. Assessment of Climate Change over South America under RCP 4.5 and 8.5 Downscaling Scenarios. American Journal of Climate Change, v. 03, p. 512-527, 2014.  
34 Lacerda, FF; et.al. Long-term Temperature and Rainfall Trends over Northeast Brazil and Cape Verde. Journal of Earth Science & Climatic Change, v. 06, p. 296, 2015.   
Figure 2 Irrigation requirements estimated using 2015 rainfed planted and irrigated areas for the baseline scenario for the five subregions 
of the study area (left panel); changes of each future scenario relative to the baseline (rig ht panel). Source: Martins et al. (2019)  
 
Water consumption in subregion 5 was much higher than in the other subregions because it has the largest irrigated 
areas. It is also in subregion 5 where the highest impact of water demand occurred for future scenarios, with an increase 
that exceeded 140% compared to the baseline for the most pessimistic scenario. A significant increase in demand was 
also observed in subregion 1, closely followed by subregion 4. All three regions are mostly located in the semiarid area 
(yellow -colored in the map), where the most significant expansion of irrigated areas is planned. For the worst -case 
scenario, even subregion R2 showed significant increases in water demand (˜70%). Although the scenario indicated 
that it would be possible to sustain or even increase levels of production in subregion R5 (Fig. 1), those increases were 
at the expense of a significant increase in water demand.  
 
For bean, there are no studies on such a level of detail estimating the irrigation requirement under future climate 
conditions. However, as shown by Follador (2016)32, maize, as well as bean, are expected to be negatively impacted 
by climate change, showing a decrease in viable area and an increase in percentage losses predicted in 2030, 
concerning the 2009 base year. While maize losses are projected to approximately 50%, the losses in bean production 
could reach 90% (Figure 3), indicating a more sensitive of bean to future climate and probably a more critical irrigation 
requirement when compared to maiz e production.  
 
 
Figure 3 Effects of Climate Change in Crops.  Source: Follador, 2016.  
 
Although irrigation practices could contribute to limit crop losses in the future, more efficient water management is 
needed. Efforts should be directed towards orienting farmers in terms of more efficient irrigation management practices 
in order to ensure sustainable agricultural practices.  
 
According to climate simulations (HadGEM2- ES and MIROC5 for RCP 4.5  scenario), NEB will experience a further 
temperature increase of 0.5 °C in the period 2011 –2040 compared to a baseline period of 1961– 1990.33 Despite 
increased precipitation in the summer, the projected annual cycle shows an average annual reduction of precipitatio n 
in the region . Furthermore, an increase in number of consecutive dry days and wide climate variability are common 
features in these and other simulations for NEB.34


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 62 
 
  
35 Marengo, J. A., et al. "Increase Risk of Drought in the Semiarid Lands of Northeast Brazil Due to Regional Warming above 4 C. " Climate change risks in Brazil. Springer, Cham, 2019. 181-200.  
36 Vieira, R. M.S.P.; Tomasella, J.; Barbosa, A. A.;  Martins, M. A. ; Rodriguez, D. A.; Rezende, F.S.; Carriello, F.; Oliveira Santana, M. O. (2020). Desertification risk assessment in Northeas t Brazil: Current trends and future 
scenarios. LAND DEGRADATION & DEVELOPMENT, v. 1, p. 1, 2020.  
37 Young, C.E. et Al.. Drought in t he Brazilian Semi-Arid. Study commissioned by IFAD (please see Annex 2).   
38 Machado Filho, H, et.al. Mudança do clima e os impactos na agricultura familiar no Norte e Nordeste do Brasil.  Centro Internacional de Polí ticas para o Crescimento Inclusivo (IPC- IG), Programa das Naçõ es Unidas para 
o Desenvolvimento (PNUD), Instituto de Pesquisa Econô mica Aplicada (Ipea), Fundo Internacional de Desenvolvimento Agr ícola (FIDA). 2016  
Figure 4. Scenarios for drought and temperature changes in NEB semiarid35 
 
Figure 4 shows that regional warming in NEB is larger than the mean global warming, and thus regional impacts will 
probably be stronger than global. It is projected that by 2040, municipalities affected by extreme drought will jump from 
25 in 2012 to 595 by 2040.  
 
The degree of aridity can be measured by the relationship 
between precipitation and evapotranspiration. For the 
Northeast region of Brazil, models warn of an expansion of 
semiarid climate areas, part icularly in the Northwest of the study 
region and an increase in aridity in the South- Central region, 
particularly in those drought -prone inner areas (Figure 
5).36Family farmers are the most affected by climate change. 
There is a significant correlation between average precipitation 
and agricultural production, but statistically, the effect is 
significantly higher for crops produced by family farmers than 
average agricultural production. The  average crop area lost 
due to droughts from 1990 to 2016 was 221,973 hectares 
per year.37 
 
It is estimated that due to climate change, subsistence foods 
such as cassava beans and corn can suffer productivity losses 
up to 5% by 2030 in the Northeast, and some scenarios project 
that cassava could even disappear from the region.38 From 
2017 to 2030, a 10% -precipitation- reduction scenario could 
cause an average annual loss of R$ 96.7 million in family 
farmers' agriculture production  value. If rainfall is reduced by 
20%, the annual loss would be R$ 193.3 million in family 
farmer's agriculture production value.37  
 
This is particularly relevant considering that current productivity 
in semiarid is already low, so any further losses could threaten 
Figure 5: Spatial distribution of the aridity index for the time -slices 
(from top to down rows) 2010, 2020, 2030 and 2040, estimated using 
dynamically downscaled scenarios of the HadGemES2 (left column), 
MIROC5 (middle column), CanESM2 (right column) mo dels, and for 
the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios.


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 62 
 
  
39 WWF and MMA. Índice de Vulnerabilidade aos Desastres Naturais Relacionados às Secas no Contexto da Mudança do Clima. 2017.  food security in the region with repercussions in both loc al and national food security. In addition, the expected climate 
changes may exacerbate other environmental problems that already affect family farming in the region: soil 
degradation, pests, dissemination of diseases and weeds and desertification.   
 
The models indicate that water accessibility will be the critical factor in developing resilience for family farmers in NEB, 
thus the current project will promote productive practices that increase availability, flow and retention of water  in the 
agricultural system.  
 
Numerous alternatives solutions to increase family farmer resilience were discussed considering institutional, 
informational, regulatory, behavioural, technological, engineering, financial aspects. The following design parameters 
were developed to guide the selection process to ensure solutions will reduce vulnerability drivers and overcome 
barriers to change (described in Annex 2. Feasibility Study):  
- Low-cost technologies , 
- Can be implemented by workforce available to family farmers , 
- Provide increased and stable production and income,  
- Low environmental impact (within Category B or C) , 
- Reduces carbon emissions , 
- Promotes the inclusion of women, youth and traditional communities , and  
- Can be scaled- up. 
 
Adaptation needs  
 
Low-income family farmers, the target group of this project, face harsh and difficult conditions for developing productive 
and sustainable livelihoods. NEB is considered the most vulnerable region to climate change in the country,39 as shown 
in Figure 6.  
 
The climate change vulnerabilities are a 
result of the following sensitivity and 
adaptive capacity factors that characterize 
the millions of people in the NEB engaged 
in family farming and exacerbate the impact of climate change: a) 
high incidence of 
pover ty and dependency on 
agroecosystem services and low 
absorption capacity against prolonged 
droughts and loss of harvest; b ) water 
scarcity and poor water quality  (ground and 
surface water) ; c) inadequate productive 
practices that further degrade the soil; and d
) deforestation of the Caatinga Biome 
depleting the ecosystem services. 
Superimposing the increases in 
temperature, droughts and rainfall 
variability on the pre- existing 
socioeconomic vulnerabilities places 
intense pressure on availability  / quality of  
freshwater in the region, translating into 
losses of arable land, desertification, 
increased food insecurity, and reduced 
local economic activities that lower farmers' income and result in rural exodus.  
Figure 6.  Sensitivity to droughts (from top to bottom) Extremely High; Very High: Medium; 
Low; Very Low; Extremely Low. 39


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 62 
 
  
40 Carbon Brief, 2018 (carbonbrief.org).  
41 The Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Removals Estimates ( SEEG), 2018. Available at: http://seeg.eco.br  
42 ECOFORTE is a program of the Brazilian National Policy for Agroecology and Organic Production (PNAPO), which aims to strengthen agroecology networks and organic farming network s throughout the country by 
providing direct financial support.  Emission Sources and Mitigation Potential  
 
Brazil has the world’s sixth largest greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, releasing 2.3 billion tons of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (CO2e) in 2016, compared with 2.1 billion in 2015. In 2016, emissions were 8.9% higher than 2005, 
jeopardizing the country's Paris goal of  reducing its carbon emissions 37% by 2025 compared to 2005 levels.40 GHG 
emissions in Brazil are largely due to forest and grassland conversion, followed by agricultural and fossil fuel 
combustion. Land- use change and agriculture accounted for 73% of all c arbon emitted in 2016.41  
 
Total emissions in the states of the Northeast in 2016 accounted for one quarter of Brazil’s total emissions (591.4 
MtCO 2e). Land use, land- use change and forestry (LULUCF), with 381.8 MtCO 2e (65%), was the major cause of 
emission s, followed by agriculture (with 106.9 MtCO2e or 18%) and energy (with 102.7 MtCO2e or 17%).  Land- use 
change, specifically deforestation in the Caatinga biome, accounted for almost 5% of the carbon emissions (28.2 
MtCO 2e). With 93.7 MtCO 2e emitted, enteri c fermentation represented 88% of the agricultural emissions and 16% of 
the emissions in the Northeast. PCR P will contribute to the national accounting method for GHGs.   
 
Finally, with 102.7 MtCO 2e emitted, energy -sector emissions in the Northeast are largely caused by fuel production  
(mostly from timber) , energy generation, road transport, and the industrial sub- sector. Renewable biomass from waste 
material (coconut husk, cashew nut shells as well as wood from sustainably managed forest plantations and  
agroforestry systems) could be vital to helping these states move towards more renewable sources of energy and halt 
deforestation of the Caatinga.  
 Scenario without project intervention  
 
In the initial baseline scenario, the livelihood of family farmers is already under stress, due to long- term degradation of 
the ecological and production functions of dryland ecosystems in NEB. These conditions result from poverty as well as rising demographic and farming pressures on the basic resources available. The situation is predicted to become even 
more severe due to climate stressors such as greater rainfall variability with more severe and frequent droughts, 
together with higher temperatures, offering glimpses of a possible collapse of farming systems tha t will worsen 
environmental degradation, increase food and water insecurity, and cause an acute crisis affecting the livelihood of these communities.  
 An analysis of the problems and trends in these agriculture systems shows that many current practices are not 
sustainable. To the contrary, these practices leave systems even more vulnerable, threatening the families that depend on them, particularly considering climate change scenarios. There is an urgent need for sweeping changes in the stewardship of semiarid agriculture systems in NEB, to help these communities adapt to predicted future conditions 
and become more resilient.  
 
Related projects
 / interventions  
There are numerous programs to strengthen family farming in the target region. Some are supported by domestic 
sources, such as Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES), and others in partnership with international or ganizations and 
climate funds.  
 
BNDES supports a large portfolio of family farming, agroecology and water access projects in Brazil, especially in the 
Northeast. It has supported installation of 24,600 cisterns for production in the NEB states, and an additional 6,800 
water cisterns are under implementation. BNDES is a co- financer of the ECOFORTE Program42, which supports 
agroecology, ext ractivism, and agroecological production networks. It has also supported hundreds of productive units 
for processing and commercializing agricultural products, mostly in partnership with state governments in the Northeast, 
and implementation of approximately 3,300 technologies of integrated and sustainable agroecological production and 
more than 500 small -scale community seed banks.


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 62 
 
 IFAD has been operating in the NEB since 1978. The agency’s finance portfolio currently totals US$ 450 million, 
reaching 350, 000 families with six ongoing projects. IFAD has five state- financed projects in Piauí, Ceará, Paraíba, 
Sergipe, and Bahia. A sixth federal project under implementation (second phase of Dom Helder Câmara Project), 
covers all states in the region. These projects support the productive structuring of family units through non-reimbursable investments. The beneficiary families receive technical assistance (TA) services for two or three years to strengthen organizational and technical capacities. IFAD -financed projects also support the structuring of cooperatives 
for building and strengthening processing units with both capacity building and physical investments. These projects 
also finance installation of water access technologies. Since 2011, IFAD has funded as  a grant the Semear International 
Program for knowledge management, identification of good practices, outreach of results, exchange visits, and 
publications. In 2018, a grant –  Adapting Knowledge for Sustainable Agriculture and Access to Markets Program 
(AKSAAM) – was implemented in partnership with EMBRAPA.  
 The Intelligent Agroclimatic Mode (MAIS Program), financed by the Proadapt fund, is rooted in community -based 
adaptation strategies and helps family farmers develop climate- smart agriculture in the Brazilian Semiarid. The program 
has engaged about 650 farmers, increasing their production by 63% and income by 204%. In addition, more than three 
tons of CO
2 can be offset for each restored pastureland. GEF supports a small -scale project called REDESER (USD 
3.9 million) with FAO and MMA to reverse desertification through agroforestry practices and productive systems.  
 
The proposed project will build upon previous work by strengthening and expanding climate- resilient productive models 
and seedbanks, improving  availability of suppliers, valuing the role of women, and building knowledge networks of 
farmers practicing agriculture adapted to the current and expected climate conditions. It will tap into processing 
infrastructure from past IFAD projects as well as markets these projected opened. It also takes a fresh look at rural 
youth and technology, integrating climate- adaptation measures with water management and income generation to 
improve ecosystem services and support the vulnerable population in overcoming climatic stressors.  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages  plus diagram ) 
The PCR P aims to achieve the following goal:  If family farmers in the semiarid NEB transform their productive systems, 
then they will be able to increase production while improving their autonomous capacity to face the challenges posed 
by ongoing climate change, because the adoption of climate resil ient practices will result in farming systems that 
perform restored ecosystem functions. These systems will have climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits, increasing and stabilizing family income and food security while incentivizing young generat ions to stay active in rural 
activities . The PCR P will work with the most marginalized and vulnerable groups of the poorest region in Brazil. The 
partnerships between IFAD, GCF, the Government of Brazil , and BNDES will mobilize resources and disseminate 
lessons to many levels of government in other regions in Brazil and abroad.  
 
The climate stressors and vulnerability sources (described in section B.1) result in a number of climate change impacts.  
The predominant farm production of monocultures and top- down application of static technological packages  are clearly 
not resilient to these impacts , as presented in B.1, and are a driver of deforestation and land degradation.   Historically, 
the government response to climate stress in NEB has mainly focused on conventional solutions such as dams, wells, 
and diversion of waterways. Such investments are expensive, may not reach family farmers or respond to their needs, and do not increase farmer’s autonomous capacity to face further climate shocks. Henc e, the PCR P proposes to 
implement diversified agricultural systems that provide farmers with the knowledge and tools to increase their own 
resilience at the family and producer’s organizations level, allowing the most vulnerable to absorb climatic shocks without overt reliance on large infrastructure projects or 
external emergency response measures. The selected 
development pathway responds equally to the climate stressors affecting the region and the socioeconomic context of family farming in NEB. In that context, the socioeconomic criteria used to define the most adequate climate resilient 
practices are the following: (a) low -cost, given the limited capacity farmers have to spend and make investments, (b) 
can be implemented by workforce available to family  farmers , (c) provide a guarantee of acceptable production and 
income, (d) contribute to GHG emission reductions , (e) have low or minimal environmental impact  (Category B or C), 
(f) promote the inclusion of women, youth and traditional communities , and (g)  can be scaled up.


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 62 
 
  
43 Branca G, McCarthy N, Lipper L, Jolejole MC. Climate Smart Agriculture: A Synthesis of Empirical Evidence of Food Security and Mitigation Benefits for Improved Cropland Management. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture 
Organization; 2011, pg. 1– 42. 
44 IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Chapter 8-Agriculture. Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York , NY, USA Cambridge University Press.  FAO43 (based on IPCC)44 classifie s practices to improve farmer’s climate resiliency into: integrated nutrient 
management, improved agronomic practices, tillage and residue management, water management, and agroforestry. 
These practices are often referred to as Climate Resilient Agriculture , and can consist of several methods, 
arrangements, and technologies. What climate resilient is in one biome or production system may not apply to another. 
Climate challenges are also varied in any given geography, and adaptation solutions depend on volume of the area 
and resources available to the farmer. Thus, given the vulnerabilities, ecosystem characteristics and potential changes in climate,  climate resilient agriculture for family farmers in the Brazilian semiarid  translates into practices that increase 
availability, flow and retention of water  in the system. Pragmatically, it means simultaneous implementation of the 
following practices and principles, (which are hereby denominated CRPS) : (i) soil preparation : maintenance of 
dispersed trees, setting u p cradles and natural fertilization; (ii) soil protection: soil cover and biomass production with 
resilient plant varieties; (iii) water management : capture and storage (both in soil and vegetation), level curves and 
terraces; (iv) planting: stratification , diversification and densification with herbaceous, shrub and tree species 
maximizing photosynthetic capacity; (v) management : active pruning and thinning; and (vi) Grazing: pasture rotation, 
fences and silage. The application of these practices results i n significant climate change mitigation benefits . 
Furthermore, the planting of shrubs and trees , and improvement in soil management results in substantial GHG 
emission reductions.  
 
While CRPS practices have the potential to yield sustainable land- management benefits , increase production,  and 
significantly reduce GHG emissions,  they require a significant change in habits, culture and investments. GCF support 
will enable farmers to take a longer -term perspective in anticipation of the significant financial, economic and livelihood 
benefits achievable through the application of crosscutting adaptation and mitigation measures that prevent  the decline 
in production and income that are anticipated to result from the effects of climate change. It responds to the urgency of climate change projecti ons for NEB , and recognizes that for these practices  to function effectively as adaptation  and 
mitigation  measures, they must be applied as part of a larger -scale program and be calibrated and adjusted based on 
the specific needs, priorities and cultural c ontext, both at the regional and family -productive- units levels.   
 
These principles are interlinked and their benefits are synergic, meaning they must be implemented together  to produce 
the desired results . Assembling an agricultural system with these elements makes it a water producer, not a consumer, 
which is the correct approach for a region with low water availability. Table 1 below presents the direct adaptation 
benefits that each principle provides to the family farmer.  In addition, CRPS will provide higher diversity and availability 
in food, diversity of income streams that can buffer against climate and market shocks as well as induce a net farm 
output/yield income stability, increase availability of food and incomes, reduce carbon emissions and improve 
ecosystem services.  
 
Table 1. Principles and practices of climate- resilient production systems in the Semiarid


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 62 
 
 The project will consist of three components that reinforce one another to promote climate resiliency as well as emission 
mitigation: 1) Climate Resilient Productive Systems (CRPS); 2) Water Access  for production ; and 3) Knowledge 
Management and Scaling- Up. 
 
Implementation of diversified agroforestry systems that will increase local water availability in the productive system -CRPS-, as proposed under Component 1  (Output 1.1 ), will influence hydrological conditions across the landscape. The 
Caatinga is a rich productive area, with fertile soils, where temporary streams and wetlands exist, making up a biome 
with good capacity for agricultural production, provided that adapted vegetation is used, with adequate arrangements and techniques appropriate to  the levels of humidity and solar radiation. Activit y 1.1.4 will provide a supportive network 
for farmers to exchange best practices, stimulate entrepreneurship and innovation as well as foster active leadership of women and youth.  
 
The water access solutions proposed in Component 2 (Output 2.1), such as rainwater harvest and storage, if 
accompanied by the current agricultural model, may be temporarily palliative –  subject to severe water loss due to high 
evapotranspiration from heat and wind –  but pr oductivity would remain limited. In fact, water investments in the semiarid 
must be complemented by soil recovery practices promoted in Component 1, to allow infiltration of rainwater, increase soil biomass rate, create shade and wind shelters to reduce ev apotranspiration (which can exceed 2,000 mm/year) . 
The specific flora and fauna in the semiarid have developed a high capacity to access and store water (in roots, trunks, stems and leaves), resulting in a biota capable of supplying more water than needed for growth and reproduction, adding surplus water to the system.  The first years of the CRPS implementation are the most vulnerable, so Output 
2.1 will increase the availability of water in the system, reduc ing impacts of droughts, while the system is still fragile.  
 
Knowledge management, policy dialogues, communication, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities under 
Component 3 (Output  3.1), meanwhile, will allow the investments under Components 1 and 2 to be sustainable and 
scaled up to other states in the region and dryland areas, including other countries, resulting in the intended paradigm shift in approaches to climate adaptation and mit igation.  
 
Figure 7. Theory of Change (Source: Developed by IFAD).


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 62 
 
 The Theory of Change (TOC) in Figure 4 shows that the project was built considering the existing vulnerabilities as well 
as potential climate change impacts. The activities were designed to overcome the barriers family farmers face in 
shifting their agriculture, animal husbandry, and extractive productive activities to one characterized by promotion of 
dense, stratified and diversified systems (CRPS), farmer -led technology develop ment, and active leadership from 
women and youth, thereby enabling farmers to build resilience capacities and adapt effectively to the impacts of climate change.  
 
The project’s youth and gender transformational focus ensure greater opportunities for women and youth in all three 
components. Participation of traditional, indigenous and afro- descendant ( quilombola ) communities will also be 
prioritized.  
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
 
Climate stressors aggravate the downward cycle caused by the inadequate practices translating into a decline in 
productivity, which in turn feeds into social and environmental degradation processes inducing the impoverishment of family farmers and ecosystem services. The partnership between IFAD, GCF, GoB, and BNDES will shift from the 
predominant current paradigm to one characterized by the promotion of dense, stratified and diversified agricultural 
systems (CRPS), farmer -led technology development, and ac tive leadership from women and youth. It will  mobilize 
resources and disseminate lessons to many levels of government in other regions  of Brazil and abroad. PCR P will work 
with existing supply chains in each micro- region, increasing productivity and strengthening 
resilience, capitalizing 
existing infrastructure and processing units.  
 
The project will consist of three complementary and mutually reinforcing components (pictured in the diagram below) to promote climate resiliency as well as emission mitigation: 1. Financing of Climate Resilient Productive Systems (CRPS), 2.  Financing of  Water Access  Practices , and 3. Knowledge Management and Scaling- Up. Selection of the 
productive systems and water access technology is described in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2).  As sole Executing 
Entity (EE), BNDES will have the final decision making pow er on project activities including: i) use of funds; (ii) State 
selection and criteria for Project Areas; (iii) criteria for Final Beneficiaries; (iv) criteria for TRIPs approval; (v) criteria for selection of the PMEL Unit, and (vi) requirements to procur e TA teams and other service providers. BNDES will verify 
the application of the criteria and requirements, and will provide final approval.  
 
Figure 8. Diagram of project


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 62 
 
 COMPONENT 1. Financing of Climate -Resilient Productive Systems (CRPS)  
 
The main objectives of Component 1 are to provide access to financing to the States to implement diversified 
agroforestry systems  that will increase local water availability in the productive system and empower beneficiaries 
(especially women and youth lea ders) in sustainable management of these systems. Investment strategies have been 
designed to meet the diverse demands of family farmers, given the range of sizes of land areas, climate -resilient 
adaptation requirements, target beneficiaries, and productiv e objectives.   
 
Through the implementation of CRPS and relevant cross -cutting activities, the project will deliver Output 1.1.  Increase 
climate resilience for family farmers and traditional communities while mitigating carbon emissions by 
applying CRPS.  
 Activity 1.1. 1.  
Selection of Project Areas and development of Territorial Resilience Investment Plans (TRIPs)  
Through Activity 1.1.1 , the project will select its implementation area and develop Territorial Resilience Investment 
Plans (TRIPs) which will act as a “master plan” to guide collective and individual eligible practices  in components  1 and 
2. BNDES will verify the application o f the eligibility criteria and requirements, and will provide final approval  to 
the TRIPs . 
 
Sub-activity  1.1.1.1. Develop a baseline study to select project area  
 
Step 1. Selection of states and PMEL.  Through a public call, BNDES will conduct a selection of pre- proposals, for 
both the state- level implementation and the PMEL  Unit. At a preliminary stage, the States taking part on the public call 
prepared by BNDES would be ranked through an in- depth analysis based on the following established criteria:  
(i) verification of borrowing capacity;  
(ii) state qualification;  
(iii) verification of counterpart capacity  (including required co- financing  from States );  
(iv) incidence of rural poverty;  
(v) climate vulnerability index and historical exposure to drought;  
(vi) food and nutritional security index;  
(vii) water quality and availability;  
It is expected that States with prior IFAD project experience or other similar implemented projects may present greater implementation project capacity and increased readiness. Two to four States will be pre- selected as eligible to present 
a State Proposal ( Consulta prévia eletrônica) to the Executing Entity (EE) – BNDES. Through the “ Consulta prévia 
eletrônica” the project proposal will be forma lly submitted to BNDES. The document is the basis to verify the eligibility 
of the proposal s pursuant to BNDES’ Operational Policies  and the PIM and does not constitute a promise of financing.  
 
Similarly, the institutions/organizations that participate in the competitive public call to support BNDES through 
implementation of  activities of PMEL Unit  (under component 3)  would be ranked through an analysis based mainly on 
the following criteria, and the pre- selected ones will present a consultation letter to t he EE that will be thoroughly 
analysed by BNDES technical team and will be subject to the approval of BNDES Board of Directors:  
(i) client qualification;  
(ii) experience with knowledge management and south- south and triangular cooperation;  
(iii) experience with similar projects and themes as envisaged in component s 1 and 2; and  
(iv) experience with implementation of similar budget.  
 
Step 2 –  Confirmation of states and PMEL Unit – analysis and approval of the Project Proposal (Consulta prévia 
eletrônica ).  
For both processes, BNDES will publish all the instructions and selection criteria for the formulation of consultation 
letters and in collaboration with IFAD will promote a workshop or similar event to present the PCRP. This proposal qualification and selection will follow BNDES’ internal objectives, functions, policies, and procedures, which include a 
thorough technical analysis. The project analysis will be subject to BNDES Board of Directors approval before the


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 62 
 
  
45 These selection criteria will be applied: (i) the environmental precariousness rate of its property (signs of deforestation, erosion, and soil degradation); (ii) food and nutritional insecurity rates (malnutrition and chronic 
degenerative diseases); and ( iii) tangible effects of drought and level of access to quality water.  
46 The exact legal instrument to be used will be defined by each state according to the applicable local law  
47 A methodology developed by IFAD with support from the knowledge management SEMEAR International Program (PSI).  
48 Each state may will set up a Consultative Council to, among other activities: evaluate and validate the TRIPs presented, ensure their quality, in the various relevant scopes (alignment with program objectives, feasibility, 
etc.). This body may request additional information, recommend improvements, and provide first -level approval or rejection of proposals for final approval of BNDES (see section B4).  signature of the agreements with the states  and sub -grant agreement with the PMEL´s organization.  The final selection 
process will involve IFAD’s no objection.  
 
The consultation letter ( Consulta prévia eletrônica) to be submitted by pre- selected states will include, among others, 
information on sta tes qualification and experience, governance and implementation arrangements, geographical 
targeting, priority activities and key targets to be achieved, duly aligned with the targeting criteria, intervention approac h 
and logframe indicators of the PCRP, s elected municipalities, as well as compliance with applicable legislation. The 
relationship between the activities to be funded with the loan and grant  proceeds to be provided to the States  and the 
results for components 1, 2 and 3 will mirror exactly the relationship for the overall project for components 1, 2 and 3. 
Each one must proportionally mirror all components of the PCRP. Therefore, state projects will differ mainly in the 
definition of territories and geographic areas (and thus also in overall siz e), as well as the specificities that may arise 
from the environmental characteristics of those territories. This design will also be part of the Consulta prévia eletrônica  
that will be submitted by States  to BNDES.  
 Step 2. 1 Define project area in each selected state.  During the preparation of the State´s proposal, t he municipalities 
within states will be ranked through an analysis based on the following criteria: (i) rural poverty incidence; (ii) climate vulnerability index and historical exposure to drought; (iii) food and nutritional security index; and (iv) water quality / 
availability. Technical Assistance (TA) will be selected per area, with one technical assistance professional serving an average of four communities (total of about 140 families) over a three- year period for Component 1 activities and two-
year period for Component 2 activities. This step will occur during the preparation of the State´s proposal . 
 
Step 3. Select beneficiary groups. As defined in the PIM (Annex 21), i n the beginning of the implementation phase 
at state level, each state will propose the beneficiary groups, focusing on those  with the greatest climatic, 
socioeconomic and environmental vulnerability.45 A baseline survey will be conducted to collect information on 
agricultural production, herds, local climate, water availability, gender issues, and nutrition , among others of the target 
population. Priority will be awarded to marginalized groups, youth, and women. Participation is not mandatory, so public 
awareness campaigns (see activity 3.1.1 ) and stakeholder engagement (Annex 7) are necessary. For indigenous 
peoples’  communities, the project will also follow Indigenous People’s Planning Framework (IPPF)  plan as presented 
in Annex 6.  
 
Sub-activity 1. 1.1.2. Develop TRIPs. TR IPs are the planning tool for all the eligible activities proposed under 
Components 1 and 2. They include investments, resources, capacity building, and other initiatives to achieve the 
objectives. Each TRIP will cover an average of four territorially contiguous communities.  To implement TRIPs, selected 
states will provide non- reimbursable funds (grants) to community organizations/associations. Final beneficiaries will 
only ac cess such grants through community organizations/associations. The sub- grant agreements46 will be signed by 
the States with community organizations and associations ; with which IFAD has in -depth experience with its operations 
and accountability. Final benef iciaries will provide 10% in- kind contribution of the total TRIP and this will be captured 
in the sub -grant agreement . Technical assistance (TA) teams will be contracted by the States to design TRIPs with full 
involvement of beneficiaries based on the Manu al for Designing Productive Investment and Business Plans . “TA teams” 
are private  or public  service providers to be selected and procured by the states, following the guidelines of BNDES. 
Under component 1, four types of Investments in Systems of Agrofores try (ISAs) will be considered for: families (ISA 
Familia), backyard gardens (ISA  Quintais), communities (ISA  Coletivo), schools (ISA Escola) as well as a pilot on Bio 
saline agriculture.47 Once completed, the TRIPs will be submitted by the SIU for validation and evaluation of the state-
level Consultative Council and then will be submitted for final approval by the states to BNDES. This mechanism will 
ensure greater involvement, participatio n and empowerment.48  
 
Activity 1.1.2. Financing of CRPS in family farms and backyard gardens   
Through activity 1.1. 2, financing will be provided for the implementation of CRPS in Family farms and in backyard 
gardens. Investments will receive TA for development, implementation, and initial monitoring.


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 62 
 
  
49 Seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, equipment rental or purchase, irrigation systems, tools, fences, etc.  Sub-activity 1.1. 2.1. Implement CRPS in family farms  
Objective:  Reduce vulnerability of production to droughts and increase income, developing a progressive culture of 
multiple sustainable uses of productive areas.  
Selection criteria:  Target beneficiary families ( sub-activity 1.1.1.1) that already have water for production.  
Investments  (ISA Familia) : Resources to implement the CRPS.49  
Area:  31,000 plots with an average of 1/2 hectare each (total 15,500 hectares)  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2.  Implement backyard gardens using CRPS  
Objective: Develop irrigated, diverse and productive backyards in conjunction with activities in Component 2, applying 
CRPS principles to reduce families’ food and nutrition insecurity from droughts , increase access to nutritious food as 
well as value and strengthe n the role of women in production.  
Selection criteria: Beneficiary group families ( sub-activity 1.1.1.1 ) that don’t have water for production. Same 
beneficiaries that will receive water access investments in Component 2.   
Investments  (ISA Quintais) :  Resources to implement CRPS.  
Area : 36,000 gardens with an average size of about 1/5 hectare each (7,50 0 hectares  expected)  
 
Activity 1.1.3. Financing of Collective Resilient Investments  
The funds for collective investments are also non- reimbursable and will follow the same co- funding and TA as individual 
investment in Activity 1.1.2 .  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Implement Collective Areas Sustainable Management (CASM)  
With increasing population and land use in the Semiarid, there is a real threat that these communities could gradually 
deplete the Caatinga, mainly due to timber extraction for firewood and overgrazing.  
Objective:  The main objective is to improve the ecosystem services provided by the Caatinga, such as micro -climate 
regulation, carbon sequestration and fixation, pest and disease control, provision of water, decomposition of waste, 
natural pollination of crops and other plants, and provision of raw materials (timber, seeds, nuts, fruits, etc.). The system will stabilize and, if possible, increase the supply of forage. The enhanced ecosystem services help ensure that the 
community will be the main stakeholders in the conservation and recovery of the system in which they live in.  
 
New options for income generation are needed, especially for women and youth, and the increase of forage for the herd, so that the animals gain more weight and compensate for possible loss of  income due to the herd’s reduction. It 
is possible to develop a slow and progressive culture of multiple and sustainable uses of the Caatinga and reduce 
extensive grazing, while increasing income, encouraging family succession, and conservation and recove ry of the 
ecosystem services offered by the Caatinga.  
 
Selection criteria: Communities that have a collective use area of around 500 hectares or more.  
Undertakings : 
• Recover degraded areas using CRPS;  
• Decrease timber demand by implementing eco- efficient st oves and biodigesters;  
• Increase supply and efficient use of water for production;  
• Structure community seedbanks and nurseries;  
• Promote low -impact productive activities in collective areas (e.g., beekeeping).  
• Strengthening community governance of access and sustainable use of the areas.  
Area : 60 CASM with an average size of 600 hectares each (total 36,000 hectares).  
Investments  (ISA Coletivo) : Tools and materials for implementing CRPS , nurseries, eco- efficient stoves and bio-
digesters.  
 Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Implement CRPS in Schools  
Rural schools are where young people, children of farming families, acquire knowledge on various subjects, such as 
rural life and agricultural production. The project will seek to enable these educational ins titutions to work on CRPS, 
rational use of water for production, renewable energies, and other climate resilience practices. Selected “rural schools”


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 62 
 
  
50 TDS – Total dissolved solids.  
51 MME-CPRM -SERVIÇO -GEOLÓGICO-DO -BRASIL. Projeto Cadastro da Infra-Estrutura Hídrica do Nordeste. Relatório Preliminar - 1ª Etapa - 225.000 km2 - Versão Beta . Brasília: MME -CPRM -Serviço -Geológico-do -
Brasil. Available at : 
https://www.cprm.gov.br/publique/media/hidrologia/m apas_publicacoes/cadastramento_fontes_semiarido_brasileiro.pdf . 2003.  
52 Hoffman and Shannon, 1985  (in their own name and account) will be the final beneficiaries/recipients of the grant funding to be prov ided by the 
states under this sub- activity.  
 
Objective:  Enable rural educational institutions for youth to experiment and teach CRPS, rational use of water for 
production, renewable energies, and other resilience practices to students. Target the cooks who prepare school meals, 
encouraging them to use native fruits and vegetables, reinforcing children’s food and nutritional security.  
Selection criteria : Rural schools within a range of the target areas ( sub-activity 1.1.1.1). Preference will be awarded to 
Family Agriculture Schools (EFAs).  
Undertakings : 
• CRPS teaching and experimentation;  
• Development and maintenance of nurseries and seedbanks;  
• Promotion of entrepreneurship in CRPS; and  
• Training for cooks and students on the nutritional value of native fruits and vegetables to diversify and enrich 
diets.  
 
Area : 1,000 schools (100 families per school) with 1/10 hectare each (total 100,000 families and 100 hectares).  
Investments  (ISA Escol a): Resources to implement the CRPS, such as seeds, seedlings, organic fertilizers, equipment 
rental or purchase, irrigation systems, tools, fences, nurseries, training materials, computers, etc.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3. Test productive models of Bio saline agriculture  
In the Semiarid, brackish or salty groundwater is common. Around 25% of wells have freshwater (< 500 mg/l TDS50), 
33% are brackish (501 –1,500 mg/l TDS), and 42% salty (>1,500 mg/l TDS).51 An estimated 75% of the wells in the 
Semiarid are unfit for human consumption. There are over 500 desalinization units operating in NEB, which produce residual water that currently accumulates in evaporation tanks with no productive use.  
Objective: Devel op pilot testing of productive activities using effluent from the desalination process.  
Selection criteria: Communities benefitted from collective desalinization systems.  
Undertakings : Fish breeding and irrigation of halophyte plants in small areas.52  
Investment : Fish, tanks, irrigation equipment, resources to implement the CRPS , soil laboratory tests, etc.  
Number of bio- saline production systems : 24 bio -saline system each irrigating 1 hectare and benefiting 50 families 
(total 1200 families and 24 hect ares).  
 
Activity 1.1.4. Build a Farmers Network and Promote local entrepreneurship for products and services that 
support family farming   
To facilitate the replication of CRPS, support will be provided: i) TA teams will build a territory -based intervention 
strategy identifying properties demonstrating exemplary experiences of CRPS and water access technologies and building a network to excha
nge these good practices; and ii) Small grants and business management support to 
microenterprises that innovate and produce specific tools and equipment to facilitate the implementation of  CRPS.  
 Sub-activity 1.1.4.1. Build a Farmers Network; the following tools will be used:   
Task 1.1.4.1.1.  Train Farmers; TA teams will train interested farmers and young promoters in CRPS principles and 
practices, water access technologies and gender -transformational  approaches (see Annex 8), appropriate for 
indigenous and traditional communities (Annex 6) and that attract youth.  
In addition, farmers who already implement aspects of CRPS will be invited to be farmer -trainers. Their selection will 
not be limited by the criteria of target group or property size. They can have several roles in the project; from integrating TA teams, allowing visits to their farms as demonstration plots, or participating in local farmer network, trainings and 
workshops. The Project will ensure both women and men become farmer -trainers.  
 
Task 1.1.4.1.2.  Hold exchange visits ; an important source of practical information and knowledge sharing. They involve 
organizing a group of farmers to visit another farmer or group. Although usually the vi sit is done to a ‘more advanced’


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 62 
 
  
53 According to Brazilian Law, "microenterprise" is defined as a company with annual gross revenue of less than R$ 360,000.  group, it is not a one -way process, because visitors discuss and comment what is being observed. These initiatives are 
often more effective than courses or lectures on the same topics due to language similarity and experience of real -life 
situations. Farmers from 5000 medium- sized farms (at least 5 hectares) located in the project’s region will be invited to 
participate in the exchange visits. There will be an active participation of Young Communicators participating in thes e 
exchanges ( sub-activity 3.1.1.1).  Messaging apps are widely used in Brazil and can be applied to bridge communication 
gaps in farming communities. TA can create and manage online social -media tools to share experiences on specific 
topics and solve problems promptly. These tools can further the sharing of the knowledge learned in the exchange 
visits.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote local entrepreneurship for products and services that support family farming  
Most small -scale products and tools available to farmers are directed towards traditional large- scale monoculture, 
creating a vicious cycle that makes farmers turn to non- resilient production practices. Specialized small -scale 
equipment and mechaniz ation can make farmers more productive and able to add value to their production.  
The few scattered farmers who dare challenge the model must develop or adapt their own tools. During visits to Bahia and Pernambuco, the design team witnessed several exampl es of these innovations: forage palm chopper and feeder, 
long-arm pruning shears, wood chipper, and low -tech water reuse facility, among others. This thriving creativity and 
potential demand face high barriers to their widespread use. Microentrepreneurs in this sector are mostly small and 
lack the management capacity for commercial financing, making efforts to scale up or even start their businesses nearly impossible. Their innovations usually never go beyond their plot.  
 With greater access to capital –  especially capital with management assistance and sustainability conditions tied to it 
– microentrepreneurs with businesses that have a direct impact on climate resilient agricultural production can scale 
up their operations and influence family farmers beyo nd the project's direct beneficiaries to improve their practices. A 
dynamic business environment can also attract youth.  
 The project will support investment in small -scale mechanization
53 of microenterprises that provide services or products 
for improving family farmers’ CRPS thereby enhancing rural entrepreneurship. Small grants may support 
microenterprises that innovate and produce specific tools and equipment, nurseries, composting services, apps to manage production, organic fertilizers, pest control, a
nd market platform, etc. These enterprises will also receive 
business management support  by the states through contracted TA teams . The GCF grant will cover the incremental 
costs associated with higher -than- average screening, evaluation and technical assis tance costs of the fund's 
investments. The small grants to microenterprises will be provided by states under specific legal agreements to 
microenterprises selected through a competitive process, following BNDES approval of the criteria .  
 Expected results of Component 1  include:  
• 575 TRIPs designed and approved;  
• 31,000 families benefiting from Family Farms 
Investments and TA;  
• 36,000 families benefiting from backyard gardens 
investments and TA;  
• 1,000 schools teaching CRPS;  
• 1,800 families from 60 communities benefiting from CASM;  
• 540 eco- efficient stoves installed;  
• 540 bio digesters  built;  
• 540 income- generating and resilient pro duction-
based activities in collective areas;  • 1,200 families benefiting from 24 bio -saline 
productive systems;  
• 5,000 medium- sized (at least 5- hectare) productive 
units participating in farmers networks;  
• 550 TA and farmer trainers trained;  
• 24,000 farmers pa rticipate in exchange events / 
workshops;  
• 84,124 hectares under sustainable management;  
• 11 MtCO 2e emissions reduced; and  
• 70 micro enterprises supported to supply small -scale 
equipment for CRPS.


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 62 
 
  
54 The same technique has been used for construction of cisterns in the One Million Cisterns Program.  
55 Cisterna Calçadão - Instruction regulated by Law number 12.873, dated October 24, 2013. Decree number 8.038 of July 4, 2013 and Ordinance number 130 of Novem ber 14, 2013.  
56 Instruction regulated by Law 12,873 of 24 October 2013, Decree number 8,038, of 4 July 2013 and Ordinance number 130, of 14 November 2013.  
57 Instituto Trata Brasil , see: http://www.tratabrasil.org.br/saneamento/principais -estatisticas/no-brasil/esgoto  COMPONENT 2. Financing of Water access practices for production  
 
The purpose of this component is to disseminate practices in efficient water capture, harvesting, storing and use to 
decrease vulnerability of livestock / crops to rainfall irregularity and prolonged droughts. All investments in t his 
component will be financed as determined in the TRIPs for beneficiary groups (described in Activity 1.1.1. ).  
 Component 2 beneficiaries are selected from a pool of families that will implement backyard gardens (described in Sub-
activity 1.1.2.2) but do not have water for production. Irrigation in small plots allows diversified production, mainly with 
fruits and vegetables, for family consumption and to sell surpluses. The TA provided to the beneficiaries will focus on 
addressing issues of  efficient water management, good irrigation practices, techniques for limiting evapotranspiration, 
and precautions to prevent soil salinization. All pumping systems will use renewable energy (photovoltaic or wind).  
 
All water infrastructure methodologies selected in the PCR P are widely disseminated in NEB and are extremely simple 
to build, known in Brazil as “social technologies”.  Construction of the water infrastructure technologies listed below is 
usually carried out by trained community masons, benefic iary families, and their neighbours with oversight from TA 
teams.
54 In addition to creating an activity for local workers, it also ensures future maintenance of the cisterns without 
relying on outside services. Technical training and training in water manag ement will be systematically provided in 
association with the construction process. For further description of these technologies, see Feasibility Study in Annex 2.  
 
Through the use of water technologies, the project will deliver Output 2.1  Improve water access to family farmers 
and traditional communities to reduce the impact of severe droughts by investing in small -scale technologies 
for harvesting, reuse, treatment and storage.  
 Activity 2.1.1. Financing of boardwalk cisterns for backyard gardens
55  
Investment : Materials to construct cisterns; irrigation equipment; tools and materials for implementing CRPS. 
Construction of a plate tank with storage capacity of 52 m3, coupled with a 200 m2 concrete water -catchment area 
(boardwalk or calçadão).   
Application : Irrigate small plots to support short -cycle crops (mainly vegetables) during dry season. The role of women 
in this production is fundamental. Impact on family food security and nutrition are significant.   
Total : 20,000 cisterns.  
 
Activity 2.1.2. Financin g of eligible social technologies to increase water availability in periods of drought 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 . Build small farm ponds 56 
Investment : Small -width deeply excavated reservoirs that store at least 500 m³ of rainwater to reduce evaporation 
and retain water for longer periods.  
Application :  Irrigate plots and support short -cycle crops during dry season.  
Total: 500 farm ponds.  
 
Sub-activit y 2.1.2.2 . Construct small groundwater storage basins  
Investment : Construction of small underground dams through a transversal blocking system along temporary 
streams and river banks, with flexible plastic sheeting lining a trench (from surface to rock or impermeable layer).  
Application : Capable of irrigating larger areas and storing a significant quantity of water for several months.  
Area : 500 small underground dams.  
 Activity 2.1.3. Financing of treatment and reuse systems for household wastewater  
For rural families, untreated water represents risks to the environment, soil, and human health. Only 27% of the NEB 
population (mostly in urban areas) has access to sewage collection and treatment.
57 The treatment systems selected 
use simple and affordable technology based on cycling water and nutrients for food pr oduction. These technologies


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 62 
 
 adapt forms of rural sanitation to the household level and contribute significantly to sanitary improvement of 
environmental and living conditions of beneficiary families.  
 
Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 . Financing of systems for grey water reuse  
Investment : Construction of treatment system consists of filtering grey water residues through physical and 
biological mechanisms, in which organic matter is biodegraded by microorganisms and earthworms.  
Application : Irrigate  small plots, such as backyard gardens and nurseries.  
Area : 10,000 greywater treatment systems irrigating 1/5- hectare plots (2000 hectares).  
 Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 . Financing of green septic tanks  
Investment : Construction of evapotranspiration tank (or green septic tank). Anaerobic digestion, which occurs in 
septic bed, consumes organic matter from household waste in the root zone of the plants.  
Application : Can irrigate trees (usually banana trees, which are part of the treat ment systems) and non- edible plants.  
Area : 5,000 blackwater treatment systems irrigating 0.05- hectare plots (250 hectares).  
 
Expected results of Component 2 include :  
• 20,000 cisterns with walkway;  
• 500 trench barriers;  
• 500 small underground dams;  • 10,000 greywater reuse systems;  
• 5,000 blackwater treatment systems.  
 
Component 3. Knowledge management and scaling -up 
 
Component 3 supports and expands on the activities in Components 1 and 2. The activities described below will be 
explored in the project so that information flows serve both to consolidate learning among families who will experience 
new approaches in CRPS and water access as well as to scale to a regional and international level the adaptation and 
mitigation measures that the project will propel.  Strategies developed will drive upscaling and deliver Output 3.1 CRPS 
and small -scale water harvesting system s disseminated in the NEB semiarid and abroad to increase climate 
resilience of vulnerable communities .  
 
Part of Component 3 (activity 3.1.2 -  sub-activities 3.1.2.1, 3.1.2.2, and sub- activity 3.1.3. 1.) will be conducted through 
the establishment of the Planning, Monitoring, Evaluating, and Learning Unit ( “PMEL Unit”). The PMEL Unit will be 
selected by BNDES through an open selection process  followed by the submission of a consultation letter ( Consulta 
prévia eletrônica), which will b e subject to analysis and approval by BNDES according to its internal procedures . The 
PMEL Unit  will not provide sub-grants  to final beneficiaries . Additionally, t he States, through the SIUs , will conduct 
activity 3.1.1 – sub-activities 3.1.1.1., 3.1.1.2 and 3.1.3. 2 of Component 3, following BNDES guidelines.  
 
Activity 3.1.1. Raise awareness and build capacities of women, youth and traditional communities  
This activity combines several strategies: i) highlight the leading role of youth and women as 'knowledge managers and 
generators’ and 'local talents'; ii) consolidate laboratories for learning, exchange and replication of sustainable practices  
in communities through a set of printed an d audiovisual materials; iii) facilitate dynamic M&E of socio- environmental 
impacts, which will be registered in materials that allow effective influence in spaces dedicated to public policy making.  
 Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. Develop a young communicators netw ork  
A total of 414 young people will be selected to participate in a media resource empowerment program focusing on 
successful experiences in accessing water resources and CRPS. In addition to being responsible for registering 
activities and facilitating production of audiovisual and printed materials, Young Communicators (YCs) will act as “social mobilizers”, fulfilling a crucial role in social organization processes.  
 Another important initiative in which YCs will take part, together with the farmers’ network (see activity 4.1), is the construction of a participatory monitoring model with audiovisual resources.


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 62 
 
  
58 The World Bank, June 2017. Brazil’s INDC Restoration and Reforestation Target, Analysis of INDC Land-use Targets. Report No. AUS19554.  Local and regional exchanges between YCs will be promoted. YC will work closely with TA teams and community -
based partner organizations. Each w ill receive a scholarship through a "learning grant" and have access to equipment 
(mobile phones and notebook computers).  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. Strengthen capacity for women, youth, and traditional communities  
All educational activities (workshops, cour ses, exchanges, etc.) will follow a “learn by doing” approach that explores 
experimentation of alternative technologies and information exchange among community members. Given that women, 
youth, and traditional communities tend to be on the margin of community -based organizing efforts, the project will 
prioritize capacity -building opportunities targeting these groups.  
 
(i) Rural women : The project strengthens rural women's capacities as part of a comprehensive environmental 
education program that explores t he connections between feminism, women’s rights, the Semiarid region biomes, 
agroecology, and food and nutritional security.  
(ii) Youth : In addition to YC networks, youth will be involved in short -term professional courses with a focus on diversity 
of production systems and CRPS. The youth will then be incorporated in TA teams and serve as liaisons with families.  
(iii) Traditional communities : Implementation of sensitivity trainings for TA professionals in issues of race and 
ethnicity, with a focus on methodological approaches and instruments that address the relationship these communities 
have with natural resources and land management techniques. The second line of action involves conducting case 
studies in traditional communities.  
 
Activity 3.1.2. Dr ive scaling -up, unlock policy barriers and experiment with CRPS and resilience participatory 
monitoring model   
 Sub-activity 3.1.2.1.   Promote south -south cooperation  
Another aspect of this project involves developing capacities by sharing knowledge, skills, resources and technologies among countries through the construction of a more horizontal relationship of solidarity than the classic "North -South" 
cooperation. At t
he start of implementation, the exchange sites inside and outside Brazil and the prioritized 
systematization methods will be identified. IFAD is currently implementing the grant Dryland Adaptation Knowledge 
Initiative (DAKI,) which will pave the way for th e project implementation, among other activities, will develop distance 
learning online platform in foreign languages and this tool could be used in case trips cannot materialize. At the start of implementation, the project will define the exchange sites i nside and outside Brazil, the method of interaction (online 
or in person) and the systematization methods. In addition to TA team members, farmers will be invited to participate. 
The project will invest in construction of a database cataloguing the practic es and technologies for proper management 
of natural resources that have been identified in these different contexts.  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.2.2. Facilitate discussions to unlock policy barriers  
The National Forest Code requires farmers in the Northeast to preserve 20% of their land as legal reserve.  Family 
farmers, however, can perform certain productive activities in their legal reserves such as agroforestry and beekeeping. 
The Forest Code anticipates that States could implement a legal reserve quota (CRA) market, where farmers that preserve above their required 20% could sell their quotas. Several policies that are constraining family farmer’s CRPS 
were identified during project design. The most notable include: i) lack of an Environmental Reserve Quota (CRA in 
Portuguese) market; and ii) norms and regulations preventing family farmers from accessing markets.  
 As recommended by the World Bank,
58 establishing the CRA market could provide additional incentives for family 
farmers to increase the area covered by the climate- resilient agriculture principles laid out in the project. A CRA credit 
produced on a beneficiary's property could be used to offset a legal reserve (RL) debt on another property within the 
same biome, preferably in the same state. The RL deb ts represent obligations acquired by any given farmer that can 
be efficiently offset by environmental improvements produced by smallholder farmers with CRPS, thereby generating 
a transfer payment from the RL offender to the smallholders. Implementing a state CRA could create a market for 
forested lands, adding monetary value to a preserved Caatinga. Given the high costs of restoration/reforestation in the Caatinga and the climate- resilient agriculture principles laid out in the project, exchange of CRAs cou ld become an


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 62 
 
  
59 The project was designed assuming t hat the legal reserve markets will not be in place. Thus, there will be no impact of the project if the policy fails to be im plemented.   
60 The P roject -level Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (pro-WEAI)  and Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDD -W) indicators studies will be developed together with the baseline and completion studies.  effective way to facilitate Forest Code compliance, meeting NDC targets and preventing deforestation of surplus native 
vegetation.59 
 
The Committee on World Food Security and FAO (2016) recommend that governments employ public policy to support  
family farmers with respect to issues such as pricing policies, public procurement, food safety and standards, and 
appropriate credit and infrastructure. Family farmers in Brazil are affected by top- down imposition of food safety 
standards designed to res pond to large- scale mechanized and standardized food production for commodities and large 
distribution channels. As a consequence of these entry barriers, family farmers revert to informal markets with lower demand and prices.  
 The project will facilitate discussions in forums on marketing and market access for family agriculture. The proposal is to take advantage of existing organizational structures, reinforce them and create new ones. These working groups 
should involve a broad set of stakeholders (e.g.,  project beneficiaries, NGOs, private and public sectors) and develop 
a roadmap to implement the CRA markets and improve regulatory conditions for family farmers’ access to markets. It 
will also commission research on targeted policy and regulatory issues.  
 
To qualify the inputs made in these forums on public policy, materials (publications and videos) will be produced that 
present results of the actions undertaken, in accordance with the progress indicators used in the M&E system. These 
publications – that present concrete social, environmental and economic results of transitioning to a model of family 
farmer CRPS –  can influence public opinion, which in turn can contribute to the “scaling up” process.  
 Sub-activity 3.1.2.3. Experiment with CRPS and resilie nce participatory monitoring model  
Since transition to CRPS is gradual and it’s social / economic / environmental impact not immediately perceived, a 
monitoring methodology is needed that demonstrates and gives visibility to transformations promoted during 
implementation. Systematization processes will be published and subsidize political advocacy processes, reaching 
external stakeholders, such as public managers and institutions working on related topics.  
 
Activity 3.1.3. Plan, Monitor, Evaluate and Learn (PMEL)  
An independent closing evaluation and mid- term review is part of the project. Activities will be developed at national 
and state level as follows:  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.1. PMEL at National level , undertakings include: building- up an information platform based on 
systematizations and innovation experiences, 12 GIS evaluations (4 at start -up, 4 at midterm and 4 at completion), 
contracting yearly M&E, IT and Communications services, collecting data and information for preparing the Project 
Completion Report, carrying out M&E meetings and planning workshops (one per year) and elaborating 4 Studies, Systematizations and other Knowledge Management products (2 at mid- term and 2 at completion).  
 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.2. PMEL at State level , undertakings include: 12 Studies, systematizations and other Knowledge 
Management products (4 per State), 21 planning workshops, 21 M&E meetings and 21 Territorial Committee Meetings 
(1 per year per State). It als o involves elaborating the baseline study, mid- term review and impact evaluation including 
the PRO -WEAI and MDDW Stud ies60. Finally, the M&E system at the State level includes 3 more State- specific studies.  
 
More details in Annex 11.  
 
Expected results of Component 3: 
• 54 workshops for young social communicators;  
• 100 systematizing workshops;  
• 9 state exchanges;  
• 36 regional exchanges;  • 70 newsletters and informative reports produced;  
• 360 territorial meeting for women;  
• 12 exchange programs for women;  
• 27 training workshops of gender experts;  
• 243 training workshops for youth;


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 62 
 
 • 414 youth benefited  with scholarships and 
communication equipment;  
• 300 training workshops for women about sustainable 
technologies;  • 4 national learning routes;  
• 3 international learning routes -  LAC and Africa;  
• 8 thematic studies.  
 
Project management  
The project management  structure and project governance is described in section B.4 and the PIM (Annex 21).  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
 
The institutional arrangements aim at simultaneously providing cohesion for the project and guaranteeing 
operational independence for the participating states , while ensuring that BNDES is the Executing Entity . They 
result from ample consultations with state governments, local stakeholders including civil society, and relevant 
national authorities, including the National Designated Authority (NDA) in the Ministry of Ec onomy (ME), Ministry 
of Citizenship (MC), Ministry of Regional Development (MRD) , Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply 
(MAPA)  as well as BNDES. The main legal agreements will be the Funded A ctivity Agreement (FAA) between 
the GCF and IFAD; th e Financing Agreement (FA) between IFAD and BNDES; the state level agreements 
between BNDES and selected state governments, and the sub-grant agreements between the states and final 
beneficiaries ; and the sub- grant agreement between BNDES and the PMEL for implementation of part of component 
3. IFAD will only make disbursements to BNDES (EE).  
 
BNDES will enter into a single financial agreement with each selected state  which will include loan and grant part of 
the financing.  States will only provide sub- grants to final beneficiaries. All states are required to finance  the entire 
envelope of eligible activities encompassed in the FP and will therefore be required to access all funding sources and 
financial instruments offered by in the proportions set out in the Term Sheet. The total amount of financing per state 
will vary according to the size of the state and total beneficiaries, as well as the fiscal and execution capacity of each 
state as expressed in the “ Consulta prévia eletrônica” described below. Final beneficiaries (who will enter into sub-
grant agreement with the states to receive the relevant funding) will be “associations”, “organizations”, “schools”, or  
“producer’s organizations and associations” that are based or operate within the targeted selected communities .   
 
The Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) will be placed within BNDES to monitor implementation, compile 
physical and financial information, report to IFAD and be overall accountable. As sole Executing Entity (EE), 
BNDES will have the final decision makin g power on project activities including: i) use of funds; ( ii) State selection 
and criteria for Project Areas; ( iii) criteria for Final Beneficiaries; ( iv) criteria for TRIPs approval; ( v) criteria for 
selection of the PMEL Unit, and ( vi) requirements to procure TA teams and other  service providers. BNDES will 
verify the application of the criteria and requirements, and will provide final approval.  
 
Each eligible state, pre-selected through a public call, will prepare a Consultation Letter, describing the project, 
(Consulta prévia eletrônica ) for submission to BNDES, which will include governance arrangements, 
geographical targeting, priority activities and key targets to be achieved, duly aligned with the targeting criteria, intervention approach and logframe indicators of the PCRP, selected municipalities, targets, and compliance with 
applicable legislation, among other relevant information. The state- level 
project is subject to analysis by the 
technical team and approval by BNDES Board of Directors, following the bank´s internal rules and procedures.  
 
Once a State- level  sub-project is approved by BNDES  and the State level agreement between BNDEs and the 
State is signed, a State -level Implementing Unit (SIU), will be set up to support procurement, financial 
management, evaluation and monitoring at state level. Each state will implement its state level financing 
agreement with BNDES and comply with IFAD policies on procur ement, financial management, auditing, 
monitoring, eligibility, and anticorruption, as well as requirements defined by BNDES in its co- financing policy. 
The state level financing agreement will be consistent with arrangements established in the Financing 
Agreement(entered between IFAD and BNDES in respect to both the GCF and IFAD funding) and comply with


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 62 
 
 its provisions. Before granting the no -objection to the subsidiary agreements, IFAD will conduct a financial 
management assessment of the corresponding SIU to ensure that the appropriate financial management 
arrangements are in place.  
 
The SIUs will be based within the state secretaries responsible for family farming and, whenever possible, states 
will build upon pre- existing operational structures of IFAD -supported projects . The TORs and selection of key 
SIU team members , as well as selection of support consultants, will follow the criteria defined by IFAD and 
BNDES in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) . Both the CPMU and SIUs will e stablish multi- stakeholder 
committees for guidance  (CPMU´s Advisory Committee and S tate Level Consultative Committee) , composition 
and responsibilities are further described in table 4  below .  
 
Figure 9. Project management structure  
 
 
Table 4. Institutional governance  
 
ARRANGEMENT  COMPOSITION  RESPONSIBILITIES  
IFAD IFAD team 
headed by 
Country Director  Produces the GCF´s Annual Performance Reports on the basis of the progress reports received from 
BNDES;  
Carries out the supervision (includes the findings of the field supervision missions), mid- term, 
implementation support and final review missions, and reports as necessary;  
Reports to the GCF;  
Conducts prior reviews and issues no -objections.  
Central Project 
Management Unit 
(CPMU)  BNDES team 
headed by 
Project 
Coordinator  Housed in the Executing Entity  (EE), it has final decision making power.  
Executes the overall project and coordinates state -level implementation and PMEL Unit in line with 
the PIM;  
Oversees, guides and evaluates proj ect execution;  
Approves the state -level and PMEL AWPBs;  
Guides the PMEL and SIUs  on implementation, including AWPBs, operational issues and reporting;  
Submits AWPBs, including procurement plans, and physical and financial progress reports for the overall project to IFAD;  
Performs financial management, accounting, engages auditors and submits audit reports to IFAD, 
relative to the activities of the overall Project;  
Submits Withdrawal Applications to IFAD;  
Requests IFAD no- objections  as defined in the PIM ;  
Proposes changes to the project design based on implementation experience and external 
circumstances (including the project’s logical framework and the PIM).


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 62 
 
  
61 GCF and IFAD loans will benefit from a sovereign guarantee by the Federal Government as approved by COFIEX Resolution No. 01/ 0137, of September 17, 2019 (doc.  SEI 5638739).  State -Level 
Implementing 
Units ( SIUs) 
 
State -level 
subproject  Subproject 
teams headed 
by Subproject 
Manager  Implements Components 1 and 2 , Activity 3.1.1, and Sub -activities 3.1.2.3 and 3.1.3.2  at state 
level in line with the PIM and the guidance of CPMU;  
TRIPS first level approval;  
Perform financial management, procurement and contract management; and provide full access to 
and collaboration with the project auditors;  
Submit Withdrawal Applications to BNDES;  
Submit requests for no- objections to BNDES, for passing on to IFAD;  
Ensure procurement is compatible with the Project’s social and environmental safeguards;  
Submits AWPBs, including procurement plans, and physical and financial progress reports for the 
subprojects to BNDES;  
Ensure that contractors are familiar with GCF, IFAD and BNDES policies,  norms and procedures to: 
(i) avoid ineligible expenditure and delays in projects implementation; (ii) protect the assets of the 
project;  
Develop TOR and cost estimates, technical specifications and budgets;  
Conduct analysis of quotations, technical and fi nancial proposals;  
Prepare price calculation maps, reports of portfolio, technical and financial evaluation; and  
Manages respective contracts provided for procurement and contracting plan.  
PMEL Unit  Planning, 
Monitoring, 
Evaluating, and Learning Unit 
headed by PMEL Manager  Implements Sub-activities 3.1.2.1, 3.1.2.2, 3.1.3.1 in line with the PIM and the guidance of CPMU.  
Perform financial management, procurement and contract management; and provide full access to 
and collaboration with the project auditors;  
Submit requests for no- objections to BNDES, for passing on to IFAD;  
Ensure procurement is compatible with the Project’s social and environmental safeguards;  
Submits AWPBs, including procurement plans, and physical and financial progress reports for the 
subprojects to BNDES;  
Ensure that contractors are familiar with GCF, IFAD and BNDES policies, norms and procedures to: 
(i) avoid ineligible expenditure and delays in projects implementa tion; (ii) protect the assets of the 
project;  
Develop TOR and cost estimates, technical specifications and budgets;  
Conduct analysis of quotations, technical and financial proposals;  
Prepare price calculation maps, reports of portfolio, technical and financial evaluation; and  
Manages respective contracts provided for procurement and contracting plan.  
Advisory 
Committee  Representatives 
from the NDA, 
federal 
government, 
civil society, 
participating 
states, BNDES  Contribute to project efficiency, integration with other programs / policies, and achievement of 
expected results.  
Advises on general direction of project execution; and  
Promotes integration and alignment with other government projects, programs and policies.  
Consultative 
Councils  Representatives 
of State 
Administration, 
beneficiaries 
and civil society  Contribute to attainment of objectives, transparency and equity.  
Reinforce participation of beneficiaries and civil society representatives (including indigenous 
peoples) in addition to representatives from state secretariats.  
Review the subproject´s AWPB.  
Assess activities and procedures of the SIU;  
Review technical -administrative, economic -financial and operational information related to SIUs; and  
Integrates and aligns with other state projects, programs and actions  
Evaluate and validate TRIPs for SIU first level approval  
 
Flow of funds and disbursement arrangements: Project operations will be in compliance with the Financing 
Agreement , IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing and its disbursements, financial reporting 
and audit procedures, as well as with BNDES regulations for financing state entities.  GCF grant and loan, and IFAD 
loans will be made available to BN DES under one financing agreement covering grant and loan instruments, and 
including a sovereign guarantee agreement61. IFAD Client Portal will be the online platform used by BNDES to submit 
requests for disbursements to IFAD. IFAD standard disbursement procedures will be applicable to both GCF and IFAD 
financing:  
 
(1) Advance/replenishment. BNDES  will maintain designated accounts for each financial instrument to receive 
GCF (as per A.10) and IFAD funds, which will then be channelled to the S tates and PMEL operating accounts. 
The currency of the designated account will depend on the currency selected for the financial instruments. The operating accounts at State level will be managed by the SIUs. IFAD will establish the amount of the advance 
for each financi ng instrument on the basis of approximately 9 months of average expenditures (indicatively). 
Funds will then be replenished following the presentation of withdrawal applications and relevant supporting 
documentation of eligible expenditures.  
(2) Direct pay ment. BNDES may also request IFAD to directly pay providers for amounts higher than the 
equivalent of USD 100,000.


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 62 
 
  
Further details and disbursement procedures will be included in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) and Disbursement 
Handbook, which will be prepared by IFAD and sent to the BNDES ( Borrower ) upon signature of the Financing 
Agreement.  
 
The financing from BNDES to the states will also be under one single financing agreement covering GCF , IFAD, and 
BNDES financing, including both loan and grant instruments , and which will include the requirement of the state to 
provide its counterpart contribution. For the states, BNDES may advance resources and make successive 
replenishments through the present ation of evidence of expenditures, following its institutional financing procedures, 
the Project Implementation Manual, and in compliance with IFAD requirements. The flow of funds arrangements 
between BNDES and the states will be established in the State l evel Agreements.  The SIU operating accounts at State 
level will also receive counterpart funds directly from BNDES.  
 
The states in turn will exclusively have sub- grant agreements with the community associations , organization , or 
participating schools (fina l beneficiaries). The states transfer funds to  legally constituted beneficiary associations and 
organizations bank account under a specific sub -grant agreement with the final beneficiary . Additionally, TA teams will 
be contracted by the states following BNDES guidelines, through open selection process and competition 
(procurement) to implement TA work. The same procedure is applicable for all TA under components 1,  2 and 3 to be 
implemented by States under the State level Financing Agreement .  
 
In addition, a non-reimbursable grant will be provided to the selected PMEL Unit to  support BNDES with the 
implementation of Sub- activities 3.1.2.1, 3.1.2.2, 3.1.3.1.  
 
IFAD project financial supervision and midterm review.  Project supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, 
independent from other national control and oversight bodies. From the financial perspective, it will consist of onsite 
supervisory missions, which will assess financial management arrangements, id entify areas requiring improvement, 
fiduciary risks, and corresponding mitigating measures. Financial supervision will also be conducted through office reviews of periodic financial and annual consolidated audit reports.  
 
There will be a midterm review of  the project, which will evaluate: (i) progress in relation to achievement of results and 
disbursement performance; (ii) effectiveness of the institutional and financial arrangements; (iii) the financial procedures 
manual, suggesting revisions and updates;  (iv) the results of execution and financial management of the states; and 
(v) achievement of AWPBs.  
 
In an on- desk role, IFAD will conduct prior reviews of the initial bidding process for each of the planned method in each 
state and of those that exceed t he resource margin set forth in the procurement plan. During supervisory, support and 
mid-term review missions, IFAD will analyse, through sampling, the subsequent tenders. Annual audits should be 
considered mainly to analyse sampling of biddings processes  not verified by IFAD in its missions to have a greater 
scope of execution verification. All IFAD reviews, as well as the audits, should be guided by the IFAD procurement policy and the fight against fraud, corruption and eligibility.  
 
To ensure the execut ing entity (BNDES) has sufficiently strong financial management systems and oversight to 
manage, control and report the project’s finances adequately to ensure that resources are used economically and 
efficiently for the intended purpose (in line with IFAD ’s financial management assessment guidelines), IFAD conducted 
a financial management assessment (FMA) at BNDES, in particular in the financial division and public management and sustainability division, which will be responsible for project coordination.  
 In terms of state- related risks, BNDES will use its expertise for credit evaluation considering the states' payment and 
implementation capacity. BNDES may seek sovereign guarantees , as extended to GCF and IFAD loans,  for the state 
level project operation.


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 62 
 
 Figure 10. Flow of Funds


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 62 
 
  
62 IMF Country report 19/242. Article IV Consultation (July, 2019)  
63 IMF Working Paper 19/236 (November, 2019). Doing More with Less: How Can Brazil Foster Development while Pursuing Fiscal Cons olidation?  Prepared by Valentina Flamini and Mauricio Soto  Authorized for 
distribution by Antonio Splimbergo    
64 IMF post: Bringing Brazil's States Back to Financial Health (October, 2019)  
65 https://www.bcb.gov.br/en/legacy?url=https:%2F%2Fwww.bcb.gov.br%2Fingles%2Fnotecon3-i.asp 
66 Brazil Country Program for the GCF (prepared in March 2018).  
67 (i) Component 1: for individual family farms  – USD 28.58 million (100% of total cost), (ii) for backyard gardens –  USD 1.95 million (10.6% of total cost)  ii) Component 3: Knowledge management  – USD 3.97 million (39% of 
total component´s costs) .  B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
PCR P is anchored in the Brazilian NDC’s  goal to establish sustainable and climate change- resilient agriculture. It works 
in alignment with national initiatives for sustainable and low carbon emission agricultural development (ABC Plan).  
 
GCF resources contribute to the economic sustainability of PCR P and leverage additional sources of funding  towards 
climate finance. The high risks perceived for both climate change and highly vulnerable groups funding in the targeted 
region (northeast semiarid)  requires GCF funding to leverage investments, which are non-existent  in the current 
scenario. The share of resources that commercial banks and institutional investors allocate to project financing in the region has remained limited and concentrated on refinancing projects already underway. Although private capital could be deployed to climate resilient agriculture projects, the anticipated returns are insufficient to attract private investors 
and, in addition, the target population cannot afford to take on debt.  
 
Availability of Climate cha nge and development investment is facing huge challenges in the country. The most recent 
IMF Country Report62 and Working Paper63 for Brazil, highlight both the fiscal deterioration in the country since 2014 
(where 2015- 16 economic recession deepened fiscal deficits) and the country´s current exposure to debt sustainability 
risks (due to the increased Nonfinancial Public Sector Gros s Debt from 60% of GDP in 2013 to 88% of GDP in 2018). 
In addition to this, a constitutional spending rule was introduced in 2016 setting a decline of about 0.5 percentage points of GDP annually in federal government expenditure in 2019−24, which could red uce the current public budget available 
for climate change in the upcoming years.   
The fiscal situation is even worse at the subnational level
64: high debt levels (that represents around 30% of total public 
sector net debt65), liquidity pressures and accumulation of large payment arrears and (in several Northeastern states) 
the inability to pay public wages are some of the critical financial problems justifying the level of concessionality 
contained in the current proposal.  
 
Brazil implemented an important t ool to finance climate change: the Amazon Fund. A global initiative managed by 
BNDES to fight deforestation in the Amazon, the Amazon Fund has received donations of over USD 1 billion from foreign 
governments. Yet, resource requirement to meet NDCs are est imated in the range of USD 300 billion (approximately 
1% of the annual GDP), significantly above the current investment level.66 The Amazon Fund will cover 0.3% of the 
climate change financing required. Other international programs target different purposes  or regions, but few address 
the Caatinga. BNDES offers the following products for climate change and poverty alleviation: a) non- reimbursable 
funding (Social Fund and Amazon Fund); and b) reimbursable funding (National Climate Fund, PRONAF and FINEM 
Environment) for the private sector. BNDES loans  to states are usually applied to infrastructure projects, which have a 
higher internal rate of return (IRR) than the proposed project. The concessionality of GCF grant and loan financing 
enables BNDES to offer an innovative financial product to states tha t specifically targets the people that are most 
vulnerable to climate change in Brazil, supporting them  to transition to a climate- resilient production system. Within this 
group, the project will be able to target women, youth and traditional communities ( indigenous, quilombola and fundo de 
pasto); these group are the most vulnerable to climate -related risk, endure extreme conditions of poverty, lack access 
to the labour market, and have no permanent income sources.  
 The GCF grant of USD 34 million will focus on activities to implement  CRPS (Component 1) as well as Knowledge 
Management and Scaling activities ( Component 3) .
67 The project addresses a key constraint to adaptation and 
emission reduction in agricultural producti on in Brazil: the lack of information and technical assistance for promoting 
climate -resilient agriculture practices. The project’s knowledge management component will promote identification, 
systematization and public awareness of CRPS. Proposed exchanges  will enable sharing of lessons learned among 
farmers. Rural schools will work on testing climate- resilient practices, technical assistance teams will have access to a


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 62 
 
  
68 Component 1 (i) individual  – USD 13.7 million (GCF cov ers 75% of total cost), (ii) Schools – USD 3.68 million (100% of total cost); and (iii) Natural Resource Management in Collective Plans – USD 5.16 million (100% of 
total cost).  
69 Component 2: (i) Cisterns –  USD 28.49 million (40% of total cost); and (ii) Re -use of grey and black water systems –  USD 13.97 million (70% of total cost).  
70 BNDES’s Social Fund is currently investing in family farming development programs in seven Northeast states and has already f unded 24,000 cisterns and 3300 social technologies  for agroecological production in the 
region.  
71 IFAD is currently implementing 6 projects supporting the productive structuring of family farming and social water -access technologies, covering 11 states, 9 of which are located in NEB.  
72  IFAD’s Strategic F ramework 2011– 2015 includes effective partnerships and resource mobilization as one of eight principles of engagement 
(https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/39132730/sf_summary_e.pdf/c76021bc -a3de-4563-adcf -eddfbb9a6e16).   plethora of adaptation solutions and entrepreneurs will provide services, machinery and tools to ease labour intensity. 
Both the states and project´s beneficiaries will benefit from the grant to  motivate a transition to climate- resilient 
production.  
 
With the GCF funding, the project unlocks the potential for replication and scaling up in NEB and in other developing 
countries facing similar challenges, thus facilitating a paradigm shift. By fostering South- South cooperation (SSC), the 
project gains in effectiveness and scale, enhancing its contributions to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda goals 
and for leaving no one behind.  
 The GCF loan of USD 65 million will be the main funding supporting CRPS investment plans in Component 1 for 
individual  family farmers , schools and collective areas .
68 It will also partially support the water technologies  needed in 
Component 2 to  shift to wards a CRPS.69 The loan element is aligned with priorities for indebtedness  and eligible criteria 
established by  national government  (COFIEX of the Ministry of Economy) . The GCF loan interest rate is lower 
compared to domestic interest rates and provides grace period and tenor’s benefits. Without the GCF concessional loan, the cost of funding would be significantly higher and would undermine the project’s economic viability. With GCF support, the project leaves locked- in development paths and uses an innovative approach in the designing of climate-
resilient production systems. This is only possible bringing together stakeholders and knowledge from various sectors, 
as well as merging IFAD, BNDES and GCF financing.  
Key obstacles identified in investment and indebtedness of the recipient that justify the current blend of GCF funding in 
the targeted region include:  
 
• Rising level of public indebtedness and fiscal imbalances at national and subnational levels;  
• Weak investment and deteriorated local credit market;  
• Lack of long- term investment drivers and high intermediation costs; and  
• High interest rates and spread practi ced in Brazil.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The long- term strategy for rural areas of the Brazilian semiarid builds on the extensive experiences and lessons learned 
from previous BNDES70 and IFAD71 projects that focused on strengthening family agriculture and climate- friendly social 
technologies in the targeted area. Building on this solid foundation, the project's results will be sustainable beyond the 
project period.  
 The project's following design elements contribute to project sustainability, durability, and scalability after development 
assistance has been finalized:  
• Institutional strengthening and capacity building: The project will build capacity of family farmers to assess, 
plan, adopt and use climate -resilient agriculture
 / water management practices.  
• Local solutions: Investments in local microenterprises that produce tools, equipment and other innovations for 
climate -resilient production will ensure local solutions are valued.  
• Multi -stakeholder engagement:72 The project was designed and will be implemented with active community, civil 
society, local and national government participation. This collective building helps ensure lasting impacts. 
Effectively managed partnerships with selected partners at international, national and local levels enable the project 
to: i) focu s on partners' complementarities and comparative advantages; ii) strengthen capacity to address 
agricultural issues effectively and efficiently; and iii) leverage resources to scale up successful approaches.   
• Engagement of BNDES: BNDES is a strategic part ner whose commitment and experiences will add value to the 
entire project cycle and maximize attainment of project goals. BNDES has a national influence and capacity to


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 62 
 
 mobilize resources, disseminate lessons learned to other bank programs and include CRPS  projects in its lending 
portfolio.  
• Voice in public policy dialogue: Advocacy to improve access to markets and establish CRA markets will ensure 
that the sustainable gains are maintained beyond implementation.  
• Women and youth  empowerment : These groups' leadership is promoted across most project activities. The 
young communicators network, for example, engages youth to register, experiment, and build awareness of the 
CRPS practices. Women leadership will be fostered through the conversion of local women into knowledge 
managers.  
• Knowledge building by lessons learned from project implementation process: A monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system and  database are developed in such a way that M&E can operate in real time from the start of 
project implementation. Outreach actions will use a range of methods and platforms, such as capacity -building 
sessions, learning, and knowledge sharing events and workshops, as well as multiple media outlets. The sharing 
of lessons learned fosters development effectiveness and allows implementation of CRPS system to be scaled up 
in existing Caatinga .  
• Self-reliance through climate -resilient productive systems (CRPS) and cost -effective interventions : CRPS 
shifts the way family farmers manage soil and water resour ces in the post -project scenario. The project 
concentrates on cost -effective technologies  that will be built and operated by the families and communities 
themselves with locally available materials.  
• Rural microenterprises : The project will stimulate development of tools, equipment and services geared towards 
CRPS to improve labour conditions in the field.  
• Fostering South -South cooperation: The project also engages in South- South cooperation for sharing 
knowledge and lessons learned with farmers living under similar climate stress in other developing countries.  
• Exit Plan . To sustain the interventions and scaling up pathways after the end of the project, the PCRP project team 
will develop an exit plan in the penultimate year  of implementation which will focus on building beneficiaries’ 
capacities to manage the investments, hand- over of data and responsibilities for maintenance of infrastructure (e.g. 
of databases) to relevant authorities, and compile results and lessons learned and finalization and systematisation of knowledge products.  
 
The exit strategy relies on the project's success in improving participants' livelihood and fostering an enabling 
environment supportive of climate- resilient agricultural production.


---
*Page 36*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 62 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
99.5 million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  65 20 years  5 years  0.75 % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  34.5     
(vii) Result -based  payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
103 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing73 Seniority  
IFAD  Senior 
Loans  30 million 
USD ($)   Maturity 
period:  
maximum 35 years  
 Grace period:  maximum 10 years  
 
Average 
maturity period: 
maximum 20 
years  Variable 
interest rate 
 
Option of 
fixed or 
variable spread  
 
 pari passu  
BNDES  Senior 
Loans  59.28  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Participating States  Non-
reimbursable 
funds   
(In-cash/kind)  
 13.72  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
202.5  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)   
IFAD and GCF loans would benefit form a sovereign guarantee indicated in 
COFIEX Resolution No. 01/0137, of September 17, 2019 (doc. SEI 5638739) , 
which allows the operation to go forward and seek Senate approval once it is 
structured. The project expects t o mobilize approximately 15 million USD of in kind, 
as parallel financing from beneficiary groups.  
 
 
73 For details on the pricing of IFAD’s and BNDES’ Co-financing, please refer to the term sheet.


---
*Page 37*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 62 
   
 C.2. Financing by component  
The GCF will finance the costs of mitigation as well as transition to CRPS in Component 1 (70.5% of the component´s 
total cost) and water access in Component 2 (41.7% of the component´s cost). It will also cover 30.7% of Component 
3 with respect to Knowledge Management and Scaling -up. Allocation of its total contribution (USD  99.5 million) will be: 
54.2% to Component 1 (USD  53.93 million), 42.6% to Component 2 (USD  42.44 million), 3% to Component 3 (USD  2.89 
million) and 0.2% to SIU  (USD 0.2 million) .  
 
GCF loan (USD  65 million) will target the following activities in support of CRPS and water access require d to adapt 
productive systems:  
 
• Component 1 for: i) backyard gardens (USD 13.73 million) (75% of total cost); ii) schools (USD 3.67 million) 
(90% of total cost); iii) CASM (USD 5.16 million) (90% of total cost);  
• Component 2 for: i) Boardwalk cisterns (US D 28.47 million) (40% of total cost); and ii) household wastewater 
treatment and reuse (USD 13.97 million) (70% of total cost).   
 GCF grant (USD 34.5 million) will cover CRPS in Component 1 and key support activities in Component 3:  
• Component 1 for: i) family farms (USD  28.34 million) (90% of total cost); ii) backyard gardens (USD  1.95 million) 
(10.6% of total cost); and support to rural entrepreneurship (USD  1.08 million);  
• Component 3 for: scaling up and sharing (USD  2.89 million) (31% of total component´s costs).  
• SIU for audits (USD 0.24 million)  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
1. Climate 
Resilient 
Productive 
Systems 
(CRPS)  Output 1.1.  Increase 
climate resilience for 
family farmers and 
traditional 
communities while 
mitigating carbon 
emissions by 
applying CRPS.   76 478 311 31 369 547 Grants  5 509 667 Senior Loans  BNDES  
22 559 564 Senior Loans  17 039 532 Senior Loans  IFAD  
2. Water 
Access for production  Output 2.1.  Improve 
water access to family farmers and 
traditional 
communities to reduce the impact of 
severe droughts by 
investing in small -
scale technologies 
for harvesting, reuse, 
treatment and 
storage.  101 803 245 42 440 436 Senior Loans  47 600 500 Senior Loans  BNDES  
11 762 310 Senior Loans  IFAD  
3. Knowledge 
Management 
and Scaling 
Up Output 3.1.  CRPS 
and small -scale 
water harvesting 
system disseminated 
in the NEB semiarid and abroad to 
increase climate 
resilience of 
vulnerable 
communities.   9 441 911 2 891 912 Grants  5 351 841 Senior Loans  BNDES  
1 198 158 Senior Loans  IFAD  
Project Management  14 776 533 238 541 Grants  819,639 Senior Loans  BNDES  
13,718,354 Non-
reimbursable 
funds  
(In-cash/kind)  Participating 
States  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  202 500 000 99 500 000 103 000 000


---
*Page 38*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 62 
   
 Under the current financial scenario, BNDES, the States, and the Private sector efforts are not enough considering the 
investment needed in climate change mitigation and adaptation in Northeast Brazil. Furthermore, the targeted final 
beneficiaries do not have access to finance with formal banks and building resilience to climate change is not the unique 
priority in terms of investments for them. Availability of Climate change and development investment is facing large  
challenges in the country. IMF Country Report and Working Paper for Brazil highlight both the fiscal deterioration in the country since 2014 (where 2015- 16 economic recession deepened fiscal deficits) and the country´s current exposure 
to debt sustainability risks (due to the increased Nonfinancial Public Sector Gross Debt from 60% of GDP in 2013 to 
88% of GDP in 2018). In addition to this, a constitutional spending rule was int roduced in 2016 setting a decline of 
about 0.5 percentage points of GDP annually in federal government expenditure in 2019−24, which could reduce the 
current public budget available for climate change in the upcoming years.  
 
While the fiscal situation at s ubnational level -high debt levels (around 30% of total public sector net debt), liquidity 
pressures and accumulation of large payment arrears and (in several Northeastern states) the inability to pay public 
wages are some of the critical financial problems - could justify the need for a 100% grant, a blended financing with 
loans and grants was discussed and agreed with federal and state level governments as suitable concessional terms. 
The definition of grant amounts and allocation followed a two tier approach: to i) ensure the States and the project 
targets the most vulnerable populations to climate change in the Northeast Region, which would typically be 
marginalized due to financial capacities, and ii) derisk the investment and promote buy in of long term adaptation and 
mitigation  measures that are typically overlooked when analysed from a traditional cost/benefit perspective. These two 
factors are considered essential to achieve a paradigm shift.  
 
Grant funds are required primarily under component 1 (88% ) to finance uptake of CRPS in family farms and backyard 
gardens. The remaining 12% of GCF grant element is needed to finance 100% of other key selected activities including local entrepreneurship to support family farming (Sub -activity 1.1.4.2), south- south cooperation and policy dialogue 
(Sub -activities 3.1.2.1 and 3.1.2.2), key planning and knowledge management activities at the national level (Activity 
3.1.3)  and Audits . For those, the grant element is key in making viable and attractive investments in these areas for the 
States. The Economic and Financial analysis provide justification of each investment´s profitability.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
 
Total GCF financing for capacity building and technology development/ transfer is estimated at USD 531,510 and USD 
57,606,340 respectively (Total USD 58,137,849) or 58% of the total GCF funding.  Technology development/ transfer in 
Component 1 involves technologies to implement diversified agroforestry systems -CRPS - in family farms, backyard 
gardens, schools and biosaline agriculture schemes (USD 53.73 million). In Component 2, Technology 
development/ transfer includes Cisterns and other Water access social technologies that will be promoted (USD 3.87 
million). Capacity building financed by GCF (USD 0.5 million) concerns Component 3 –  Activities 3.1.1.1 (Youth 
communicators network) and 3.1.2.1  (Learning routes). The following Table identifies expected Capacity  Building and 
Technology transfer financing in each component from the total budget and GCF.  
 
Table  5: Financing for Capacity Building and Technology Development/Transfer


---
*Page 39*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 62 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
The project will contribute to five Adaptation and three Mitigation Fund Level Objectives and Results.  
 
Adaptation (A1, A2, A4, A5, and A7) 
Water is considered to be the limiting factor for agricultural and animal husbandry in the Semiarid. The water debate 
should focus not on its absence but on how to preserve water during the rainy season so that it can cover demand 
during the rest of the year. Component 2 presents water -harvesting techniques that have been applied in the 
semiarid. These technologies will be implemented to shift the culture of production in NEB towards CRPS, so that 
infiltration can occur naturally, making springs perennial and promoting a biological water reserve in the soil, roots 
and leaves of specialized vegetation. Studies74, 75, 76 suggest that stratified systems are more resilient to extreme 
climate conditions than annual crops and tree- crop monocultures since they have several mechanisms to reduce the 
impact of drought (buffering of humidity, reduced air  / soil temperature extremes, and windbreaks and shelter belts to 
slow wind speed and reduce water loss from evapotranspiration, etc.). Stratified, diversified and densified cultivation 
increases the land's photosynthetic capacity and therefore the volume of biomass per cultivated area, increasing 
water circulation and promoting improvement in the microclimate.77 Plants are combined into a system capable of 
photosynthesis throughout the year, thus constantly producing biomass and accumulating water. It is important to 
reinforce this process with active management, the entire system sprouts vigorously generating becoming resistant to 
the drought period.  
The project expects the following adaptation benefits:  
• 1 million people (40% women and 50% youth) will benefit from adoption of diversified, climate- resilient 
livelihood options (fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.), accounting for 3.7% of t he total rural Northeast 
population;  
• 53,600 households will have food security (during drought periods) (assuming 80% success rate);  
• 28,800 will have water available for production (assuming 80% success rate);  
• 36,000 hectares of Caatinga ecosystem will be protected and strengthened in response to climate variability 
and change;  
• Working groups will be operational to strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for climate- responsive 
planning and development;  
• 75,000 vulnerable households will use tools,  instruments, strategies and activities to respond to climate change 
and variability;  
• 26,800 households with increased production and earnings.  
 
The outreach and emission reduction benefits of the project are summarized below:  
 
Table 2 –  Summary of direct and indirect beneficiaries  
Activity  Direct Beneficiary  Indirect Beneficiary  
Activity 1.1.2.  Implement 
CRPS in family farms and 
backyard gardens  31,000 families in family farms  
36,000 families in backyard gardens.  
Assuming an average family size of 4 people per 
family  
268,000 beneficiaries   
Indirect beneficiaries where not 
calculated per activity.  
 
PCRP will influence changes in 
state legislation, school 
curricula, stimulate enterprises, 
and develop a business mod el Activity 1.1.3. Implement 
Collective Resilient 
Investments  1,800 families from 60 communities  
1,000 schools with an average of 100 families per 
school  
 
74 Mamede, M & Araújo, Francisca. (2008). Effects of slash and burn practices on a soil seed bank of Caatinga vegetation in Nort hestern Brazil. Journal of Arid Environments. 72. 458-470. 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2007.07.014.  
75 Branca, Giacomo, et al. "Climate-smart agriculture: a synthesis of empirical evidence of food security and mitigation benefits from improved cropland management." Mitigation of climate change in agriculture series 3 
(2011): 1-42.  
76 Miccolis, A., et al. "Restauração Ecológica com Sistemas Agroflorestais."  Centro Internacional de pesquisa agroflorestal. ICRAF: Brasília (2016).  
77 Lasco, Rodel D., Rafaela Jane P. Delfino, and Marya Laya O. Espaldon. "Agroforestry systems: helping smallholders adapt to climate risks while mitigating climate change."  Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change 5.6 (2014): 825-833.


---
*Page 40*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 62 
   
 1,200 families benefiting from 24 bio -saline 
productive systems;  
Assuming an average family size of 4 people per 
family  
412,000 beneficiaries  based on agroforestry for the 
semiarid which could, 
conservatively, benefit 
indirectly 10% of the rural 
population in the Northeast 
Brazil.  
 
According to the latest census 
of IBGE the rural pop ulation in 
NEB was 14.760.704.  Activity 1.1.4. Build a 
Farmers Network and 
Promote local 
entrepreneurship for 
products and services that 
support family farming  24,000 farmers participate in exchange events / 
workshops  
5,000 middle size farmers participate in farmers 
network  
Assuming an average family size of 4 people per 
family  
70 microenterprise each with an average of 3 
employees – 210 beneficiaries.  
116,840 beneficiaries  
Activity 3.1.1. Raise 
awareness and build 
capacities of women, youth 
and traditional communities  300 trainings for women with an average of 25 
women per training (7,500 women)  
360 workshops and meetings with an average of 25 
participants (9,000 women)  
243 trainings for youths wit h an average of 20 youths 
each  
Assuming an average family size of 4 people per 
family  
85,440 beneficiaries  
Activity 3.1.2. Drive 
scaling -up, unlock policy 
barriers and experiment 
with CRPS and resilience 
participatory monitoring 
model  Newsletters, communication materials and 
informative reports disseminating innovative solutions 
will reach and influence directly an audience of 
29,430 families (300 families per municipality 
approximately) (117.720 beneficiaries)  
Assuming an average famil y size of 4 people per 
family  
117,720 beneficiaries  
TOTAL  1,000,000  
direct beneficiaries  1,500,000  
indirect beneficiaries  
Component 2 was not included in the calculation of beneficiaries to avoid overlap.  
 
Mitigation (M4, M6 and M9)  
The project will contribute to the shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways by reducing emissions from 
land use, deforestation, forest degradation, and through sustainable forest management and conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon st ocks. CRPS principles and practices will eliminate the slash- and-burn method of land 
clearing and increase biomass production and carbon sequestration.  
 
To implement the CRPS proposed to reduce free- roaming livestock, fodder storage and pasture rotation w ill be 
promoted. Stratified systems with trees can provide benefits to ruminant farms, since trees can be sources of shade 
and shelter, improving productivity by reducing heat stress in tropical climates. Some tree species also produce leaves 
and pods that  are highly palatable to animals and available during the dry season when pastures are of low nutritional 
quality. Native trees of the Caatinga improve weight gain and milk production.78  Well- managed pastures can improve 
the ecosystem services provided by the Caatinga, such as micro- climate regulation, carbon sequestration  / fixation, pest 
and disease control, provisioning of water, decomposition of wastes, natural pollination of crops and other plants, and 
provisioning of raw materials (such as timber, oil  seeds, and fruits).  
 
The project's estimated outcomes include:  
• At least 24,800 households reportedly adopting environmentally sustainable and climate- resilient technologies 
and practices (assuming 80% success rate);  
• 268,000 climate information products  / services are used in decision- making in climate- sensitive sectors;  
 
78 Araújo Filho, J. A. Manejo pastoril sustentável da caatinga.  Recife, PE: Projeto Dom Helder Camara, 2013. 200 p.


---
*Page 41*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 62 
   
 • At least 40% of the families benefited report increased production;  
• 84,124 hectares of land under improved and effective management, helping reduce CO 2 emission.  
• Total carbon balance of t he project ranges between - 11 266 144 tCO2eq and - 11 797 804 tCO2eq over the 20 
years period.  
Table 3 -  GHG emission reductions per activity  
Activity  Results  GHG emissions (20 
year lifetime)  GHG emissions (8 
year project 
lifetime)  
1.1.2 Implement CRPS in 
family farms and backyard 
gardens  23,000 hectares  4 861 260  1 994 504  
Activity 1.1.3. Implement 
Collective Resilient 
Investments  36,124 hectares  1 082 030  432 812  
540 eco -efficient 
stoves and 540 bio  
digesters  87 838  35 135  
Activity 1.1.4 Build a 
Farmers Network and 
Promote local 
entrepreneurship for 
products and services that 
support family farming  25,000 hectares  5 283 978  2 113 591  
Total land management   11 227 268  4 620 022  
Total renewable energy   87 838  35 135  
TOTAL   11 315 106  4 655 157 
 
Additional expected outcomes concerning other relevant economic, financial and productive indicators (example: 
increase in economic / financial benefits, household income, family -farm sales, etc.), are presented in Annex 3 
(Economic and Financial Analysis) and in Section E (Logical Framework).  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
• Potential for scaling up and replication  
The project will scale up diverse agroforestry systems using CRPS directly reaching 250,000 family farmers 
(approximately 1 million beneficiaries). The project entails a strong partnership with civil society, critical in terms of 
grass root demand for upscaling of activities. In addition, the involvement of key federal partners (Ministry of Agriculture, 
Ministry of Citizenship, and Ministry of Environment) and the private sector creates optimal conditions for upscaling. 
Activities under Component 3 create conditions for scaling up a nd driving a paradigm shift to the entire Semiarid, 
potentially reaching 1.5 million rural families79 (approximately 6 million beneficiaries) as well as farmers from other 
drylands in Latin America (e.g., Gran Chaco, Central American Dry Corridor). The succ essful implementation of CRPS 
will lead to a scaling up at state level and beyond the selected sites after project implementation. BNDES will have a 
key role in scaling up through future financing of operations in Brazil at the federal, state and municipal  levels. BNDES 
can apply lessons learned from the project to its credit lines to farmers in other Brazilian biomes, enabling replication 
on national scale. BNDES also has means to encourage rural entrepreneurs to provide tools and services beyond the 
Semia rid, a potential market of over 4 million family farmers (about 16 million beneficiaries).  
• Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
One of the project's guiding principles is outreach of innovative methods and technologies through CRPS. The project 
will promote knowledge exchanges, inspired by popular education, to propagate successful experiences and foster 
innovation. CRPS initiatives will be compiled in a database, a web portal and a set of materials that provide good 
practices for fostering climate resilience in several parts of NEB, Latin America, and Africa.  
• Contribution to creation of an enabling environment  
The project will promote self -reliance of the family farmers and traditional communities by introducing potential 
commercial varieties which will complement the staples they already plant, creating an agroforestry system that can 
 
79 Data from the 2006 Agricultural Census (IBGE) show that there were over 1.5 million households in the Semiarid.  Based on this data, it is estimated that there are currently about 1.75 million familiy establishments in the 
region. [INSA -(IBGE). Estabelecimentos agropecuários do semiárido brasileiro (Censo 2006) . Campina Grande: INSA/SIGSAB. Available at: 
http://sigsab.insa.gov.br/static/themes/v1/lib/elfinder/Arquivos/Publica%C3%A7%C3%B5es/Estabelecimentos%20agropecu%C3%A1rios%20do%20Semi%C3%A1rido_S%C3%ADntese%20(2006).pdf. 3 p. 2014.]


---
*Page 42*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 62 
   
 provide its own inputs and  that are less water dependent. The project creates an enabling environment for 
coordination among stakeholders, stimulating complementarities between public and private sectors in 
implementation of CRPS. Technical assistance will improve the capacity and knowledge of public and private rural 
advisory agencies, rural organizations, and farmers. Supported seed banks and nurseries should feed the continuity 
of planted systems and favour their dissemination  while increasing their self -reliance . Since program activities help 
develop new tools and equipment for CRPS  management and lower their costs, local companies will be able to 
access the market and rural credit programs, consolidating expansion of diversified agroforestry system that will 
increase local water  availability in the productive system.  
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies   
The project will help Brazil achieve its NDC and targets of the Low -carbon Agriculture Program (ABC). CRPS principles 
are a viable option for smallholders to fulfil their legal obligations under the Brazilian Forest Code (FC). The project will 
support beneficiaries to resolve the obstacles they face (e.g., lack of technical support and incomplete fiduciary 
documentation) to fully comply with the national regulatory framework. The FC establishes Environmental Reserve 
Quotas (CRA)80, a market mechanism of offsetting that can be an effective conservation tool rewarding farmers who 
sequester carbon or avoid deforestation emissions81. The project will c ontribute to development of a local roadmap for 
implementing the CRA market. All participating families will also obtain the CAR, an instrument that is crucial for 
implementation of the Forest Code.  
• Overall contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans  
The project will promote a shift from the predominant monoculture and top- down application of technological packages 
to promotion of farmer -led technology development o f diversified system that are less water dependent . More efficient 
water management linked to restoration of vegetation cover will produce valuable synergies for carbon sequestration, 
crop yields, and land management, providing independence for family farmers and positive impact on livelihood of 
beneficiaries. Farming adaptation results should enable a paradigm shift not only among farmers  but also technical 
advisory services.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
IFAD’s core mission is to enable rural poor people – who are the most vulnerable to climate change – to overcome 
poverty themselves. The project will enable the transition of 1 million people (smallholder farmers and their families) to 
increase their resil ience in a climate- extreme environment, through improved CRPS and water access. It will also create 
employment opportunities, as local economies are fostered and stimulated by its investments, and will promote rural 
entrepreneurship activities. An indirect  but long- term macro- level economic benefit from the project will be its 
contribution to food security and self -sufficiency. Reducing farming households' vulnerability will also reduce the 
likelihood of such households needing relief assistance or safety net pay -outs.  
Ecosystem restoration through CRPS offers compelling synergies between climate- change mitigation and adaptation, 
small -scale farmers become more resilient through more efficient water use, soil conservation, improved microclimate, 
increased s oil water content, control of pests and diseases, improved farm productivity, beekeeping, and providing 
greater thermal comfort for animals, all while sequestering carbon at the same time. In addition, this approach helps 
preserve the Caatinga ecosystem by  increasing organic matter and thus decreasing demand for timber; improves 
pastoral management by adjusting stock rates; improves management of native vegetation; applies rational forest 
management through selective logging, regrowth management, and redist ribution of nutrients in the agro- ecosystem. 
It also diversifies production, increases land productivity and improves income and quality of life for farmers and their 
families. The system works for the protection of springs (riparian) and reduction of water losses to provide sustained 
access to water.  
The project will ensure youth and women’s participation in community decision- making, as this modus operandi is 
central to IFAD's operations and support for policy dialogue and South- South cooperation.  
 
80 Each Forest Reserve Credit represents one hectare (1 ha) of forest Legal Reserv e, in addition to the amount required by law to be maintained in any given rural property.  
81 The CRA market can potentially reduce the country’s overall Legal Reserve ‘debt’ by 56%.


---
*Page 43*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 62 
   
 All me asurable benefits arise from addressing problems such as: (i) decrease in income resulting from increased costs 
of forage purchases when a climate change event occurs; (ii) decreased productivity due to growing pressure on native 
grazing; and (iii) expansi on of degraded lands and unsustainable practices.  
Quantitative economic co- benefits include:  
- At least 15% increase in vulnerable households' income as a result of CRPS contributing to poverty alleviation 
in the region.  
- At least 23,000 hectares of degraded or monoculture lands transitioned into diversified and integrated CRPS  
models.  
- 36,000 vulnerable farmers benefiting from increased water access.  
- Estimated increase in local fruit production of 78,000  tons after a 10- year period, improving local population's 
access to fresh fruits / vegetables and consumption / nutrition levels.  
- 70 local microenterprises strengthened, generating 200 local jobs for rural youths to support resilient 
productive family farming.  
- Families in collective areas diversify their income sources with other income- generating activities and also 
reduce timber extraction.  
- 67,000 family farms participating in CRPS reaching an increase in biomass production of at least 50,000 
kg/ha after a 10- year per iod.  
- At least 1,080 smallholder households saving R$ 80– 104 per month in firewood purchases due to 
implementation of efficient and ecological systems (stoves and bio- digesters).  
- At least 36,000 hectares of collective areas with reduced CO 2 emissions and i mproved livelihood of the 
families.  
Qualitative benefits rely on (i) social -capital enhancement and improved cohesion to increase empowerment in targeted 
groups; and (ii) improvements in food security, nutrition and health by increasing self -consumption of  more in- farm 
natural fruits and vegetables.  
 
• Gender -transformational  development impact  
The gender assessment revealed that women have less access than men to both tangible productive resources (land, 
credit, housing, and basic services) and intangible resources (education, technical assistance, political participation). 
The project will promote gender equality by providing access for rural women to the productive resources needed for 
agricultural development. The project will build women's leadership skills, foster their participation in decision- making 
processes, and assist women in accessing credit and technology for production and commercialization.  
 
Gender transformative considerations will be mainstreamed into all training associated with project implementation. 
40% of TA hired to perform services in communities must be women, which will facilitate greater leadership of the 
female population in the project. In the courses, meetings and exchanges, there will be an effort to maintain equity 
between men and women in the target beneficiaries . The project will ensure that at least 40% of family farms will have 
women and youth in their implementation cycle.  
 
The educational approach adopted in local workshops and territorial meetings between women farmers will be inspired 
by 'feminist pedagogy', and its main objective is to foster a broad process of Environmental Education, seeking 
connections between feminism, women's rights, the Caatinga Biome's specificities and agroecological principles.  
 
The Project’s gender focus will ensure better opportunities for women and youth in all three components. These 
implementation measures ensure that 400.000 women (40% of total beneficiaries) to have access to project benefits.  
 
The full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan is provided in Annex 8.


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 62 
   
 D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)  
Although Climate Change Vulnerability Index (CCVI) classifies Brazil's risk as medium82, the Brazilian Semiarid is the 
most vulnerable region in South America, exposed to an average annual temperature increase of 4o–6o C.83 If current 
trends are confirmed, the region will become arid by 2050. The targeted area has a high incidence of long and severe 
droughts; the most recent drought cycle lasted approximately five years (2011– 2016). Approximately 200,000 km2 (20% 
of the regi on, with 1,262 municipalities) is highly susceptible to desertification; 34 million people live there84. In the 
context of global warming, communities' crucial dependence on crops raises the regional vulnerability index, which can 
spike to extreme or high- risk levels.  
 
The project targets the most vulnerable groups to climate change in the country (rural women, youth and traditional 
communities of the Semiarid), enabling expansion and diversification of income -generating activities.  Women are 
particularly v ulnerable to reduced food or water supplies. Traditional communities (indigenous, fundo de pasto and 
quilombola) are also highly exposed, particularly to land- tenure insecurity, because most of them lack legal titles or 
recognition of their communal lands.   
 
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
Although Brazil is classified as an upper -middle -income economy (2017 per capita earning of USD 8,580, poverty levels 
are alarming, and the country has one of the world's highest inequality rates.85 From 2014 to 2017, poverty has 
increased by 33%, soaring to 11.18% of Brazilians (23.3 million people). 86 The target area is the world’s most populous 
dryland87 and the local population is among the poorest in the country –59.1% of all Brazilians in extreme poverty live 
in the Northeast (9.61 million people), and the region encompasses 32.7% of municipalities with very high food and 
nutritional vulnerability  (a total of 52 municipalities )88. Family farmers of the Semiarid face pressing economic and 
social development challenges, including severe limitations in income, access to credit, food, and water security.  
 
• The absence of alternative sources of financing  
Bridging the existing investment gaps will be critical to ensure Brazil's transition to climate- friendly and resilient 
development pathways89. As presented in greater detail in  Section B5,  key obstacles were identified creating the 
absence of tailored funding for climate change adaptation and mitigation in highly vulnerable rural areas in the Northeast 
Semiarid: i) rising level of public indebtedness and fiscal imbalances at national and su bnational levels; ii) weak 
investment and deteriorated local credit market; iii) high perceived funding risks for highly vulnerable groups in the 
targeted region; iv) lack of long- term investment drivers and high intermediation costs; and iv) high interest  rates. The 
current project will address these obstacles with a financial instrument (composed by a blend of grant and loan that 
leverages public and private funds, enabling new investments in climate change- related projects.  
 
• Need for strengthening insti tutions and implementation capacity  
This project will play a crucial role in strengthening local, regional and national institutions for education, research and 
extension, and regulation on strategies for promoting climate adaptation and resilience in the agricultural sector. TA will 
be provided to small farmers’ organizations and schools, introducing new concepts and skills linked to environmental 
sustainability. These initiatives will reinforce linkages among implementing agencies and organizations of the  Northeast, 
leveraging comparative advantages of each partner to maximize mitigation and adaptation benefits, as well as other 
co-benefits (Section D3). Besides, South- South cooperation will facilitate knowledge- sharing among other developing 
countries.  
 
 
82 CAF (2014). Vulnerability Index to climate change in the Latin American and Caribbean Region. Available at: http://scioteca.caf.com/bitstream/handle/123456789/509/caf -vulnerability -index -climate-change.pdf  
83 IPCC (2014). Central and South America. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. In: Barros VR et al. (Eds), Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York,  NY, USA, p. 1499-1566.  
84 Vieira, R. D. S. P., Tomasella, J., Alvalá, R. C. S., Sestini, M. F., Affonso, A. G., Rodriguez, D. A., ... & De Oliveira, S. B. P. (2015). Identifying areas susceptible to desertification in the Brazilian Northeast.  Solid Earth,  6(1), 
347-360.  
85 Alvaredo, F., Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (Eds.). (2018).  World inequality report 2018. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.  
86 Based on statistics of the Continuous National Household Sample Survey (PNAD), 2004 to 2014, extreme poverty reduction surpas sed 63%.  Neri, Marcelo (2018). Qual foi o impacto da crise sobre a pobreza e a distribuição 
de renda? FGV Social. Available at: ht tps://www.cps.fgv.br/cps/bd/docs/NOTA -CURTA -Pobreza-Desigualdade-a -Crise-Recente_FGV_Social_Neri.pdf.  
87  Marengo, J. A. (2008) Vulnerabilidade, impactos e adaptação à mudança do clima no semi-árido do Brasil, Parcerias Estratégicas, 27, 149– 75, 2008. Available at: 
http://seer.cgee.org.br/index.php/parcerias_estrategicas/article/viewFile/329/323%20%C2%A0.  
88 IBGE (2017). Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios Contínua (PNAD).  
89 OECD (2017). Financing Climate Futures. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/environment/environment -development/Financing-Climate-Futures -NDB -Brazil -South-Africa.pdf.


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 62 
   
 D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed project is included in GCF's national strategy, and it adheres to these strategic foundations and 
investment areas: adaptation based on ecosystems and water security; resilience and sustainability of indigenous and 
traditional communities; restoration, conservation and reforestation; low carbon agriculture, and adaptation of the 
productive process. Another of the strategy's key priorities is water security.  
 
Brazil has an overarching national climate- change policy, which paves the way to implementation of adaptation and 
mitigation measures by the three federative government layers: federal, state and municipal. The National Policy 
supports the national voluntary commitment of reducing GHG emissions by 36.1% to 38.9% in relation to the projected 
emissions, until 2020. Regarding specific REDD+ actions, Brazil has the commitment to stabilize emissions at 2005 
levels for the Caatinga biome.  
 
In the Nationally Deter mined Contribution (NDC), Brazil emphasizes that adaptation is considered a fundamental 
element to tackle the effects of climate change. Social considerations are at the core of Brazil's adaptation strategy, 
focusing on the need to protect vulnerable popul ations from the negative effects of climate change and enhance 
resilience.  
 
In this context, the country developed a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and put forward cross -sector adaptation 
strategies to address the wide range of risks caused by climate change. The NAP has also set guidelines to implement 
adaptive measures to improve climate resilience in 11 sectors and themes.  The sectors that are the most closely related 
to our project objectives are: Agriculture, Water Resources, Vulnerable Populations, Food and Nutritional Security and 
Biodiversity and Ecosystems. The main national governance mechanism is the National Strategic within the Inter -
ministerial Committee of Climate Change. At the beginning of project implementation, the Executing Entity  will co ntact 
the Inter -ministerial Committee of Climate Change to present the project and liaise with federal and state 
implementation governance bodies for each of the sectorial programs identified.  
 
The NDC supports strengthening the Low Carbon Agriculture Program (ABC) as a key strategy for sustainable 
agriculture development and commits to restoring 15 million hectares of degraded pasturelands, enhancing 5 million 
hectares of integrated cropland  / livestock  / forestry systems and restoring and reforesting 12 million hectares of forests 
by 2030. The ABC plan is one of the sectorial plans devised under the national climate- change policy. Its overall 
objectives include: 1) reduce greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture; 2) improve efficient  use of natural resources; 3) 
increase resilience of production systems and rural communities; and 4) promote adaptation to climate change in the 
sector.  
 
Brazil has also been reviewing environmental regulation of private rural areas to reduce deforestation and promote 
sustainable land use practices. The Forest Code was reviewed and updated in 2012, and Law No. 12.651/2012 
reinforces Brazil’s commitment to protect native vegetation and the integrity of the climate system by setting restrictions 
on use of native- vegetation areas on private properties: Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves 
(RL), as defined by the law, must be maintained by landholders with native vegetation at a proportion of 20% at Caatinga  
Biome. The Forest Code also included responsibilities for environmental liabilities through a mandatory registration on 
the Rural Environmental Registry (CAR) for all rural landholdings (Article. 29, Law No. 12.651/2012).  
 
Beyond the Forest Code revision in 2012, a series of advances in environmental policies and laws has occurred over 
the last 20 years. Recently the National Policy for the Recovery of Native Vegetation (PROVEG) was launched with the 
challenge of implementing the Forest Code in a total area of at l east 12 million hectares by 31 December 2030.  
 
The additional Recovery of Native Vegetation Plan (PLANAVEG), launched through Inter -ministerial Ordinance No. 
230, dated November 14, 2017 will support the continuation of the implementation of the Forest Cod e, providing 
incentives to smallholders, indigenous peoples and traditional communities, having as a basis the information from the 
National Rural Environmental Registry System (SICAR).


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 62 
   
 The Brazilian Biomes Environmental Monitoring Program is aligned wit h the objectives of the ENREDD+ and will deliver 
the enhancement and improvement of systems and monitoring protocols –  particularly for the extra- Amazonian biomes 
– necessary for achieving the desired national scale combat to deforestation and forest degradation and to foster forest 
recover using the National Climate Change Fund.  
 
Nevertheless, Brazil has been advancing on setting an enabling environment for country’s priorities for low -emission 
and climate- resilient development, and recently has had its fi rst successful and exclusive approval of payment for 
US$ 96 million for reducing deforestation, degradation or emissions through other REDD+ activities such as 
conservation, sustainable management of forests or enhancement of carbon stocks (e.g. ecosystem restoration).  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Financial structure justification and profitability indicators  
As discussed in Section B5, under the current scenario of climate funding in Brazil, the project would not be profitable 
for the country or the states without GCF funding. Given the current fiscal situation and level of national and subnational 
indebtedness, the financial elements were particularly proposed to render the project viable. With the project, both the 
states and the Union will be benefiting from concessionality i n terms of interest rates, which would lead to a viable 
investment project, considering contribution of the GCF grant element. Consequently, the proposed financial elements 
were selected to render the project viable. With the current level of grant and loan element required, the project´s 
profitability would reach 10.04%. Without the GCF grant element and without GCF funding at all, the project would not 
be profitable (IRR: 9.39% in the first case and 5.84% in the second).  
 
Benchmarks  
Latin America is a sc arcely populated continent, thus costs per beneficiary tend to be higher than other developing 
regions. Table 6  below compares the PCR P with other GCF rural development projects in the region. Considering GCF 
finance portion only, the efficiency is 99 UDS/ beneficiary. Even considering the entire cost, PCR P lies within the higher 
effectiveness range of rural adaptation projects in the region.   
 
Table 6. Project Benchmark  
Projects  PCR P 
Brazil  PROEZA  
Paraguay  CFAVCP  
Cambodia  Guatemala  Be Resilient  
Belize  RECLIMA  
El Salvador  
Date of approval  TBD March 2018  March 2018  November 2019  March 2019  September 2018  
Direct 
Beneficiaries  1,000,000 87,210 390,000 132,000 30,000 225,000 
Annual 
Emissions  550,140 t CO2 
eq90 262,267 tCO 2eq 35,000 tCO 2eq NA NA 210,842 
tCO 2eq 
EIRR  19.77%  16.13%   -  
NPV US$ 15 2 Million   US$ 133,543   -  
Effectiveness of 
GCF Adaptation 
Investment (USD 
GCF/Beneficiary)  USD 
99.5/beneficiary  USD 
288/beneficiary  USD 
102/beneficiary  USD 
166/beneficiary  USD 
266/beneficiary  USD 
159/beneficiary  
Effectiveness of 
GCF Mitigation 
Investment  (USD/ 
tCO2 reduced)  USD18 / tCO 2eq USD 96 / tCO 2eq USD 1142 
/tCO 2eq NA NA USD 169/ tCO 2eq 
Total Cost  
(USD millions)  202.5 90.3 141.39 37.6 20 127.7 
GCF funding (USD  
Million)  65 Million loan  
34.5 Million grant  25.1 Million grant  10 Million loan  
30 Million grant  22 million grants  1.9 million loan  
6.1 million grant  35.8 Million grant  
 
Financial profitability indicators  
 
Financial analysis (Annex 3) allows understanding, based on behavioural  hypothesis and parameters, if potential 
beneficiaries will be motivated to take the risks and make the investments required by the project. It simulates the 
 
90 Please see detailed calculations in Annex 22 –  FAO GHG appraisal report


---
*Page 47*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 62 
   
 incentives and benefits (at  the individual level or in groups) to ensure beneficiaries will have the means to take on the 
project´s proposal. The analysis uses a realistic approach by making assumptions on the delays in adopting 
technologies and drop- out rates for entrepreneurship i nitiatives.  
 
Nine models were developed to simulate impacts for each type of intervention on each targeted group of beneficiaries. 
There are nine models to illustrate the range of activities that could be developed by the targeted beneficiaries. All 
models  progressively involve beneficiaries from year 1 to 6 (leaving the last two years for completion of the activities). 
Only in year 8 will 100% of benefits be considered. However, 75% success rate is applied while aggregating to illustrate 
the case when beneficiaries get lower impacts or if dismiss the project´s proposal during the first 4 years.  
 
A detailed explanation for the typologies and assumptions made in models is presented in Annex 3. It includes technical 
descriptions and the breakdown year per year of quantities and value with and without project to get the financial 
profitability indicators presented in the tables below. Overall, the financial analysis shows positive Net Present Values 
(NPV), Financial Internal Rate of Returns going beyond the cut-off rate and Benefit -Costs ratio higher than 1,  so all 
models are considered profitable, with IRR rates ranging from 10% to 39% depending on the supported activity, and 
net present values (NPV) at the 10% discount rate varying from R$ 2. 322 to R$ 40,000. The following list summarizes 
profitability indicators for all the financial models.  
 
Table 7. Profitability indicators per model  
Model  IRR NPV Ratio B/C  
Item % $R N° 
Model 1a - CRPS for vegetables and fruit trees 1 - Grey Water Reuse  19.0%  5,734  1.96 
Model 1b - CRPS for vegetables and fruit trees 2 - Other Water infrastructure  39.0%  33,958  2.21 
Model 1c - CRPS for vegetables and fruit trees 3 - Cisterns  28.7%  27,054  2.18 
Model 2a - CRPS for forage production and CRPS diversification in degraded Caatinga 1  14.0%  7,268  1.27 
Model 2b - CRPS Forage production and diversification in degraded Caatinga lands 2  11.3%  2,322  1.43 
Model 3a - CRPS for forage production and diversification in palm monoculture 1  18.8%  11,224  1.29 
Model 3b - CRPS for forage production and diversification in palm monoculture 2  25.3%  40,018  1.55 
Model 4 - Micro entrepreneur Business development  10.0%  39,521  1.16 
Model 5 - Bee-keeping  35.1%  219,941  2.89 
 
Economic profitability indicators  
 
Economic analysis considers all the costs and benefits of the Project (with economic prices to calculate total economic 
costs). It allows evaluating the global efficiency in management resources for the government and society. The analysis 
is made by aggregating the farm models using economic prices and adding externalities (that will be represented in 
this case by the environmental benefits from avoiding CO2 emissions). It was calculated over the period of 20 years 
and at a shadow discount rate of 10%91. To incorporate the results in the economic analysis all prices have been 
calculated applying conversion factors for imported tradable goods, exported goods and labour . No market distortions 
are supposed to affect non- tradable goods.  
 
Economic Internal Rate of Return is estimated at 19 .77% while the NPV reaches US$ 15 2 million.  Summary of the 
project´s economic profitability indicators:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NPV@10% 
(R$ million)  R$ 6 84  
NPV@10% 
(US$ millions)  US$ 15 2 
EIRR (%)  19.77 
B/C Ratio  3.18  
 
91 Taking into account 10 year bonds yields for the country (between 9 and 10%).


---
*Page 48*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 62 
   
 A sensitivity analysis was carried out assuming different risk scenarios. These include an increase in project costs 
(10%, 20% and 50%), a reduction in project benefits (10%, 20% and 50%), delay in project benefits (1 and 2 years) 
and the occurrence of climate change extreme events (every 2, 3 and 4 years). The project is assumed to be 
profitable and resilient as it supports most of the tested scenarios as an increase in costs up to 30% or a reduce in 
benefits of 30%. Even in a case of a mi xed increment in costs up to 20% and reduction in benefits up to 20%. In 
these cases, the NPV remains in positive range. The project would not be profitable in a case of a mixed cost 
increase of 20% and a benefit reduction up to 30%.  Besides, nine sources of benefits equally contributing to total 
project´s benefits have been identified. This serves to demonstrate that the project is well diversified and not highly 
exposed to price or sectorial risks. Detailed assumptions and calculations are attached in Ann ex 2 and 3.


---
*Page 49*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 62 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  550,140 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime   Between -11 266 144 tCO2eq and -11 797 804 tCO2eq  
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing  202,500, 000   USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  99,500, 000  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  11 M  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  18   Choose an item.  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  9   Choose an item.  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  103,000, 000   USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  103,000, 000   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) 1.04   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  1.04  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  600,000 males and 400,000 females  
Indirect  780,000 males and 720,000 females (using percentages of the 
NEB rural population 52% male and 48% female)  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  0.3% male    
0.2% female  
Indirect  0.36% male  
0.33% female


---
*Page 50*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 62 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term Final  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood options 
(including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.)  Geo-
referencing, 
and resilience 
scorecard at 
baseline, mid-
term and 
completion 
surveys.  N/A Male 
240,000 
 
Female  
160,000 Male 
600,000 
 
Female  
400,000 Activity 1.1.2  
268,000 beneficiaries  
consisting of :  
• 31,000 families in 
family farms  
• 36,000 families in 
backyard gardens.  
 Activity 1.1.3  
412,000 beneficiaries 
consisting of:  
• 1,800 families from 60 
communities  
• 1,000 s chools with an 
average of 100 families 
per school  
• 1,200 families 
benefiting from 24 bio-
saline productive 
systems;  
 
Activity1.1.4  
116,840 beneficiaries consisting of:  
• 24,000 farmers 
participate in exchange 
events / workshops  
• 5,000 middle size 
farmers participate in 
farmers network  
• 70 microenterprise 
each with an average 
of 3 employees –  210 
beneficiaries.  
 
Activity 3.1.1  
85,440 beneficiaries consisting of:   
• 300 trainings for women with an average 
of 25 women per 
training (7,500 women)  
• 360 work shops and 
meetings with an 
average of 25 
participants (9,000 
women)  
• 243 trainings for youths 
with an average of 20 
youths each  
 
Activity 3.1.2  
• 117,720 beneficiaries 
consisting of: 
Newsletters, 
communication 
materials and 
informative reports 
disseminating 
innovative solutions will 
reach and influence 
directly an audience of 
29,430 families (300 
families per 
municipality 
approximately) 
(117.720 beneficiaries)  
• Assuming an average family size of 4 people 
per family and 60% 
male and 40% female.  
 
Total of 1,000, 000 direct 
beneficiaries  
A2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well -being, 
and food and water 
security  A2.2 Number of food 
secure households (in areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts)  Resilience scorecard at 
baseline, mid-term and 
completion 
surveys.  2,414 
households led by 
women 
 
13,668 
households 
led by 
men92  4,663 
Households 
led by women  
 26,425 
households 
led by men  8,040 
households led by women  
 45,560 
households 
led by men  Diversification 
strategies are 
effective and taken up 
by family farmers, including through backyards gardens.  
 
Food security is 
defined according to 
FAO (2006)  
 
92 The exact baseline of food insecure households will be determined in the baseline survey upon selection of participating stat es. A conservative initial estimate is presented based on the pr oject targeting policy. The project 
will target municipalities in which at least 70% of the population is registered in the Cadastro Unico (earning less than or equal to 50% of the minimum income). The conservative estimate assumes that the maximum 
allowab le target population not registered in the Cadastro Unico (30%) is food secure.


---
*Page 51*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 62 
   
 A4.0 Improved resilience 
of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  A4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected 
and stregnthened in response to climate 
variability and change  Studies of 
satellite 
imagery in 
areas with 
recovered 
vegetation93.  
Mid-term and 
completion surveys.  N/A CRPS in 
family farms and backyard 
gardens 
11,500 ha 
 
Collective 
Resilient 
Investments  
15,000 ha 
 
Farmers 
Network  
7,150 ha  CRPS in 
family farms 
and backyard 
gardens 
23,000 ha 
 
Collective 
Resilient 
Investments  
36,124 ha 
 
Farmers 
Network 
25,000 ha  Widespread uptake of 
CRPS together with sufficient water 
access / availability 
allow for measurable impact of ecosystem services.  
M3.0 Reduced emissions 
from buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances  M3.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) reduced or avoided -  
buildings, cities, industries, and 
appliances  Ex ACT monitoring 
tool progress 
reports,  
Supervision 
missions.  N/A -17,567 tCO
2e - 35,135 tCO 2e Methodology 
described in Annex 
22, page 19 and 20.  
 Annual emission reduction: 4.07 tCO
2e 
per appliance per year 
 
20 year project 
lifetime emission 
reduction:  
87,938 tCO 2e  
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks  M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equiv alent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or avoided (including increased 
removals) - forest and 
land use  Ex ACT 
monitoring 
tool progress 
reports,  Geo-
referencing and studies of 
satellite 
imagery; 
diagnostic soil 
studies.  N/A 
 
-2.3 MtCO 2e -4.6MtCO 2e FAO EX -ACT 
Methodology is 
applied described in 
Annex 22.  
 Annual emission reductions: -6.7 
tCO2eq per hectare per year  
 
20 year project 
lifetime emission 
reductions:  
11,266,014  tCO2eq  
 
 
93 A repository for satellite imagery and studies developed will be established and accessible at DATA.IFAD  E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Expected 
Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
A5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory 
systems for 
climate -
responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.2 Number and 
level of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms   Coordination 
mechanism 
published, 
Supervision, and 
completion Study.  No coordination 
mechanism 
exists for sanitary 
regulations 
specific for family 
farmers  
 
No coordination 
mechanism 
exists for legal 
reserve credit  
 
Mechanisms 
exist for domestic 
violence, but 
implementation is 
weak in the rural 
area 1 mechanism 
implement ed  
and partially 
effective for 
sanitary 
regulations 
specific for family 
farmers  
 
1 mechanism 
implemented but 
not operational 
for legal reserve 
credit  
 
1 mechanism 
enhanced to treat 
domestic 
violence, in the 
rural areas  1 mechanism 
implement ed  
and effective for 
sanitary 
regulations 
specific for family 
farmers  
 
1 mechanism 
implemented and 
partially effective 
for legal reserve 
credit  
 
1 mechanism  
enhanced to treat 
domestic 
violence, in the 
rural areas   
A7.0 
Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of Fund -Resilience 
scorecard at 
baselined and 
completion survey, 
Geo- referencing 
and satellite 
imagery. Mid -term 0 households 
apply CRPS 
practices and 
principles.  30,000 
households have 
adopted at least 
one strategy to 
respond to 
climate change  75,000  
households have 
adopted at least 
one strategy to 
respond to 
climate change  Sustained interest, 
uptake and referral 
of project tools by 
family farmers.


---
*Page 52*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 62 
   
  
 
94 Project Planning, Monitoring Evaluation and Learning System (PMEL).  supported tools 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate change 
and variability   and completion 
survey  
M7.0 Lower 
energy intensity 
of buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances  M7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances as a 
result of Fund 
support   Resilience  
scorecard at 
baselined and 
completion survey, 
supervisions 
missions.  Persistent use of 
wood, coal and 
LPG stoves 
contributing to 
deforestation.  236 520 kwh of 
Biogas 
production 
replacing 
fuelwood 
extraction and 
combustion 
emissions  473 040 kwh of 
Biogas 
production 
replacing 
fuelwood 
extraction and 
combustion 
emissions   Methodology 
described in Annex 
22. 
M9.0 Improved 
management of 
land or forest 
areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions  M9.1 Hectares of 
land or forests 
under improved 
and effective 
management that 
contributes to 
CO2 emission 
reductions   Normalized 
difference 
vegetation index 
(NDVI), Geo-
referencing and 
satellite imagery. 
Mid-term and 
completion survey  N/A 15,000 ha of 
Caatinga dry 
forests will be 
improved through 
the intr oduction 
of live fences, 
pasture rotation 
and silage as 
well as an 
improved 
management of 
shrubs and dry 
forests through 
live fences.  
 
7,150 ha of Baja-
caatinga 
pastures with 
declining 
productivity will 
be converted into 
silvopastoral 
system.  
 
11,500 Mono-
culture crops will 
be converted into 
CRPS.  36,000 ha of 
Caatinga dry 
forests will be 
improved through 
the introduction 
of live fences, 
pasture rotation 
and silage as 
well as an 
improved 
management of 
shrubs and dry 
forests through 
live fences.  
 
25,000 ha of 
Baja- caatinga 
pastures with 
declining 
productivity will 
be converted into  
silvopastoral 
system.  
 
23,000 Mono-
culture crops will 
be converted into 
CRPS.  CRPS are adopted 
and sustained 
throughout NEB, 
reducing impact of 
droughts.  
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 1.1.   
 
Increase climate 
resilience for family 
farmers and traditional 
communities while 
mitigating carbon 
emissions by applying 
CRPS.  Families with increased 
resilience score through adoption 
of CRPS  
 
(by sex and age; 40% women 
and 50% youth)  Resilience 
scorecard, 
tracking of 
PMEL94 system, 
field sampling 
verification  0 68,000 170,000 Farmers will adopt 
and sustain CRPS 
correctly at 
sufficient scale to 
yield benefits of 
improve fertility, 
increase water 
availability which 
will in turn increase 
resilience of the 
families and their 
income as well as 
overall 
environmental and 
ecosystem service 
provision.  
 
Families will 
benefit from the 
diverse production 
yields of CRPS 
and incorporate Reduced agricultural losses 
during drought periods by 
applying CRPS as compared to 
the 2010 -2020 baseline.  
 
(measured at the municipal level, 
reported as project aggregate)  Resilience 
scorecard at 
baselined and 
completion 
survey, municipal 
reports on 
agricultural yield , 
productivity  and 
losses . 0 4% 
reduction in 
losses  
during 
drought 
periods.  8% 
reduction 
in losses 
during 
drought 
periods . 
Hectares of land  
implementing 
agroforestry, backyard gardens, 
collective pasture management, 
using CRPS  Normalized 
difference 
vegetation index 
(NDVI), Geo -
referencing and 
satellite imagery. 
Mid-term and 0 33,650 84,000


---
*Page 53*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 62 
   
 completion 
survey  these nutritional 
ingredients in their 
diets.  
Increased soil moisture (%) 
during the dry season by 
applying CRPS  Diagnostic soil 
studies 
measuring s oil 
water content and  
plant available 
water (PAW)  0 4% 10% 
Households receiving productive 
investments report increased 
production.  
Disaggregated by sex of head of 
household  Baseline, mid-
term and 
completion 
surveys  0 10,720 26,800 
Percentage of individuals 
demonstrating an improvement in 
empowerment (IFAD CI IE.2.1)  Project -level 
women’s 
empowerment 
index (pro- WEAI) 
at baseline and 
completion  0 0 70% 
People provided with climate 
information services (IFAD CI 
3.1.2)  Resilience 
scorecard, 
tracking of PMEL 
system and 
supervision 
missions.  0 49,600 124,000 
Percentage of women, 15- 49 
years of age, who consume at 
least 5 out of 10 food groups 
(MDD- W) (IFAD CI 1.2.8)  Minimum Dietary 
Diversity -Women 
indicator at 
baseline and 
completion  0 0 75% 
Number of persons/households 
reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable and 
climate -resilient technologies and 
practices (IFAD CI 3.2.2)  Tracking of PMEL 
system and 
supervision 
missions.  0 9,920 24,800 
People trained in production 
practices and/or technologies. 
(IFAD CI 1.1.4) (by sex and age; 
40% women and 50% youth)  Tracking of PMEL 
system and 
supervision 
missions.  0 Male  
5,760 
 
Female  
3,840  Male  
14,400 
 
Female  
9,600  
Number of micro- enterprises that 
develop tools and services for 
CRPS.  PMEL Team 
tracking of 
investments, and 
supervision 
missions.  0 28 70 
Output 2.1  
 
Improve water access to 
family farmers and 
traditional communities 
to reduce the impact of 
severe droughts by 
investing in small -scale 
technologies for 
harvesting, reuse, 
treatment and storage.  Families with increased 
resilience score through adoption 
rainwater harvest and storage 
(by sex and age; 40% women 
and 50% youth)   Tracking of PMEL 
system, geo 
referencing of 
infrastructure and 
satellite imagery, 
and supervision 
missions.  0 8,400  21,000  
There will be 
enough rainwater 
during 
imple mentation of 
the PCRP so that 
these water 
harvesting systems 
can irrigate the 
CRPS.  Rural households that report a 
reduction in the water shortfall in 
relation to the production 
requirements (IFAD CI 1.2.3)  Resilience 
scorecard at 
baseline, mid-
term and 
completion.  0 11,520  28,800  
Number of hectares of farmland 
with water -related infrastructure 
built/rehabilitated (IFAD CI 1.1.2)  Tracking of PMEL 
system, geo 
referencing of 
infrastructure and 
satellite imagery, 
and supervision 
missions.  0 1,800 ha  4,500 ha  
Number of families with improved 
health by installing green septic 
systems and greywater reuse.  Tracking of PMEL 
system, geo 
referencing of 
infrastructure and 
satellite imagery, 
and supervision 
missions.  0 6,000  15,000


---
*Page 54*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 62 
   
  Output 3.1  
 
CRPS and small -scale 
water harvesting 
system s disseminated in 
the NEB semiarid and 
abroad to increase 
climate resilience of 
vulnerable communities.  Number of women, youth and 
traditional community members 
who report increased capacity 
and applying their knowledge  Inputs from SIU 
Gender, Youth 
and Ethnicity 
team, progress 
reports; 
supervisions 
missions  0 3,600  9,000  
Women, youth 
and traditional 
community 
members will be 
motivated and 
participate in the 
training programs.  
 
Institutional 
arrangements will 
be developed for 
other states and 
dryland regions  to 
implement CRPS.   Number of young communicators 
who report using social 
communication tools to register 
and systematize activities 
developed in communities.  Inputs from SIU 
Gender, Youth 
and Ethnicity 
team, progress 
reports; 
supervisions 
missions  0 166 414 
Use of climate information 
products/services in decision-
making in climate sensitive 
sectors  Resilience 
scorecard, 
baseline and 
completion 
survey.  0 107,200 268,000 
Scale up locations (national and 
international) adopting CRPS 
and small -scale water harvesting 
technologies due to SSTC  Progress reports, 
learning route 
publications, and 
supervision 
missions.  0 3  7  
Number of policy changes that 
boost family farmers’ inclusion 
and income.  Progress reports 
and supervision 
missions.  0 1 3 
Percentage of Financial / 
physical execution of the AWPB.  Progress and 
financial reports; 
supervision 
missions.  0 - >75%  
E.6. Activities  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1.  
Selection of project areas and 
development of Territorial 
Resilience Investment Plans 
(“TRIPs”)  Selection of communities to receive investments.  Develop a baseline study to select 
project area  State proposals, one study per 
state to select project area  
Design of TRIPs with full 
involvement of selected 
communities.  Design and approve TRIPS  575 TRIPS 
Activity 1.1.2  
Financing of CRPS in family farms 
and backyard gardens  Application of productive activities 
following the six principles and 
practices of CRPS in family farms, 
not only to increase resilience but 
also to contribute to increase 
families’ production, efficiency and 
nutrition.  - Implement CRPS in Family 
Farms  
- Provide TA for implementation  31,000 families benefited  
15,500 hectares with CRPS  
Application of productive activities 
following the six principles and 
practices of CRPS in backyard gardens, not only to increase 
resilience but also to contribute to 
increase families’ production, 
efficiency and nutrition and 
encourage women’s leadership.  - Implement CRPS in BYGs in 
conjunction with activities in 
Component 2;  
- Provide TA for implementation  Male  
86,400 
 
Female  
57,000 
 
Persons provided with targeted 
support to improve their nutrition 
(IFAD CI 1.1.8)  
 
7,500 hectares with backyard 
gardens using CRPS  
Activity 1.1.3  
Financing of Collective Resilient 
Investments  Implement Collective Areas 
Sustainable Management (CASM) 
to Improve the ecosystem 
services provided by the 
Caatinga, such as microclimate regulation, carbon capture, 
sequestration and fixation, pest 
and disease control, water supply, 
waste decomposition, natural 
pollination of crops and other 
plants, and supply of raw - Recover degraded areas using 
CRPS;  
- Increase supply and efficient use 
of water for production;  
- Structure community seedbanks 
and nurseries;  
- Promote low -impact productive 
activities in collective areas (e.g. 
beekeeping).  
- TA 1,800 families benefited  
36,124 hectares


---
*Page 55*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 62 
   
 materials (e.g. wood, oilseeds and 
fruits)  
Implement biodigestors and 
ecoefficient stoves in CASM  - Train local communities 
(specially women) on techniques 
to build biodigestors and 
ecostoves.  
- Provide TA for implementation 
and training in maintenace  540 biodigestors and 540 ecostoves  implemented  
Implementation of climate- resilient 
agricultural practices in schools.  - CRPS teaching and 
experimentation;  
- Development and maintenance 
of nurseries and seedbanks;  
- Promotion of entrepreneurship in 
CRPS; and  
- Trainings cooks and students on 
the nutritional value of native fruits 
and vegetables to diversify and 
enrich diets  
- TA 1,000 schools benefited  
100 hectares  
Implementation of Biosaline 
agriculture practices in communities with installed 
desalination devices.  - Fish breeding;  
- Irrigation of halophyte plants in 
small areas  1,200 f amilies benefited  
24 hectares  
Activity 1.1.4  
Build a Farmers Network and Promote local entrepreneurship 
for products and services that 
support family farming  Farmers’ network is built by 
providing technical assistance 
training. Farmer Trainers are trained to enhance their 
knowledge on CRPS, water 
access and 
gender/youth/traditional 
communities’ sensitive approach).  
 
Farmers participate in workshops 
and visits to improve their 
knowledge in productiv e practices 
and new technologies.  -Training sessions  
 
- Exchanges carried out at local 
and regional levels;  
 - Workshops and training for 
family farmers and community 
leaders promoted  550 professionals trained  
 
24,000 participants  
 
25,000 hectares  
Promot ion of entrepreneurship in 
CRPS   70 microenterprises supported 
Activity 2.1.1  
Financing of boardwalk cisterns  
for backyard gardens  Build rainwater reservoir to 
produce food, forage, seedlings 
and/or animal water consumption.  - Building cisterns with community 
participation;  
- Irrigation systems  
- TA 20,000 cisterns and irrigation systems  
Activity 2.1.2  
Financing of eligible social 
technologies  to increase water 
availability in periods of drought  Build small farm ponds to Irrigate 
plots and support short -cycle 
crops during dry season.  - Building trench barriers with 
community participation;  
- Irrigation systems  
- TA  trench barriers and irrigation 
systems  
 
Groundwater Storage. Build small 
underground dams to store water 
to produce food, seedlings, forage 
and/or animal water consumption.  - Building underground dams with 
community participation;  
- Irrigation systems  
- TA 500 small underground dams  and 
irrigation systems  
Activity 2.1.3  
Financing of treatment and reuse 
systems for household 
wastewater  Greywater reuse. Water treatment 
systems that allow greater water 
availability for food production.  - Building greywater treatment 
systems with community 
participation;  
- Irrigation systems  
- TA 10,000 treatment and irrigation 
systems  
Blackwater treatment. Biological treatment of sewage and biomass 
production  - Build wastewater biological 
treatment systems with community participation;  
-TA 5,000 treatment systems  
Activity 3.1.1  
Raise awareness and build 
capacities of women, youth and 
traditional communities  Young communicators use social communication tools to register 
and systematize actions 
developed in communities.  -Workshops for youth 
communicators;  
- Inter-state exchange visits;  
-Inter-regional exchange visits;  
- Training for youth;  
-Learning scholarships for youth.  414 young communicators  
Events for the inclusion of women 
and traditional communities in 
processes of decision- making and 
knowledge- sharing of sustainable 
technologies.  -Training for Women on 
sustainable technologies;  
- Workshops and meetings for 
Women;  
- Exchange visits for women;  
- Training for TA in Gender 
approach, race and ethnicity;  
- Compilation of Case Studies  699 events  promoted and 3 case 
studies developed


---
*Page 56*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 62 
   
  Childcare support activities  
Activity 3.1.2  
Drive scaling- up, unlock policy 
barriers and experiment with 
CRPS and resilience participatory 
monitoring model  SSTC - Capacity building through 
the exchange of knowledge, skills, 
resources and technologies 
across countries.  - National Learning Route / 
Exchange- Visit;  
- International Learning Route / 
Exchange visit (LAC);  
- International Learning Route / 
Exchange Visit (Africa)  7 events promoted  
Actions for influencing and 
disseminating public policies with the goal to support CRPS in 
family farms.  - Thematic studies;  
- Forums and Meetings at local, 
state and federal levels  8 studies and 103 events carried 
out  
3 working group moderators  
Building a monitoring 
methodology that can be applied with CRPS demonstrations in 
each territory, allowing a clear 
visualization of socio-
environmental transformations 
that will occur during the 
intervention period.   108 events  
Activity 3.1.3  
Plan, Monitor, Evaluate and Learn  Technical activities for projects’ follow -up, monitoring results and 
publicizing good practices at 
national level.  
 
Including baseline and impact 
evaluation surveys.  -  National Impact Evaluation;  
- GIS Evaluations;  
-Planning and Communication 
Services;  
- M&E Services;  
- Planning Workshops;  
-Studies and other KM products.  
- Compilation of Studies and other 
KM products;  
- Planning Workshops;  
-Territorial Committee Meetings;  
- M&E Meetings  75 documents elaborated or 
events carried out  
Technical activities for projects’ 
follow -up, monitoring results and 
publicizing good practices at state 
level.  State specific studies, territorial 
committee meetings, KM 
products.  32 documents elaborated  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, 1 page)  
PCRP aims to increase production while improving the most vulnerable peoples autonomous capacity to face the 
challenges posed by ongoing climate change. The target therefore is to increase and stabilize family income and food 
security while incentivizing young generations to stay active in rural activities even in areas/periods at risk of climate 
change impacts. As such project activities tackle the main barriers that limit an incr eased resilience of this specific 
population. Project performance indicators measure access to knowledge, technology and support required to 
overcome said barriers and increase their resilience in the face of ongoing climate change. The project applies in 
tandem a series of monitoring tools and strategies to ensure result -oriented monitoring and successful achievement of 
project objectives. Relevant results will be r eported:  
1. Avoided losses during drought events as compared to the 2010 -2020  baseline;  
2. Increase in soil moisture during the dry season;  
3. Reduced and avoided emissions;  
4. Increased resilience capacities; and  
5. Behavioural change (i.e.  Production practices, WASH, gender empowerment, minimum diet diversity)  
 
The main MRE tools of the Pr ogram and Projects are:  
 
The Logical Framework integrates three levels of indicators: impact (based on results of Impact Assessment Studies), 
result and process (Project advances). The last two types are based on the results of actions in the field and support 
the rethinking and realigning of strategies and activities. The M&E system is sensitive to gender and generation; thus, 
whenever possible, these data will be disaggregated.  
 
Baseline and Completion studies  will be developed for an objective comparison of implementation progress and 
adequate measurement of projects  impact and results  related to the Project's expected outcomes . As minimum –
together with project resilience scorecard and GIS mapping of Climate Change trends/impac ts-, the following indicators


---
*Page 57*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 62 
   
 will be included: i) income; ii) level of assets and equity; iii) production, consumption and commercialization; iv) natural 
resources and environmental management; v) level of families’ participation in community -based organi zations; vi) 
valuation of gender, race and ethnic identities; vii) access to public policies; and viii) food security. The baseline involv es 
a sample survey of treatment groups (representing the beneficiary families) and a control group (representing those 
who will not be served by the project). Information will be disaggregated on gender for knowledge, attitudes and 
practices (KAP) regarding climate change adaptation in target communities. Research questionnaire will follow the 
model IFAD applies for its P rojects in Brazil, adapted to cover other expected impacts as per proposal.  
 
The project will monitor changes in the resilience capacities of farming families  considering multiple factors, linked 
to socioeconomic and agroecological conditions, contributing to the families’ capacities to cope with climate shocks and 
adapt to growing tress from slowly increasing temperatures and hotter and dryer conditions. Inspi red by the DFID KPI4 
Methodology  adapted to the IFAD and GCF project type, a resilience sc orecard and index have been developed tailored 
to the project’s theory of change. The resilience questionnaire and scorecard may be adjusted by the PMEL in 
consultation with project stakeholders at project start -up and will be completed as part of the baseline survey, at midterm 
and at project completion. The resilience scorecard will be used for knowledge generation and improved analysis of 
resilience dynamics by combining it with the GIS -based monitoring studies of vegetation cover and ecological quality and 
climate data showing if stresses or extreme weather events have occurred during the implementation of the project.  
 
M&E using Geographic Information System (GIS),  including vegetation cover and ecological quality combined with 
monitoring of rainfall and temperatures, demonstrates vegetation recovery and is an input to calculate carbon 
sequestration. To analyse the restoration of recovered areas, the following ecological indicators will be monitored: 
canopy and soil cover, regenerating density, and number of regenerating species. This analysis extrapolates the limits 
of the intervention areas, evaluating the spillover effect of project actions. Vegetation recovery wil l be monitored every 
three years and studies should be preferably performed during/after the rain season. These studies will be implemented 
in partnerships with expert institutes  or instruments , such as GEO -BNDES, the National Institute of Space Research 
(INPE), MapBiomas, in addition to specific consultancies.  
 
A quantitative systematization of interventions by thematic area  informs the Project M&E unit of the most 
immediate impacts on households in terms of resilience capacities, income and food security  in short to medium term. 
These activities are articulated with other Project components and include specialists of different areas -  Race, Ethnicity, 
Gender, and Youth. Results of learning exchanges will also be systematized and reported. At least 3 thema tic 
systematizations will happen throughout the project execution period.  
 
Participatory and qualitative evaluation of results. The CPMU through PMEL will hold participatory meetings and 
develop a monitoring methodology with the participation of youth comm unicators. M&E data will be used to 
communicate Project’s results to the media, governments and partners. Outcomes of exchanges and learning initiatives 
will also be published as part of the Project Knowledge and Results Management.  
 
Technical Progress Reports (TPR).  State Projects will submit TPRs each semester with detailed descriptions 
activities by component and subcomponent. TPR informs to what extent implemented activities promoted progress in 
reaching the goals set in the Project design and Annual O perational Plan.  
 
Detailed information on MRE activities is presented in Annex 11.


---
*Page 58*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 62 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
Overall, considering the mitigating measures described below, the level of impacts of the project risks is medium/low 
with a medium/low probability. The main risk of the project is the capacity of the state agents to assembly qualified 
human resources to i mplement the activities proposed –  both in terms of project management and technical assistance. 
Activities were incorporated throughout the project to mitigate this risk. Other risks identified are lack of interest among 
potential beneficiaries due to lit tle awareness of CRPS, fiduciary risks and financial guarantees risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
There may be a lack of interest among potential beneficiaries to shift production to adopt CRPS principles.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Field visits have shown that farming families are generally aware of the problems they endure to produce in the face 
of recurring crisis, such as the severe droughts of rec ent years. They are interested in finding solutions to their various 
problems, starting with those related to agricultural production. For some families, the poverty condition may be an 
obstacle to their full participation in Project activities. The projec t is aware of this challenge, and will work with the 
family’s immediate needs such as food security.  
 
The knowledge of CRPS is not widespread in local communities. An awareness campaign during the development of 
TRIPs is necessary to engage families and c ommunity groups in the development. During the project, exchange visits, 
in which family farmers will have the opportunity to meet others already working with these systems, will be crucial instruments to raise awareness and mobilize families. TA will encourage families to start small, implementing CRPS 
in restricted areas and expand as the CRPS produces benefits and family farmers can compare the new productive 
system with traditional ones.  
 
The water harvesting and storage technologies implemented by the Project are widely known and accepted by families 
in NEB, which also can stimulate project participation. The mitigation measures discussed will reduce the occurrence probability of this risk to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
There is a risk of project delays, mainly in the first years, for four main reasons: i) absence of complete teams in the 
State level Project Implementing Units ( SIU), ii) lack of knowledge of the project’s operative functioning by these 
teams, iii) turnove r of key personnel, implementing agencies and governments, and iv) poor coordination . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Priority will be awarded for states which have past IFAD projects and are experienced in setting up SIU and TA teams.   
SIUs need to expedite the hiring of procurement, contract, monitoring, and financial teams as soon as the Project 
execution starts. Once projects become effective, IFAD and BNDES should receive the names of team members (state servants), the Terms of Reference (TOR) to hire supporting consultants and should train teams in the required thematic 
areas. The Procurement Plan (Annex 10) includes draft TORs of the key positions to speed contracting processes.  
 The risk that the agencies involved in project implementation have limited qualified human resources will be mitigated 
in various ways. The project will be careful to hire qualified and experienced staff through a rigorous selection process. There will also be an effort to train these officials, seeking to strengthen the ir qualifications. Contracted TA providers


---
*Page 59*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 62 
   
 will carry out operational activities in the communities, and the recruitment process should ensure the staff's 
qualifications. An intensive training cycle is planned for the beginning of the project. Courses will  be taught by 
professionals of recognized knowledge, or organizations such as EMBRAPA, or Federal Universities.  
 
The turnover of key project personnel can be considered of low risk if mitigated by an appropriate selection of 
professionals with training and experience, as well as by ensuring a fair and reliable remuneration for performed 
activities. The selection of key team consultants should follow IFAD guidelines on qualifications and the contractual 
arrangements IFAD allows, such as time contracts for consultant activities with monthly, measurable and reliable 
payments.  
 
The use of implementing agencies is a high risk for project execution because, in general, their regulations conflict with specific aspects of the activities necessary for efficient and transparent services. As a mitigation strategy, SIUs 
should be strengt hened to carry out direct execution, empowering teams with specific training conducted by IFAD with 
the participation of state attorneys and representatives of interested parties. In adoption of the Executing Entity, it is 
essential to ensure compliance wi th IFAD and BNDES guidelines in the contracts and provide specific training to 
support implementation.  
 
Considering that advisory and consultative councils with broad participation will be installed, there is a medium risk of 
lack of coordination and conf licting mandates, among government agencies, non- governmental organizations and the 
private sector, interrupting project activities. Nevertheless, States have a long history of executing projects financed by external sources with the active participation of several stakeholders in councils.  
 
The project is fully aligned with Brazil’s National Adaptation Plan and contributes to its Sectoral Policies in Agriculture, 
Water Resources, Vulnerable Populations, Food and Nutritional Security and Biodiversity and Ec osystems. State level 
groups to coordinate the implementation of the plan, which in practice are led by state agriculture secretaries. In the beginning of the project implementation, the Executing Entity  will contact the Inter -ministerial Committee of Climate 
Change to present the project and liaise with federal and state implementation governance bodies for each of the 
sectorial programs identified above in order to ensure institutional support.  
 
At the project level and lessons learned, it has been found that establishment of agreements with international 
technical cooperation agencies, due to limitations of their rules, has generated impacts in the agility of meeting the 
needs of IFAD projects. Mitigati on of this vulnerability will be done by strengthening direct execution ( SIU team 
conducting bidding procedures and contracts), alignment with  BNDES (Executing Entity) and training organizations 
that carry out projects.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Low Medium  
Description  
BNDES credit funds available for financing states do not present a significant risk, because it is backed by the bank’s 
financial stability. The counterpart to be invested may originate from: i) BNDES financeable funds available through 
credit to the state s, which will allow permanent liquidity; and (ii) each state's own funds, which may suffer eventual 
lapses of contributions, especially in the first quarter of each year, and then normalize due to the state's revenue 
collection (increasing after the month of March). Because expenses do not happen at the same pace, however, 
these months will be covered by other funding.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
In each state project, the contracted counterpart is guaranteed by law and presents a relatively low risk due to the financing schedule, bringing a permanent flow of resources. In project implementation, risk will be leveraged by 
additional counterparts from the final beneficiaries. They will contribute using economically measurable goods and 
services with low assign ed risk.


---
*Page 60*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 62 
   
 Regarding the impact of COVID 19, while the pandemic is still unfolding, it is clear that States finances have been 
heavily affected. While states contribute with a small proportion of the project´s budget with their own counterpart 
financing, for the recurrent costs of SIU , they have to enter into an agreement with BNDES accepting the project 
financing terms. . While all states in NEB have expressed an interest in the project, the reality is that the agreements 
will only be feasible in states with a fiscal capacity to borrow. In 2020,  4 states are in this capacity and it is expected 
that a minimum of 2 states, yet probably more, will be in such a capacity in 2021/2022 as the project is contracted at 
state level . This is why it is important for the project to define the State only at start of implementation, as state credit 
rating (and capacity to borrow) varies from year to year.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Legal  Low Medium  
Description  
Approximately one -third of the Northeast farmers do not own their lands and are in the situation of tenants, partners or 
squatters. Traditional communities (quilombolas, indigenous and " fundo de pasto") are usually found in this situation. 
Most of them do not have ownership titles, which may hinder some types of investments in certain areas.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
In selection of beneficiary families and activities (Component 1 or 2), the question of the modality of access to land 
and the available area will be considered. In the case of traditional communities (particularly quilombola and those working in collective areas), the modal ity of land access will be particularly detailed. TA teams will prepare a specific 
action plan to define: 1) investments that can be safely carried out; 2) type of support that could contribute to greater 
land security (e.g., in the case of quilombola communities, support for recognition of the official status of their territories 
by the Palmares Foundation); and 3) obtaining the Rural Environmental Registry (CAR).


---
*Page 61*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 62 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
 
The project is categorized by IFAD as a Category B since it may have some adverse environmental and/or social 
impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, but the impacts are: (i) less adverse than those 
for category A; (ii) site specific and few are irreversible in nature; and (iii) readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. Category B projects require an ESMP, which is incorporated in the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
95 review note showing the output from the 
environmental and social analysis presented in Annex 6.  
 The due diligence process categorized t he project based on an evaluation procedure and a standardized questionnaire 
that provides information on the likelihood, frequency, intensity, manageability, duration and reversibility determining that the type of risk and the significance of potential impacts were low (or medium in few cases) as indicated in the identification of risks and impacts table. The project will not finance any activities that may generate significant adverse 
environmental and social risks and impacts.  
 
The potential impacts are insignificant, site specific, reversible in nature, and can be readily remedied by appropriate 
preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. The project aims to increase the economic, social, and environmental resilience of poor family farmers  by promoting CRPS and small -scale water access. Due to the nature of project 
activities, it is expected that all negative environmental impact can be prevented. The screening of the PCR P has been 
conducted on a preliminary basis at the project concept stage for consideration at the Operational Strategy and Policy Guidance Committee (OSC) review stage, and then finalized in advance of the quality enhancement review. The assessment process involves a review and approval of project documentation by IFAD’s Executive Board and BNDES 
as part of the project cycle approval process. In all the steps, a number of internal and external evaluators provided 
inputs and peer review of the process.  
 
The project does not envisage any adverse social impact. A complete set of activities, including a free and prior informed consultation (FPIC) plan, has been developed (see Annex 6) to ensure indigenous people’s participation in project 
development and to prevent any potential conflict during implementation.  
 Table 8 presents a summary of environmental and social impacts by component and output and their respective 
mitigation measures.   
 
Table 8. Environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures per component and output.  
Activity  Impacts  Mitigation measures  
COMPONENT 1  
Activity 1.1.1. Territorial Resilience 
Investment Plans  Not applicable  Not applicable  
Activity 1.1.2. Implement CRPS in 
family farms and backyard gardens  
 
Activity 1.1.3.  Implement 
Collective Resilient Investments  Soil fertilizers management and 
disposal  Life cycle management practices will be part of 
TA for farmers; recycling will be encouraged.   
Greenhouse gas emissions from fertilizers.  The project will reduce use of synthetic fertilizer 
by increasing biomass production, improving soil health and natural fertilization with CRPS. In 
addition, organic fertilizers will be preferred.  
Land speculation, forcing poor farmers out of the project areas.  TA teams will prepare an action plan to define 
the type of support that could contribute to 
greater land security and attainment of the CAR.  
Potential ecosystems damage to clear land for CRPS.  
 
Erosion from poor soil management 
practices.  Farmers will receive TA in CRPS. CRPS calls for 
elimination of slash and burn as a land- clearing 
method. Soil preparation will be performed by 
selecting, pruning and maintaining dispersed 
trees up to optimal density. The biomass 
removed will serve as soil cover. Soil -preparation 
 
95 The Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) is IFAD’s main safeguard instrument to enhance the sustainability of results -based country strategic opportunities programmes, country strategy 
notes, programmes and projects. The risk assessment process recognizes the heterogeneity of responses, given the widely different country and community circumstances.  All IFAD projects are required to perform a SECAP.


---
*Page 62*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 62 
   
 activities must be carried out during the dry 
season, well before the first rainfall. Planting that 
follows level curves will be encouraged. Line planting will be concave in the longitudi nal axis to 
accommodate the natural humidity of the 
environment and favour the development of the 
plantation, creating a micro- valley where the 
plant root is located.  
Biosaline agriculture increasing salt 
content in soil.  A soil monitoring plan will be developed, 
containing period sampling and analysis.  
TA services that are devoid of 
gender -transformational 
approaches and exclude female agricultural workers from technical, 
production -oriented activities.  TA teams will be trained in gender - 
transformational approaches and will have goal 
that at least 40% of the participants in their 
activities will be women.  
Labour conditions and workers safety might not comply with 
international standards.  National and international safety and security 
procedure wi ll be required for all workers. 
Application of guidelines to handle toxic products. Training will be provided to all 
stakeholders.  
Activity 1.1.4. Build a Farmers 
Network and Promote local 
entrepreneurship for products and 
services that support family far ming  Not applicable  Not applicable  
COMPONENT 2  
Activity 2.1.1. Build boardwalk 
cisterns for backyard gardens  
 
Activity 2.1.2.  Implement social 
technologies to increase water 
availability in periods of drought  
 
Activity 2.1.3.  Implement treatment 
and reuse systems for household wastewater  Water resources and table 
depletion.  To build a CRPS in degraded and compacted 
areas, it is  necessary to plant in terraces and 
level curves as well as install artificial capture, 
storage and filtration system to eliminate runoff 
and promote forced recharge, and thus improve 
soil hydration rather than deplete it.   These 
technologies will be impl emented to shift the 
culture of production towards CRPS, so infiltration can occur naturally and promoting a 
biological water reserve in the roots and leaves 
of specialized vegetation.  A plantation matrix will 
be constructed with species that photosynthes ize 
during the long dry season, combining plants into 
a system that can produce biomass and 
accumulating water all year. At the initial stages 
biomass to be withdrawn (for forage for animals 
and food for human consumption) from the 
system should be the smallest part (1/3), leaving 
most (2/3) to feed the system itself.  
Irrigation can increase salt content 
of soil.  Period soil sampling, as per established in ESMP 
in Annex 6.  
Soil compaction, erosion, and loss 
of microbiome in the areas 
surrounding water infrastructure 
works.  All workers participating in the construction will be trained in environmental and social 
safeguards.  
Conflicts over the water use.  No wells will be drilled as part of this project. The 
project will not interfere with existing streams and 
springs. A successful project will create an 
increased water availability in the region.  
Famers may not segregate and 
safely store / transport waste from 
residual construction remnants and 
biodegradable residues.  Life cycle management practices will be part of farmers' TA; recycling will be encouraged.   
Land speculation forcing poor farmer s out of project areas.  TA teams will prepare an action plan to define 
the type of support that could contribute to 
greater land security and attainment of the CAR.  
Labour conditions and workers' safety might not meet international 
standards.  National a nd international safety and security 
procedure will be required for all workers. 
Application of guidelines to handle toxic 
products. Training will be provided to all 
stakeholders.


---
*Page 63*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 62 
   
 Irrigation can inc rease the soil's salt 
content.  
 
Poor operation of treatment unit 
may result in contaminated soil.  Periodic soil sampling, as established in ESMP in 
Annex 6.  Effluent from treatment plants will not be used for short -cycle plants, but to irrigate 
trees and long-cycle plants.  
Soil compaction, erosion, and loss 
of microbiome in areas surrounding 
water infrastructure works.  All workers participating in construction will be trained in environmental and social safeguards.  
Famers may not segregate and 
safely store / transport waste from 
residual construction remnants and 
biodegradable residues.  Life cycle management practices will be part of farmer`s TA, recycling will be encouraged.  
Land speculation forcing poor 
farmers out of the project areas.  National and international safety and security 
procedure will be required for all workers. 
Application of guidelines to handle toxic 
products. Training will be provided to all 
stakeholders.  
Labour conditions and workers' 
safety might not comply with 
international standards.  TA teams will prepare an action plan to define 
the type of support that could contribute to 
greater land security and attainment of the CAR.  
 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM)  
 
IFAD's GRM can be accessed when necessary to manage project -related grievances that cannot be resolved by the 
project’s Executing Entity. The GRM and guidelines will be developed for the project based on IFAD's corporate complaints procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-
compliance of it s environmental and social policies and mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures.  The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the government or executing 
entity. However, if the complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation, they may bring the matter straight to IFAD. 
The regional division will examine the complaint and, if necessary, contact the EE or the governmental body to decide if the complaint is justified.  The SIU will establish one or more GRM. Explanation of the GRM process will be included 
in the capacity -building program and the project will organize consultations to determine the most suitable channel for 
beneficiaries and stakeholders to communicate their concerns and ideas (see Annex 7). As part of the safeguards performance monitoring, the project will also be responsible for documenting and reporting any grievances received and how they were addressed.  The GCF independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretari at’s indigenous peoples 
focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. Further developed in 
annex es 6 and 7.
  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
The gender assessment revealed that women have less access than men to both tangible productive resources (land, 
credit, housing, and basic services) and intangible resources (education, technical assistance, political participation). 
The project will promote gender equality by providing access for rural women to the productive resources needed for 
agricultural development. The project will build women's leadership skills, foster their participation in decision- making 
processes, and assist women in accessing credit and technology for production and commercialization.  
 
Disasters and climate- change- related crises have been happening more frequently over the last decade, and it is 
evident that their impacts are disproportionally felt by those socially excluded and living in poverty. Thus, women and 
children have 14 times more probability of dying in climate- related disasters than men. Moreover, the low resilience of 
people in the face of climatic, economic and social shocks is exacerbated by inequality. Research indicates that women 
and young girls living in rural areas of NEB, are the most vulnerable to climate change- related risks in the country 
(CEPAL 2016). Gender inequality is most clearly exposed in water resources management and further aggravated by 
erratic climate patterns. Hydrological conditions have been severely altered over the past 10 years, provoking extreme 
scarcity of water sources due to prolonged droughts, which has increased the need for simple , efficient technologies 
aimed towards rainwater water harvest and storage that can directly benefit rural women, as well as positively affecting other family and community members. Lack of water is a common factor mentioned by women in the semiarid region


---
*Page 64*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 62 
   
 as directly affecting the possibility of diversifying agricultural systems and undertaking projects involving the creation of  
community gardens or backyard gardening in family plots based on agroecological principles. For this reason, PCRP 
proposes concre te actions aimed at improving the access to water for agricultural production, as well as the 
development of climate- resilient agriculture practices – strategic actions which will undoubtedly benefit rural women, 
especially if their knowledge and talents are channeled into community -based initiatives, which is a major consideration 
in the methodological approach suggested within the scope of this Project.  
 In order to address the problem of women’s workload and ensure women’s direct involvement in technological innovations, the PCRP Gender Action plan prioritizes the creation of strategies that will promote women's engagement in applying labour -saving renewable technologies and sustaining the knowledge management process generated from 
their use, and directl y contribute to shifting gender social relations. Gender transformational considerations will be 
mainstreamed into all training associated with project implementation. Dissemination of climate information will apply 
gender transformational considerations, and local governments will be trained to ensure that financial support can flow 
to activities that meet women's needs. 40% of TA hired to perform services in communities must be women, which will facilitate greater leadership of the female population in the project. In the courses, meetings and exchanges, there will 
be an effort to maintain equity between men and women in the target beneficiaries . The proportion of 40% of women 
will be more easily maintained by applying the “cirandas” initiative for childcare during the activities.  
 The project will ensure that at least 40% of family farms will have women and youth in their implementation cycle. It should be emphasized that partnerships with gender reference organizations should be fostered as a way of faci litating 
gender mainstreaming with a feminist approach in the AT system, as these organizations can provide methodological approaches that support local and regional processes.   To guarantee women's economic autonomy, a fundamental guideline of the Projec t will be the promotion of specific 
training activities that ensure the incorporation of technologies based on the 'learning by doing' pedagogical approach 
and facilitate the exchange of knowledge aimed of housework organization and care. The educational approach 
adopted in local workshops and territorial meetings between women farmers will be inspired by 'feminist pedagogy', and its main objective is to foster a broad process of Environmental Education, seeking connections between feminism, 
women's rights,  the Caatinga Biome's specificities and agroecological principles. Additionally, PCRP will prioritize 
raising awareness on the causes and forms of gender inequality in the rural areas and the necessity of guaranteeing 
women’s participation and ensuring their empowerment in local and regional processes. Youth, Gender and traditional 
communities’ specialists will support SIUs and field support teams in a series of sensitivity training sessions to coordinate gender specific capacity -building activities with wo men rural workers, and construct mechanisms for gender 
mainstreaming in the construction of TRIPs. Due to high incidences of violence against women within states in the 
Northeastern region, which has increased dramatically since the onset of COVID -19, this  theme will be a cross -cutting 
topic in trainings and work carried out by TA teams.  
 Dissemination of climate information will apply gender transformational considerations, and local governments will be 
trained to ensure that financial support can flow to activities that meet the needs of women.  
 
The Project’s gender transformational focus will ensure better opportunities for women and youth in all three 
components. These implementation measures will  allow : 
- 400.000 women (40% of total beneficiaries) to have access to project benefits,  
 
The full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan is provided in Annex 8.   
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
 
Financial management (FM): BNDES, at t he Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) will have the overall 
responsibility , and final decision making power  (as included under Activity 1.1.1), for FM and will be appropriately staffed 
to exercise this responsibility. The main FM functions will be: (i) consolidate the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); 
(ii) consolidate financial information for interim reporting and annual financial statements; (iii) monitor liquidity


---
*Page 65*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 62 
   
 requirements and prepare and submit  withdrawal applications to IFAD;  (iv) implement and maintain at central and state 
level an integrated financial management system or an acceptable alternative arrangement ; (v) engage with the 
Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) to carry out annual audits and submit consolidated audit reports to IFAD  or private audit 
firm hired for this purpose; and (vi) ensure that overall internal controls are effective and that participating states are in 
compliance with Subsidiary Agreements, the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), and IFAD procurement and FM 
procedures and requirements. The SIU s' responsibilities will include: (i) prepare the AWPB; (ii) compile interim reports 
and annual financial statements; (iii) Implement and maintain the integrated financial management system  or 
acceptable alternative arrangement ; (iv) ensure that accounting transactions are promptly and accurately registered, 
bank reconciliations regularly performed, and relevant documentation orderly retained; (v) collaborate with the auditors 
and pr ovide full access to information and documentation; and (vi) ensure that the internal controls are sound and 
project activities are carried out in compliance with the Subsidiary Agreements, the PIM, and IFAD procurements and 
FM procedures and requirements.  
 
Accounting and reporting: A common integrated financial management system or an acceptable alternative 
arrangement will be used at the central and state levels. The system will provide for budgeting, accounting, and 
reporting in compliance with IFAD requ irements, including registration and reporting by source of funding, originating 
state, component and expenditures, multiple currencies, assets and contract management. Interim financial reports 
and annual financial statements will be prepared in accordanc e with the PIM and with IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing. Consolidated Financial Statements will be submitted to IFAD not later than four months after 
the end of each fiscal year. Flow of funds: The flow of funds and disbursement arrangements are described in section 
B.4 of this document.  
 
External audit:  The project will be audited annually by the SAI or private audit firm hired for this purpose in accordance 
with international auditing standards. The consolidated annual audit report, in cluding all sources of funding and 
participating states, will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of the fiscal year.  
 
Procurement management: will be carried out through the SIUs with the support of experts in bidding, hiring, and 
accountability. State Project teams should have technical capacity to prepare and manage contracts, as well as 
support the formalization, execution, and closure of agreements with beneficiaries. In all procurement and contracting 
plans (PCP) and their activities, SIUs should use IFAD and BNDES guidelines. Bidding can be award to a partner 
institution, mainly for recruitment of staff, after analysing institutional capacity to follow IFAD and BNDES bidding 
guidelines, contractual arrangements, and anti -fraud / corruption policies. To ensure an efficient execution, IFAD will 
conduct analysis of each project's installed capacity. IFAD will keep track of team selection to ensure that the 
workforce is satisfact ory, review preparation of Project Implementation Manual (PIM), oversee preparation of 
guidelines and handbooks for bidding commissions to ensure proper project execution, and supervise procurement 
and contract management. IFAD will also provide training t o improve teams' capacity at the start of implementation 
and when necessary.  SIUs will be responsible for the safekeeping and provide instruction on procurement processes 
and ensure that beneficiaries do so and make them available for future audits or IFAD  and BNDES supervisions. This 
also applies in cases where there is a partner institution supporting project implementation.  
 
Anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT): As per BNDES Policy for Prevention 
of Money Laundering and Combating Terrorist Financing96, the bank participates in collective initiatives to combat fraud 
and preventing money -laundering and the financing of terrorist activities (AML/CFT) such as the Integrity and 
Anticorruption Business Pact (Ethos  Institute), the National Strategy to Combat Corruption and Money Laundering 
(Enccla), the National Forum of Management of Ethics in State- owned Enterprises and commissions of the Brazilian 
Federation of Banks (Febraban) on compliance and AML/CFT, and promotes much training of its employees on how 
to combat fraud and prevent money -laundering and/or the financing of terrorist activities.  BNDES was created by Law 
No. 1,628, of June 20, 1952, as the body that contributes to formulat ion and execut ion the nation al economic 
development policy. As a public company and a member of the National Financial System, BNDES is subject to the 
supervision and evaluation of national control bodies, such as the Federal Court of Accounts - TCU and the Central 
Bank of Brazil. Br azil has the Financial Activities Control Council (Coaf), which has technical and operational autonomy, 
operates throughout the national territory and is administratively linked to the Central Bank of Brazil. Its main function 
 
96 Available at: https://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/export/sites/default/bndes_en/Galerias/Download/BNDES_AML_policy__english.pdf


---
*Page 66*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 62 
   
 is to produce and manage fina ncial intelligence information to prevent and combat money laundering and to promote 
institutional dialogue with national, foreign and international bodies and entities that have connection with its activities.   
 
All disbursements to producer organizations are made in accordance with The Brazilian Federal Revenue Office 
procedures97: (i) S tates make an agreement with banks, which have more presence in the field near producers’ 
organizations. All the accounts opened by producers organizations operate under this agreement between the state 
and the banks; (ii) In order to open the bank account (which needs to be specific and solely for the funds utilized for the 
project), producers organizations complete forms and need to be legally registered in the Ministry of Economy´s 
database (National Register of Legal Entities CNPJ) so that all information is verified and checked; (iii) The state 
transfers the funds to the account of the producers which will only be released once compliance with the project is  
ensured and according to specific demands of expenditure presented by the organizations; (iv) All bank accounts for 
producers’ organizations are directly managed by the state (project) which has access to all information in the account; 
(v) Producers orga nizations need to render accounts on all expenditure and to support them in this procedure the state 
will hire technical assistance (TA) teams dedicated to this task; (vi) in case the resources generate income (as they will 
be in the account and for exampl e can lead to savings) they can be utilized provide it is in line with the purpose of the 
project; otherwise all unutilized amounts including income generated is returned to the state.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity decl ares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the fundi ng proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.  
 
97 Receita Federal, Ministério da Economia https://receita.economia.gov.br/orientacao/tributaria/cadastros/consultas -cnpj


---
*Page 67*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 62 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)  
☒ Annex  14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)  
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22 
Annex 23  GHG Appraisal report  
Temporary annex on co- financing


---
*Page 68*
---

17/06/2019 SEI/ME - 2500349 - Ofício
https://sei.fazenda.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=2940759&infra_s … 1/2
MINISTRY OF ECONOMY OF BRAZIL
Secretariat for International Economic Affairs
OFÍCIO SEI Nº 35/2019/CGIG/SUINT/SAIN/SECINT-ME
Brasília, June 14, 2019.
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon City, Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
regarding "Planting climate resilience in rural communities of the Northeast (PCR)".
Refer ence: Electronic process nº 12120.100376/2019-54.
Dear Mr. Manzanares,
1. We refer to the project " Planting climate resilience in rural communities of the Northeast
(PCR) ", as included in the funding proposal submitted by the International Fund for Agircultural
Development (IFAD) to us on April 4th, 2019.
2. The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Affairs, Ministry of Finance, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3. Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our non-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.
4. By communicating our non-objection, it is implied that:a)The Government of Brazil has no objection to the project as included in the funding
proposal;
b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c)In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as included
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
5. We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining non-objection to the project as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
6. We note that a non-objection decision does not constitute any kind of guarantee or
commitment by the Brazilian Government. Also, it does not exempt the International Fund for Agricultural
Development from complying with legal, regulatory and administrative requirements in Brazil.No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 69*
---

17/06/2019 SEI/ME - 2500349 - Ofício
https://sei.fazenda.gov .br/sei/controlador .php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=2940759&infra_s … 2/27. We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 
Best regards,
 
 
Document signed electronically
ERIV ALDO ALFREDO GOMES
Secretary for International Economic Af fairs
 
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Erivaldo Alfredo Gomes, Secretário(a) de Assuntos
Econômicos Internacionais, em 14/06/2019, às 19:56, conforme horário oﬁcial de Brasília, com
fundamento no art. 6º, § 1º, do Decreto nº 8.539, de 8 de outubro de 2015.
A auten cidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
h p://sei.fazenda.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código veriﬁcador 2500349 e
o código CRC 3BA017AC.
 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco K, 8º andar, sala 874 - Bairro Zona Cívico-Administrativa
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF
(61) 2020-5644 - e-mail and.gcf@economia.gov.br
Processo nº 12120.100376/2019-54. SEI nº 2500349


---
*Page 70*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the 
Northeast (PCRP)  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project or target country 
or location (s) of programme  Northeastern Brazil  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  Portuguese is the o fficial language of Brazil . 
Link to disclosure  English: 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_e.pdf/d35a7750 -600e -b268 -b405 -
ba751a1695d9   
 
Portugues e:  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_p.pdf/7a357fac -a8e2 -9e86 -9283 -
a760e0e0a4e7  
Other link(s)  https://www.ifad.org/en/secap -disclosed -documents   
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the “Social, Environmental and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) note”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  Portuguese is the o fficial language of Brazil . 
Link to disclosure  English: 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_e.pdf/d35a7750 -600e -b268 -b405 -
ba751a1695d9   
 Portuguese:  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_p.pdf/7a357fac -a8e2 -9e86 -9283 -
a760e0e0a4e7  
Other link(s)  https://www.ifad.org/en/secap -disclosed -documents   
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category 
B project is contained in the “Social, Environmental and 
Climate Assessmen t Procedures (SECAP) note”.


---
*Page 71*
---

Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)/  
Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  Portuguese is the o fficial language of Brazil . 
Link to disclosure  English: 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_e.pdf/d35a7750 -600e -b268 -b405 -
ba751a1695d9   
 
Portuguese:  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40206666/s
ecap_brazil_pcrp_p.pdf/7a357fac -a8e2 -9e86 -9283 -
a760e0e0a4e7  
Other link(s)  https://www.ifad.org/en/secap -disclosed -documents   
Remarks  An IPPF consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the “Social, Environmental and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) note”.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Place  Casa das Nações Unidas (ONU)  
Praça  Municipal Thomé de Souza s/n  
Elevador Lacerda  
40.020 -010  
Salvador - Bahia - Brazil  
 
Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social 
(BNDES)1 
Av. República do Chile, 100 -  Centro  
Rio de Janeiro – RJ 
20031 -917  
Brazil   
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Wednesday, December 9, 2020  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, November 9, 2020  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity  stated above.  
 
1 Electronic copy has been submitted to the EE on Thursday , October 8, 2020 hard copies will also be made available 
in EE address in due course.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  72 
 
  
Secretariat’s assessment of FP143  
Proposal name:  Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the 
Northeast (PCRP)  
Accredited entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  
Country:  Brazil  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
Transforming the agricultural system of the 
poorest rural farmers in N ortheast  Brazil   Project depends on uptake of CRPS and 
continue d appl ication of  sustainable 
agroforestry systems.   
Adequate mitigation and adaptation 
technologies  for small -scale family farmers 
and an emphasis on a gender -sensitive 
approach  The proposed water -saving technologies should 
be carefully monitored to avoid negative 
environmental externalities.  
A Project Management and Accountability 
System will enable m easurement of GHG 
emission reduction results obtained from 
activities to reduce degradation, establish 
agroforestry cropping and restore soil carbon 
in the Caatinga regions of the selected States  More precise calculations of the project’s net 
GHG emissions reductions and food security 
impact will depend on selection of sites 
within selected States of the Brazilian 
Caatinga region and baseline studies 
conducted after project inception.  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XXIII , titled “List  of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The semi -arid region of N ortheast Brazil (NEB) has been experiencing periodic droughts 
with chronic water scarcity. Average t emperature increased by 0.8 degrees  Celsius between 
1901 and 2000, and an important acceleration in warming during the last three decades. Severe 
droughts occurred in 1993 and 2012, with the overall drought frequency, intensity and severity 
increasing over the past 36 years.  Crops produced by family farmers have been affected by 
these climate drivers and impacts, with the a verage crop area lost being 221,973 hectares per 
year from 1990 to 2016. NEB is projected to experience a further temperature increase of 
between 0.5 and 2.0 degrees  Celsius in the period 2011 –2040, compared with the baseline 
period 1961 –1990.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  73 
 
  
4. The project proposes to address these observed and projected climate impacts and to 
build the resilience of the most vulnerable and the poorest farmers in NEB. At the same time, the 
project will promote low -emission agriculture and restore forests, thereby generating emissions 
reductions and carbon sequestration through sustainable forest management. The project will 
be implemented for eight years, with a requested GCF funding of USD 99.5 million (USD 65 
million as senior loans and USD 34.5 million as grants) and co -financing of USD 103 million, 
including from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) of USD 30 million, 
the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) of USD 59.3 million and participating States of USD 
13.7 million.  
5. The project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and sequestrate 11  
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq) in total  during the project lifespan of 20 
years. At the same time, the project will directly benefit one  million  people in at leas t three 
States of NEB through the introduction of c limate resilient productive systems  (CRPS ) and 
increased water security for agriculture. An additional 1.5 million people will also be indirectly 
benefited through the territorial resilience investment plans development and implementation, 
as well as capacity -building and knowledge management activities, especially for women, youth 
and traditional communities.  
6. The project is structured into three components : 
(a) Implement CRPS ; 
(b) Water access for production ; and  
(c) Knowledge management and scaling up . 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component  1: Climate resilient productive systems (total cost: USD 7 6.5 million; GCF cost: USD 54 
million, or 71 per cent)  
7. Output 1 will  implement CRPS for family farmers and traditional communities in their 
family farms and backyard gardens. It will also implement sustainable landscape management 
in larger areas of the Caatinga  under collective community management to  reduce deforestation 
and restore deg raded lands. It will develop t erritorial resilience investment plans (TRIPs) , 
which will be planning tools for the implementation of CRPS. The CRPS includes a range of 
activities, including setting up resilient backyard gardens, reducing land degradation i n areas of 
collective community management \  by adopting eco -efficient stoves and biodigesters, adopting 
biosaline agriculture, and local entrepreneurship for family farming.  
8. One of the key challenges this output aims to address is the increase in soil salinity and 
brack ish or salty groundwater leading to worsening water scarcity . The proposed solution – 
biosaline agriculture with halophyte plants combined with collective desalinization systems – is 
assessed to be adequate and are b est suited to manage the challenge of land salinization in the 
regional context. The CRPS is also deemed to be the optimal solution in semi -arid NEB, given 
their effects of recharging soil moisture, soil carbon, retaining water and improving 
microclimate.  
9. The other challenge of increasing land degradation due to overgrazing and timber 
extraction in the Caatinga will be managed using  alternative solutions such as  eco-efficient 
stoves and biodigesters that will reduce the demand for timber extraction. It is anticipated that 
without the project family farmers in the project areas will continue their slash -and-burn 
agriculture and accentuate land degradation, aggravating their livelihoods by reducing agricultural production.  Overall, the proposed solutions are adequate and reasonable for 
manag ing the baseline situation in the target region.


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  74 
 
  
10. The proposed solution has good potential to maximize its impacts, as it is widely 
accessible to the poorest families in the region. Virtually every family unit in NEB has a 
backyard . Beneficiaries participating in the project will transform th eir backyard  to climate -
resilient agroforestry systems, consisting of food crops, fruits, medicinal and ornamental plants, 
spices, and fodder combined with livestock. Although the size of  the backyards is quite small,  
under CRPS these spaces allow frequent  irrigation, proximity  to the house and a leading role of 
women farmers .  
11. Another strength of this project is the effort to increase beneficiaries’ ownership of the 
interventions. For each a ctivity, beneficiary farmers must contribute at least 10 per  cent of the 
financing of the TRIPs amount. Although the TRIPs and CRPS will be financed mostly with GCF 
grants, the project requires family farm labor in  construction and maintenance to  ensure 
ownership by the beneficiaries encouraging sustainability of the project interventions.   
Component  2: Water access for production  (total cost: USD 101.8  million; GCF cost: USD 42.4  
million, or 42 per cent)  
12. Component 2 will provide various technologies for water collection and storage for use 
in agricultural production , such as cement patio  (or calçadão) cisterns, underground dams, 
trench barriers, greywater reuse system , as well as green septic tanks . These technologies focus 
on increasing water security by capturing and storing rainwater and reusing greywater and 
blackwater for irrigation.  
13. The issue of water scarcity in NEB is driven by both climatic and non -climatic drivers, 
with the non -climatic driver being the lack of distribution across Brazilian territory. Climatic 
drivers, namely low rainfall and high evaporation , are the main reason for this component and 
the inter -seasonal rainfall variability  has been analy sed in the feasibility study . 
14. The proposed water -saving technologies are adopted from other countries and adapted 
to the NEB context. They have been tested over the past two decades and were selected as the 
best practices. The analyses have been provided in the feasibility study of their adequacy t o the 
local context.  
Component  3: Knowledge management and scaling up (total cost: USD 9.4  million; GCF cost: USD 
2.9 million, or 31  per cent)  
15. Component 3 will strengthen the institutional and technical capacity of the p roject 
beneficiaries in implementing  components 1 and 2, promote South- South cooperation and 
unlock policy barriers to support farmers in access ing markets.  
16. The need for the proposed activities is well justified , and it is positively assessed that 
adequate capacity -building and institutional strengthening will be followed by practical 
measures, given that most of the proposed adaptation activities require incentives to shift the 
farmers’ current unsustainable practices . The key success factor of this component will b e the 
establish ment of  a coordination mechanism among the different institutions at the local and 
regional levels, in order to effectively and efficiently deliver the knowledge and technologies to the poorest and the most vulnerable farmers. It is importan t that the activities undertaken 
under this component are properly documented and shared , with concrete outputs generated, 
so that they can be sustained, scaled up and replicated into other regions of the country.  
Component 4: Project management (total co st: USD 14.8 million; GCF cost: USD 0.2 million, or 0.2  
per cent)  
17. The last component is the project management cost for implementation of the project. 
The GCF portion of the project management cost is around 0.2  per cent of the total requested 
GCF funding, and is compliant with GCF policy on fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  75 
 
  
3.1 Impact potential                               Scale:  Med ium-high  
18. The project aims to reduce emissions and sequestrate carbon of 11,086,999 tCO 2eq 
during the project lifespan of 20 years. This mitigation result will be generated through 
sustainable land management of forest lands, annual and perennial croplands and grasslands  on 
84,124 hectares , as well as through installation of 540 eco -efficient stoves and 540 biodigesters. 
The calculation of emission reductions was done with the EX- Ante carbon balance tool (EX -ACT) 
using tier 2 values for the soil organic carbon.  A baseline was calculated for agricultural 
emissions (annual), grassland and livestock and use of inputs (fertilizers and energy 
consumptions). These are not included in the logical framework , and it is recommended that 
these baseline s are captured and report ed during project implementation . 
19. The GHG calculation did not account solar -powered pumps (31,000)  for emissions 
reduction or for the possible generation of emissions through the production and 
transportation of materials for cement pat io cisterns. For the latter, the accredited entity ( AE) 
explained that initial GHG emissions have not been included because the States have not been 
determined yet, and the estimation would have to be based on the actual conditions in 
particular States (e. g. transportation distances). In addition, possible emissions from grid -
powered desalination systems have also not been taken into account, as the project does not 
install any new desalination units, but rather employs the existing units to reuse brackish water. 
These omissions in emission reduction s and generation, and the final carbon balance, should be 
monitored and reported to GCF through annual performance reports .  
20. The proposal aims to reach 0.5  per cent of the total national population and 12  per cen t 
of the population in NEB . The project’s direct beneficiaries are estimated at one million  people 
who will benefit from CRPS and increased access to water for agricultural production. A n 
additional 1.5 million people in the region are also expected to ben efit from  enhanced 
knowledge and learning in low -emission and climate -resilient agriculture.  
21. In terms of scientific evidence for climate change and its impacts in the region, the 
feasibility study presents observed climate data drawn from multiple meteoro logical stations 
cited in different studies (e.g. Da Silva (2004) and Carvalho (2020)) . The results show 
contradict ory climatic trends in terms of precipitation depending on the areas, although the 
overall temperature shows increasing trends. A separate st udy on the impacts of droughts on 
agricultural production in NEB has also been presented, covering the period 1990 –2016. The 
analysis shows severe extreme droughts in certain years (1993 and 2012) but it is difficult to 
determine increasing trends and more  prolonged effects of droughts over the years within the 
given timeframe.  
22. Targeting of the project areas ( sites within the Caatinga biome of selected States and 
beneficiaries will be based on a set of selection or eligibility criteria which are to be developed 
in greater detail at the initial stage of the project implementation. The feasibility study  provides 
a set of general criteria for selecting the r egional s tates and beneficiaries. The criteria en sures 
that the selection will be done using the climate vulnerability index, the level of food and 
nutritional insecurity, as well as other important environmental-  and poverty- related 
indicators. The criter ia are deemed to be appropriate and are in line with the GCF investment 
criteria indicators.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential         Scale: Med ium-high  
23. The paradigm shift in this project is demonstrated to a certain extent. The project  is 
expected to transform the  family farmers’ production system from dependence on mono -
cropped beans, corn and manioc requiring expanding degradation of natural vegetation  to 
climate -resilient and biosaline agriculture including diversification on the use of crops and


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  76 
 
  
community conse rvation  of native Caatinga vegetation . The project will also s hift small  family 
farmers’ conventional agriculture  practices, which are highly sensitive to climate change, to 
drought -resilient crop production systems that will ensure food security for subsi stence 
farmers. The shift of the agricultural system to a  more drought  tolerant one with a reliable 
supply of water is acknowledged  as positive . The project will incentivize this shift in agriculture 
with the use of full grants from GCF . It could have been more compelling if the project developed 
a financial mechanism to further incentivize farmers to continue the resilient farming after the 
project for financial sustainability . 
24. For the water -saving systems, the proposed technologies to be adopted are not new, but 
they are adapted to the NEB context (e.g. in the case of biodigesters , from Chinese and Indian 
models ) and were selected based on the best practices that have been developed in NEB during 
the last two decades.  
25. The project also h as good potential for scaling up and replication within the target areas 
and in other regions of the country. A s ignificant amount of grants are to be invested in 
knowledge management and South- South cooperation. It is expected that , based on such 
knowledg e management and capacity -building, the project will create a positive enabling 
environment for local and national stakeholders to replicate and scale up agricultural 
adaptation. It is also important to  involve the private sector in agricultural value chai ns, 
widening opportunities for smallholder farmers to add value to their products and create sustainable financing opportunities, which will gradually reduce the need for full grant support 
in the future.  
26. The pro ject utilizes concessional loans for water -saving technologies with sovereign 
guarantee, and requires beneficiaries to contribute at least 10 per cent of costs for CRPS 
investment. These mechanisms will ensure some level of sustainability of the project. However, 
the AE should develop a concrete exi t strategy containing a financial plan for beneficiaries to 
continue CRPS, sustainable forests management and to maintain the infrastructure after the 
project  ends . The AE committed to develop such an exit plan in the penultimate year of the 
project implem entation.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                        Scale: High  
27. The proposal provides sound justification for its potential to generate positive 
environmental, social and economic externalities. The proposed technology  packages include 
generally proven results with good practices that have beneficial environmental impa cts, such 
as creating positive microclimate s and improving soil conditions. No harmful environmental 
impacts are foreseen to be associated with the selected climate resilient seeds and other plant 
materials proposed in the CRPS , although the proposed water -saving technologies  should be 
carefully monitored to avoid negative environmental externalities.  
28. The proposed water supply and agricultural practices  will enhance food and water 
security and generate an increase in farmers’ production and incomes.  Economi c co-benefits are 
foreseen to be  substantial , particularly from the production of various cash crops , vegetables, 
medicinal and herbal plants . The project is also expected to positively contribute to relieving 
impacts of COVID -19. The project is expected t o generate around 200 local jobs  for youth and 
strengthen 70 local entrepreneurs.  
29. The potential for social benefits is also assessed as high : diversified agricultural 
productio n, greater access to water and to markets  will directly benefit society in the long term , 
and will better prepare and equip  communities for current and future climate change impacts.  
30. Gender considerations have been  adequately included in the project design . The target 
for the project’s technical assistance is that 40 per  cent of the beneficiaries will be women, and 
for each proposed a ctivity, 50 per cent  of the beneficiaries will be women. It will  be important to


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  77 
 
  
foster women’s skills in agricultural activities,  their participation in decision -making processes, 
and to  stre ngthen their capacity to access credit  for greater diversification in their agricultural 
practices. A detailed gender assessment and action plan has been developed and was submitted 
as an annex.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient          Scale: Med ium-high  
31. The vulnera bility of the country and the target beneficiaries and their adaptation needs 
are generally  explained throughout the proposal,  and the analysis of the scale and intensity of 
the country’s exposure to climate risks is provided in the feasibility study . The impacts of 
climate change, particularly incidents resulting from droughts, on agricultural production and 
livelihoods are presented . The vulnerability of smallholder farmers, including women, is 
acknowledged and t heir losses due to the climatic even ts are noted.  
32. Although Brazil  is classified as an upper m iddle -income country, the proposal justifies 
the grants  portion  by highlighting the level of poverty of the project beneficiaries. The proposal 
emphasizes the cur rent lack of loans or other kinds of financial instruments with formal banks, 
as well as lack of access to markets for poor rural farmers to implement low -emission and 
climate -resilient agriculture. Thus, the grants are deemed to be adequate for the margin alized 
population in NEB in terms of their financial capacity.  
33. The proposal explains the financial needs of the recipient based on the degree of poverty 
and vulnerability of family  farmers. Although such justification is acknowledged, it could have 
been st rengthened by placing it within the context of  a wider investment strategy ; this could  
includ e a financial estimation of the cost of implementing climate change mitigation and 
adaptation measures in agriculture at the national level, and the associated sho rtfalls in the 
national budget  or other resources . Such an exercise would have provided a clear road map or 
pathway for climate resilience building in the sector from a financial perspective, and would 
clarify the level of contribution  and its impacts from  GCF.  
3.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
34. The proposal states  that the project contributes to the country’s nationally determined 
contribution  (NDC), national adaptation plan  and its various national development and climate 
change strategies . It would have been more compelling if the proposal had delineated in a more 
concise manner how and to what extent the project will contribute to the low-carbon  
agriculture program me as pa rt of the NDC . 
35. As the executing entity (EE), B NDES  has demonstrated its financial management 
capacity to manage a similar size of investment . The result of the financial management capacity 
assessment conducted by the AE was satisfactory. Given that BNDES is also  the GCF AE,  it is 
expected that this project will strengthen the capacity of BNDES on managing GCF investments  
and support them bringing more projects in the future.  
36. The project was designed on the basis of rigorous consultations with relevant 
stakeholders, including the GCF national designated authority. A stakeholder engagement plan was submitted as an annex to the funding proposal.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                   Scale: Med ium-high  
37. The proposed structure  of grants and l oans blending at concessional terms is assessed 
to be adequate and reasonable, considering the level of poverty of the target beneficiaries who


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  78 
 
  
are identified as the most vulnerable population of the region , as well as the nature of non -
income generating activities.  
38. Given the size of the investment, and comparing the other forestry investments in Brazil,  
including the approved results -based payments from GCF in the Amazon biome, the cost -per-
tonne in this project is deemed relatively expensive. This is due to the introduction of various 
technologies to reduce pressure on natural resources and forest lands.  
39. The proposal demonstrates the economic viability of the project , with a positive net 
present value (NPV) of USD 152 million and economic internal rate of return of 19.8 per  cent, 
using the discount rate of 10 per  cent.  The analysis shows that proposed agricultural activities 
will be economically viable in a 20-year  time -horizon.  The proposal also demonstrates cost -
effectiveness  using a  financial model. The project is expected to generate positive NPV of $2,322 
to R$40,000  Brazilian Reais,  with a financial internal rate of return  of 10 to 39 per cent.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and so cial safeguards  
40. The project is a partnership between the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) , acting as the  AE, and the Government of Brazil’s Development Bank of 
Brazil (BNDES) as the EE. It seeks to transform poor farming famil ies’ productive systems in the 
semiarid region by increasing production and improving their capacity to address a range of 
climate change challenges. Its long -term goals are : creation of resilient and productive farming 
systems; restored ecosystem functions; incre ased and stabiliz ed family income , food security 
and nutrition; and supporting young generations to stay active in rural activities.  
41. The AE has provided a Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure 
(SECAP), which is IFAD’s equivalent to GCF’s required Environmental Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). The SECAP describes the project’s social and environmental risks and 
mitiga tion strategies, and the key considerations regarding climate impacts associated with the 
project. The SECAP appendices include an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, the 
project’s Risk Categorization Screening Questionnaire, and a copy of the AE’s Comp laints 
Submission Form, among others. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan is provided as an appendix to 
the financial proposal. The initial screening of the social, environmental and climate issues likely 
to be associated with the project determined it to be c ategory B – moderate risk. The Secretariat 
confirms this categorization and it is within the AE’s accreditation level as regards 
environmental and social risk.  
42. The proposed project consists of three components: 1) climate resilient productive 
systems; 2) w ater access; and 3) knowledge management and scaling -up. The AE commits that 
approximately 1,000,000 people in 250,000 family farms will directly benefit from 
implementation of the project. It further commits to increasing the resilience of agricultural 
production systems over 84,124 h ectares, increasing water access to 36,000 families, and 
mitigating between 11,086,999 tCO 2eq and 11,621,173 tCO 2eq over a 20 -year period.  
43. The SECAP describes the policies, laws and regulations of the Government of Brazil with  
relevance to the project – including policies governing poverty reduction and family farming; 
food and nutrition security; traditional communities and indigenous peoples; water access; 
climate change; and a range of environmental regulations. The Environm ental and Social 
Safeguards 4 on community health, safety and security was triggered in the screening 
procedures due to the likely use of fertilizers for increased crop productivity. The SECAP states 
that careful selection of chemicals and management will be promoted, but also states the project 
will not promote the use of chemical pesticides. Fertilizers are expected to be used only during


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  79 
 
  
the first few years of the project, when the CRPS activities are not capable of generating enough 
biomass, then scaled  down to zero as the system matures and can produce its own fertilizers. 
Local manure is to be prioritized if available instead of chemical fertilizers, with technical 
assistance teams working to ensure adequate use and handling of fertilizers. The project  can 
further strategize on developing information and capacity -building among the farmers, many of 
whom are accustomed to the more harmful types and applications of agrochemicals that the 
project can help eliminate.  
44. Indigenous peoples' issues are present in the project area and their full engagement is 
important for success of the p roject. The p roject documentation complies with the requirements 
of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. The SECAP in a nnex 6 and the Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework in appendix 1 of the SECAP provide the main means to achieve these goals.  
45.  A major infrastructure project in the project area is the transposition of the São 
Francisco River. This project has been controversial with many claims that indigenous peoples have been negatively affected by the project. An important goal of this project is to help 
indigenous peoples and avoid additional, similar  negative outcomes. Ongoing consultations 
guided by the concept of free, prior and informed consent will therefore be especially important to avoid similar mistakes. The project commits to carrying out further consultations with 
indigenous peoples within the project areas during its implementation cycle.   
46. Another important goal will be to ensure that indigenous peoples benefit fr om the 
project. There is a commitment to developing log frame indicators that will include relevant 
disaggregation  for women, youth, indigenous and quilombola beneficiaries.   
47. The SECAP describes stakeholder engagement activities that took place in the planning 
of the project, and the grievance procedures currently required by the AE. It commits to developing project -level grievance redress mechanisms ( GRMs ) consistent with GCF 
requirements and based on the AE’s mechanism, and building agreement with stakeh olders on 
the best methods for implementing the project level GRMs. The SECAP includes specific detail 
outlining how the AE will need to ensure all project -affected communities are able to access the 
AE’s mechanism (as well as any future project -level GRM) , including those who may not have 
access to internet resources. As described, the project has a clear process for accessing the 
various grievance mechanisms, and the importance of robust stakeholder engagement to 
minimize the risk of grievances is include d. It will be important to consider that beyond the 
initial signing of agreements by all parties, implementation of those agreements is often a 
significant challenge and must also be monitored and reported.  
48. The SECAP provides a useful graphic representati on of the project’s various GRMs and 
their functions. This and other aspects of stakeholder engagement and grievance handling 
procedures should be widely available in relevant languages and locations, given the significant 
number and capacity differences o f project -affected individuals across a wide geographic area. 
The SECAP commits to giving special attention to project participants to address this concern: 
farmers, illiterate or technolog y illiterate people, people with hearing or visual disabilities, 
people with limited or no access to internet and other groups with special needs. Dissemination 
of information among these groups will be carried out by state -level project management units 
using social media, local newspapers, flyers, brochures, radio, and television. Tracking, 
monitoring and rectifying deficiencies in this regard will be important aspects of project 
implementation.  
49. Responsibility for stakeholder planning and engagement activities, including designing 
mechanisms for confidential reports and financial support, will fall to the Youth, Gender and 
Traditional Communities Specialist within each state -level project management unit , with 
support from monitoring and evaluation specialists on tracking compliance issues and 
grievance handling. It is im portant that these specialists have the training and capacity to design


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  80 
 
  
and manage complex stakeholder engagement and grievance redress procedures, particularly 
given the high number of intended beneficiaries and potentially impacted farming families.   
50. While the SECAP mentions that the GCF independent grievance redress mechanism is 
available to impacted stakeholders at any time throughout the project, it will be important that 
the project make this information available not only to the expected project ben eficiaries, but to 
all project management units and partners who have a role in addressing grievances via the 
various mechanisms available to stakeholders.  
4.2 Gender policy  
51. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the G ender Policy of GCF .  
52. The gender assessment provides information regarding the enabling environment 
where many advances were made in rural public policies and program mes which have adopted 
specific strategies for inclusion and support for agroecological production and marketing of 
rural women’s production in the agriculture sector. However, previously established policies 
aimed at reducing social inequalities have suffered serious setbacks, leading to unfavourable 
conditions experienced by women in rural areas. Policies on women ’s rights are seen to function 
at minimum thus rendering Brazil one of the countries with the highest inequality rates in the 
world. However, t his does not invalidate  the already established and active role that is being 
played by autonomous rural women ’s organizations and movements in Brazil as a response to 
the lack of inclusion of rural women ’s agendas in rural workers' organizations.  
53. The assessment , which relied on desk reviews and lessons learnt from previous 
program mes, indicates that women and young girls living in rural areas of Brazil’s Northeast are 
the most vulnerable to climate change -related risks in the country. The challenge is not only to 
young girls and women but also affects traditional communities. T he vulnerabilities have social, 
economic and political dimensions that limit their capacity for adaptation. The assessment indicates that women have no access to effective policies and programme s. Despite the policy 
gaps however, the assessment indicates t hat women continue to play important roles and 
continue to engage in the collection and sale of non -timber forest products for subsistence when 
other income -generating activities are not feasible. Women play critical roles in promoting 
innovations in techn ology and in sustainable agricultural systems that are resilient to climate 
change. While women produce for subsistence, they also find ways to improve their capacity 
and try to engage in local and regional markets however weak and incomplete their 
organiz ational skills may be. Women tend to operate in the informal sector, with little access to 
legal procedures, lacking working capital, producing low -quality products and with no 
possibility of selling their produce in many of the markets available.   
54. The as sessment indicates that, despite their efforts, women are among those more 
prone to chronic poverty, and are the poorest and most vulnerable. In the NEB , the number of 
families with women heads of household is increasing. Half the population of the semi -arid NEB  
have no income or only government assistance as their single source of income, and 59.5  per 
cent  are women. The majority of farmers producing in areas less than five  hectares are women, 
and 87.3  per cent  of women farmers do not have  access to technical assistance services. Women 
are engaged in bird breeding (73.5  per cent ); mixed crop/livestock production (72.3  per cent ); 
horticulture/floriculture (63.0 per cent) which are subsisten ce, agricultural or non -agricultural 
activities. Further , the assessment also indicates that, of the total number of rural farmers 
without land, there are almost twice as many women as men. In addition, although women 
participate in productive dynamics, they are generally excluded from decision -making about 
resources. While  decision -making on resources is out of their reach, the skewed division of 
work in the communities also means that the task of searching, managing, handling and storing 
of water for household consumption  is primarily that of women . Extreme situations such  as


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  81 
 
  
droughts lead to an increase in their workload, and with water scarcity the y need to travel 
increasingly lengthy distances in search of sources, carrying water in pots or cans. While the 
economic and social situation of women is dire , it is also simila r as regards the reproductive 
aspect in that the majority of rural women (90.8  per cent ) devote 26.1 hours per week to 
domestic work, while 43.1  per cent  of men dedicate only 10.2 hours per week to this type of 
work.  
55. The assessment recogni zes – and the pr oject will work towards – increased 
acknowledg ement of the existing contributions of women in the communities and in the sector , 
while at the same time investing in their already existing potentials and knowledge,  for 
increased efficiency, effectiveness and remuneration. The existence of stereotypes hinders 
women from achieving their full potential in addition to the existence of s ocial inequalities of 
race and ethnicity. The lessons from other project experiences  indicates the need to include 
prioritization and targeting of women (in public and technical teams) and underserved 
communities by indicating minimum rates of women's part icipation while at the same time 
instituting affirmative measures that can be understood as initial steps to achieve gender 
transformation. The intention is to stimulate sustainable agricultural practices that value the 
knowledge and skills of women in rur al areas, contributing to their autonomy and social, 
economic and political resilience.  
56. The AE has provided a gender action plan which includes activities, targets (minimum 
40 per cent ), indicators, timeline, budgets and gender expert(s) and thus fulfils  the 
requirements of GCF  policy. At the initial phase, the project will conduct an assessment with 
communities to identify the structural and cultural factors that facilitate or hinder the 
participation and benefit of women and communities in the project. T he findings will inform the 
current gender action plan and help refine it, in quantitative as well as qualitative terms. The 
current gender action plan submitted includes activities which are aimed at addressing the 
gender and social empowerment issues and  are targeted particularly at women. Activities 
included are intended to  enhanc e already existing women’s roles , such as cultivation of 
nutritionally -rich foods in backyard gardens and other productive spaces; sustainable 
management of natural resources with women participating; income -generating and resilient 
production -based activities for female agricultural workers; partnering with organizations 
working on gender; training on sustainable productive practices and/or renewable, energy -
efficient technologies; ensuring access to rainwater harvest and storage techniques; investment 
in technological innovations by women; investment i n microenterprises run by females and 
childcare support activities. Other activities are also included that will look into reorie nting or 
gender transformative actions such as sensitization on gender -based roles; knowledge 
management and interventions in public policies for youth and traditional communities; 
enabling women to engage in “male” trade and documenting the case studies o n traditional 
information and dissemination.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
57. GCF is requested to provide a total of USD 99.5 million comprising USD 65 million senior 
loan and USD 34.5 million in grants. The project will implement climate resilient productive systems in family farms and increase water access for farmers in Northeast  Brazil. The AE and 
BNDES are providing a senior loan of USD 30 million and USD 59.3 million respectively. The AE 
and GCF loans will benefit from a sovereign guarantee, and all co -financiers will be pari -passu 
with GCF except for pricing. It is advised tha t the guarantee agreement with the government is 
executed before GCF disbursement .


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  82 
 
  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)  
58. IFAD , the AE,  has partnered with Brazil since 1978 with  operations that are 
conce ntrated in the N ortheast  Region . As of January 2020, IFAD supported 12 projects to a total 
value of USD  859.5 million including USD 313 million in IFAD financing.  
59. The EE for this project is BNDES, which is accredited with GCF. It has the final decision -
making authority for all project activities such as use of the funds, selection of states, and 
eligible interventions. IFAD conducted a financial management assessment at BNDES, in particular the financial div ision and public management and sustainability division, which will 
be responsible for coordination. The AE is satisfied with the EE’s capacity and has a plan to 
address any shortcomings identified during the implementation.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific execution ris ks ( medium risk)  
60. State-level implementing units ( SIU) capacity: project activities will be implemented in 
coordination with the EE and the state- level implementing units. Selection of the participating 
states is yet to be decided and inadequate capacity at  the SIU may be a challenge for timely 
project implementation. To mitigate th is risk, the AE will carry out capacity assessments of the 
SIUs and provide necessary technical support to the EE.  
61. Behavio ural change and land tenure: a pproximately 82  per cent  of the GCF grant will 
finance uptake of CRPS in family farms and backyard gardens. The success of the project will 
depend on how interested famers  are in adopt ing CRPS to yield benefits, improve fertility and 
increase their resilience and income. The fundin g proposal states  that one third of farmers in 
the Northeast do not own land and this may hinder some investment activities. For some families the level of poverty may be an obstacle for their full participation. In selection of 
beneficiaries, the differen t modalities of access to the land will be considered. In addition, the 
project will work with the family’s immediate needs , such as food security , and technical 
assistance will encourage families to start the CRPS on a small scale in a restricted CRPS area 
and expand at a later stage.  
62. Credit risk: the borrower of the GCF loan is BNDES (Moody’s rating, Ba2). The 
Government of Brazil (Moody’s rating, Ba2) will guarantee the loan. The G overnment has high 
debt burden and currently bears  the combination of the  fiscal and monetary policy measures to 
the negative credit impact of the economic disruption related to COVID 19. The highly concessional loan of GCF with long term repayment profile is expected to support the state 
Government and EE in making the repayme nt.  
63. All financing resources will be blended and provided as grant to the final beneficiaries. 
The loans and grant elements are budgeted in different subactivities. The AE clarified that the 
allocation of grant and loans is the result of the consultation p rocess with the Government on 
the willingness of States to invest in certain project activities.  
64. Economic and financial viability: the economic analysis results in an economic internal 
rate of return  of 19.77  per cent  and the project remains viable in most of the tested scenarios 
such as an increase in costs up to 30  per cent  or a reduc tion  in benefits of 30  per cent  according 
to the sensitivity analysis. In financial analysis, nine models were developed to simulate im pacts 
for each type of intervention on each targeted group of beneficiaries. Overall, it shows a positive 
financial internal rate of return  ranging from 10  per cent  to 39  per cent  depending on the 
activity and based on the behavio ural hypotheses that beneficiaries will be motivated to take 
the risks and make the investments required by the project. The project expects to mobilize 
approximately USD 15million in -kind parallel financing from the beneficiary groups.  
4.3.4.  Compliance  risk (medium risk)


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  83 
 
  
65. The AE has des cribed the internal controls to be utilized in this project to prevent the 
occurrence of money laundering, terrorist financing, and prohibited practices. The AE has 
confirmed that there are no U nited Nations  Security Council  sanctions issue s present in the  
project or its activities. While some of the proposed activities contemplate the distribution of 
commodities among some beneficiaries, the AE has described internal controls applicable to 
ensure proper integrity and accountability in that process. A mecha nism for the reporting of 
complaints and allegations of wrong -doing (whistle -blower) has been set up. In general, the 
proposed activities do not in themselves suggest an unduly high level of risk. The AE has 
evidenced that it will undertake appropriate mea sures to monitor and mitigate risks.  
66. Accordingly, based on the information provided, Compliance Risk is assessed as 
medium.  
4.3.5.  Recommendations  
67. It is recommended that the Board considers the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  Project implementation will be affected 
by the capacity of State level 
implementing units. The AE will carry out 
capacity assessments of the SIUs and 
provide necessary technical support to 
the EE. Success of the project depends on 
famers’ uptake of CRPS and continue d 
appl ication of  sustainable agroforestry 
systems.   Accredited entity/executing entity 
capability  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary   
68. As part of its responsibilities as AE , IFAD will carry out project supervision independent 
from other national control and oversight bodies. The supervision will consist of onsite 
supervisory missions, which will assess financial management arrangements, identify areas 
requiring improvement, fiduciary risks, and corresponding mitigating measures. IFAD will also 
conduct financial supervision through office reviews of periodic financial and annual consolidated audit reports.  
69. The EE for the project will be BNDES. BNDES will have the final decisi on-making power 
on all project activities including: ( i) use of funds; ( ii) state and project implementation area 
selection; and ( iii) selection of final beneficiaries. The c entral project management unit will be 
placed within BNDES to monitor implementation, compile physical and financial information, report to IFAD and be accountable  overall.  
70. IFAD conducted a financial management assessment at BNDES, in particular in the 
financial division and public management and sustainability division, which will be responsible 
for project coordination. IFAD has concluded that it is satisfied with the EE’s capacity.  
71. Project operations will follow the loan and grant agreement(s), IFAD General Conditions 
for Agricultural Development Financing and its disbursements, f inancial reporting and audit 
procedures, as well as with BNDES regulations for financing state entities. The GCF grant and 
loan, and IFAD loans will be made available to BNDES under one financing agreement covering 
grant and loan instruments and a sovereig n guarantee agreement.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  84 
 
  
72. In terms of the flow of funds, cash transfer from IFAD to BNDES will follow two 
modalities;  
(a) Advance/replenishment, where BNDES will open and maintain designated accounts for 
each financial instrument to receive GCF and IFAD funds. I FAD will establish the amount 
of the advance for each financing instrument on the basis of approximately nine months 
of average expenditures (indicatively). Funds will then be replenished following the 
presentation of withdrawal applications and relevant s upporting documentation of 
eligible expenditures ; and  
(b) Direct payment, where BNDES may request IFAD to directly pay providers for amounts 
higher than the equivalent of USD 100,000.  
73. The project will be audited annually by the Supreme Audit Institution in acc ordance 
with international auditing standards. The consolidated annual audit report, including all 
sources of funding and participating states, will be submitted to IFAD within six months after 
the end of the fiscal year.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting   
74.  The funding project is cross -cutting  with the  aim to mitigate 550,140 tCO 2eq 
annually and at least 11.3 MtCO 2eq over its lifetime, of GHG emissions,  and to enhance climate 
resilient sustainable development through adaptation. It is expected to benefit 600 ,000 males 
and 400,000 females directly and 780,000 males and 720,000 females indirectly. 
75.  Overall, the funding proposal and logframe have been found to adequately apply 
the results management framework and performance measurement framework indicators. The 
outcomes and impacts and their  related indicators are aligned with GCF  requirements. Pertinent 
information on measurable organizational value, baseline, targets and assumptions , has been 
provided. Similarly, the logframe contains clear presentation of pro ject-level results, their 
indicators and other required information in a concise manner. Their diligent application during 
implementation would facilitate results monitoring, progress reporting, performance 
assessment and finally delivery on the ground.  
76. The implementation timetable has been found to follow the required structure and 
format. The milestones and deliverables are well articulated and reporting timelines are 
provided as required.  
4.6 Legal assessment   
77. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed wi th the AE on 24 September 2018, 
and it became effective on 9 November 2018.  
78. The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It is recomm ended that, prior to submission of the funding proposal to the Board (a) the AE has 
obtained all its internal approvals; and (b) GCF has received a certificate or legal opinion from 
the AE in form and substance satisfactory to GCF confirming that all final  internal approvals by 
the AE have been obtained and that the entity has the authority and capacity to implement the project.  
79. The proposed project will be implemented in the Federative Republic of Brazil, a 
country in which GCF is not provided with privil eges and immunities. This means that, among 
other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks 
need to be further assessed. The Secretariat sent a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities together with a  background note to the Ministry of Economy in December 2017, and


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  85 
 
  
comments to such draft were received in February 2019, to which the Secretariat replied with 
clarifications in June 2019. While discussions are ongoing, an agreement has not been reached 
thus far. 
80. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provid ed with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, 
or has been provided with appropriate p rivileges and immunities.  
81. Under the proposed project, as described in the funding proposal and term sheet, the AE 
will enter into a subsidiary agreement to provide the GCF Proceeds as a loan and a grant 
(together with the AE’s co -financing) to Banco Nacion al de Desenvolvimento Economico e Social 
(“BNDES”) , which will in turn pass down the GCF Proceeds and the AE’s co -financing, together 
with BNDES’ co -financing resources, to the selected sub -national states (the “Participating 
States”) who will use such pr oceeds to extend sub -grants to the beneficiary 
communities/organizations for the financing of eligible  agroforestry and water management 
practices and interventions, in accordance with the project implementation manual (PIM) to be 
developed and approved b y BNDES, in consultation with the AE.    
82. The definition of “Executing Entity” in the AMA includes any entity that channels GCF 
Proceeds and/or carries out the implementation of a funded activity. Even though the 
Participating States will channel GCF Proceeds, the Participating States will not have any 
decision -making authority for the approval of the Territorial Resilient Investment Plans 
(“TRIPs”) (which will describe the eligible practices and interventions to be implemented in the 
targeted areas)  or the sub-grants to be extended downstream, being that BNDES will be in 
charge of approving or not the proposed TRIPS and sub -grant  applications presented by the 
Participating States. In this regard, BNDES will act as the only executing entity for this project . 
Therefore, the AE will not have a direct contractual relationship with the Participating States, as the latter will not exercise any final decision -making and will be subject to  BNDES’ guidelines 
and decisions for the implementation of the project.  
83. Furthermore, the AE requested the Secretariat a deviation from the terms of the AMA to 
exclude the application of GCF’s step -in rights for this project, indicating that since it is a public-
sector project with a sovereign counterparty, it is not feasible f or the AE to allow GCF or any 
other party to take over its contractual relationship with the executing entity. Accordingly, and following the receipt by the Secretariat of a written confirmation from the AE that the National 
Designated Authority (NDA) of the Federative Republic of Brazil has been informed of, and 
acknowledged, this deviation to the AMA and its implications, an express provision has been 
included in the term sheet to allow for such deviation from the AMA. This means that, subject to 
Board ap proval, in case the AE decides to discontinue project implementation, the GCF will not 
have recourse to take over the AE role or appoint another party to replace the AE, and the only alternative would be cancellation, without prejudice of other remedies av ailable to GCF under 
the AMA.  
84. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Delivery by the AE to GCF of a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained 
all its inte rnal approvals within 120 days of the Board approval;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date in which the AE 
has provided a certificate  or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all internal 
approvals, whichever is later; and


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/ Add. 03 
Page  86 
 
  
(c) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 87 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP143 
Proposal name:  Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the 
Northeast (PCRP)  
Accredited entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  
Country/(ies):  Brazil  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential          Scale:  Medium  
1. This is a medium- size d cross -cutting funding proposal covering the following GCF 
results area s: mitigatio n activities for forestry and land use (34 per  cent of the GCF 
contribution) ; and adaptation activities for most vulnerable people, communities and regions , 
health and well- being, food and water security , and ecosystem and ecosystem services (in total , 
66 per  cent of the GCF contribution).  
2. The project will take place in the semi -arid region of Northeast Brazil (NEB), a highly  
vulnerable region populated by the poor est people in the country.  The p opulation of th e region 
amounts to 21.3 million people, wh ich is 10 per cent  of the country’s total  population. According 
to the proposal , 90 per cent of agricultural properties in th is dryland region of Brazil are family 
farms demonstrating high vulnerability to climate change.  
3. The GCF funding requested by the project is a USD 99.5 million  (49 per cent of total 
project cost) , of which 35 per cent is grant and 65 per cent is concessional  senior loan. The 
proposal has an 8-year implementation period and a total lifespan of 20 years. It  is included in 
the GCF country programme  of Brazil  and in the work programme  of the accredited entity (AE) . 
4. This funding proposal  will be implemented jointly by the Government of Brazil, IFAD 
and the Brazilian Development Bank ( BNDES )1 which is the execut ive entity for the project.  
BNDES is an organization linked to the Ministry of Economy.  
5. The semi -arid NEB is a tropical dry climate , with average minimum and maximum 
temperatures of 21.23 and 30.85 °C, respectively. This region has a short, erratic rainy season 
from March to May, and annual rainfall averages from 390 to 1,550 mm. According to the 
feasibility study , the region has experienced chronic problems  relat ing to water scarcity, with 
periodic droughts.  The feasibility study  used the  World Mete orological Organization’s  
operational definitions of different types of drought  (meteorological, agricultural, hydrological 
and socioeconomical) by duration, frequency and severity .2 The region is affected by 
agricultural and hydrological droughts , and these  are the main target s of the proposal . 
 
1 BNDES (Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social) is a public company wholly owned by the federal 
government of Brazil with legal personality under law, private equity and property. The BNDES statute is available 
at: < https://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/bndes/bndes_en/Institucional/The_BNDES/BNDES_bylaws.html/ >. 
2 Agricultural drought links various characteristics of meteorological (or hydrological) drought to agricultural impacts, 
focusing on precipitation shortages, differences between actual and potential evapotranspiration, soil water deficits, 
reduced groundwat er, or reservoir levels.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 88 
 
 
6. The feasibility study includes a range of  charts and maps on the latest trends of 
meteorological and agricultural droughts , derived  as a result of assessments  conducted by 
different climatologists using  observational data from this region. Th e materials  show that 
droughts affected all states in the NEB for almost half of the period  from 1981  to 2016 . The 
states most affected by recurr ing meteorological drought s during these 36 years were Bahia, 
Pernambuco and Ceará. The most impacted areas, considering the vegetation index  (agricultural 
droughts) , are located in the central area, including eastern Piauí, northern Bahia and the 
western Pernambuco states. For th ese territories , drought conditions remained for  a 
considerable period (more than 25 years) . 
7. The extreme3 category drought that happened from  2011  to 2016 had a high 
socioeconomic impact as well as  significant agricultural and hydrological impact s. The 
consequences of this drought affected th e whole region , and  it is considered to be the worst  
drought  in the past 100 years . It exacerbated many social problems through the indebtedness of 
farmers, mig ration, disease and malnutrition. The estimated economic losses of this drought are 
in the order of US D 6 billion in the agricultural sector alone. The funding proposal  explains  that , 
as a result of this drought,  the water supply  in NEB  has suffered  succes sive reductions since 
2012, with  a minimum stored volume of 13.8  per cent  in March 2017. T he drought continues to 
demonstrate the vulnerability of NEB . Further details on the trends of extreme climatic 
phenomena and their impact on the region are provided under the investment criteria “needs of 
the recipient” .  
8. The project consist s of three components that compl ement and reinforce one another to 
promote climate resiliency as well as reduce  greenhouse gas  (GHG) emission s:  
(a) Component 1 will introduce  climate resilient productive systems (CRPS)  in NEB , which  
should  increase the resilience of family farmers and traditional communities  to the 
impacts of climate change, as well as mitigat ing GHG emission s. This component 
contributes to the total emission  reduction  commit ment  of the project by strengthening 
carbon sinks on 84,124  hectares  (ha)  comprising family farms , backyard gardens  and 
collective areas , and by converting  these territories to sustainable management . This 
component also includes installing 540 eco -efficient stoves  and building 540 
biodigesters for family farmers , and implementing 540 income -generating activities in 
collective areas  (mainly forests and pastures) , support ed by investment in 70 micro 
enterprises to supply small -scale  equipment for CRPS ;  
(b) Component 2 will  reduce the impact of severe droughts  by focus ing on improv ing access 
to water for family farmers and traditional communities,  and by investing in small -scale 
technologies for harvesting, reuse, treatment and storage of rainwater . The technical 
assistance  provided to the beneficiaries will focus on addressing issues such as efficient 
water management, good irrigation practices, techniques for limiting 
evapotranspiration and precautions to prevent soil salinization .4 All pumping systems 
will use renewable energy (photovoltaic or wind  power ). The a nticipated r esult s of thi s 
component are 20,000 cisterns with walkway s (cement patios with underground tank) , 
500 trench barriers, 500 small underground dams, 10,000 greywater reuse systems, 
5,000 blackwater treatment systems  (green septic  tanks) ; and  
(c) Component 3 is dedicated to k nowledge management and s caling  up CRPS . This 
component is considered by the project to be fundament al for future sustainability and 
 
3 Extreme drought is defined as the second -highest level of drought, with major crop/pasture losses and widespread 
water shortages or restrictions. 
4 In the semi -arid regions, brackish or salty groundwater is common. Around 25 per cent of wells contain fresh water. 
An estimated 75 per cent of the wells in the semi -arid region contain water that is unfit for human consumption. There 
are over 500 desalination units operating in NEB, which produce residual water that currently accumulates in 
evaporation tanks with no productive use.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 89 
 
 
scalability.  The k ey output of this component is the dissemination of the CRPS  process 
and the small -scale water harvesting system s throughout  the NEB semi -arid region and 
beyond , in order  to increase the climate resilience of vulnerable communities.  
9. The project will delive r and monitored several other results are as. For example,  GHG 
emissions will be reduced by more than 11 million  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  
(MtCO 2eq) over 20 years ;5 at least 1,080 smallholder households will save 80–104 Brazilian real 
per month as a result of a reduction in firewood consumption  owing to implementation of 
efficient stoves and biodigesters ; 67,000 family farms participating in CRPS are estimated to 
reach an increase in biomass production of at least 50,000 kg/ha after a 10 -year period ; 
agricultural losses during drought periods will be r educed by 10 per  cent  compared with  the 
2010 –2020 baseline;  and soil moisture during the dry season will be increased by 15 per  cent 
compared with the baseline . Approximately  1 million  people in 250,000 family farms (40  per 
cent women and 50  per cent  youth) directly benefit from the project.  
10. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP)  considers that , according to the 
preliminary assessment , the direct adaptation and mitigation impact s of the funding proposal 
should be  high. However, in the absence of the baseline statistic s that are  crucial for assessing  
results that can be achieved , the independent  TAP assesses the impact of this proposal as 
medium, at this stage of assessment . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential        Scale: Medium  
11. This project  does  not propose any innovation or drastic changes in behaviour which are  
new for the region and its population , but the activities planned are dedicated to scaling up and 
accelerati ng actions that have already been initiated in the region ’s sustainable development 
process . The independent TAP confirms that , due to the severe impact of climate change in NEB, 
this intervention is very timely and crucial for the region.  
12. However, the funding proposal does have an innovative element regarding effective 
implementation of sustain able development activities. The AE plans to introduce a planning, 
monitoring evaluation and l earning system ( described in a nnex 11  of the funding proposal ) 
which is based on result -based monitoring  for planning . Baseline assessment will be based on 
multi -criteria analysi s, applying the set of indicators  for assess ing three interlinked components 
of system resilienc e: climate change impact on the system ; sensitivity of the system to the 
climate exposure/risks ; and the adaptive capacity of the system and planning  the activities 
considering the results of this analysis.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential       Scale:  Medium  
13. The project plans to  scale up di verse agroforestry systems using CRPS  and a demand -
driven approach  to sustainable management of the agriculture sector. The whole concept of the  
proposal is to contribute to the sustainable development of NEB with a particular focus on the 
rural population. A ll three components are constructed on th e principle  of sustainable 
development . 
14. One of the biomes of the Brazilian forest , the Caatinga6 ecosystem,  is also considered 
within the proposal as being suitable for demonstrati ng a sustainable colle ctive management 
approach  for collective territories which should help to preserve  this biome  by decreasing 
demand for timber ; improv ing pastoral management by adjusting stock rates;  improv ing 
 
5 In the independent TAP’s assessment all calculations are done for 11 million tCO 2eq. 
6 Caatinga is one from the Brazilian Biomes not yet included in REDD -plus activities. It covers 4 per cent of total 
biome of Brazil.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 90 
 
 
management of native vegetation ; and appl ying  rational forest m anagement through selective 
logging, regrowth management, and redistribution of nutrients in the agroecosystem . 
15. According to the feasibility study, t he gender vulnerability assessment found  that 
women have less access than men to both tangible productive r esources (land, credit, housing 
and basic services) and soft resources (education, technical assistance, political participation) . 
The project plans to  build women ’s leadership skills, foster their participation in decision -
making processes, and assist women in accessing credit and technolog ies for production and 
commercialization . Forty per cent  of the t echnical assistance provided by the project will be 
dedicated to perform ing services in communities directed to  women . The project’s gender focus  
will ensure better opportunities for women and youth in all three components. These 
implementation measures ensure that 400 ,000 women (40  per cent  of total beneficiaries) have 
access to the benefits  of the project . 
16. Six performance standards are described  in annex 6 of the proposal, of which 
performance standard 6 on “Resource efficiency and pollution pre vention” states that “the 
project will not support the use of pesticides. Also,  the water -related infrastructure planned is 
very local and small in scale g iven the local needs .” The independent TAP notes that this 
standard is important for avoiding application of pesticides and ensur ing sustainable 
agriculture  practices.  
17. The proposal explains that the project plans to introduce small water -saving  
technologies ( e.g. plant ing in terraces and level curves , install ing artificial capture , storage and 
filtration systems  to eliminate run -off, promot ing forced recharge ) in degraded and compacted 
areas  to improv e soil hydration rather than deplete it. Thes e technologies will be implemented 
to shift traditional methods , so that infiltration can occur naturally , and to promot e a biological 
water reserve in the roots and leaves of specialized vegetation . The independent  TAP notes that 
a statement regarding the se technologies,  explaining that they are very local and small,  does  not 
guarantee that  there is no potential  for negative  side effect s. Special monitoring measures 
should be implemented on the possible negative impact of small water -saving technologies ’ and 
at the same time the water balance of whole basin of underground water  should be controlled . 
Monitoring  of only  individual technologies is not enough measure for assess ing their negative or 
positive impact.   
18. Performance standard 7 on “Indigenous peoples ” states that  “At the present stage of the 
project design process it is still not possible to identify which indigenous peoples’ groups and 
communities will be targeted. This will depend on the geographic covera ge of the p roject’s 
interventions that, at the same time, will depend upon states’ participation .” 7 The independent 
TAP notes that the proposal does  not confirm in general that these groups will definitely be 
involved. Special attention should be given by the Secretariat to this indicator of sustainable 
development  in a baseline study , which should be provided before the second disbursement of 
the GCF proceeds. The funding proposal should en sure the equal participation of these  most 
vulnerable stakeholders , which is  a priority of the Government  of Brazil . 
19. The funding proposal contributes to the following sustainable development goals  
(SGDs ):  
(a) Component 1  contributes to SDG 1 (end poverty in all its forms everywhere ), which 
aims to ensure that, by  2030, all men and women, in particular the poor and the 
vulnerable, have equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic services, 
ownership and control over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural 
resources, appropriate new technology and financial services, including micro  finance ; 
and aims to build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and 
 
7 The Northeast region, where the Planting Climate Resilience project will take place, is home to a total of 233,079 
indigenous individuals (26 per ce nt of the total indigenous population), representing 80 indigenous peoples’ groups.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 91 
 
 
reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate -related extreme events and other 
economic, social and environ mental shocks and disasters ;  
(b) SDG 2 ( end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote 
sustainable agriculture), which involves promoting sustainable agricultural, supporting 
small -scale farmers and equal access to land, technology and m arkets. It also requires 
international cooperation to ensure investment in infrastructure and technology to 
improve agricultural productivity ; 
(c) Component 2 contributes to SDG  6 (ensure availability and sustainable management of 
water and sanitation for all)  by p rotecting and restoring water- related ecosystems ; and   
(d) Component 3 contributes to SDG 4 (ensure inclusive and equitable quality education 
and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all ). Activities of component 3 
particularly contribute to provid ing equal access to affordable vocational training, to 
eliminate gender and wealth disparities.  
20. The independent TAP considers that, at this stage of assessment, the p otential of the 
project  to cont ribute to sustainable development is  medium.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
21. The information provided in the proposal and the feasibility study show that the semi-
arid  region of Brazil is one the most vulnerable region s in South America , even though  Brazil  
itself is a  ‘medium risk ’ country according to the Climate Change Vulnerability Index8. The 
targeted area has a high incidence of long  duration  and severe droughts ,9 with the most severe 
recent  drought cycle  lasting 5 years (2011 –2016).   
22. Drought indices for the NEB10 were analysed for 36 years (1981 –201611), using  the 
standardized rainfall index and the vegetation health index, which are, respectively, a 
meteorological drought index and an agricultural drought ind ex. The analyses  showed  that 
drought intensity has been increasing  over the period . In particular, a comparison of two 
periods , 1981 –1986 and 2011–2016 show ed that the duration of meteorological droughts 
increased from 30 months to more than 50 months , the frequen cy of occurrence  in the period 
increased from 3 to 5  times and the sever ity of droughts changed  from ‘moderate drought ’ to 
‘extreme  drought ’ affect ing a more substantial area (from 49 to 94 per  cent  of the NEB territory ) 
with significant impacts for population, as well as economic activities.  Arid conditions (which 
did not exist previously) have been observ ed during the later  years  of the period , mainly in the 
central semi -arid region, covering almost 2 per cent  of the NEB .  
23. Projections of f uture trends show that despite the rise of precipitation in the summer  in 
some territories, the projected annual cycle shows a dominating annual reduction of rainfall in 
the NEB region accompanied by  an increas e in the number  of consecutive dry days. The 
projections  suggest that of the 595 municipalities under the risk of extreme drought s, 392 will 
be at risk of severe drought s and 306 will be at  moderate drought risk  by 2040 .12  
24. Studies assessing the  impact  of climate change on agricultural crops found that the 
seven main crops of Brazil are expected to be negatively impacted by climate change, with the 
 
8 https://scioteca.caf.com/bitstream/handle/123456789/509/caf -vulnerability -index -climate -change.pdf  
9 Brito SSB et al. 2017. Frequency, duration  and severity of drought in the Semiarid Northeast Brazil region. 
International Journal of Climatology . 38(2): pp.517 –529.  
10 As footnote 9  above.  
11 To compare different subperiods the whole period was divided into seven subperiods and assessment was done for 
each of them: 1981 –1986, 1987 –1992, 1993 –1998, 1999 –2004, 2005 –2010 and 2011 –2016.  
12 Marengo JA et al. 2019. “ Increase risk of drought in the semiarid lands of Northeast Brazil due to regional warming 
above 4 ˚C.” In: CA Nobre, JA Marengo and WR Soares (eds.). Climate change risks in Brazil . Springer International 
Publishing. pp.181 –200. Available at: < https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -92881 -4>.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 92 
 
 
exception of sugar cane. From the information provided in the feasibility study on crop yiel ds 
losses predicted for each region in 2030 compared wi th the base year  (2009) , for scenarios B2 
(optimistic) and A2 (pessimistic)  the Northeast is clearly the region most affected, with over 80  
per cent loss of beans , maize losses anticipated at 50 per cent , over 40  per cent  loss  of soy, and  
rice and cotton estimated at 15–25 per cent  loss.  
25. According to the  feasibility study,  modelling of surface and groundwater supplies per 
water basin for NEB  has demonstrate d the alarming results of sudden -onset  reduction s in flows 
by 2100  in the river bas ins that supply the region: São Francisco, Atlântico Norte e Nordeste and 
Atlântico Leste. Such a scenario is of concern, given that NEB  is already becoming drier and 
experienc ed a 7-year continuous cycle of prolonged severe hydrological droughts from 2011 to 
2017 .13 
26. The needs of the country are well communicated in Brazil’s nationally determined 
contribution ( NDC ). Brazil is committed to reducing GHG emissions to 37 per cent below the 
2005 level by 2025 and, as a subsequent indicative contribution, to reducing GHG  emission s by 
43 per cent below the 2005 level by 2030. The Government  of Brazil  is also committed to 
achieving its NDC targets through eliminat ing extreme poverty and reduce inequality.  
27. The funding proposal directly contribute s to the NDC goal of restoring and reforesting 
12 million ha (7 million ha of tree plantation plus 5 million ha of restoration) which will be 
accomplished by complying with its Native Vegetation Protection Law (“Forest Code”), and the 
subsequent National P lan for Restoration of Native Vegetation.   
1.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High  
28. Priority and ownership of this proposal is confirmed by the G overnment of Brazil by its 
inclu sion  in the GCF country programme  of Brazil . 
29. In its NDC Brazil emphasizes that adaptation is considered fundamental to tackling  the 
effects of climate change. Social considerations are at the core of Brazil’ s adaptation strategy, 
focusing on the need to protect vulnerable populations from the negative effects of climate 
change and to enhance resilience.  Brazil’s National Adaptation Plan aims to implement 
knowledge management systems to promote technology development for adaptation, and to 
develop processes and tools in support of adaptation actions and strategies at di fferent levels of 
government. It should be further noted  that Brazil is aiming to enhance its national capacity in 
water security (National Water Security Plan) and conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity (National Strategic Plan for Protected Are as, implementation of the Forest Code, 
particularly concerning protected areas).  
30. The main national governance mechanism  for climate change  is the Interministerial 
Committee on Climate Change. Before beginning project implementation, the executing entity 
will contact the Interministerial Committee on  Climate Change to present the project and liaise 
with federal and state implementation governance bodies for each of the sectorial program mes 
identified . 
31. The proposal requests 83 per  cent of the project costs as a senior loan , demonstrating 
the country’s ownership and high priority for the project .  
32. BNDES  (one of the executi ng entities)  supports a large portfolio of family farming, 
agroecology and water -access projects in Brazil, especially in NEB . It has supported installation 
of 24,600 cisterns in NEB states, and an additional 6,800 water cisterns are planned . BNDES is a 
 
13 Ribeiro Neto A , Rolim Da Paz A and Raimundo Da Silva E. 2016. “Impactos e vulnerabilidade do setor de recursos 
hı́dricos no Brasil às mudan ças climá ticas ”. In: Brasil. Ministério Da Ciência, Tecnologia e  Inovação (eds .). 
Modelagem Climática e Vulnerabilidades Setoriais à Mudança do Clima no Brasil . Brasília: Ministério da Ciência, 
Tecnologia e Inovação . pp.18 9–240.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 93 
 
 
co-financer of the ECOFORTE p rogram me.  It has also supported hundreds of productive units 
for processing and comme rcializing agricultural products, mostly in partnership with state 
governments in NEB , and implementation of approximately 3,300 technologies for  integrated 
and sustainable agroecological production  and more than 500 small- scale community seed 
banks.  
33. The extensive experience gained and lesson s learned from previous BNDES and IFAD14 
projects that focused on strengthening family agriculture and climate -friendly social 
technologies in the targeted area demostrate high country ownership and should ensure  the 
project ’s results  have  long -term sustainab ility beyond the project period . 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                   Scale:  High  
34. The independent TAP considers the financial and technical efficiency of this proposal to 
be high.   
35. The funding propos al is requesting from GCF a USD 34.5 million grant to reduce GHG 
emissions by 11 MtCO 2eq over the  20-year lifespan of the project (550,140 tCO 2eq annually) 
and strengthen th e adaptive capacity of 1  million  beneficiaries, 0.47  per cent of the total 
population of Brazil and 6.7 per  cent of the rural population of NEB. The independent TAP notes 
that the cost to GCF of USD 9 per tCO 2eq reduced by the project  (calculated based on requested 
grant ) is not high , considering that the project is located in a region that is very vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change. A 90 per cent of grant is allocated for component 1 for GHG 
mitigation through cross- cutting activities. The cost for the country , which is  USD 15 per tCO 2eq 
(calculated on the basis of  loans amount ing to  USD 65 million from GCF, USD 30 million from 
IFAD and USD  73 million  from BNDES) is also not considered as high , compar ed with the results 
that should be ac hieved and the anticipated contribution to Brazil’s NDC .  
36. The project budget distribution could be considered as eff icient . In particular, the cost of 
the first component is 37.7 per  cent of the total project cost and accounts for the highest share 
of GCF grant (91 per  cent). This is the key component reducing GHG emissions and 
strengthening the resilience of local farmers . The second component accounts for the highest 
share in the total project cost ( 50.3 per  cent ). This component applies 65.3 per  cent of the GCF 
concessional senor loan  and is responsible for improving access to  water for production  
through d issemination of various small technologies for rainwater harvesting, greywater reuse 
and water de salination . A 4.7  per cent of the project budget is allocated to component 3 , which 
is dedicated to knowledge management and scaling up activities and results of components 1 
and 2. The independent TAP considers that the project budget distribution is quite efficient , 
including  the management cost which is USD 14.8 million (7.3 per  cent  of total cost ) covered by 
the loan from BNDES and with the GCF grant at a share  of 1.6 per  cent , which is not  considered 
as high.   
37. Despite the fact that the current leverage of co -financing is no t high (at a ratio of 1: 1.04), 
the project expects to mobilize , in addition, approximately USD 15 million of in kind/cash 
parallel financing from beneficiary groups . 
38. The p lanning, monitoring evaluation and l earning system  to be implemented by the 
project  will consider  the establishment of the baseline situation, demand -driven planning and 
management of the project using  result s-based monitoring . The independent TAP considers this 
approach as pre-requisite for ensuring high efficiency.  
 
14 IFAD is currently implementing six projects supporting the productive structuring of family farming and social water -
access technologies covering 11 states, 9 of which are located in NEB.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B. 27/02/Add. 03 
Page 94 
 
 
39. The proposal explains that  BNDES has a national influence and capacity to mobilize 
resources, disseminate lessons learned to other bank program mes and include CRPS projects in 
its lending portfolio , which should ensure the long -term financial s ustainability of the process.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
40. The independent TAP recom mends this funding proposal for approval by the  GCF Board  
with the following conditions:  
(a) Satisfaction of the following conditions prior to disbursement under the FAA:  
(i) Prior to the second disbursement of GCF Proceeds, the Accredited Entity shall 
submit to the Fund, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, a 
comprehensive baseline study, which shall include, among others, (i ) the risks 
related to the operation of small water technologies identified during the 
baseline assessment  conducted by the accredited entity , (ii) the relevant risk 
mitigation measures,  and (iii) a report on the level of involvement of  indigenous 
peoples’ groups and communities based on the geographic coverage of the 
interventions targeted by the funded  activity .  
(ii) Prior to the second disbursement of GCF Proceeds, the Accredited Entity shall 
submit to the Fund, in a form and substance sat isfactory to the GCF Secretariat, a 
revised “Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures” document which incorporates the relevant risk mitigation measures in relation to the risks 
identified during the baseline assessment  conducted by the A ccred ited Entity .


---
*Page 95*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 03 
Page 95 
 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 143) 
Proposal name:  Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the 
Northeast (PCRP)  
Accredited entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (I FAD ) 
Country/(ies):  Brazil  
Project size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
IFAD agrees with the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) that the  direct adaptation 
and mitigation impacts of the funding proposal should be high . The project implementation 
arrangements call for the specific project intervention areas within the semiarid North East 
Brazil (NEB) to be defined during the first year of pr oject implementation. Thus, project 
specific baseline  statistics  cannot be presented at this time . However, as acknowledged by 
TAP, climate vulnerability conditions are applicable to all semiarid NEB States eligible to 
participate in the project. Upon the selection of the participating States, IFAD, BNDES and the 
States will apply clear eligibility criteria, as defined in the Funding Proposal, to ensure the 
most vulnerable areas  and people are targeted within each S tate, thus ensuring  a high impact 
of PCRP.  Baseline data will be collected  and presented to the GCF accordingly.  
Paradigm shift potential  
Historically, the Government has dealt with droughts in NEB  by implementing large -scale 
infrastructure projects such as large dams , extensive well drilling programs and,  more 
recently , the transposition of the San Fra ncisco River. This is the first time the G overnment , 
together with the national development bank BNDES, is willing to under take a loan operation 
to implement a nature -based solution at s cale. This is a  flagship response to a climate change 
adaptation problem in NEB , which implies a significant  change  in approach.  Although there 
are pilot programs in NEB successfully  implementing agroforestry systems, a multi -State  
operation to increase re silience at scale is a new concept in the country. T hus, IFAD believes 
the paradigm shift potential to be high.  
Sustainable development potential  
PCRP aims to increase production while improving the most vulnerable peoples’  autonomous 
capacity to face the challenges posed by ongoing climate change . The project tackles the main 
barriers that limit an increased resilience,  and drives development  towards a more 
sustainable pathway  by increasing and stabilizing family income and  food security , 
transforming productive systems, and incentivizing young generations to stay active in rural 
activities.  The project applies IFAD’s historical expertise in targeting the poorest and most 
vulnerable population, and is built around the p rinci ple of social inclusion.  Furthermore, t he


---
*Page 96*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 03 
Page 96 
 
 
 
 project promotes  affirmative actions for the participation  of women, youth, and indigenous 
and traditional communities.   
Water management investments considered in PCRP are evaluated as low risk technologies 
according to IFADs “Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)”, 
particularly guidance statements 7 and 8. The project will revisit this assessment as 
requested by the TAP.  
Needs of the recipient  
IFAD acknowledges ITAPs assessment and fully agrees with the evaluation.  
Country ownership  
IFAD acknowledges ITAPs assessment and fully agrees with the evaluation.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
IFAD acknowledges ITAPs assessment and fully agrees with the evaluation.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
IFAD tha nks the TAP for its recommendation and confirms the conditions are implementable.


---
*Page 97*
---

Brazil  
Planting Climate Resilience in Rural 
Communities of the Northeast (PCRP) 
Gender Assesment and Actiona Plan  
GCF Additional Financing  
July 20
20 
Gender documentation  for FP143


---
*Page 98*
---

 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 1  
2. Context of the conditions rural women face: gender- based social inequalities 
in the Brazilian Semiarid  .............................................................................................................. 3  
3. Guiding concepts on gender in the context of socioenvironmental projects  .. 5 
4. PCRP 's gender action plan: strategies and approaches  ......................................... 8  
4.1 Phase I: Diagnosis focused on gender inequalities in the scope of PCRP  ....... 8  
4.2 The gender action plan: guiding principles and operational forms .................... 9  
5. Detailing the project's gender action plan  ................................................................ 11 
5.1 Some considerations about the approach selected  ............................................... 11 
5.2 The main lines of action to be included in the gender action plan  .................. 12 
5.2.1  Guaranteeing female representation (at least 40%) in technical 
teams and target populations  ......................................................................................... 12 
5.2.2  Consolidating partnerships with reference organizations working in 
gender issues and adopting a feminist approach  .................................................... 12 
5.2.3  Definition of guidelines for educational activities with a gender 
focus on rural women  ........................................................................................................ 12 
6. GENDER ACTION PLAN:  “PLANTING CLIMATE RESILIENCE IN 
RURAL COMMUNITIES OF THE NORTHEAST” (PCRP ) .................................. 19 
OUTPUT 1.1: APPLICATION OF CRPS IN FAMILY FARMS, BACKYARD 
GARDENS, SCHOOLS, BIOSALINE PRODUCTION, 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND FARMERS’ NETWORKS  ................................... 19 
OUTPUT 2.1: Improve water access to family farmers and traditional 
communities by investing in small- scale technologies for harvesting, reuse, 
treatment  and storage  ............................................................................................................ 23 
OUTPUT 3.1:  CRPS and small- scale water harvesting system disseminated in 
the NEB semiarid and abroad to increase climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities.  .............................................................................................................................. 24 
7. References  .............................................................................................................................. 28


---
*Page 99*
---

1 GENDER ASSESSMENT: 
Planting climate resilience in rural communities of the Northeast (PCRP ) 
 
1. Introdu ction  
 
Women are more vulnerable to the effects of climate change since they constitute the 
majority of the world's  poor and have been historically socialized to take care of natural 
resources, which are increasingly threatened by precarious environmental conditions. Disasters 
and climate -change- related cris es have been  happening more frequ ently over the last decade , 
and it is evident that their impacts are disproportionally felt by those socially excluded and 
living in poverty. Thus, women and children have 14 times more probability of dying in 
climate -related disasters than men .1 Moreover, the lack of resilience of people dealing with 
such catastrophes is exacerbated by inequality.  
Research indicates that women and young girls living i n rural areas of Brazil’s 
Northeast, the project’s target region , are the mo st vulnerable to climate change- related risks in 
the country (CEPAL 2016) . They also face social, economic, and political barriers that limit 
their capacity  for adaptation , as they have no access to effective and lasting policies and 
programs that address  socioenvironmental adversities. Despite the strengthening  of the womens 
movement' s organizational power in Brazil, especially in the last 15 years, the lack of gender-
transformational  policies attentive to women's needs and other gender issues  is notable in 
climate -change mitigation and adaptation initiatives. Research has proven that the only efficient 
way to combat climate change is by improving the resilience of those living at risk , such as 
women. The p roject  "Planting climate resilience in rural communities in the Northeast" ( PCRP ) 
takes t his into serious consideration. 
Socioenvironmental ly the most vulnerable groups  (women, young pe ople, and 
traditional communities ) have been able to lead changes to overcome hardships they face. 
These initiatives should be fostered by the actions proposed in the PCRP  Action Plan. For 
example, studies show the important role that non -timber  forest products (NTFPs) (such as 
medicinal plants, animals , fruits, etc.)  play in adaptation to climate change . In all countries , 
women often engage in collection / sale of NTFP products for subsistence when other income -
generating activities are not feasible. 
Research  studies have shown  on rural farms, mostly it is women who are the ones 
engaged in agroecological transition. They introduce innovations in productive arrange ments, 
which in many cases lead s to intra -family conflicts, usually due to the resistance  of men 
(husbands and children) to change to new models of agricultural production initially perceived 
as more expensive and less profitable. Women are often the first to coordinate productive 
processes in the logic of diversification, seeking ways to plant  “a little bit of everything" in a 
variety of  ways within different  productive agricultural spaces and to seek sustainable practices 
that do not harm the environment and  make  full use of local resources.  
As set forth  in CEDAW2 General Recommendation No. 34, while women have played 
a traditional role as managers of natural resources, State parties often fail to acknowledge the 
 
1 For further information, see: “The South Asia Women’s Resilience Index: Examining the role of women in preparing for and 
recovering from disasters.” Economist Intelligence Unit, 2014 (available at: 
https://www.gdnonline.org/resources/The%20South%20Asia%20Women%27s%20Resilience%20Index%20Dec8.pdf ).  
2 The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) was adopted by the United Nations 
General Assembly on 18 December 1979, and entered into effect on 3 September 1981. It consists of a preamble and 30 articles,  
16 of which identify substantive rights that must be respected, protected, guaranteed and promoted by t he signatory State parties.


---
*Page 100*
---

2 role of rural women and girls in unpaid work, their contribution to the Gross Domestic Product 
and, the refore, to sustainable development.  It can be seen that women are generally excluded 
from processes and decisions on use and management of natural resources and territories. 
Participation of rural women in positions of political and social control in the f ield of 
environmental policies and agricultural development – all of which grew an d intensified as a 
result of Brazil democratization process  – has always been neglected.  According to the Forests 
and Gende r, published by the International Union f or Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ): "As  
most of the world's biodiversity inhabits fragmented landscape mosaics  outside protected areas,  
women and other community members who manage and use  forests for a range of land- uses 
must also be considered as primary stak eholders"  (Aguilar et al., 2011, p.22) . The PCRP  project 
is based on the following assumption: W omen should be considered  "stakeholders" (parties 
involved / engaged) in management plans for non- timber agricultural activities. They play a  
vital r ole in prom oting innovations in technology / methodology in sustainable agricultural 
systems that are resilient to climate chagne. 
International agreements on women's human rights have made real progress in recent  
decades in acknowledging the multiple and diverse inequalities women experience, especially 
women  in rural areas and  women who belong to traditional communities (indigenous, 
fisherwomen, Afro -descendants). Some  documents  that address the inequalities rural women 
experience include the Beijing Platform for Action and the UN Committee on the  Elimination 
of Discrimination A gainst Women.  
It is also important to emphasize the organizational strength of autonomous  rural 
women's organizations and movements in Brazil as a response to the l ack of inclusion of rural 
women's agendas in rural workers' organizations, such as the Rural Women Workers 
Movement of the Northeast  (MMTR -NE); the Movement of Women Farmers (MMAs) , and 
then, under the name of the Movement of Peasant Women (MMC) integrated i nto the Via 
Campesina; and the Baba ssu Coconut Breakers  Interstate Movement (MIQCB). In 2004, these 
women's movements and organizations held a productive dialogue with the State, and the 
Program for the Promotion of Gender, Race, and Ethnicity (PPIGRE) was created in the 
Ministry  of Agrarian Development (MDA)  to identify and address issues related to rural women 
and their interface with socio -environmental issues. F rom 2004 to 2015, significant progress 
was made in women’s productive organization s, such as the Technical Assistance (ATER) 
Women  policy, which set  some important standards for building rural women 's leading role in 
different regions of Brazil.  
 The PCRP  project presents a unique opportunity to leverage significant changes in the 
socioenvironmental field  based on  contributions by rural women. R ural women  are not only 
indirect beneficiaries who benefit due to their belonging to the family nucleus, they are also 
protagonists who make valuable contributions in proposi ng and implementing strategies and 
actions.  
In this gender assessment  report, the first part will look at  the precarious social situation 
that is the daily life of  rural women in the Northeast  region of Brazil , where the actions of th e 
project will be implemented . The  project  will prioritize  the difficulties and aspiration s 
expressed by rural youth, a neglected segment in rural areas, so the issues affecting young rural 
women in particular  will be  under scored . The project will also aim to prioritize the needs and 
demands of “tradi tional communities”, in such a way that gender issues are focused on in 
conjunction with racial and ethnic factors. The project's  focus on young women and traditional 
communities  is manifested  in the proposed action plan . 
In the second part, a detail ed action p lan will be prepared  in the gender field, to be 
implemented in the beneficiary  area during the project's life cycle . As a strategic action that


---
*Page 101*
---

3 integrates the first phase, a specific study on rural women's  social position, their relationship 
with the environm ent, and their demands in  two main a reas – access to water and practices in 
resilient productive systems – will be  prepared . This study carried out through a participatory 
diagnosis will provide a basis  for other strategic actions included in the Gender Action Plan  as 
well as for the monitoring process.  
 
2. Context of the conditions rural women  face: gender -based  social inequalities in 
the Brazilian Semiarid  
 
Brazil continues to be one of the countries with the highest inequality rate s in the world , 
and women in  particular  are affected . Recent research (2007) by the United Nations 
Development Program  (UNDP ) shows that although 27% of the urban poor in Brazil have 
managed to escape poverty in the last ten years, the remaining 73% have stagnated in a situation of chronic poverty. Among those more prone to chronic poverty are  people with less  education , 
the Northeast population, and informal workers . Among these groups, women  are the poorest 
and most vulnerable. 
In the Northeast , the number of  families with  women  heads of househo ld (families in 
which  the leading provider is the woman) is increasing . In 2004, 32% of households  were led 
by women, with the aggravating fact that 60% of these women  did not receive a ny support from 
the fathers  of their children. This  reality  illustrates  the complete inequality of gender relations 
in terms of  responsibility for future generations. In most states, heads of households are 
generally  black  women  (FUNDAÇÃO CARLOS CHAGAS , 1998). 
Half the population of the Northeast S emiarid  region (more than 10  million people ) 
have no income or only  government assistance as their single  source of income, and 59.5% are 
women (INSA, 2010) . More than five million people (31.4%)  earn below the minimum wage ; 
47% are women. About 5.5% of the population in this area earn an income two to  five times 
above the minimum wage, the majority  of these  (67%) are men ; and of  the 0.15% of the area's 
population with income 30 times above min imum wages , only 18% are women (IBGE, 2000). 
In rural areas, only 5% of women's income  is derived from  from agricultur e. In contrast, the 
largest source of income for extremely poor men in rural areas comes from agricultural 
activities  (85% earn their wages from agriculture) . 
Although rural women produce from  60–80% of food in developing countries, they 
have less than 2% of available land (FAO, 2011) . Men presently  control 87.3% of rural 
properties in Brazil  and 94.5% of the country's  total rural area  (OXFAM, 2018) . According to 
Terrenos da Desigualdade  (2016), of the total number of  rural farmers without land , there are 
almost twice as many women as men.  The majority of farmers producing in areas <5 hectares 
are women, and 87.3% of women farmers in Br azil do not have access to technical assistance 
services (OXFAM, 2016) . 
According to census data (IBGE, 2014), 45.5% of rural women are inserted in the labor 
market , compared with 72.2% of rural men.
3 By analyzing this data, it is essential to consider 
that, when engaging in domestic activities in a rural property, which is also characterized as their home, women have less opportunity and time to enter the labor market, unlike men, who tend to spend a few  hours per week working in the productive sphere. According to the national 
household sample survey ( PNAD, 2013), the majority of rural women (90.8%) devote 26.1 
 
3 "Data indicate that 54.5% of rural women are not in the labor market, so they are soon characterized as 'unemployed,' since t hey 
are not in the formal market and their production does not enter into the accounts. However, its agricultural production corresponds 
to another type of economy: the economy of the fair, trade, solidarity economy and even donations" (JALIL et al., 2017, p.64) .


---
*Page 102*
---

4 hours per week to domestic work, while 43.1% of men dedicate only 10.2 hours per week to 
this type of work (JALIL et al.,  2017, p.64). 
Approximately 4 6.7% of rural women are involved in subsistence agricultural activities 
in Brazil, compared to 14.0% of rural men (IBGE, 2009). T he most common types of farming 
activities in which rural women are engaged include : bird breeding (73.5%);  mixed crop / 
livestock  production (72.3%); horticulture / floriculture (63.0%) (IBGE, 2009). Conversely, 
among men, paid employment is predominant in alm ost all agricultural activities. Less than one 
third  of the peo ple in  subsistence and unpaid activities  are men . This data is crucial because it 
reveals women's  greater participation in unpaid , subsistence, agricultural  or non- agricultural 
activities. Clearly a wide range of women’s contributions are not recognized as  work and 
therefore are not accounted for in the market  logic that governs the hegemonic concept of 
economics. The density of women's economic life and daily work is made invisible by the fact 
that most transactions a nd actions are not monetized or calculated for their  insertion in  formal 
markets. Although women participate in productive dynamics, working in almost all tasks of 
the property, they are generally excluded from  decision making ab out resource , jeopardizing 
their personal and f inancial autonomy (SILIPANDRI; CITRÃO, 2011). 
At the same time, in terms of  economic initiativ es of rural women, the National 
Mapping of the Solidarity Economy, which made up the National Information System on Solidarity Economy (SIES), implemented by the Federal Government, revealed the strong prese nce of rural women in economic practices that are  outside the mercantile economy. It also 
points out t he diversification of  arrangements created by women for economic purposes. A 
study of productive rural organizations for women c onducted in 2011 identifie d almost 800 
groups composed exclusively of women and more than 9000 organizations made up of  women 
producing handicrafts, plant s, and benefit ted foods, as well as provid ing services (FARIA, 
2011). In the second stage of the mapping, conducted between 2009 and 2013, a total of 19,708 
organized enterprises were identified, distributed a cross  2713 Br azilian municipalities (SILVA; 
CARNEIRO, 2014), more than half in rural areas (GAIGER, 2012). These mappings revealed 
that "women work proportionately more than men and run a consider able percentage of 
enterprises , illustrated  by their greater community and social involvement" (GAIGER, 2012, 
pp. 19–20). This set of data and research shows that in all regions of the country, contrary to 
many politi cal arguments, women are involved in economic processes, sometimes engaging 
more than men in productive activities. Women produce for s ubsistence while seeking ways to 
qualify their capacity for productive organization, seeking their insertion in local and regional 
markets. Yet, although in many enterprises women have a leading role in management 
processes, there are several weaknesses and gaps in their organizational processes that keep 
their products from achieving insert ion in the formal market. Most ventures are informal, with 
little access to legal procedures. Other common problems are operational and structural, such 
as lack of working capital, difficulty in ensuring improve d products and their di stribution, and 
obstacles that prevent them from finding means of transportation to sell  their products.  
Women are more directly affected by climate -change impacts , particular ly droughts 
and floods, which have  severe repercussions for food and nutritional health and safety. In many 
developing countries such as Brazil, women are primarily the ones responsible for the search, management , handling and storage of water. In this context, extreme situations involving water 
deprivation due to prolonged droughts ( as is the case in  the semi arid region of Brazil ) can lead 
to an increase in their workload. W hen water is scarce, women are the ones who must  travel 
longer distances to look for  water sources, carrying water in  pots or cans for long distances , so 
that they put their safety at risk or spend  hours waiting in line at  the water -tank truck. Therefore, 
gender inequality is revealed in  water resources management , conditions that are aggravated


---
*Page 103*
---

5 by erratic climate patter ns. Survey d ata show that as natural resources (such as water)  become 
scarcer, women's participation in resources management  activities  significantly increases.   
In looking at the  advances and setbacks in the field of public policies, it can be observed  
that during the period 2004–2016, many advances were made in rural public policies and 
programs; policies such as ATER, credit and public procurement, although targeted to the 
broad er public of family agriculture, have adopted specific strategies for inclusion and support 
for agroecological production and marketing of rural women ’s production. For  instance, in the 
case of the Food Acquisition Program ( PAA) , in 2012, contracts with wo men (as holders) 
accounted for 35% of the total, which  grew in the next period. Resolution 44 of 2011 stipulated 
that 5% of the PAA's annual budget should be allocated direct ly to women (or mixed groups 
with at least 70% women). It also resolved that at least 40% of participa nts in the modes of 
Purchase of Family Agriculture with Simultaneous Donation and Local Direct Purchase with 
Simultaneous Donation  should be women, and 30% in  Stocks for Family Agriculture and  
Incentives for Production and Milk Consumption. 
Since 2016, all previously established policies aimed at reducing social inequalities  
have suffered serious setbacks, le ading  to precariousness conditions currently experienced by 
women in rural areas. Policies on women's rights were cut  to mi nimum functioning levels ; there 
have been cuts in policies and social programs such as Bolsa  Família and PAA, and no new 
ATER calls for women were issued. In this complex scenario of  setbacks in public policies and 
services, the PCRP  faces the challenge of providing inputs for construction of mitigation and 
adaptation policies in the face of climate change, while at the same time contributing signi ficant ly to improved living conditions for rural women. 
 
3. Guiding concepts on gender in t he context of socioenvironmental projects  
 
To guarantee transformations in gender  balance in  social relations, in addition to 
increasing empowerment  of women, a crosscutting treatment of gender is needed in social 
projects, program s, and policies. The notion of gender mainstreaming  in social projects, 
programs, and policies presuppose s that gender permeates every aspect of all project cycle, 
from design to implementation and monitoring. The assumption is that gender must be intrinsi c 
to the project's  structure, reaching  every aspect of the action plan, from activities programmed 
with beneficiaries to the monitoring and evaluation system. From this perspective, th e project 
is commited  to a crosscutting approach to gender, based on the understanding that it is not a 
mere addition or factor , but is  intrinsic to the very  structur e. For the project to attain its goals 
depends on this gender -centered perspective. Also, gender should ideally be tackled with an  
inter-setorial approach to social inequalities, through a deep understanding of its  connection 
with race and ethnicity.  
Some lessons learned from a gender diagnosis conducted with six IFAD -supported 
projects in the Northeast semiarid region in December 2017 should be taken into account so 
that this project can incorporate the gender approach transversally in its goals, strat egies, and 
actions. In most p rojects  analyzed,  the importance of prioritizing rural women as beneficiaries  
was clear. It was important to include t argets indicating  minimum rates of women 's 
participation, in both the public  benefited by the actions and in the technical team . Although 
specification of minimum participation  numbers  for segments considered to be more prone to 
situations of social exclusion ( such as women ) is an important measure, it is not sufficient and 
cannot be confused with an effective and cohesive implementation strategy that aims to 
overcome social  inequalitie s. Therefore, affirmative measures can be understood as initial steps


---
*Page 104*
---

6 in a more encompassing and comprehensive approach. To truly ensure the mainstreaming of 
gender in a project, it is crucial to ensure compliance with some of the conditions listed below:  
1) Projects that have one or two specialist(s) / consultant(s) in gender as part of the 
technical team undoubtedly tend to achieve more significant advances. W ithout such an expert , 
it becomes much more  of a challenge to ensure that this approach gets  incorporated into the 
action  plan. However, regardless of the arrangement of the project in question, there  must be  
continuous investment in gender- transformational  training processes for members of the 
technical and administrative teams to enable them to have a gender perspective when working  
with the target audience.  
2) Building partnerships with gender -based organizations (preferably with a feminist 
approach) facilitates incorporation of the theme institutionally since  these organizations can 
provide methodological approaches that support local and regional processes.  
3) Strategies and actions for gender equality and women's empowerment must be 
funded in the budget, through allocation of resources in specific expenditur e categories. T his 
way, it is possible to guarantee affirmative actions in socio -environmental projects, as 
significant steps for achieving women 's autonomy in the respective groups. 
4) When possible, setting up  an inter -institutional social oversight unit  to monitor the 
actions implemented f rom a gender perspective, gender mainstreaming approach at the 
institutional level will be assured.  
 
INNOVATIVE  EXPERIENCES  IN GENDE R TRANSFORMATIVE  APPROACHES  
AND  THEI R RESULTS  
 
MAJOR  PROBLEM  
TACKLED   INNOVATIV E EXPERIENCE(S)  
IN GENDER  
TRANSFORMATIV E 
APPROACHES  RESULTS/  IMPACTS  
-The invisibility of 
women’s skills and 
knowledge in the 
promotion of sustainable and 
innovative agricultural, 
productive and extractive practices.  -Investment in productive 
enterprises led by women, such as 
arts & crafts and processing of 
agricultural products, as well as backyard gardens and social technologies for water access 
(cisterns), grey water reuse and 
ecological stoves.  
-the creation of strategies that will 
promote women's engagement in 
applying renewable technologies 
and sustaining the knowledge management process generated 
from their use.  --Women’s groups created in 
rural territories, 85% of which 
are focused on productive 
income -generating 
(agricultural and non -
agricultural) activities.  
-Women trained in tasks and 
technological equipment 
(cisterns, etc.) that are 
traditionally considered to be 
“men’s jobs”, in such a way that 
they become reference points/ local leaders in the application 
and experimentation of diverse 
renewable and sustainable 
technologies.  
- Up to 50% of women 
participating in or taking 
leadership in agroecological or 
agroforestry initiatives.  
-40% of rural women Projects’ 
beneficiaries involved  in 
preparing and selling 
agroecological products 
(processed and “in natura”) in


---
*Page 105*
---

7 community -level, municipal and 
regional Markets.  
-A greater diversity of markets 
being accessed by women -led 
community enterprises.  
-Links with public policies, 
especially tho se which are 
favorable to rural women, such 
as PAA and PNAE (for 
institutional purchases), have 
been established.  
 
 
-Difficulties 
encountered in existing 
Project monitoring & evaluation systems for 
effectively registering 
and monitoring the impact of wome n’s 
agricultural production on food and nutritional security, income and 
agro -biodiversity in the 
Semiarid region of 7 
Northeastern States.  -The introduction of the use of 
agroecological logbooks to capture 
the economic, social and environmental contributi ons 
women make to their households in the 6 IFAD projects.  -Implementation of 
agroecological logbooks with a total of 879 rural women beneficiaries and the creation 
and strengthening of a total of 
80 self -organized women’s 
groups involved in the use of these instruments in rural 
communities of 7 Northeastern states.  
 
- Analysis of diverse types of 
information generated by ALs, 
in accordance with a wide array of social and economic 
indicators that are integrated 
within the M & E systems of 
the six projects.  
Heavy workloads of 
rural women due to multiple tasks in spheres  of agricultural 
production and social reproduction  -Initiatives that alleviate women’s 
responsibilities with child- care 
and domestic tasks, such as the development of a methodology 
for “child- care circles”, in which 
local leaders are trained to 
facilitate educational activities for 
young children that take into 
account themes linked to social and environmental sustainability.  
-Introduction of labour -saving 
technologies in the IFAD Projects, such as eco -efficient stoves.  
-Involvement of 3 of the 6 
projects  in activities linked to the 
“Campaign for Equal and Just Division of Domestic Labour” 
directed towards rural women 
and coordinated by the Northeastern Network of 
Feminism and Agroecology.  
  
-An improvement  in up to 60%  
of women's  level  of 
participation  in Project activities  
due to initiatives  for sharing/  
socializing care -work 
responsibilities (such as child -
care);  
- The strengthening of 
leadership qualities, as 
community members – 60% of 
whom are young women - who are interested and committed to this action are 
selected for trainings in the 
methodological approach for “Child -care circles” and act as 
“child care workers” during 
project activities;  
-The experimentation of a 
diversity of labour -saving 
technologies adapted to the 
conditions of the Semiarid region have been 
implemented, with clearly proven positive impacts on 
rural women’s workload.


---
*Page 106*
---

8 The limited capacity of 
technical work teams to 
internalize the 
perspective of "social inequalities" (gender, race, and ethnicity) and 
apply it in their 
interventi ons.  -  Sensitivity -trainings on gender -
mainstreaming directed towards 
technicians of Project team and 
members of partner organizations;  
- The c reation of a committee for 
Gender mainstreaming within 5 of 
the 6 Projects, made up of staff in 
the Project Mana gement Units and 
technical service providers, with 
the purpose of monitoring the 
implementation of the gender strategy and action plans.  
 
 -Participation of representatives 
of organizations (up to 80%) 
that offer technical assistance 
services in the scope of the project in trainings and workshops focused on issues of 
gender, race and ethnicity, with 
the purpose of creating a more thorough approach to technical 
assistance services, which 
includes a gender focus.  
 - Gender, race and ethnicity 
specialists acting as focal points 
in the Project Management 
Units to aid the inclusion of gender equality actions within 
strategies in each one of the 
Project’s components.  -Incorporation of criteria 
concerning sensitivity to gender 
issues and proven experience in 
the field in 60% of Project team professionals’ contracts and work “terms of reference”;  
-Recruitment of women as 
professionals (up to 40%) as 
an affirmative action  in Project 
TA teams.  
 
4. PCRP 's gender action p lan: strategies and approaches  
  
4.1 Phase I : Diagnosis focused  on gender inequalities in the scope of PCRP   
 
The gender mainstreaming in a p roject with a socioenvironmental focus starts with 
diagnostic and research actions that are generally carried out in the first phase of project 
execution. From the survey and analysis of information about the aspects that interfere in the 
social condition of women and  men in the sociopolitical and socio -environmental context s in 
which the project is implemented , it is poss ible to build the foundations for  a consistent and 
coherent action plan, aligned with the logical f ramework. To be effective, this a ction plan must 
guarantee the empowerment of women through two  channels: 1) greater  access to and control 
of resources and services; and 2) greater access to opportunities and capacity building.  
Thus, gender analysis  should  be a starting point for  the preparation of an intervention 
plan that will address the social vulnerabilities experienced by women on as well  the 
potentialities of coping with gender inequalities. This  qualitative  diagnosis will be a 
complementary source t o the information  generated by the b aseline  study, most of which is 
grounded ni quantitative indicators. It will be carried out by the technical assistance teams 
through a participatory methodology called Participatory Rural Appraisal , a set of techniques 
and tools that allow the social groups themselves to be both informants and executors so that they manage  planning and development. Consultations with stakeholder institutions will 
complement the information generated in the diagnos tic phase and based on other studies 
carried out by r esearch c enters,  academic institutions , and  multilateral agencies.


---
*Page 107*
---

9 A caveat should be made here, concerning the diagnosis to be carried out in the first 
phase of the project. The main objective of this diagnosis is t o identify the structural and cultural 
factors that facilitate or hinder the participation of women in socioenvironmental processes, 
especially in terms of women's  access to goods , and monetary and non -monetary resources. 
According to studies by Moser and Satterthwaite (2008) and Carmen Deere (2002), both the 
level  of social vulnerability and ability to adapt to adverse and precarious situations depend on 
the degree of access to resources, assets, and inputs (material or non- material). Research 
conducted around the world reveals that women tend to have limited access to inputs and 
resources (physical, financial, human, social , and natural), which undoubtedly represents a 
significant impediment to their process of social, economic and political autonomy. 
Thus, a  reference plan  should guide this initial diagnosis, so that gender- based  social 
disparities  can be revealed, showing the different priorities of men and women; their capacities, 
skills, abilities and restrictions in the various productive activities; their access  to and control 
of various types of resources; and their in fluence  in the decision- making processes in the 
various collectives in t he family and community. This conceptual framework, which serves as 
the project's backbone, will include the following dimensions: (i) a ccess  to and control of 
resources (human, socia l, natural , and economic ); (ii) a ccess to and control o f benefits 
(monetary and non- monetary); (iii) decision -making; (iv) job title / division of tasks; (v) w elfare 
(health, gender violence, among other factors).  This last factor  mentioned  – women’s welfare 
and well -being, which includes the complex issue of violence - must be taken into consideration 
in this initial diagnosis and in strategic actions to be carried out in the Gender Action Plan, 
given the increase in violence against women on a nation- wide level , especially in rural sectors, 
during the period of social isolation since the onset of COVID-19 
Use of participatory techniques that are part of  the Rural Participatory Appraisal is 
indicated to facilitate participation of various social actors and provide a multifaceted 
perspective on the topics addressed. The methods will be custom -tailored to respond more 
sensitively  to the issues faced by rural women. In general, we recommend prioritizing the  
mappings of spaces (map, flowchart) and visualizations of temporal cut -outs (Timeline, River 
of Life , etc). 
 
4.2 The gender action plan: guiding principles and operational forms  
 
The action p lan will be prepared  based on the results gathered in the Rural Participat ory 
Appraisal mentioned above, to overcome obstacles and stimulate the gender potentialities that 
are identified in the field of social relations and that fall within the several dimensions that 
make up the c onceptual framework . In the intervention strategies outlined in the action plan, 
the project team should seek greater integration between the five dimensions of the c onceptual 
framework.  
The action p lan will be built on some assumptions, detailed below. The project aims to 
stimulate sustainable agricultural practices that value the knowledge and skills of rural women , 
contributing to their autonomy and social, economic and political resilience. In this sense, the 
project will  seek the social and productive inclusion of women taking into account the specific 
features of their identities and  occupation in the different territories, as farmers, gerazeiras , 
ribeirinhas  and fishers , which i nvolve  different ways of relating to the land and natural 
resources according to each socioenvironmental context. Any strategy focused on reducing 
gender inequalities is linked to the recognition and appreciation of women's knowledge and skills in sustainable use of natural resources and aims at empowering women so they can make 
decisions about the management of available resources. The project should also adopt measures


---
*Page 108*
---

10 to encourage women's participation in management and social control spaces, such as Food and 
Nutrition Security Forums and Councils, Territorial Commissions and Rural Development 
Committees, so they can focus on designing and monitoring policies that promote access to 
land, credit, and technologies adapted to the semi -arid context for production and 
commercialization.  
Implementatio n of the action plan in the field of gender should be guided by the 
following prerequisites, criteria, and questions:  
• Which groups (directly or indirectly) do the project's actions  target and what is the 
composition of these groups?  
• What is the compositi on of families that are part of the social fabric in the beneficiary 
communities and how can the power relations inherent in  the family environment be 
characterized?  
• How do effects of the themes addressed by the project differ for men and for women?  
• Does the project help open  possibilities and opportunities that combat gender 
inequalities ?  
• What are the capacities of the beneficiary women that can be channeled to advance the 
achievement of project goals?  
• What should the methodological approach in planned actions  be in order  to facilitate 
participation of rural women, especially women in traditional communities?  
It is essential to point out that a gender strategy is operat ionalized through construction 
of a gender action plan that does not exist in isolation, but which has the task of dialoguing with all project as pects, integrating the overall planning of the executing agency  and the evaluation 
& monitoring mechanisms. The  M&E system should not only ensure the collection and analysis 
of disaggregated indicators but also a  balance between quantitative and qualitative indicators, 
since qualitative indicators are better able to capture changes in social relations
4 by verif ying 
shifts in the unequal power relations in different spheres. Throughout the project  
implementation cycle, evaluation meetings on gender -related impacts and women's 
empowerment should be  held. These periodic evaluations should be incorporated into the 
project i mplementation report, m idterm report, and f inal evaluation.  
At the start of the project implementation cycle, the information collected  in the 
baseline5 will be essential for constructi ng the monitoring plan, with special attention given to 
incorporating the gender perspective i nto the tools and methodological approach. I t is also 
important to analyze inputs and outcomes from the gender perspective. And  gender- specific 
budget allocation  will ensure  specific actions  that strengthen the performance of rural women 
and contribute to a more even  balance between the productive and reproductive fields in the 
exercise of their functions.  
A planning / monitoring / systematization / evaluation system  must be established , in 
order to verify changes in the functions carried out by rural women in promotion of sustainable 
practices and their degree of political, social and economic autonomy. I n the first two to three  
years of the project implementation cycle, the young communicators and  social communication 
/ knowledge m anagement advisors must seek an  alignment between materials produced with 
indicators aimed at measuring changes in gender roles and social relationships in the monitoring 
 
4 "Qualitative indicators" are indi cators that express variables or dimensions that cannot b e expressed by numbers only, such as: 
"increased self -esteem," "leadership capacity" or "changes in attitudes and behaviors," among others. While an indicator may help 
identify the quality of female participation, it can bring with it the difficulty of ver ification (WEITZMAN, 2006).  
5 The purpose of the baseline study is to identify the ground -zero situation of target populations, that is, the starting point to which 
modifications will be compared. Information from the field will be compiled in a data verification system and analyzed through a 
rigorous system of statistical analysis.


---
*Page 109*
---

11 system. The production and dissemination of materials that highlight good practices in the field 
of gender social relations will undoubtedly be an interesting way of showing progress in 
meeting the indicators both for the public served internally by the p roject and for public 
managers and representatives of institutions that are associated with the themes that guide 
intervention proposals. 
 
5. Detailing the pr oject's  gender action plan 
 
5.1 Some considerations about the approach selected  
 The pedagogical approach to be adopted in educational and organizational activities 
incorporates a feminist perspective , which focuses on the sexual division of labor  and its 
repercussions on various dimensions of social reality. The project's training processes aim to 
make the beneficiary population aware of this  often -ignored fact: the overall  domain of "care" 
is housed by the term "domestic work" or "repr oductive labor ," referring to unremunerated 
work , while work  activities  that generate value in the market (according to the postulates of 
economic sciences) are framed as components of "productive work ." Th e project  seeks to unveil 
the artificial separation between "productive labor" and "reproductive labor ," showing that they 
are inseparable in women's lives and should both be valued accordingly , although  currently a 
social  hierarchy exists between the two.  
The focus on "sexual division of labor" is  concern not only with foster ing greater 
engagement of women in "productive" processes but also with  promot ion of the  concept of 
"care" work, to help beneficiary women avoid too oversized workloads . In an IFA D-supported 
project in the semiarid region of Bahia (Projeto Viva Semiárido) , it is worth highlighting a pilot 
experience that is begin ning and appears in the design of the  Ciranda das Crianças  project. 
The intervention is not limited t o affirmative action enabling  participation of women in the pilot 
activities, but encompasses other dimensions, all of which have been approached by the  
project's  gender a dvisor in a progressive way, namely: (i) retrieval  and appreciation of games 
that wer e common in previous generations; (ii) training children as future citizens with 
awareness of the importance of gender equality in relations; (iii) training women to play the 
role of c irandeiras , becoming local and regional references. 
Regarding the methodological approach employed, it is essential to make some 
considerations. Workshops and meetings generally use a methodological approach that allows 
externalization of feelings from the sharing of life experiences, which results in  greater 
awareness o f one's  social condition and consolidation of self-organization processes. The 
process of informal education is dialectical and complex and should contribute to appropriation 
of subjects  -- not only techniques but also understanding of social and power rel ations in which 
the different subjects are involved in multiple  dimensions: social, political, economic , cultural. 
Among the educat ional  activities , the PCRP  emphasi zes exchanges that are inspired by 
"peasant -to-peasant" methodology, based on the enriching learning that comes from  practice, 
knowledge sharing, and recognition that examination of  different realities is an  essential factor 
in social change. In this methodology, organized rural women speak to women in the newly 
formed groups about their organization al process and what were the  difficulties, advances, and 
changes experienced in the family and community. Such exchanges will strengthen the role of 
women fostering the proposal and experimentation of innovative methodologies and 
technol ogies aimed at social and environmental sustainability.


---
*Page 110*
---

12 5.2 The main lines of action to be included in the gender action plan  
 
5.2.1 Guaranteeing female representation (at least 40%) in technical teams and target 
populations  
 In order to adopt a gender- transformational  approach to rural development, at least 40% 
of the technicians hired to provide technical assistance in the communities (including 
"experi mental  farmers" or "local talents") should be women , which  will facilitate their 
prota gonism in planned actions. In courses, meetings, and exchanges planned in the project , an 
effort will be made to maintain a balance between men and women in the target audience. The 
proportion of 40% of women will be more easily maint ained in the  cirandas  initiative for child 
care during the planned activities. With regard to CRPS, it is important to ensure that at least 40% of family farms rely on  women and young people to hold the leading role in the  
implementation cycle.  
 
5.2.2 Cons olidating partnerships with reference organizations working in gender 
issues and adopting a feminist approach  
Building partnerships with local  gender-oriented organizations should be fostered as a 
way to help incorporat e the gender approach with a feminis t perspective  in the TA system, once 
these organizations can provide methods and tools that support local and regional processes.  
Therefore, one of the project's first steps  is to map the potential partner organizations 
in the scope of the project at the level of each State to support implementation of the gender strategy, under coordination of th e contracted gender a dvisor (s). These referen ce organizations 
that will act in the dynamics of each PMU and should also be represented on the project 's 
steering c ommittee so that they can contribute to the global monitoring of strategies and actions.  
 5.2.3 Definition of guidelines for educational activities with a gender focus on rural 
women  
 
Implementing  affirmative actions that ensure the autonomy of women -- both in terms 
of technical assistance and capacity building, through educational activities and encouragement 
of participation in public policies spaces -- is an essential step for transform ing gender balance 
in social relations in all spheres: family, co mmunity and society. To follow this path means to 
strive for a better quality of interventions, so that rural women can participate fully in the 
processes, exercising their  citizens' right s, without entailing the overload of tasks. There must 
be measures i n this project to guarantee the availability  of care work, a work that fits the field 
of "social reproduction" and which plays a primary rol e in sustaining productive work, s ince 
these two fields of social and economic life are inseparable.  
In addition to guaranteeing training opportunities for women (to encourage the process 
of self -organization) , it is essential to support training opportunities involving mixed groups 
that address gender issue s so that men gradually become aware of the importance of gende r 
equality in their daily lives. Therefore, in the  scope of the  proposed exchanges and territorial 
meeting s, a crosscutting gender approach should be incorporated into the overall thematic 
approach. 
The following section presents the specific lines to be explored in this field of actions 
focused primarily on rural women:


---
*Page 111*
---

13 5.2.3.1  Specific training activities for  rural women in technological innovations 
 
Through training and capacity- building workshops, women will gain greater control 
over resources – material, intellectual and financial – in a context where lack of access to inputs 
and productive resources is an obstacle to women 's self- determination.  
The educational approach adopted in local workshops and territorial meetings among 
women farmers  supports a broad environmental education process, seeking connections 
between feminism, women's rights, the specific  condictions of the Caatinga Biome , and 
agroecological principles. To ensure women's  economic autonomy, a fundamental guideline of 
the project will be the promotion of specific training activities that allow the incorporation of 
technologies from the pedagogical approach "learn by doing, " so that women become adept at  
using technological innovations in a  conscious way and can reproduce them in the local 
communities.  These technical skills in management of equip ment and technologies (such as 
tanks, for example)  specifically target  the training of  women to become multipliers . This 
approach will be instrumental in changing local attitudes about women 's roles in managing 
local resources and inputs while improving their social status and increasing their income.  
 
5.2.3.2  Actions target ing women in public schools and EFAs 
 
Although diversification is considered a primary principle of agrifood systems6 needed 
in the approach to implementing resilient productive investments by TA teams, it does not 
necessarily guarantee that families’ dietary intake  in the coverage area  is more varied , since 
there is often a disconnect between productive practices and consumption habits. In order to 
help improve the nutritional quality of the families' diets, an action plan will be carried out with 
women farmers in the context of r esilient productive Investments developed in the EFAs and 
schools.  
The proposal is to disseminate information on the value of native plants and foods in 
local and regional culture s, as well as to encourage the use of new recipes for school meals and 
establishment of seed banks in public facilities and local communities, t argeting women who 
traditionally take care of food and socio- biodiversity practices in these environments. 
Workshops at the school and EFAS levels should be replicated by the self -serving women in 
their local communities, among their families and neighbors , so that changes in eating habits 
are perceived as a collective issue ( within both the family and the community) and not just as 
an individual problem to be addressed  by women as if it were one of their innate functions.  
 
5.2.3.3  Knowledge management, Social c ontrol and i nterventions in public policies (PPs)  
 
Iin the training and social organization processes, it is necessary to take into account 
the need to guarantee women  access to the set of public policies that enable recognition and 
expansion of their productive activities. T raining activities  should include examination of  
information on public policies  and women should be enco urage d to participat e in policy 
discussion s in public meetings  in the ir territories, such as the Municipal Councils for 
Sustainable Rural Development (CMDRS), in addition to the various bodies, councils and forums of policy articulation and public policy management ( including RESAB, regional 
 
6 The starting point is the understanding of agrifood systems as inclusive and sustainable processes that encompass social, cul tural, 
economic, environmental and political aspects and consider the connectio ns between production, processing, distribution, and 
consumption of food product.


---
*Page 112*
---

14 education o ffices, school nutritio n councils, among others ). Participation of rural women in 
these  public institutions and venues will be closely monitored on the basis of indicators from 
various domains (social, political, economic, and environmental). Social communication  
products will b e essential inputs to support the performance of women leaders in various PP 
formulation and monitoring spaces.  All knowledge management products (audiovisual or 
written) should feature innovative experiences led by women in traditional communities 
(indige nous and quilombola), in such a way that the significant contributions of such 
communities in the use of natural resources and in the creation of sustainable practices are fully brought to public attention. 
Youth will play a key role in social communicatio n and knowledge production 
strategies, given that 450 young people will be selected to act as Youth Communicators in a media resource empowerment program. These young Communicators – 50% of whom will be 
girls – will have the following tasks and responsibilities: (i) they will act on  a local and regional 
level in the strengthening of grassroots organizing efforts between families involved directly or indirectly with the implementation of CRPS; (ii) they will register and systematize activities, transforming such reports into audiovisu al and written materials; (iii) they will strengthen the 
link between systematization and M & E through a hands -on experience with monitoring of 
CRPS in family farms and backyard gardens in accordance with selected indicators. Criteria will be developed by the Knowledge management professionals for the selection of these 
participants, based on leadership potential, past involvement in social organization initiatives, interests and skills in sustainable agriculture and social technologies. In the selection p rocess, 
one of the goals will be the participation of girls (50%), in order to ensure equal representation. After the training program, the youth that were selected will be evaluated by the instructors and the Knowledge management professionals, so that they are aware of their strengths and weaknesses, and a work plan will be constructed for each one of them, that will be closely monitored by the local work team (TA teams, knowledge management professionals, etc.) 
Contracts will be drawn up for each one of the Youth Communicators, that lay out a set of rules 
and guidelines for their work responsibilities, including the function of the scholarship (“learning grant”) and the use of equipment for social media (cel phones and notebooks). In order to ensure the e fficient performance of the "Young Communicators" in the field activities, 
beyond receiving a scholarship for their services through a "learning grant", each one will have access to equipment (cell phones and notebooks) for the creation of the social commu nication 
products. Throughout the project, the performance of the Youth Communicators will be evaluated and monitored, in accordance with the terms laid out in their contracts and the rules and regulations that have been previously established.   
 
5.2.4 Assistance in climate resilient productive systems (CRPS ) management highlighting 
women 's protagonism  
 
 The methodology to be used for planning and monitoring productive investments 
should address the demands and desires of all family members so that at least 40% of women 
and 50% of young people are directly involved. The technicians who carry out the technical 
assistance must be  concerned  not only with  resolving  technical issues but also with  advising 
family or community members and groups  on issues related to CRPS  management, which 
requires a methodological approach based on the guiding principles  of associativism and 
cooperativism. 
 In manag ing the territorial investment plans in r esilience that make up the CRPS, 
gender considerations are crucial. In this project, technicians will  be guided to view  the yard


---
*Page 113*
---

15 around a family's home  as a productive space rather than simply  an extension of the domestic 
space (as typically viewed  in most  programs and projects that provide technical assistance 
services in Brazil ). In the agroecological transition, in which  the backyard often plays  a central  
role, some women will become farmer -experimenters, observers and innovators, having 
appropriated knowledge and technologies, as they pass on their knowledge to other women and 
also learn from each other. Technicians accompanying these investments will focus on the ways 
in which changes in agricultural practices trigger processes of growing  awareness at the core 
of social relations.  
Another important consideration in the system of Technical Assistance designed for 
PCRP  is the need to validate and channel traditional knowledge and talents in the construction 
of farmers’ networks, in such a way that the cult ural heritage of such groups is fully 
strengthened and affirmed. Appr oaches that can be adopted in the construction of horizontal 
educational approaches to technical assistance that affirm farmers forms of knowledge and 
expertise, especially those of traditional communities, will be the object of trainings of technical assistance professionals.   Also, when focusing on Collective Resilient Investments, technical 
assistance professionals will be trained, through specific training sessions, to attend to the needs 
of many indigenous and afro- descendent communities, which historically have  adopt ed 
collective methods for managing the land as well as natural resources.  
 O ne of the TA teams ' responsibilities in this project is to support CRPS  management, 
which goes beyond financial management  of inputs and resources  to include organization of 
work and qualification of productive processes. The starting point for incorporat ing a gender 
focus into  management processes is the problematization of the sexual division of labor. The 
processes of assisting  and training women's gro ups and mixed groups in the productive 
organization should take into account  time spent in domestic and care  work , seeking to alleviate 
the burden of reproductive activities through t he socialization of these tasks, in addition to use 
of equipment and other concrete measures related to infrastructure support.  
In order to strengthen business management of women's  and mixed groups ' family and 
community enterprises , technicians will use tools that help better distribution of work and time, 
so as to incorporate the household dimension ; more significant control over resources and 
greater transparency in accountability; and the improvement of a system for calculating 
productive process costs  affecting the income obtained from  sales. The t echnical assistance 
team should recognize the nature of women workload and the weaknesses and strengths that 
affect their daily routine during visits, meetings, and workshops  guided by the basic concepts 
of associativism and cooperativism. 
One line of the PCRP  that aims to help  insert farmers  in productive ventures  is the 
provision of investments for microenterprises that provide services and products to guarantee 
improvements in productive processes that are driving forces of CRPS. St ipulated criteria 
intend to prioritize the leadership of women , especially young women, in construction of these 
enterprises . Thus, the inherent capacities of entrepreneurship are  stimulated and developed 
among youth. 
 
5.2.5 C onstructi ng technical assistance services that respond to  the demands and needs of 
rural women  
 
 (i) Commercialization 
In the field of advisory services for marketing  CRPS products, it is vital that TA 
technicians promote the consolidation of points of sale  that go beyond institutional markets, 
such as agroecological fairs. T he short direct circuits favor women's d irect interaction with


---
*Page 114*
---

16 consumers from the sale of socio -biodiverse products without the intermediary action of men, 
to strengthen women's  economic, social and political autonomy. The fairs are already a 
common event  in popular culture, but  their scope must be broadened to become a  process of 
political articula tion that promotes  visibility of specialized products, such as agroecological 
products. Attention must also be paid to the challenges of focusing on the issue of health 
legislation and moving toward participatory certification. 
The action plan should conta in strategies to enable the tracking of productive groups, 
mixed groups and/or families interested in expanding marketing possibilities, inserting their products in different  informal and formal markets . In some cases, it will be important to 
improve product presentation (packaging, labels , etc. ) and plan measur es of distribution 
through communication and marketing strategies. These measures, aimed at quality control and improvement of the product's visual image, will increase the possibilities of placing  different  
agroecological products ( in natura and processing) in a range of  marketing venues. 
 (ii) Adapted and sustainable technologies   
Addressing risks related to climate change requires new information, tools, and 
technologies, in order to provide subsidies to improve  sustainability of agricultural and socio -
environmental practices. Effective time -saving  technologies and equipment will f acilitate 
accomplishment of agricultural work , especially for women, who usually experience a work 
overload due to their multiple functions in productive and reproductive tasks and responsibilities . 
In this sense, it is worth mentioning the creation of str ategies in the "p lan of a ction" 
that will promote  women's  engagement in appli ed technologies and the knowledge 
management process generated from their use. To this end, there are some questions about the "social" function of technology, since it not only helps generat e economic returns and  
environmental impact but also must answer to the beneficiaries' expectations, positively influencing the quality of their lives and power dynamics underl ying social relationships.  
   From this angle, the approach to introduce social and renewable technologies in  CRPS 
is based on the idea of "learn by doing ," since women will be trained in construction and 
management of technologies such as eco -stoves or gray -water -reuse systems. The goal is for 
the beneficiary women  to become multipliers of practices such as trench barriers  and cisterns. 
Enabling women to coordinat e an equipment -building activity (traditionally  viewed  as a "male" 
trade ) indeed represents a factor in the approach of empowering  benefi ciary women to hold this 
position, bes ides directly shifting  gender social relations  in the family  and community. 
5.2.6 Social c ommunication and k nowledge m anagement from a gender perspective  
Social media and knowledge management strategies need to be combined with 
educational and organizational processes engaging women to maximize their effects. It is 
advisable to register and organize  innovative and successful experiences of working with 
gender and women, to facilitate  analysis of acquired learning. It is also advisable to integrate 
an information organiz ing methodology in the  exchanges between CRPS, with significant 
participation of women, so that the se exchanges  are conducted with a view to ward organization 
of information  as a process,  not just a final product . In all written or audiovisual 
systematizations, most of which will be taken on by the Youth Communicators, (see 5.2.3.3 for more details), special attention should be given to the initiatives undertaken in the context of 
traditional communities, so that their innovative experiences can be highlighted.  At least 40% 
of the case studies and other systematizations to be carried out will focus on the traditional communities within the Project’s intervention area, with the goal of gathering information about their diverse forms of traditional knowledge as well as their practical experiences concerning the conservation of biodiversity and sustainable practices.


---
*Page 115*
---

17 Methodological tools such as  agroecological guidebooks will be essential  in the 
participatory organizing process , significantly enhancing the role of women as experienced  
farmers in the various agricultural production spaces. The "Agro- ecological Register" aims to 
record and monitor production, tracking (identifying as sold, donated, exchanged, or  consumed) 
everything that is grown on productive farms and in  areas of women's leadership  on farms . It 
will serve as a tool for empowering women, since from this instrument, they see themselves as 
protagonists in productive processes and begin to become more actively involved in other areas 
such as marketing or Political Articulation. The register , which will integrate the environmental 
perspective, will help valoriz e rural women's productive capacity  and assess the economic and 
environmental impact of productive processes in the  areas in which CRPS will be implemented.  
Efforts should be made  to ensure that the m ethodologies adopted to organize 
experiences in the p roject are integrated into the M&E system. Some levels  of changes in social 
gender relations and empowerment of women farmers from work in CRPS can be measured  
and serve as input for the qualitative and qualitative indicators of the M& E system. The results 
should be  published ( in notebooks and/or videos) at the end of the organizing process and made 
available to  the public and the project's partner organizations, in public spaces and political 
venues (councils, f orums).   
 
5.2.7 Training on gender from a feminist perspective  
 
A gender specialist will be contracted for the purpose of gender -perspective training, 
but technical teams also  need to  internalize the perspective of "social inequalities" (gender, 
race, and ethnicity) and apply it in their interventions. So  an effort  shoul d be made  to provide  
training to  technical teams, especially  in the  project's  initial phase, and reinforcement 
workshops throughout the implementation cycle. It is important to emphasize the need to "re-
educate" contractors to work in communities through a n intense training process organized in 
modules that seek a balance between conceptual deepening and empirical experience from 
fieldwork. Within these training sessions, professionals should be prepared not only to 
understand complex themes, such as the ca uses of gender, racial and ethnic inequality and their 
various manifestations within rural communities, but also they should be prepared to develop 
methodological approaches that take into account the specificities of traditional communities 
and the specific needs and demands of women in collective processes.  
 
5.2.8 Strengthening gender management / social control  unit in the institutional 
framework  
 
 In addition to implementing strategies that ensure gender mainstreaming in practices 
with help from  gender , race and ethnicity experts , it is recommended that efforts be made to 
incorporate gender focus into the project's structures and units . In any social project, it is 
essential to invest in the strengthening of management units  to help mainstream groups and 
perspectives at the institutional level that have often been classified as " marginalized " (gender, 
race, and ethnicity). This strategy  also supports the work of  gender / race / ethnicity advisors, 
which will be key in  the institutional structure at different project levels (in state PMUs and 
field teams), systematically tracking the actions programmed in the w ork plan and monitoring 
changes at local, municipal and regional levels. Th e commission (which should include 
technical team members and  be open t o participation of  partner institutions working in these 
thematic areas ) should be an internal space for ongoing reflection, based on organized


---
*Page 116*
---

18 information on the progress made and obstacles in meeting  indicators , besides providing a 
review of the action s in the diverse stages of the implementation  cycle . 
This commission  also plays a role in the advocacy process. It  must link the activities 
carried out in the framework of the p roject 's work p lan with the general trends of the political 
conjuncture, taking into consideration  the impact  of actions mapped at the local and regional 
level s with negotiation and monitoring of public policies on rural development a nd 
environmental sustainability  that are gender -based, race- based, and ethnicity- based .


---
*Page 117*
---

19 6. GENDER ACTION PLAN:  “PLANTING CLIMATE RESILIENCE IN RURAL COMMUNITIES OF THE NORTHEAST” (PCRP ) 
 
IMPACT STATEMENT:  
 
The project will contribute to increased climate -resilient agricultural production for 1 million direct benefi ciaries ( of which, at least 40% are women and 50% 
are youth) of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions in the rural Northeast area of Brazil.  
 
OUTCOME STATEMENT:  
 Increased resilience to climate change of at least 400,000 women in the project  area, through improvement of their capacities to access sustainable forest 
management, efficient water management, climate smart agriculture, agroforestry practices, food and nutritional security and knowledge management and scaling -up techniques.  
 
Output   Activities  Indicators and targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  
Component 1 - Climate Resilient Production systems: implement CRPS, empower beneficiaries to manage sustainably these systems and promote leadership by 
women, youth and traditional communities. 
OUTPUT 1 .1: APPLICATION OF 
CRPS IN FAMILY FARMS, 
BACKYARD GARDENS, SCHOOLS, BIOSALINE PRODUCTION, 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND 
FARMERS’ NETWORKS  Activity 1.1.1. Selection of Project 
Areas and development of TRIPs  
 
- Guarantee the participation of 
women (at least 40%) in the stages 
of design and implementation of TRIPs;    
- Conduct baseline survey on the target  population. Information will 
be disaggregated on gender for 
knowledge, attitudes and practices 
(KAP) regarding climate change - Studies designed towards 
identifying families willing to 
receive investments that contemplate 
gender issues and gather gender 
information.  
 
- At least 40% of the women in 
communities involved in developing 
Territorial Resilience Investment 
Plans; 1st and 2nd year of 
Project’s implementation cycle  Gender specialists; PMU teams; Management 
Council (made up of 
representatives of state administration, beneficiaries and 
civil society); Teams 
of technicians (for 
rural technical 
assistance services)


---
*Page 118*
---

20 adaptation in target communities.  
Studies will include the following 
gender- transformational 
dimensions: (i) Access and control over resources (human, social, natural and economic); (ii) Access and control over benefits (monetary 
and non monetary); (iii) Decision 
making; (iv) Work load/ division of tasks and responsibilities; (v) Health 
and well -being (gender violence, 
social relat ions, etc).    
- 40% of technical assistance team 
that will implement TRIPs are 
women.  
Activity  1.1.2 Implement CRPS in 
family farms and backyard 
gardens  
 
- Implementation of productive 
activities focused on the cultivation of nutritionally -
rich foods in 
backyard gardens and other 
productive spaces, including native, 
rustic edible plants that are more 
resilient in semiarid conditions, 
many of which tend to depend on the 
investment of women’s time and 
labour; 
- Promotion of seed banks” as a 
mechanism for validating the native - At least 40% women from families 
involved in decision making 
processes concerning the use of 
resources, inputs and technologies 
in Household Resilient Investments; 
-Number of women and their 
children with significant 
improvements in their state of health, 
including a reduction of rates of 
malnutrition and chronic 
degenerative diseases.  
-Number of women directly 
involve d in the preservation and 
circulation of heirloom seeds within their communities and territories for planting practices.  2nd to 6th year  Gender specialists; PMU teams; Management Council (made up of 
representatives of 
state administration, beneficiaries and 
civil society); Teams 
of technicians (for rural technical assistance services)


---
*Page 119*
---

21 knowledge of heirloom seeds, 
involving women directly in such 
efforts.  
 
Activity 1.1.3  Implement 
Collective Resilient Investments  
 
 
- Implementation of productive 
activities focused on the cultivation 
of nutritionally -rich foods in 
productive spaces, including native, 
rustic edible plants that are more 
resilient in semi- arid conditions, 
many of which tend to depend on the 
investment of women’s time and 
labour; 
- Training sessions for cooks (most of whom are female) in school 
facilities where CRPS is being 
taught, aimed at fostering recipes with native crops that originate from 
the school gardens; 
- Construction of Collective 
Resilient Investments with a 
methodological approach that - 40% women (of total of families 
benefitted in collective resilient 
investments) participating actively 
in the sustainable management of 
natural resources within collective 
areas;  
-60% of traditional communities in 
the Project area directly involved in 
collective resilient investments with  
signs of strong female leadership;  
- 40% of income- generating and 
resilient production -based activities 
in collective areas made up of female 
agricultural workers;  
- 40% of students involvedin CRPS 
training are girls;  
-Number of women (Cooks; 
Professors; students)  sensitized for 
disseminating climate -resilient 
agricultural and food practices in 
schools and Family -based 
agriculture centers (EFAS);  
-Number of women directly 
involved in the preservation and 2nd to 6th year  Gender specialists; race and ethnicity 
consultants; PMU 
teams; Management Council (made up of representatives of 
state administration, 
beneficiaries and civil society); Teams 
of technicians (for 
rural tech nical 
assistance services)


---
*Page 120*
---

22 involves 40% women and 50% 
youth (of all members of t he family) 
as major protagonists.  
- Promotion of seed banks” as a 
mechanism for validating the native knowledge of heirloom seeds, involving women directly in such 
efforts.  circulation of heirloom seeds within 
their communities and te rritories for 
planting practices.  
 
Activity 1.1.4: Build  a Farmers’ 
Network  
- Empower women agricultural workers participating in i nteractive 
activities such as exchanges and work team efforts for  the 
implementation of sustainable 
technologies; 
- Create gender -transformational 
training programs with 550 
technical service providers and farmers identified as “local talents”;  
- Consolidate a participatory CRPS 
monitoring methodology to be 
carried out by the farmers network in coordination with technical 
assistance teams that contains at 
least 2 indicators focused on -Atleast 40%  women selected and 
trained in sustainable productive 
practices and/or renewable, energy -
efficient technologies; 
-Atleast  40% of female leaders 
selected are from traditional 
communities (indigenous, 
quilombola, “fundos de pasto”) 
-550 technical service providers and 
farmers identified as “local talents” sensitized in gender roles, dynamics 
and relations within the field of 
climate change and environmental 
sustainability;  
-Number of socio -environmental 
indicators that register and monitor 
transformations in gender roles , as 
well as racial and ethnic relations 2nd to 6th year  Members of the “farmers network”; technical service providers; Gender 
specialists; PMU 
teams


---
*Page 121*
---

23 qualitative transformations in 
gender roles and relations within 
socio -environmental processes. within diverse spaces  for agricultural 
production. 
- Promotion of entrepreneurship in CRPS among young female farmers;  - At least 40% of rural micro -
enterprises developed under young 
women’s leadership; 
-Atleast 60% of traditional 
communities are stimulated to create 
rural micro -enterprises under young 
women’s leadership. 2nd to 6th year  PMU teams; Gender 
specialists; technical assistance teams  
Component 2:  WATER ACCESS  FOR PRODUCTION  - disseminate practices aimed to capture, harvest, store and use efficiently water that empower women, 
youth and members of traditional  communities, with the main objective of  decreas ing the vulnerability of livestock and crops to rainfall irregularity and prolonged 
droughts  
OUTPUT 2.1: Improve w ater 
access to family farmers and traditional communities by investing in small- scale 
technologies for harvesting, reuse, 
treatment and storage  -Foster women’s participation in the 
construction and replication of 
technologies such as c isterns, 
rainwater reservoirs, trenches and 
small underground dams; 
-Promote workshops and visits to 
improve farmers’ knowledge in water harvesting and storage 
technologies with at least 40% 
women’s participation.   - Number of women (40% of the families in volved) benefitted by 
rainwater harvest and storage techniques; 
- Number of women trained in 
technologies dedicated towards the capture and storage of rainwater 
who act as local and regional 
“multipliers.”  2
nd to 6th year   Technical service 
providers; Gender 
specialists; PMU teams  
- Foster training sessions focused on 
the re -use of grey and black water in 
family residences among local - Number of training sessions with 
at least 40% of female participants; 2nd to 6th year  Technical service 
providers; Gender 
specialists; PMU


---
*Page 122*
---

24 female farmers;  teams  
Component 3: Knowledge management and Scaling -up - strategies for capacity - building;  learning, exchange and replication of sustainable practices and 
qualifying  inputs for public policy making  with a focus on different social inequalities (gender, race and ethnic issues) 
OUTPUT 3.1:  CRPS and small-
scale water harvesting system 
disseminated in the NEB semiarid 
and abroad to increase climate resilience of vulnerable communities.  
 Activity  3.1.1.  Raise  awareness  and 
buil d capacities  of women,  yout h an d 
traditional  communities  
 
- Promote affirmative actions 
(women -only events, workshops and 
training sessions);  
- Foster alternatives for childcare support and socialization of domestic activities;  
- Hold sensitivity training sessions for technical assistance providers in gender, race and ethnicity approaches;  
- Compilation of case studies with focus on gender issues, especially within the context of traditional 
communities; 
- Register and systematize 
knowledge- sharing of sustainable 
technologies by female farmers and 
youth leaders; - At least 165 o f 414 young 
communicators are young women; 
- 200 sustainable technologies and 
methodological innovations 
registered, 40% of which have been implemented under female 
leadership;  
- 40% of women involved directly 
in training and replication of 540 eco-suffici ent stoves and 540 bio-
digesters;  
- Use of at least 5 different social media resources and techniques for 
capturing technological and 
methodological innovations; 
- 550 technical service providers 
and local talents (farmer leaders) 
using methodological appr oaches 
with gender, race and ethnicity 
focus;  
-  Childcare support activities carried out in 80% of the total of 1st to 6
th year  PMU teams; gender specialists; social communication 
specialists/ 
consultants; technical assistance teams; Farmers 
Network (“Local 
talents”)


---
*Page 123*
---

25 - Foster the creation of a young 
communicators’ network, 40% of 
whose members are female;  
- Promote trainings, workshops and inter-regional, inter- state exchange 
visits between youth communicators, 40% of whom are 
women; 
- Contribute towards the 
diversification of social media 
resources and techniques for 
registering methodological and technological innovations. 699 events promoted;  
- Up to 200 women’s groups and grassroots organizations created as a 
result of affirmative -action 
activities.  
Activity 3.1.2  Drive scaling -up, 
unlock policy barriers and 
experiment with CRPS and resilience 
participatory monitoring model  
 
- Guarantee women’s participation 
(at least 40%) in 5 learning routes in 
Brazil, at the level of Latin America and Caribe (LAC) and Africa;  
- Design and implement a methodological approach to learning routes and exchanges within Brazil 
and internationally that features 
women as main protagonists and -Number of learning  routes 
(national and international) that 
include visits to experiences led by 
women , 40% of which should be 
developed within the context of 
traditional communities; 
- 40% of women included in 
learning routes and exchanges (technical service providers and 
female community leaders); 
- 50% of systematizations that 
compose 8 thematic studies 
featuring women- led initiatives; 
-40% of thematic studies and 1st to the 8th year  Social 
communication specialists/ 
consultants; M & A 
consultants; Gender specialists; CPMU 
(BNDES team); 
Management Council


---
*Page 124*
---

26 disseminators of knowledge;  
- Produce thematic studies and 
publications that feature women -led 
initiatives in the construction of resilient and sustainable productive systems;  
- Ensure the dissemination of 
proposals for climate change 
resilience with a gender, racial and ethnic focus in relevant channels of 
information.  publications feature women -led 
initiatives in traditional 
communities (indigenous, 
quilombola, etc.);  
- 50% of outcomes and learning 
initiatives published as part of Knowledge and Results 
Management component should 
feature women -led experiences;  
- 40% of 70 newsletters and 
informative reports produced 
feature women as protagonists in climate resilient productive systems and contain proposals / 
recommendations for incorporating 
a gender focus in climate change resilience strategies;  
- 60% of project beneficiaries (men and women) receiving news about measures and strategies for resilience in the face of climate 
change via particular information 
channels.  
Activity  3.1.3 . Plan , Monitor , Evaluate  
and  Learn  
 
- Develop a monitoring system that 
will use disaggregated data, as well - Numb er of indicators of progress 
in monitoring system that contemplate gender, racial/ethnic 
dimensions; 1
st to the 8th year  Social 
communication specialists/ 
consultants; M & A 
consultants; Gender


---
*Page 125*
---

27  
 as indicators of progress in gender 
and racial/ethnic dimensions; 
- Hold meetings to evaluate project 
results using as a reference at least 4 
indicators with a gender focus; 
- Carry out seminars with 
representation of community leaders 
(40% of whom are women and 
atleast 4 0% of whom are from 
traditional communities) at the 
beginning, middle and finalization of 
project implementation to evaluate project results and impacts;  
- Develop a participatory and 
qualitative monitoring methodology 
of TRIPs involving youth communicators, 40% of whom 
should be women;  
- Construction of guidelines and 
reference schemes for thematic systematizations with gender, racial 
and ethnic focus. - Number of technical progress 
reports (TPRs) that incorporate a 
gender analysis;  
- 40% of participants of meetings and seminars for evaluation and monitor ing are female beneficiaries.  
- At least three thematic 
systematizations throughout the 
project execution period that emphasize immediate impacts on 
households in terms of income and 
food security in short to medium term with a gender, racial/ethnic focus. specialists; CPMU 
(BNDES team); Management 
Council


---
*Page 126*
---

28 7. Refe rences   
 
1. AGUILAR, L., SHAW, D. D. M.; QUESADA- AGUILAR, A. (2011). Forests and 
Gender. IUCN/WEDO, 2011. 
2. BLOMSTROM, E.; BURNS, B. Global policy landscape: A supporting framework for gender -responsive action on climate change. In: AGUILAR, Lorena; GRANAT, 
Margaux; OWR EN, Cate. Roots for the future: The landscape and way forward on 
gender and climate change. Global Gender and Climate Alliance and the International Union for Conservation of Nature; IUCN & GGCA: Washington, DC, USA, 2015. 
3. BRUMER, A; ANJOS, G. Gênero e reprodução social na agricultura familiar. Revista Nera, 2012, n. 12, p 6- 17. Available at: 
<http://www.mstemdados.org/sites/default/files/1396 -4020-1-PB.pdf>. 
4. CATACUTAN, D.; NAZ, F. A guide for gender mainstreaming in agroforestry research and development . ICRAF Vietnam, 2015.  
5. CEDAW. General recommendation No. 34 on the rights of rural women. 2016. 
Available at: 
<https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20Documents/1_Global/INT_CEDAW_GEC_7933_E.pdf>.  
6. CEPAL. La matriz de la desigualdad social en  América Latina. 2016. Available at: 
<https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/40668/4/S1600946_es.pdf>. 
7. ECONOMIST INTELLIGENCE UNIT. The South Asia Women’s Resilience Index: Examining the role of women in preparing for and recovering from disa sters, 
2014. Available at: <https://www.gdnonline.org/ resources/The%20South%20 Asia%20Women%27s%20Resil- ience%20Index%20Dec8.pdf>. 
8. FARIA, Nalu. Economia feminista e agenda de luta das mulheres no meio rural. In: BUTTO, Andréa (org). Estatísticas Rurais e  Economia Feminista: um olhar sobre o 
trabalho das mulheres. Brasília, Ministério do Desenvolvimento Agrário, 2009, p. 11-28.  
9. FARIA, Nalu. Mulheres rurais na economia solidária. In: BUTTO, Andréa, et al. Autonomia e cidadania: políticas de organização pro dutiva para as mulheres no 
meio rural. Ministério do Desenvolvimento Agrário (Brasil) IICA, Brasília, DF (Brasil), 2011. 
10. FARIA, Nalu; MORENO, Renata. (org). Análises feministas: outro olhar sobre a economia e a ecologia. São Paulo: SOF, 2012, p. 7-11.  
11. FERDOUS, T.; JOST, C.; SPICER, T.D. Gender, and Inclusion Toolbox: 
Participatory Research in Climate Change and Agriculture. Copenhagen, Denmark: CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), CARE International and the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), 2014.  
12. FUNDAÇÃO CARLOS CHAGAS. Mulheres, Trabalho e Família, 1998.


---
*Page 127*
---

29 13. GAIGER, Luiz Inácio Germany. Por um Olhar Inverso: prismas e questões de 
pesquisa sobre a Economia Solidária. Sociedade e Estado, 2012, 27.2: 313-335. Disponíve l em: <http://www.scielo.br/pdf/se/v27n2/a06v27n2.pdf >. Acesso em: 
12 abr. 2017.  
14. HIRATA, Helena. Gênero, classe e raça: Interseccionalidade e consubstancialidade das relações sociais. Tempo Social - Revista de sociologia da USP, v. 26, n. 1, 2014, 
p. 61-73.   
15. IBGE. Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra por Domicílio (PNAD). Rio de Janeiro, v. 33, p. 1 – 133, p. 2013. 
16. INSTITUTO BRASILEIRO DE GEOGRAFIA E ESTATÍSTICA (IBGE). Estatísticas de gênero: uma análise dos resultados do censo deomográfico 2010. Estudos e Pesquisas Informação Demográfica e Socioeconômica, n. 33. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE, 2014. 
17. JALIL, L.; DE MORAES, L.; OLIVEIRA, M. Porque ainda discutir a ‘justa’ divisão sexual do trabalho? Alguns aportes necessários à luta por igualdade e liberdade para as mulheres rurais no Brasil. In: JALIL, L.; ESMERALDO, G.; OLIVEIRA, M. Rede Feminismo e Agroecologia do Nordeste. 1 ed. Recife, 2017. 
18. MASSON, Laura. Feministas en todas partes. Una etnograf ía de espacios y 
narrativas feministas en Argentina. Buenos Aires: Prometeo Libros, 2007.  
19. MOREIRA, Sarah. Mulheres e Meio Ambiente: o olhar das mulheres sobre os fogões ecol ógicos, um estudo de caso da comunidade Garapa I – Acarape/ 
Cear á.Monografia apresentada no Curso de Especializa ção em Geografia: 
Educaçã o Ambiental da Universidade Estadual do Cear á, 2013.  
20. OXFAM. Terra e desigualdade: mulheres, direito à terra e os impactos do agronegócio. 2018. Available at: <https://www.oxfam.org.br/noticias/terra -e-
desigualdade-mulheres- direito -a-terra-e-os-impactos-do-agronegoci o>. 
21. PAULILO, Maria Ignez Silveira. Trabalho familiar: uma categoria esquecida de análise. Revista Estudos Feministas, Florianópolis, UFSC, v. 12, n. 1, p. 229-252, jan./ abr. 2004. 
22. Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra por Domicílio (PNAD). Rio de Janeiro, 2009. 
23. Relatório Terrenos da Desigualdade. 2016. Available at: 
<https://www.oxfam.org.br/sites/default/files/arquivos/relatorio -
terrenos_desigualdade-brasil.pdf>. 
24. SILIPRANDI, EMMA; CINTRÃO, ROSÂNGELA. As mulheres agricultoras e sua participação no Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos (PAA). In: BUTTO, Andréa. Autonomia e Cidadania: Políticas de Organização Produtiva para as Mulheres no Meio Rural. Brasília: Ministério  de Desenvolvimento Agrário, 2011. p. 153-191. 
25. SILVA, S. P.; CARNEIRO, L. M. Os novos dados do mapeamento de economia solid ária no Brasil. In: Mercado de trabalho: conjuntura e an álise, n. 57. Bras ília: 
Ipea, 2014.


---
*Page 128*
---

30 26.WEITZMAN, Rodica. Tecendo Deslocament os: Relações de gênero, práticas
produtivas e organizativas entre trabalhadoras rurais. Tese de Doutorado.
UFRJ/Museu Nacional/PPGAS, Rio de Janeiro, 2016.
27.WOORTMANN, Ellen F. Da complementaridade à dependência: espaço, tempo egênero em comunidades ‘pesqueiras’ do nordeste. Revista Brasileira de CiênciasSociais (ANPOCS), Ano 7, N. 18, 1992.
_______________