=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20200610141336+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20067
/ModDate: D:20200723162312+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20067
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
18 – 21 August 2020  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 10 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum X 
Funding proposal package f or FP 138 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.26/02 /Add.10 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents   
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 59 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  60 
Secretariat’s assessment  62 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   76 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  92 
Gender documentation  93


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project 
Country(ies):  Senegal  
Accredited Entity:  West African Development Bank (BOAD)  
Date of first submission:  2020/ 01/21  
Date of current submission  2020/ 05/21  
Version number  V.1.5


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  
 
  
 
ACRONYMS  
 
ASER  : Senegalese Agency for Rural Electrification (Agence Sénégalaise d’Électrification Rurale)  
ASN : Standards Association of Senegal (Association Sénégalaise de Normalisation)  
AML/CFT : Anti -money laundering - combating finance of terrorism  
APR : Annual Performance Report  
BCEAO : Central  Bank of West African States  
BE : Baseline Emissions  
BOAD : West African Development Bank ( Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement ) 
CDM : Clean  Development Mechanim  
CoP : Conférence of Parties  [to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change]  
COPERES : Council of Professionals of Renewable Energies in Senegal  
CRSE  : Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (Commission de Régulation du Secteur de l'Électricité)  
DER : General Delegation for Women and Young Entrepreneurs (Délégation générale à l’Entreprenariat Rapide des 
Femmes et des Jeunes)  
DEEC  : Direction de l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés  
DREEC : Divisions Régionales de l’Environnement et des Établissements Classés  
ER : Emission Reduction  
ESMF /ESMP : Environmental and social management Framework /Plan 
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States  
ECREEE ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energies and Energy Efficiency  
ERIL : Local Rural Electrification Initiative (Electrification Rurale d'Initiative Locale)  
ERPA : Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement  
ESIA : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
FONGIP  : Priority Investment Guarantee Fund (Fonds de Garantie des Investissements Prioritaires)  
FONSIS  : Sovereign Strategic Investment Fund (Fonds Souverain d'Investissements Stratégiques)  
FSE : Special Support Fund for the Energy Sector (Fonds Spécial de Soutien au secteur de l’Energie)  
GCF : Green Climate Fund  
GDP : Gross Domestic Product  
GEF : Global Environment Facility  
GHG  : Green House Gases  
IPP : Independent Power Producers  
IRENA : International Renewable Energy Agency  
KYC : Know Your Customer  
LPDSE Letter of Development for the Energy Sector (Lettre de Développement du Secteur de l’Énergie)  
MCC : Millennium Challenge Corporation  
MEP : Ministry of Energy and Petroleum  
MFI : Microfinance institutions  
MEF P : Ministry of Economy, Finance and Planification  
M/SME : Micro /Small Medium Enterprises  
NDA : National Designated Entity   
NDCs : Nationally Determined Contributions  
NGO : Non -Governmental Organization  
O&M : Operation and Maintenance  
OECD : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  
PE : Project Emissions  
PMU  : Project Management Unit (Unité de Gestion du Projet)  
PNER  : National Rural Electrification Program (Programme National d'Électrification Rurale)  
PoA : (CDM) Programme of Activities  
PPER  : Priority  Rural Electrification Program (Programme Prioritaire de l'Électrification Rurale)  
PPPs : Public Private Partnership  
PREM: Multi -Sectoral Energetic Projects (P rojects Energétiques Multi -sectoriels)  
PSE : Plan Senegal Emergent  
PUDC :  Emergency Community Development Program (Programme d'Urgence de Développement Communautaire)  
PV : Photovoltai c 
RE : Renewable Energy  
ROGEP  : Regional Off -Grid Electrification Project  
SENELEC  : Société Nationale d’Electricité du Sénégal  
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals  
SHS : Solar home system  
ToR : Terms of Reference  
UNFCCC : United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change  
WAEMU : West African economic and monetary union 
(*) Some institutions’ names and acronyms are retained in French


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
A 
A 
A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☒ Energy access and power generation :    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
100%  
 
  
 
 
 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  1,127,447 tCO2eq  
(2021 – 2045) A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Adaptation co- benefits  to 
344,000 beneficiaries  
(38,900 households ) 
4% of Senegal rural 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  198,692,182   Euros   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)1 A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  75,445,176 Euros  
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant  EUR 1,821,945   
☒ Loan   EUR 73,623,231  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  2021 - 2026 A.12. Total lifespan  25 years  
(PV equipment lifetime)  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval    
2/24/2020  A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
 
1 Equivalent to EUR 225 million


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
A 
A 
A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 
 A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Government of the Republic of Senegal represented by the Senegalese Rural 
Electrification Agency (ASER)  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
 
This proposal aims to foster the development of off -grid renewable energy mini -grids to reduce CO 2 emissions from the 
Senegal power sector whilst contributing to electricity access objectives and promoting gender -balanced rural economic 
growth.  Low-carbon universal access is a critical pillar of the Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) phase II, as the energy 
sector was considered one of the greatest success of PSE phase I2, with national power generation increasing two- fold 
between 2012 and 2018, and 20% of the energy mix derived from clean energy sources.  
Currently, o nly 42% of Senegal’s rural population has access to electricity. Electricity access rate is still relatively low 
and reveals a great disparity between urban and rural populations, with regional disparities that are even more dramatic 
in terms of the level of coverage. With coverage rates ranging from 12% in Kedougou to 70% in Dakar, only five other 
regions (Diourbel, Saint -Louis, Matam,Thiès, Ziguinchor) have been able to achieve an elect rical coverage rate of at 
least 50%. Two regions (Kolda and Kedougou) have a coverage rate of less than 20%. At the departmental level, 
Salémata, Medina Yoro Foula, Ranerou and Saraya have an electrical coverage rate of less than 10%3. These low 
rates are due to excessively high costs of investment and operations, dispersal and low level of consumption, yet the 
benefits of rural electrification are undisputed, significantly improving the quality of life of communities  and increasing 
productivity.  Distributed renewable energy generation also help increase the reliability and resilience of  power supply  
by making it  less vulnerable to disruptions caused by natural disasters.  Multiple socio -economic and socio- ecological 
co-benefits  can further contribute to improving living standards of the communities . 
The Government of Senegal is thus committed to tackle this issue and has pledged to reach universal energy access 
by 2025. Meanwhile, lack of resources means that any improvements are likely to be met through carbon- intensive grid 
extensions and diesel -powered generators (lower upfront cos t). However, the Government of Senegal  (GoS)  has 
committed, through the Paris Agreement (2015) and COP21, to contribut e to the international collective effort to mitigate 
climate change emissions and put in place adequate adaptation measures. In the energy  sector, this commitment has 
resulted in the definition of strategies and the implementation of priority actions presented in the Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) of Senegal.  
The objective of the proposed project  is to support the GoS by providing concessional co- funding needed to mobilise 
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market  and achieve its low -carbon rural electrification 
goals as proclaimed in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Senegal , under the form of sovereign loan and 
grant  de-risking local operators’ involvement while alleviating GoS tariff compensation burden following harmonization.   
Climate change in Senegal is predicted to affect  average yearly rainfall  with an increase in rain intensity leading to 
flooding, along with increased air temperatures and sea level rise.  Its effects on water resources  thus include  stressors 
affecting hydropower production, which contributes more than 10 percent to the country’s electric ity supply and is 
susceptible to variable rainfall and increased evaporation rates of retention ponds and dams4. Its effects  are also 
particularly faced by the agriculture sector where the majority of agricultural activities are heavily dependent on the 
pumping of underground water . Rural electrification  improves access to groundwater and thereby supports higher 
agricultural productivity and better food security. In addition, other income- generating activities are made possible 
through access to electricity and ther eby information and communications technologies, improving household 
resilience.   
Proposed intervention  
In line with Senegal NDC s5 and its national ambition of universal access to electricity by 2025 (SE4All), this project , to 
be executed by the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER)  under delegation of the Government of Senegal , 
aims at deploying 100% solar mini -grids in a thousand (1,000) isolated villages across Senegal , i.e. half of the 
most vulnerable, least attractive locations to be electrified , by rural electrification  concessionaires . By channe lling 
 
2 Official speech of President Macky Sall in Paris in December 2018  
3 MPE 2019.  SE4All Universal Access Operational Plan for Implementation of the rural electrification program  
4 USAID, 2017. Climate Change Risk in Senegal: Country risk profile5 See Senegalese NDC energy sector pledges in 
section B1, including solar rural electrific ation targets  
5 See Senegalese NDC energy sector pledges in section B1, including solar rural electrific ation targets


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
A 
A 
A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 
 concessional funding and by easing the connection of beneficiaries and facilitating access to productive use rs of 
energy , the project  will accelerate and perpetuate the electrification of communities that remain outside the perimeter 
of PPER (Rural Electrification Priority Plan ’) private concessionaires and S enelec  intervention.  
The project  will mobilize concessional resources from the GCF to engage private sector local operators with  acceptable 
risk-reward conditions, complementing BOAD co -financing and Senegal resources mobilized towards 1,000 newly 
electrified villages through 100% solar photovoltaic mini -networks . In addition,  a grant is requested for strengthening 
the capacity of the main rural electrification stakeholders , for facilitating  first connection access to most vulnerable 
eligible social services and women & youth- entrepreneurs  based on the experience of JAPPALE coupons6 and lessons 
learned from PPERs , and a loaned guarantee facility for catalyzing access to  local micro -financ ing towards productive 
and gender users of energy . 
Climate impacts  
Whilst the energy sector  is very exposed to diverse impacts of climate variability and change through changes in energy 
supply (e.g. disruption of operations and distribution) and demand (growing populations and evolving power needs), it 
is a strong contributor to the drivers of climate change, namely through the emission of greenhouse gases . 
 The proposed project  seeks to place Senegal on a low -carbon energy trajectory relative to its energy sector  high- GHG 
baseline . By benefitting 38,917 newly  electrified rural households within 5 years ( 32 MW total solar PV mini -grids 
ultimate capacity)  across 1,000  villages , it will result in an estimated 45,098 tCO
2 annual emission reductions 
impact  i.e. 1.13 M. tCO 2 to be avoided over its technical lifetime, resulting in an abatement cost of 28.8  
GCF €/tCO 2e.  
 Moreover, access to electricity from renewable sources will co -benefit the resilience of rural livelihoods to climate 
variability
 and their adaptive capacity related to disaster risk reduction and recovery , alleviating climate  stress and 
improving access to water and agriculture productivity, health and community empowerment, and information and 
communication services . 
 
6 See section B.3 for description of this innovative voucher system helping rural households in Senegal afford the fees to 
connect to electricity solutions that best fit their needs


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 4 
 
  
7 USGS 2012. A Climate Trend Analysis of Senegal  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF KEY CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT S AND DRIVERS  IN SENEGAL  
Senegal’s climate is generally characterized as tropical, with one rainy season from May –November and a dry season dominated 
by dry, hot harmattan winds between December and April. Temperatures and rainfall  vary across regions, with rainfall generally 
increasing from north to south and temperatures increasing from  coast to interior. Along the coast, temperatures are cool, ranging 
from 17– 27°C. In the northern Sahelian zone, the climate is characterized by cool nights (minimum of 14°C) and hot days (maximum 
of 40°C). The north has a longer dry season from November –May, and receives about 360 mm of rainfall the rest of the year. Moving 
south, rainfall increases and reaches up to 1,500mm per year in the extreme south. Hot and  humid, the southern region averages  
temperatures of 30°C throughout the year.  
Climate trends since the 1960s include7: 
• Increase in average temperatures by 0.9°C, with higher rates of warming in the north and more pronounced between 
October and December.  
• Twenty -seven more ‘hot’ nights per year since 1960.  
• Decline in rainfall; although rains have partially recovered since the mid- 1990s, they have not recovered their pre- 1970 
levels and remain 15 percent below the long- term average.  
• Rainfall decline is most significant in the southern region during the wet season (June–  September).  
Regional key climate hazards and climate projections consistently make West Africa one of the world’s most vulnerable regions to 
climate variability and change, in particular at the energy sector level  (Figur e 1): 
 
Source : USAID, 2018. Climate Risk Profile: West Africa


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 
 
  
8 at the shorter horizon of 2035, scenario RCP4.5 forecasts for Senegal are:  
- Cumulative rainfall decrease of 9.40 mm  
- Rainy season start delays of 5 days ±3.34  
- Rainy season duration reduction by 8.3 days ±4.46  
- Minimal and maximal temperatures are expected to increase by 0.6-0.7 °C.  The four climate indices that are most relevant for the energy sector in Senegal and West Africa are as follow:  
• Mean Annual Temperatures (projected to increase by 2.1°C in 2050 based 
on RCP 8.5 high emissions scenario used in IPCC 5th Assessment 
Report)8 
• Temperature Seasonal Variability (changes in cooling degree days that 
capture the amount of heat that society would like to reduce by period 
through some form of ac tive cooling)  
• Extreme Events Precipitation ( as warmer air has a higher capacity to carry 
moisture in form of water vapor, future climate raises the likelihood for 
strong rainfall events and particularly towards extremes), while  Mean 
Annual Precipitation wi ll fall by - 46.0mm in 2050  
• Drought / Wet -conditions Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
Index (raising pressure on water resources for direct hydropower 
production or indirectly through power plants cooling)  
 
 Actually, more extreme heavy rainfall events, and reduced river flow in some areas, are projected to increase evaporation and 
siltation, damage to dams and turbines  creating challenges for hydropower development
 ; hence the relevant diversification of energy 
sources promoted by the solar rural electrification project , as opposed to the predominant strategy of national grid extension.   
Research estimates that by 2050, climate effects exacerbating unsuitable development  practices  will reduce hydropower potential 
in the Volta River Basin by nearly 5 0%. River flow in Senegal and the Gambia will decrease by 8 percent  and 22 percent, respectively . 
Regional hydropower systems at risk on both Senegalese cross- border  river basins are:  
 Organisation for the Promotion of the Senegal River (OMVS) which includes Senegal, Mauritania, Guinea and Mali around 
common hydropower asset s:  
• Manantali hydropower plant ( 200MW  operating since 2002, 30% owned by Senegal)  
• Felou hydropower plant ( 62 MW operating since 2013, co -sponsored by Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal ) 
• Gouina hydropower plant ( 140 MW , in construction in Mali ) 
• Koukoutamba hydropower plant ( 294 MW  in construction, which will be OMVS’ fourth  and largest hydropower project)  
 Gambia River Basin Organisation (OMVG)  which covers  the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea- Bissau and Senegal  shared hydropower 
project(s) : 
• Kaleta (240 MW operated by Guinea since 2015, exporting 30% of its power to Senegal and Guinea- Bissau)  
• Sambangalou (128 MW , in construction, owned at 48% by Senegal ) 
• Souapiti (450 MW, in construction)  
 Multiple regional interconnections as part of the West African Power Pool  (around 1/3 of annual electricity consumption within 
ECOWAS is exchanged on the interconnected network)  
Multi -variable climate vulnerabilities of the region’s energy sector are summarized in below Table 1: 
Figure 2:  Observed and projected change in June –September rainfall and temperature for 1960 –2039 (top), 
together with smoothed rainfall and air temperature time series for June –September for southern and north -
central Senegal (bottom right). Mean rainfall and temper ature are based on the 1920– 1969 -time period.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 
 
  
Source : USAID, 2018. Climate Risk Profile: West Africa 
Whilst the energy sector  is very exposed to diverse impacts of climate variability and change through changes in energy supply (e.g. 
disruption of operations and distribution) and demand (growing populations and evolving power needs), it is  a strong contributor to 
the drivers of climate change, namely through the emis sion of greenhouse gases.  
According to the World Resources Institute Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (WRI CAIT), 27% of Senegal’s 2011 GHG emissions 
arose from energy, making it the second most emitting sector as per below chart (Figure 3).  Emissions in the energy sector (Figure 
4) are forecast to quadruple by 2030 in the business -as-usual scenario, dominated by fossil fuel consumption (Senegal NDC ).  
       
        Figure 3: Senegal GHG Emissions by sector (2011)            Figure 4: Senegal Energy sector CO 2eq emissions forecast 2010- 2030 (GgCO2e)  
KEY CHALLENGES OF THE  ENERGY SECTOR RELATED TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN SENEGAL  
Senegal is a regional leader for West Africa, with a reputation of economic and political stability. The country is expected to maintain its strong rate of economic growth, having registered over 6 percent per annum for the last four years. With a highly urban population 
— roughly half is concentrated around cities —  the G overnment of Senegal is focused primarily on grid expansion in urban areas 
due to their high population densities and lower expansion costs efforts.
 However, rural populations, low density  and remotely 
located, present more challenges than opportunities regarding energy access. With 196,000 square km, 54% of the 15 million 
population of Senegal live in rural areas . Whilst the GDP per capita is 1,521 $ (2018), over 50% of the rural populatio n lives under 
the poverty line. In this context, the energy sector faces three major challenges: (i) meeting the National commitments for clean 
energy and mitigation; (ii) responding to the adaptation for beneficiary communities ; and (iii) building c apacit ies at institutional level 
in the rural electrification subsector . 
 
Meeting t he National commitments  for clean energy and mitigation   
 The Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) targets


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 
 
  
 Following the declaration of the United Nations General Assembly which considered 2012 as “The International Year of Sustainable 
Energy for All (SE4ALL)”, an initiative called “global access to sustainable energy for all by 2030” was launched by the UN, in 
collaboration with several development partners such as  the World Bank, with the main specific objectives to be achieved by 2030 
below:  
- Guarantee universal access to modern energy services;  
- Double the rate of improvement in energy efficiency, and  
- Double the share of renewable energies in the overall ener gy mix.  
 
Senegal joined this initiative and worked to achieve appreciable results in terms of access to electricity: 64% national access rate 
and 33.2% in rural areas in 2016, with interesting prospects that leave glimpse the execution of current projects and programs. 
Indeed, the Government aimed to reach a rural electrification rate of 60% in 2019 and universal access to sustainable electri c 
services by 2025.  
  
To achieve these results, the country has mainly used, apart from the grid- connected system, i solated secondary and regional power 
plants operating mainly on fossil fuel s. These plants have reduced profitability, very high production costs and emit significant 
greenhouse gases  (GHG) . However, Senegal is endowed with a large solar energy resource. Over most of country’s territory, the 
solar irradiation is above 2 000 kWh /m2/year for Global Horizontal Irradiation and above 1 800 kWh/m2/year for Direct Normal 
Irradiation (Ministere des Energies Renouvelables, 2011). This provides good prospects for photovoltaic solar power projects.  
 
Today, among the 14 regions of Senegal, 9 have an electrical coverage rate of less than 60%. These show a rate of between 31%  
and 56%, with the exception of Kédougou and Kolda who are the most disadvantaged with 12% and 17% respectively. These figures  
obviously indicate a significant effort is expected in these two regions in particular, but also mask the equation of the absolut e 
number of localities that remain to be electrified in each region. With the exception of Dakar (4), Kédougou (423), Matam (762), 
Sedhiou (748) and Ziguinchor (473), all the other regions each have at least 1,000 localities to be electrified. Overall, 14, 519 localities 
remain to be electrified and a population of 3,372,458 to be covered by 2025.  
 
Achieving universal access by the end  of 2025 is listed as a priority of the GoS Emerging Senegal Plan, translated into a National 
Rural Electrification Program (PNER) under implementation according to the following phases:  
 The National Emergency Program for Rural Electrification (PNUER 2015- 2019)  
- Accelerating the implementation of Rural Electrification Concessions and Local Initiative Rural Electrification (ERIL)  
- Carrying out PNUER projects with State and partner funding  
 
The Complementary Program for Universal Access by 2025  
- Implementation of a "Universal Access" investment program  
The Complementary Program for Universal Access is structured according to 6 key axes, including the promotion  of decentralized 
systems through installation of  100% solar or hybrid mini -grids  to connect 4% of the remaining rural population whilst 95% will be 
connected to the national grid.  
 
Senegal NDC
9 
Following on from the ratification of the UNFCCC (1994) and the Kyoto Protocol (1991), Senegal has submitted three National 
Communications (NC) to the UNFCCC: the First NC was submitted in 1997; the Second NC in 2010; and the Third NC in January 
2016). Dur ing this period (2011), Senegal also established the National Climate Change Committee (COMNACC) in 2011 and 14 
Regional Climate Change Committees (COMRECCs) at regional levels. These committees will orchestrate the implementation of Senegal’s INDC, which later became its  First NDC when Senegal ratified the Paris Agreement in September 2016.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 
 
 Senegal ’s NDC target s an economy -wide  relative emission reduction of 21% 
by 2030 compared to BAU (blending CO 2, CH 4 and N 2O), at an estimated cost 
of implementation of  6.80 billion USD. The unconditional part of its mitigation 
target amounts to 5% reduction while the additional 16% ($5 billion  estimated 
costs of implementation) are condition al on the support of the international 
community.  Its mitigation objectives span,  on the one hand, the production of 
electricity from renewable sources and with improved energy efficiency,  
including in off -grid areas,  the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in 
terms of biomass and waste, and the planni ng of resource mobilization that 
involves the implementation of national development strategies, and , on the 
other hand, reduction of GHG emissions through energy efficiency in 
buildings, transport and industry.  
The contribution of the energy sector has be en broken down into 3 sub- sectors:  
(i) electricity and domestic fuel;  
(ii) energy efficiency; and  
(iii) transport.  
 
Part of the emissions reduction policy in the sector is based on the increase of renewable energies in electricity production by 30% 
by 2030. The above Figure 5 shows the reduction commitments of the corresponding emissions, according to the unconditional 
(CDPN) and conditional (CDPN+) scenarios  depicted in below  Table 2 (electricity sub -sector):  
 
Electricity sub -sector’s unconditional 
(CDPN) options  Electricity sub -sector’s conditional  (CDPN+) options  
Programme EnR ( Renewable Energies) 1  
 Solar PV: power plants of a total 
capacity of  160 MWc  
 Wind :  power plants of a total capacity 
of 150 MW  
 Hydro:  power plants of a total capacity 
of 144 MW / 522 GWh  Programme EnR 2 (2020 - 2025)  
 Solar PV: commissioning of an additional capacity of  200 MWc  
 Wind : commissioning of an additional capacity of 200 MW 
 Biomass:  commissioning of an additional capacity of 50  MW 
 Solar – CSP:  commissioning of an additional capacity of 50 MW  
 Hydro:  commissioning of an additional power generation of 200 GWh in  
2025  
 Replacement of  Jindal 320  MW coal power plant by two Liquefied Natur al 
Gas Combined Cycle  of 400 MW (2025: 200 MW and 2028: 200 MW)  
Rural Electrification (PNUER)  
 392 villages electrified with solar or 
hybrid mini -grids (diesel / solar)   
 5,000 villages electrified by solar mini -grids for universal access to 
electricity * 
* Senegal 2015 NDC number  of 5,000 villages suitable for solar mini -grids was recently updated  as being 2 ,348 remaining 
vulnerable localities  in the latest PNER Operational Plan, of which the proposed project aims at fast -tracking  1,000 – almost half –  
with the support of the GCF.  
 
Responding to the adaptation for beneficiary communities  
 
Among climate change threats, Senegal is vulnerable to drought, flooding and related health epidemics. Priority areas for adaptation 
measures include agriculture and health sectors  with particular attention to promoting access to: (i) weather & climate information 
in order to mainly reduce vulnerability to flooding that affects most of the peri -urban populations in one hand, and agricultural lost 
and damages due to drought towards r ural communities; and (ii) basic installations  for achieving communities resilience mainly to 
climate -induced health hazards  (heath centres ) and stress on  agriculture (water pumping).  
 
The importance of access to energy in improving the resilience of poor  communities to the negative effects  of climate change, has 
been demonstrated, particularly in the health sectors, access to water for consumption and agriculture (through electrical pumping), 
in the diversification of livelihoods and in the field of climate information systems for the establ ishment of an effective early warning 
system. For example, according to the World Health Organization, the world’s poorest populations are more frequently exposed to 
number of climate- sensitive diseases from extreme weather events and disasters. However, f or many people the basic requirements 
for achieving resilience on health, such as a safe energy supply for cold storage of medicines, operation of health centres  at night, 
etc., are not being met. Climate change implies, in particular, the quality and comp osition of water which is compromised, thus


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 
 
 affecting the nutritional status of populations and water security.  Severe cholera epidemics have occurred due to floods wit h major 
riverbed overflow and subsequent water contamination.  Similarly, salinization is a predominant handicap of public health, at the 
origin of the recrudescence of cardiovascular diseases in the regions of Kaolack and Fatick and in Casamance in particular, but also 
of dental fluorosis which is rampant in the area, this salinization seri ously threatens Casamance.  
A safe energy supply is also important to put in place an effective early warning system in allowing populations to have access to 
climate information or previsions thanks to their mobile phone which need to be rechar ged (current ly forcing some women to walk 
up to 6- 7km away) , their television sets or radios, and I nternet.  Agriculture in Senegal is predominantly rain- fed and so erratic 
weather patterns present an ever -increasing risk to smallholder farmers across the country. Late onset of rain can lead to a reduced 
growing season; unexpected torrential rain and flash- flooding can lead to farmers losing scarce resources of seed, other farm inputs 
and labour together with the loss of topsoil, resulting in declining food security.  These climate change effects  also combine with 
socio -economic changes – population growth and competition for scarce resources – to provide challenges to any development 
strategy. Being able to anticipate climate fluctuations from a few days to a few months in advance can be decisive in allowing smallholder farmers to adapt their agricultural practices to compensate.  Vulnerability analysis with farm ers identified that accurate 
and early weather information is essential for farmers to mitigate risk and practice effective adaptation measures.
 Information may 
be available both internationally and through national meteorological agencies and would be acc ess via mobile phone , TV or radio 
and help overcome the challenges of other early warning systems that struggle to get the information down to the “last mile” to 
farmers on the ground, especially farmers with low literacy levels.  
 
In terms of livelihoods, Senegal women and youth are very active in the agricultural value chain and they are found in the processing 
and petty trade segments.  In the processing chain, they are organized into women's promotion groups (GPF) or economic interest 
groups (GIE) or micro enterprises to jointly address the challenges and issues of empowerment. They face many constraints, 
especially those related to the correct supply of inputs and other factors of production such as energy. The  poor access to productive 
energy limits their activities of transformation, storage of raw materials, conservation and packaging of finished products.  Hence 
rural electrification can support more income- generating activities and thereby increase the resilience of vulnerable people and 
households.  
Giving that all of the sectors targeted for the growth of the Senegalese national economy, such as agriculture, livestock , fishing, 
tourism, health and nutrition issues, access to water, remain vulnerable to the effects  of climate change, the Government of Senegal 
has made the issue of adaptation to climate change a priority as part of the country’s NDCs. To this end, a spec ial place has been 
given to the promotion of climate information and the establishment of an early warning system which requires access to reliable 
and sustainable energy.  
 
Building capacities at institutional level in the  rural electrification subsector  
 
Under the Priority Rural Electrification Program (PPER) , Senegal is divided into 11 overall services territories: those belonging to 
Senelec and  10 territories slated for concession to private operators. Operators for each territory are responsible for  all generation, 
transmission, and distribution within those territories and are mandated to undertake grid extension. From 2008– 2013, six of these 
concessions were successfully tendered to private consortiums,  while the remaining four concessions were officially granted to 
Senelec in late 2018:  
 
Table 3 below details the six concessions awarded to private operators for 25 years , following international procurement process , 
and remaining f our concessions attributed to SENELEC : 
Geographic concession  Private concessionnaire  Concession 
signature date  Entry into 
force  
 Dagana- Podor -Saint Louis  Compagnie Marocco -Sénégalaise 
d’Electricité (C OMASEL Louga)  30/05/2008  29/03/2011  
 Louga- Linguère- Kébémer  Compagnie Marocco- Séné galaise 
d’Electricité (C OMASEL Louga)  19/11/2009  29/11/2011  
 Kaffrine- Tambacounda- Kédougou  Energie Rurale Africaine (ERA)  29/06/2011  24/12/2013  
 Kaolack -Nioro -Fatick -Gossas  Electricité Du RIP (EDR)  22/11/2012  12/11/2014  
 Kolda- Vélingara  Kolda Energy  29/07/2013  09/04/2015  
 Mbour  SCL Energie Solutions  09/11/2012  16/11/2018


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 
 
  Sédhiou - Ziguinchor - Oussouye - Bignona  
 Foundiougne  
 Matam – Bakel  
 Diourbel - Bambey - Mbacké - Rufisque - Thiès - 
Tivaouane  SENELEC  
 
The Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) was formally created by  decree in 1999 with the sole aim of promoting rural 
electrification.  The Agency is autonomous, however it functions under the tutelage of the Ministry for Energy  and the Ministry of  
Finance , whilst also reporting to the CRSE. Its roles and responsibilities are laid out  
in Article 30 of the 1998 Electricity law which include:  
 Development of rural electrification programs in line with national plans ; 
 Provision  of financial and technical assistance to support rural electrification initiatives;  
 Encouragement of ‘bottom- up’ rural electrification project proposals from private operators;  
 Organisation of invitations to tender for ‘top- down’ electricity distribution concessions;  
 Provide loans and grants to licensed entities that operate in rural areas;  
 Supervision of the contracted installations resulting from these activities;  
 Manage the Rural Electrification Fund.  
 
Table 4 below provides an overview of mini -grids coordinated by ASER  over the past 15  years : 
YEAR  PROGRAM / DONOR  NUMBER OF MINIGRIDS  
2005- 2006  Isofoton -ASER/ SPAIN Govt  9 
2008  PERACO -ASER/Govt of Netherlands  18 
2010  PERACO -ASER/Govt of Netherlands  70 
2011  Daye Ouwens -ASER/ Govt of Netherland  10 
2011  Merl-ASER/Govt Austria  27 
2019  ECREE- ASER / UE Facility  40 
Source : USAID Power Africa 2019 –  Off-Grid market assessment for Senegal  
 
In addition to this situation, from 2000 to 2019, ASER has realized more than 12 Grid extension projects enabling the 
electrification of more than 3,000 villages.  
 
Issues contributing to the unsustainability of O&M included  non-cost-reflective tariffs, under -sizing of the grid, and lack of metering 
and monitoring.   In response to the former, the concept unrolled end of 2019 behind harmonization is that the government now 
compensates operators for the difference between their cost -reflective tariff and the harmonized tariff , implying systematic metering. 
The GoS pay s this compens ation through its Special Fund for Energy Sector Support (Fonds Special de Soutien au Secteur de 
l’Energie).  
 
The grid expansion modeling for 2025 demonstrates a clear densification of the Medium Voltage network planned in the western 
parts of the country, where population density and consumption are higher, as well  than a significant number of off -grid solutions in 
the eastern part of the country. This densification is made in great majority by ramifications of the existing Medium Voltage 
backbones  and planned.  
 There is a need to strengthen operational capacities of the solar rural electrification stakeholders , especially ASER,  for planning, 
implementing and monitoring of the 100% -photovoltaic mini -grids component  
 
PROPOSED INTERVENTION  
 
The proposed project intends to uphold the renewable share of Senegal’s ambition to reach universal energy access by 2025 by 
fostering solar -powered mini -grids development in isolated villages  that are not connected to the national electricity grid, which would 
still rely on fossil fuels  or suffer from unmet needs under the baseline scenario. GCF funds are sought for financial and technical 
assistance to align Senegal energy access program with its NDC, decarbonizing and climate- proofing rural electrification with the 
following outputs:


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 
 
  
10 UNFCCC (2018) Senegal Rural Electrification Program. CDM programme documentation is available here . Note that 
none of the grids to be developed under this  project will be included in the CDM PoA . 
11 Lighting Africa –  Senegal. More information available at: http://bit.ly/2eXfl2m  • strengthened operational capacities of the solar rural electrification stakeholders for planning, implementing and monitoring  
of the 100% -photovoltaic mini -grids  component  
• 38,900 households electrified by 1,000 mini -grids  within 5 years ,  
• enhanced access to 3,739 gender -balanced productive uses equipment and social services in all the targeted villages  
 
Having opted for the concept of rural electrification concess ion and public -private partnership to make the private sector a major 
player in rural electrification, Senegal has already been able to mobilize significant funding -  over 67 billion CFA ( EUR  102 M) raised  
through KfW -Ipex.  
 
Together with BOAD co -funding and the GCF -requested remaining financial need, this  1,000 solar mini -grids project will generate 
direct emission reductions of 45,098 tonnes  of CO 2 equivalent per year over 25- y lifetime. ASER rural electrification program  (grid 
extensions, solar home systems and distinct mini -grids that will be clearly demarked from the GCF project)  being already registered 
under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM),10 its monitoring and reporting of emission reductions will be conducted in 
accordance with the UNFCCC- approved renewable- powered rural electrification CDM methodology AMS III.BL “Integrated 
methodology for electrification of communities”. The CDM offers a recognised  MRV framework that will enable  BOAD to 
transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time and subsequently report progress to the GCF  as well as integrate 
them into Senegal’s NDC accounting and reporting.  While separate carbon finance from the World Bank PoA replenish es the 
JAPPALE household connection voucher scheme, however, the GCF supported activities will not result in carbon credits issuance 
and trading, unlike the CDM- supported complementary program.  
 
In parallel of the CDM P oA synergies, ASER will coordinate the collaboration between other relevant initiatives in both Senegal and 
neighbouring countries in order to optimise  the project  outcome. These include: Lighting Africa’s initiative in Senegal11, the regional 
off-grid electrification project (ROGEP) overseen by the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, and the 
World Bank’s Scaling Solar, which represents a significant driving force in achieving Senegal’s NDC targets with regards to s olar 
PV installed capacity , yet outside of the scope of the GCF project . 
 
Linkages between energy access, resilience and adaptation  co-benefits  
 Access to weather & climate information: rural electrification will improve access to forecasts,  early warnings  systems 
knowledge & best practi ces through Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) such as radio, TV, mobile phones, 
and reliable, affordable and resilient types of energy services  
 Livelihood viability : rural electrification fosters new income and employment  sources , water pumping and agriculture 
processes and irrigation systems that improve productivity and food access, efficient time savings  for new enterprises, and 
more climate -adapted productive user s 
 Gender circumstances : rural electrification opens o pportunities for women empowerment, social development and 
wellbeing, improved health and access to health services particularly beneficial for women and children, improved socio-
economic status by acces s to better education, and time savings allowing time to be used more productively  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Senegal’s off- grid electricity market and barriers  
 
The solar PV market is growing in Senegal, and the country is showing its 
intention to become the solar leader in the region, tapping on its favourable  
photovoltaic power potential (opposite Figure 6). However, these efforts are 
almost exclusively focused on large- scale implementation – in only 2017, 6 
grid-connected PV plants are being connected for a cumulative capacity of 
113.5 MW. The vast majority of this power feeds bac k to urban areas.  
The attractiveness of decentralised  solar PV mini -grids and solar home 
system ( SHS)  products is also becoming apparent due to decreasing costs 
of solar panels and related technologies; however, implementation of these 
technologies has re mained limited to date. This is largely due to access to 
finance barriers and lack of technical expertise, which this project aims to 
tackle.  
Figure 6 : World Bank, Solargis, 2017.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 
 
  
12 https://www.get- invest.eu/wp -content/uploads/2019/06/GETinvest -Market -Insights_SEN_PV_Guide_2019.pdf  
13 Limited information is available about the exact number of traditional pumps in operation in the country with a frequently 
stated number — from sector stakeholders in country — being 25,000.  
14 Using the data from  Progrès -Lait led by ASER & ENDA Energie, covering 100 milk conservation platforms by solar 
systems with 20 kWp batteries  
15 Cartographie du secteur de l’énergie solaire au Sénégal. 2017  
16 https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/PULSE -Full-Study.pdf  The majority of the decentralised  energy provision services currently in place in Senegal have been implemented in the 3 ‘ top-down’ 
PPER pilot concessions  of Dagana- Podor -Saint Louis, Louga- Linguère- Kébémer and Kaffrine- Tambacounda- Kédougou. Despite 
the documented potential, these initial  concessions have only delivered a fraction of their planned results in their first implementation 
phase. P rogress in the first half of 2018 was insufficient to meet the 30% electrification target for this first phase , due to the slow 
start-up of dealers, the high connection costs and the difference between the rates applied by the dealers and those of SENELEC 
making the cost per kWh higher in rural areas than in urban areas.  In addition, local financial institutions have limited familiarity  with 
renewable energy investments, and project finance at attractive terms (e.g. cost of capital, tenors) is not widely available in Senegal . 
As of end of 2018, 4,138 rural villages have been electrified out of 21,170 rural villages in total  and 2,513 rural villages are already 
under development ; hence 14,519 villages are s till awaiting electrification , which represent s 2.3 million inhabitants to address  by 
2025.  
 
In parallel to the paradigm shift in terms of avoiding substantial GHG emissions for the country  by diversifying energy supply from 
thermal -powered national grid extensions, solar rural electrification can tackle established climate vulnerabilit ies of off -grid 
communities  to health & water sanitation, agricultural & economic productivity  as well as empower women and young populations 
to build more climate informed & resilient livelihoods.  Droughts, floods and other severe weather events  indeed  have serious 
consequences  for rural livelihoods and economies , push ing vulnerable communities further into poverty – all the more  as climate 
variability and change can make these events more frequent  and more damaging.   
 
Besides households , solar energy could indeed power a myriad of different productive activities that can be mechanized across 
agriculture, industry and commerce, transforming people lives while avoiding emissions . These include appliances for trades -people  
such as sewing machines and carpentry tools, equipment for farmers such as water pumps and processing machines, and for retail 
outlets such as refrigerators  and blenders.  The productive use sector is dominated by pumping, h owever, limited development has  
occurred around solar mills or regarding cold chain applications . Given the importance of agriculture in predominantly rural off -grid 
areas and since close to 50% (over 750,000) of Senegalese households are active in the agricultural sector, a focus can thus be 
made on water pumping/irrigation, refrigeration and cooling, and processing use cases12: 
 Water pumping & irrigation -  The area of land in Senegal with good potential for irrigation is estimated at 497,500 ha. 
Electric and diesel pumps are frequently used, e.g. pumping for banana plantations.13  
 Agro -processing - the most important agricultural products in terms of gross production value include  
groundnuts and rice, before milk, hence an established potential for solar -power milling, threshing, and drying.  
 Refrigeration & cooling – since over 450,000 households in Senegal are involved in livestock breeding, the potential in this 
market is significant. It is estimated that an installed capacity of close to 20 MW would be required to serve all livestock 
farmers  for milk storage.14 
In the sect or of social services , the project’s focus also targets safe energy supply for cold storage of medicines, operation of 
health centres at night, and effective Information & Communication Technologies and early warning systems  allowing populations 
to have access to climate information or previsions . 
However , several obstacles still prevent the full realization of solar power potential for servicing communities and productive users15: 
 Information- wise, the advantages and possibilities of solar energy are poorly know n and sometimes misunderstood. Users 
do not necessarily have the right information on quality or reliability of solar products on the market, nor enough visibilit y on 
the costs as compared to their limited abili ty and willingness to pay . Required implementation capacities include technical, 
transactional, marketing and communication expertise.  
 Upfront investment costs of solar infrastructures and equipment  are out of the affordability range of most households and 
rural microenterprises16. Available financial resources rates and maturities mismatch real needs from operators and end-
users, both towards traditional financial institutions and households credit s ources.  
 Incentives are unclear in the context of a n evolving regulatory sector, existing concessions model update, applicable tax 
and tariff, resulting in frustrations among the private sector.  Focusing on distribution channel efficiency, tax/fiscal polici es 
and financing costs is necessary for facilitating the uptake of productive applications to serve as anchor loads and sustain  
solar mini- grids business models.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 
 
 Recognising this, the Ministry of Energy and ASER planned  to adapt the financing model to be applied across all 10 concessions to 
help overcome the access to affordable  finance barrier currently hampering progress , hand- in-hand with efforts to harmonise 
electricity tariffs nationwide in order to alleviate the cu rrent pricing disparities witnessed in the ‘pilot concessions’.  Outside of the 
concessions  and grid extension -targeted localities (7,559) , remaining off -grid solar -targeted villages thus  call for the following shift 
framework to meet Senegal’s rural electr ification Nationally Determined Contribution and Universal Access ambitions : 
 
Figure 7 : Theory of change diagram  
 
 
 
Table 5 below provides details of the project’s objectives achievement logic:  
Barrier removal actions to be undertaken by the project  Assumptions  underlying the project actions  
 Capacity building  of the project’s key stakeholders  for 
enabling solar mini -grids deployment framework , starting with 
the end- user beneficiaries’ awareness and appropriation, the 
socially -equitable competencies of ASER -hosted Project 
Management Unit  and gender -based community groups , and 
the environmental expertise and knowledge management 
required upstream and downstream  
 Concessional co -financing  of the low-carbon power 
generation assets to de- risk local operators’ participation and 
secure the best combination of tariff and service from the 
conceded solar energy mini -grid networks , meters and public 
lighting  
 Incentives for connection of eligible social services (such as 
Information & Communication Technologies,  health centers 
and schools ), women  & youth -entrepreneurs to the PV mini -
grids  and mechanism to facilitate access to  resilient  productive  Senegal politically recognized rural vulnerabilities to 
climate change and its  Rural Electrification National 
Plan offers potential for 100% solar electrification in 
remaining 2,348 off -grid villages  
 Senegal aims to integrate climate change mitigation  
into institutions  that exist and can host and retain 
trained staff  
 GCF involvement brings down the WACC to an acceptable level to Senegalese treasury  
 Private operators are interested in investing low 
upfront capital risk  
 Appropriate micro- finance network is available in 
rural areas  
 Households are aware of climate change and have 
the capacity to pay for clean energy


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 
 
  
17 ‘Access’ as defined by the multi -tier framework developed by World Bank under the Sustainable Energy 4 All initiative. 
This multi-attribute framework includes seven dimensions - Capacity, Duration, Reliability, Quality, Affordability, Legality, 
Safety  
 equipment financing through microfinance  (such as water 
boreholes, refrigerators) , climate information and early warning    Rural energy development success builds on 
extensive community mobilization, and capacity 
building for efficient electricity use  
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
Overall Objective  
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to reducing GHG emissions by boosting the solar PV mini -grids component of 
the country’s ambitious goal of reaching universal energy access17 in 2025 by providing concessional co- funding needed to mobilise  
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market, thus supporting the achievement of Senegal’s Nationally 
Determined Contribution, which mentions rural electrification as a key objective. Vulnerable and geographically dispersed rural 
communities currently disconnected from any grid are the key beneficiaries of this program, with a special focus on women and 
children through productive uses , community services  and early warning systems .  
 
To meet Senegal’s target pledged under the SE4ALL initiative, a national rural electrification investment program has been prepared 
by the government. The execution of  the program is delegated to the Agence Sénégalaise d' Electrification Rurale  (ASER), the 
Senegalese rural electrification agency , on the basis of  an Operational Plan released in December 2019. The overall  2019- 2025 
Complementary Program for Universal Access is valued at FCFA 690 billion (USD 1.17 billion), which mostly  cover s a) medium-
voltage grid extension; and b) rural mini -grids electrification investment s. Financial support from the Green Climate Fund is 
requested to contribute concessional and grant co -finance to triple  its solar mini- grids electrification component for the 
benefit of 344,000 inhabitants ( 4% of the 8.64 million rural population ). 
 
GCF Project ’s components  
The project  presented for the GCF’s consideration targets a FCFA 130 billion ( EUR 198.7 million ) investment package pursuing 
decentralised, renewable energy generation in rural communities, through 100% solar PV mini- grids  as a sustainable, climate-
friendly solution for vulnerable communities’ electricity access . The project  is to be implemented between 202 1 and 2025  by ASER 
as the Delegated Executing Entity  by the State of Senegal , nationwide.  
 Of this amount , FCFA 4 7 billion ( EUR  71.7 million) of concessional , sovereign loan from GCF  is to be dedicated to procuring and 
installing solar mini -grids , lowering up- front risk for private sector to 5%  of the investment costs to step- in and operate the solar 
power mini-grids assets  (Component 2) . FCFA 940  million ( EUR  1.4 million) of grant will be dedicated to Technical Assistance 
(Component 1)  and Project Management , besides FCFA 1.5 billion (EUR 2.3 million ) of financial incentives for productive use 
(Component 3). The grant will cover two components:
 (i) the provision of technical  assistance – transactional, marketing and 
communication expertise to enable the uptake of productive uses  including  a gender equality promotion program to ensure women 
and children noticeably benefit from the realised  electrification efforts , and (ii) the financial incentive for community services and 
productive users connection through  redeemable vouchers , while the  productive equipment acquisition through microcredit 
guarantees will be loaned.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 
 
  
18 other programm e activities (including PPER) are not directly related to the GCF project and do not impact on the 
achievement of the GCF project’s goals  
19 excluding Project Management Costs of EUR 0.4 mln  
20 The General Delegation for Women and Young Entrepreneurs  has been set up by the President of Senegal  to help boost 
entrepreneurship,  which is the main occupation of the Senegalese population, while promot ing economic, financial and 
social inclusion as well as territorial equity . Figure 8: Overview of the timing of the proposed investment18 
 
Component 1: Technical Assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders (EUR  3.7 mln19) 
Outputs  Activities  
Output 1.1 -  Capacity building of 
rural electrification stakeholders  Activity 1.1.1 -  Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and GCF requirements  
Activity 1.1.2 -  Seminars and trips and workshops (technology watch, public consultations, 
conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.)  
Output 1.2 -  Gender  action plan 
implementation  Activity 1.2.1 -  gender -relevant community -organizations mapping & tutoring  
Activity 1.2.2 -  gender -stakeholders training ( PMU  – local operators  – community organizations )  
Activity 1.2.3 -  gender -oriented communication campaign  
Output 1.3 -  Environmental & social 
downstream activities  Activity 1.3.1 -  E&S measures implementation and monitoring  
Activity 1.3.2 -  Establishment of a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other 
electronics)  
 
This component targets capacity building of the project’s key stakeholders (ASER -hosted Project Management Unit , Ministry of 
Energy, local operators , rural beneficiaries incl. community -based organizations ), to favour the implementation of a sustainable 
framework of the delivered services and benefits of the solar mini -grids, starting with the end- user beneficiaries’ climate information, 
solar power benefits awareness and appropriation, the technical and administrative competencies of the PMU , gearing gender and 
youth institutionalization, and the environmental expertise and knowledge management required upstream and downstream:  
To the benefit of the Project Management Unit  and the Ministry of Energy  
- Trainings  on procurement procedures , project management  and GCF requirements  
- Seminars and trips and workshops (technology watch, public consultations, conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.)  
 
To the benefit of the targeted rural beneficiaries (prioritizing women and young involvement) 
- Gender action plan implementing activities ( gender -oriented training, awareness raising, and community -organizations 
tutoring ) in partnership with DER20, leveraging and rolling -out its framework in the remote villages of the GCF intervention


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 
 
 in order to (i) Organize awareness, financial education and entrepreneurship events for vulnerable youth and high school 
students, and identify potential entrepreneur s, (ii) Accompany and coach young people in the development of their idea and 
the creation of their business plan, and (iii) Providing tailor -made technical support to local incubators and spaces dedicated 
to their employability  
 
To the benefit of local concessionnaires operating the targeted villages mini -grids  
- Monitoring of ESMP implementation and environmental and social support  
 
- Setting up a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics) , in order to manage the potential negative 
cumulative effect of the used batteries and other systems on the environment . The recycling unit is to be installed on 
governmental land, however its construction and operation will be procured from private sector and conceded for exploitation 
under the s upervision of the State (who will retain ownership of the assets ) based on ASER -DEEC convention. Local 
operators will remain responsible for the collection and transportation of the e- waste; the recycling operator’s responsibility 
starting at reception towards treatment  
 
Figure 9:  Technical Assistance arrangements di agram  
 
 
N.B. in order to prevent conflicts of interest, the Ministry of Finance will also be involved under delegation from the GoS Executing 
Entity for Component 1 that includes ASER and the Ministry of Energy as beneficiaries.  
 
Component 2: Procurement  and Installation of solar powered mini -grids  (EUR  192.2 mln) 
Outputs  Activities  
Output 2.1 -  Preparation of detailed 
Engineering Studies  Activity 2.1.1 -  Site selection, engineering studies & Specific environmental and social 
analysis for each site  
Output 2.2 -  Supply, installation and 
commissioning of equipment  Activity 2.2.1 -  Solar PV power plants construction and minigrid deployment  
Activity 2.2.2 -  Smart meters installation & miscellaneous aleas  
Output 2.3 - Modern public lighting  Activity 2.3 .1 - Deployments of solar street lighting  
Output 2. 4 - Control and supervision of work Activity 2. 4.1 -Control and supervision of work 
 
Financing the bulk of the technology investment to de- risk local operators ’ participation in funding solar energy production equipment, 
synchronization and control tools, low -voltage mini -grid networks and connections, civil engineering  (competitive Request for 
Proposal s,  which c ontrol and supervision of construction  will be assigned to independent experts ), allowing private operators to 
offer the best combination of tariff /service . Pending detailed Engineering studies, t he mini -grids will include solar PV plants ranging 
from approximately 15-45 kW peak (expected average of 3 2 kW) together with inverters and clean battery systems for energy 
storage, as well as local distribution lines and meters  tailored to villages categories by size, ranging from:


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 
 
 • Kit I: villages with populations between 100 and 200 inhabitants:  15 kWp 
• Kit II: villages with populations between 200 and 400 inhabitants: 2 3 kWp 
• Kit III: village with a population between 400 and 7 50 inhabitants: 30 kWp 
• Kit IV:  village with a population between 750 and 1500  inhabitants : 45 kWp  
 
From ASER’s experience in designing and implementing solar mini -grids projects in Senegal (more than 130 mini -grids already 
installed and 270 under implementation), the compartmentalization was carried out on the basis of an initial classification of vi llages 
done, considering their respective population and level of equipment in terms of productive and social basic infrastructures  (school, 
health, boreholes, etc.). On the basis of this village segmentation by population, a demand analysis questionnaire has been elaborated and a survey done after sampling of villages reflecting the main characteristics of each type of village.  
After the survey, a standard energetic profile has been elaborated for each type or category of village. From these energetic  profiles, 
different standardized types of PV kits have been selected for the project at this feasibility level  (see Annex 2 Feasib ility Study for 
details tools utilized and sample modelling results) . 
 At this stage, the sites are selected on the basis of their access rate of the non- electrified areas. Department having an electrification 
rate below 10, 20% are priority areas. In addi tion, high priority is given to remote areas located far from the existing MV grids (more 
than 5 to 7km) with small population (less than 700 inhabitants)  for the GCF intervention.  
 The mini -grid connections will cater for Tier 3 to Tier 5 service levels. A consumer may upgrade from a lower service level to a higher 
service level, and vice -versa . 
 
Service level  Power demand  (watts)  Daily capacity (kW -hrs) 
Tier 3  >200 > 1 kWh/day  
Tier 4  >800  > 3.4 kWh/day  
Tier 5  > 2kW  > 8.2 kWh/day  
 
Local concessionnaires will not be involved in the mini -grids construction (procured to EPC by ASER) but in the meters initialization 
& official connection activation once low -voltage and indoor installations of the households and productive users have been realized. 
Therefore, the GoS  represented by ASER (i.e. the EE) will remain responsible for implementation of this Activity, rather than 
concessionaires, and it will engage concessionaires as service provider to assist with the implementation of this Activit y. 
- Deployment of modern public lighting  from solar energy will also be  realize d in the project’s rural areas and help provide 
suburban security and economic growth in the villages . 
The Germany -financed deployments of solar street lighting will consist of the procurement and installation of energy -efficient 
(LED) public lighting  equipments.  
Figure  10:  Solar mini -grids cons truction and operat ion structure


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 
 
  
21 Emission reductions achieved under Component 2 will not be used to subsidize the coupons of the World Bank JAPPALE 
programme, because distinctly monitored and not to be issued under the CDM.  
22 As per World Bank 2018-11 minutes from the last steering committee of the JAPPALE vouchers project, and World Bank 
2019-01 pilot implementation report  Component 3: Incentives for Social & Productive Use of Electricity  (EUR  2.3 mln)  
Outputs  Activities  
Output 3.1 -  Gender & social c onnection s  Activity 3.1.1 – Connection of eligible social services, women& youth -
entrepreneurs to the PV mini -grids  
Output 3. 2 – Micro -financed productive equipment credits 
guarantees  Activity 3.2.1 -  Implementation of mechani sm to facilitate access to productive 
equipment financing through microfinance  
 
Social services and productive equipment will respectively lead to the develop ment of  sustainable livelihoods and enhance the 
capacity of villages to pay for solar power supply, strengthening the mini- grids business model vi ability while maximizing social and  
gender inclusivity . This bottom- up component aims at supporting productive use & services access to off -grid solar power and 
related revenue- generating production/transformation equipment  through a two- level financial assistance:  
- Gender & Social connections  (result -based payment) for eligible social services  and women & youth- led enterprises  
‘PREM ’ (Multi- Sectoral Energetic Projects ), lifting the upfront connection costs  related to the indoor installation of community 
services (such as health clinics & schools)  and gender -focus  productive users  (predominantly  agriculture -related)  , to 
stimulate anchor load demand and ground the mini -grids sustainable operation . 
Besides general eligibility criteria (geographic location within a village where electricity is available from the concessionaire, 
first electrificatio n of the women or youth entrepreneur  with productive use intention or community service need justification 
and compliance with the technical conditions required by the concessionaire), the identification  of beneficiaries of the 
coupons distribution will be empowered to the gender -mainstreaming communities in selected villages once informed about 
the rules and objectives, to build ownership and commitment among beneficiaries. A Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU) 
will govern between ASER and the concessionaires, containing the legally -binding rules of the project  towards Subsidy 
Payment Request s, the eligibility of beneficiaries and a set of rights of the coupon beneficiaries.  ASER will pre -approve the 
concess ionaries coupon distribution plans on a periodic basis . 
 
When making use of the coupon, the beneficiary must: remit the coupon to the concessionaire, pay the remaining value and 
sign the payment receipt. Concessionaires will only be able to confirm the coupon in the coupon software after initializing  
the electrical connection. This confirmation will allow ASER to be informed on the beneficiary’s connection, and honor the 
corresponding Subsidy Payment Request  (SPR)  from concessionnaires . After payment to the concessionaires, ASER will 
issue a Subsidy Payment Confirmation, in order to link payment to specific SPRs, which will allow the traceability of payments, and to keep the financial history for each coupon.  
 
This mechanism inspires from the original JAPPALE coupon program
, a World Bank carbon- finance voucher system to 
reduce electricity connection costs for rural households, thus making connection costs accessible to rural populations in 
order to increase access to electricity and significantly increase the rate of dealer penetration into the electrification market21. 
For productive users, the vouchers nominal value will be set at 100,000 CFA (150 EUR) and prioritize youth & women-
involving activities , giving right to a reduction on connection fees  which can be redeemed by the operator upon verified 
completion of connections , aiming at the following objectives:  
 Eliminate the access barrier constituted by connection costs (installations, connection or first top- up costs),  
 Guarantee the safety of installations and the application of energy efficiency measures,  
 Increase the service rate in electrified villages,  
 Contribute to achieving the overall goal of universal access  
A JAPPALE scheme concept evaluation and adaptation in relation to tariff harmonization as well as best practices for scaling 
up throughout the territory have been released in 2019, including a valuable set of recommendations about the software, 
the training material, villages selection, activation pay ments, e- codes confirmation and communication22. Likewise, ASER 
will provide coupons to concessionaires, who will distribute coupons in villages or at their agency, for eligible clients who 
opt to go directly to the agency.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 
 
  
23 Principles and operational guidelines to be further developed during Year 1  
24 2019. GET.Invest  market insights —  Senegal: renewable energy applications in agricultural value- chains  
25 MIX. Link: https://www.themix.org/ — accessed January 2019 Figure 11: Scheme of the coupon mechanism  
 
- Productive equipment acquisition credit access facility; Guarantee issued to cover the loans extended by a micro-
finance institution for the purchase of resilient productive use equipment by rural entrepreneurs and support for the 
development of micro businesses23 across agriculture, indus try and commerce (equipment for farmers such as water pumps 
and processing machines  like grinding mills , appliances for trades -people such as sewing machines and carpentry tools , 
and for retail outlets such as refrigerators and blenders.  
 
Examples show tha t there is increased interest in financing renewable energy applications for productive use in Senegal. 
Nevertheless, the lack of access to medium and long -term agriculture financing and credit, in particular for smallholders 
facing land tenure issues, remains a critical barrier and will need further attention if the country is to successfully tap into 
these markets24. 
Table 6: Top six Micro -Finance Institutions ( MFIs ) in Senegal by outstanding loan amount25 
MFI Total loan portfolio  (USD million)  Number of  Borrowers  Total deposits  (USD million)  
CMS  202.5  nc 242.9  
ACEP Senegal  73.9 49,000  19.4 
MicroCred – SEN 101.11  48,000  48.44  
PAMECAS  60.98  89,000  60.69  
U-IMCEC  17.77  21,000  12.52  
MECAP  11.9 Nc 7.53 
 
MFI selection will remain at the discretion of the Government of Senegal (Ministry of Economy and Finance) and be subject to 
eligibility  criteri a (includ ing geographical proximity with rural target beneficiaries, energy -related products management abilities and 
financial capacity  criteria) & BOAD due diligence that will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists  – on 
top of obligat ions in the AMA between GCF and BOAD ;  the Bank will conduct also administrative investigations into corruption, 
fraud, coercion, coll usions and inconvenient practices, and make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal 
investigat ions.  Upon BOAD’s experience, this financial guarantee will be a loan proceed commit ted for covering part of the risk taken 
by the microfinance ins titutions (maximum 40% of receivables deemed irrecoverable).   The resources will be managed by a Partner  
Financial Institution to be competitively selected by the Government  of Senegal  among national  institutions like Banque Agricole,


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 
 
 Crédit Mutuel, COFINA, FONGIP , following BOAD due -diligence and g eneral minimum cr iteria includ ing reputational/recognition, 
governance and regulation, systems and experience.  
Figure 12: Microfinance guarantees structure di agram  
 
Business Model  
The GCF sovereign loan to the Government of Senegal intends to reduce local operators’ risks in operating and maintaining solar 
mini- grids in the smallest, most remote vulnerable villages to be electrified in Senegal. Based on the limited upfront concession f ee 
of 5% of investments levied from the local operators and the applicable compensation from harmonized tariffs, private sector 
profitability can be expected above 12 %, when full equity investment from operators in the same context would return a negative 
IRR (unless governmental tariff compensations payable to operators are increased fivefold to reach a comparable return, given the 
communities limited ability to pay which translated in tariff harmonization).  Project arrangements, procurement and ownership remain 
under the GoS, while construction is contracted to private suppliers and local operations & maintenance to historical 
concessionnaires.  
The project  will create an enabling environment for the private sector to step in and to provide the necessary co- finance and 
expertise,  deliver ing the following outputs by 2025: 
• strengthened institutional capacities for mobilizing private sector towards Universal Access completion, enhancing rural 
stakeholders’ awareness and gender -driven participation  
• 38,917 households electrified by rural  mini-grids, focus ing on solar solutions with battery storage  
• financi ally-incentivized  implementation of 3,739  ‘Projets Énergétiques Multi -sectoriels’ , for the solar powering of productive 
uses (mostly irrigation,  refrigeration and agro- processing) and community services (such as schools, clinics) in villages with 
more than 250 inhabitants.  
 
In doing so, the project  will reach up to over 344,000  rural inhabitants , tabling on a progressive growth in demand, diversified 
between households improving their living standards, emerging productive economic uses and reinforced community services. 
Based on its 25 years projected supply, t he project  is esti mated to contribute to the mitigation of at least 45,098 tonnes  of CO 2e 
equivalent per year, i.e. 1.13 M. tCO 2 to be avoided over its technical lifetime.  
 
Besides its mitigation impact and environmental co- benefits  includ ing (i) reduction of air pollution due to fossil fuel consumption 
and improvement of air quality thanks to promotion of renewable energies  and (ii) reduction of pollution by waste oils at thermal 
power plants , the project’s adaptation co-benefits  will feature:  
• Greater resilience t o climate- stresses through reduced vulnerability to water scarcity , diseases and farming yields  
• Illuminated studying and access to ICTs  
• Socially -equitable avenues for income generation  
Indeed, t he introduction of modern energy and related productive incentives in the rural communities  will actually  lead to specific  
socio -economic and gender -sensitive development effects  including:  
- better sanitation and social services and increased possibility of activities during evening hours  
- long-term effects through schooling  and information, as well as changed migratory patterns  
- increased availability of safe drinking water , refrigeration and mechanization  for food production and sale  
- improved access to  climate / weather / best practises information through radio, television, and the Internet  
- better health of especially women and girls following improved indoor lighting and decreased air pollution as well as s afer 
streets  and reduced distances to cover in search of energy services and/or resources  
- local economy stimulation, employment generation and value -added revenue increases  lifting rural areas out of poverty   
- fossil fuel imports savings, improving households power purchase and in turn , the country’s energy security & fiscal balance


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 
 
 Figure 13: proposed alternative technologies by type of settlement (ASER)  
 
- At the peri -urban level , off-grid solutions are not suitable given the presence of networks MT and BT  
- past experiences using diesel have shown that the logistics of fuel can be very expensive and complex (with supply disruptions 
in more isolated regions)  
- Investments in SHS can be envisaged in very small villages and isolated (in the eastern parts of the country) for which an 
investment in the extension of the network or in a mini -network is not justified from an economic point of view.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
 
In its role as  representant of the Executing Entity  (Government  of Senegal ), ASER will ensure operational supervision of the project 
from procurement and construction of all mini-grids until end- beneficiar y installations. The project implementation unit  will be 
integrated at ASER general management level, with a Project Coordinator acting under the supervision of a  Steering Committee 
(Comité de Pilotage – CP). It will rely on the following structures to assume its coordination functions : 
• the Technical Monitoring Committee (CTS) which will support the coordination and monitoring of the project work  
implementation;  
• the operational structures (management units) of ASER General Management which will be responsible for the 
implementation of the project .


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 
 
 Figure 14: ASER management organogram  
 
 
ASER Project Management Unit will be based within ASER premises and comprise:  
    - a Project Coordinator  
    - an expert Engineer in Renewable Energies (solar)  
    - a Financial Analyst  
    - an UN Procurement Specialist  
    - a person in charge of Monitoring and Evaluation,  
    - an Environmental and Social Safety officer  
 
The project’s  legal, contractual, institutional and financial arrangements will include the following stakeholders:  
• NDA  (National Designated Entity ): The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development acts as the Senegalese NDA 
and is supportive of the ASER program and the proposed GCF project . It was introduced to the NDA during the Senegalese 
National Committee on Climate Change , as early as September 2017. The NDA has provided  a letter of no objection upon 
the Funding Proposal preparation stage.  
• AE (Accredited Entity) : BOAD will act as the AE , trustee and co- financier of the ASER GCF project . BOAD already has an 
ongoing financing relationship with the Senegalese government, and made  available a total sum of CFA 12.22 billion (USD 
22.00 million) through subordinate, longer -term loan,  no yet disbursed and  conditional upon the provision of concessional 
co-finance by a partner financier, as part of the total budget for the 1,000 villages . It will enter into a Trust Agreement with 
GCF for the entire amounts to be loaned and granted to the GoS.  
• CRSE  (Regulatory Commission of the Electricity Sector ): The Commission is mandated to protect consumers against 
excessive electricity tariffs, ensure access and quality of service, enhance competition among IPPs and supervise 
SENELEC’s performance. In the project , the CRSE will be responsible for monitor ing compliance of operators against set 
tariffs and terms of reference as well as grievances once the assets are commissioned.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 
 
 Figure 15: Institutional arrangements (GCF scope highlighted in yellow)  
 
Regulatory framework for the development of mini solar grids  
 Law 98- 29 relating to the Electricity Sector  
o Guarantee the country's electricity supply at the lowest cost  
o Broaden people's access to electricity, especially in rural areas  
o Attract the significant private investments required for the development of the sector  
 Law 2010- 21 on renewable energies  
o Diversify sources of production by using renewable energies.  
o Promote the dissemination of equipment related to renewable energy technologies.  
 Decree 98- 334, setting the terms for issuing and w ithdrawing licenc es or concessions for the production, distribution and sale 
of electrical energy  
 Decree 98- 335 relating to the principles and procedures for determining and revising tariff conditions.  
 LPDSE/2019 -2023 (Policy Letter for the Development of the Electricity Sector), including mini-grids related advocacies:  
o Implementation of the electricity tariff harmonization at national level  
o Electrification of community services and productive uses by integrating the gender approach for sustainable 
improvement of rural people's living conditions  
o Support for renewable energy development by setting up incentives for facilitation of the acquisition of renewable energy 
equipment  
o Establishment of a promotion and quality control system of renewable energy equipment  
 
Project implementation map  
The country has been divided into 10 geographic concessions, whereby each concession groups a number of localities for which 
an international bidding process was enacted. An international bidding process has been completed in 6 out of the 10 concessions,


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 
 
  
26 These include ERA - African Rural Energy, COMASEL - Maroc -Sénégal Electricity Company, ENCO - Energy Servi ce 
Company, and SCL - Energy Solutions  
27 The national tariff of FCFA 97 per kWh is based on a SENELEC 2017- 2030 production plan that defines the average cost 
of electricity generation at FCFA 62 per kWh; a cost of transmission estimated at 20 FCFA per kWh;  and the cost of 
distribution of 15 FCFA per kWh; and the remainder linked to electricity loss.   identifying the most competitive private sector concessionaires26 that are tasked to build, operate and maintain assets for a fixed 
period, while  the remaining 4  have been attributed to SENELEC public scope;  the first phase of implementation (‘Programme 
National d’Urgence d’Électrification Rurale’ covering the period 2015 –  2018) being under finali sation.  
 
Figure 16: map of Senegal rural electrification concessions  (left) and unelectrified villages (right, SE MIS) as of 2019  
  
Lack of adequate (debt) finance has forced private sector concessionaires i n the initial ‘pilot concessions’  to charge excessive 
electricity tariffs to rural customers to allow investors meet their financial return requirements.  While the national electricity tariff has  
been set at  harmonized levels of  FCFA 90-97 (EUR  0.14-0.15) per kWh27 for low to medium power domestic subscribers , 
concessionaires currently charge as high as FCFA 250 (EUR 0. 38) per kWh.  The gap  is compensated by the Government in a 
harmonization effort aiming at removing the disparity in electricity tariffs –  representing a burden of 11 billion FCFA (USD 19 million) 
per year , which the GCF intervention will help phasing out . When factoring high grid- connection costs (and internal ho use wiring), 
only the most affluent rural households could afford to sign up for such services, leaving the vast majority disconnected.  
ASER, the Government’s delegated contracting authority for the development of rural electrification in Senegal, has set up a new 
organi sation to meet current challenges. To guarantee a successful implementation of this program, ASER has developed a 
Strategic Development Plan (PSD) which defines the main axes around which its intervention will be articulated during the per iod 
2019- 2023. It has also formulated an operational plan for implementing the ‘Complementary Program for Universal Access’ enabling 
Senegal to reach its objective of universal access by  2025.  
The Accredited Entity  
The West African Development Bank (BOAD) will act as the Accredited Entity , Trust ee (the FAA between GCF and BOAD will be in 
the form of a trust arrangement ) and co- financier of the ASER project . BOAD , in its role as AE, will be responsible for the overall 
management of this project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and 
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; 
(iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project cl osure 
and evaluation.   
 
BOAD has been active in Senegal since its inception and has cooperated with both the Senegalese Ministry of  Finance and the 
ASER program for a long time. As of December 2019 , BOAD has a total of FCFA  128.8 billion in public sector loans in Senegal, 
supporting 191 projects and initiatives. BOAD is also closely engaged  in the Senegalese energy market, managing an aggregate 
amount of FCFA 239. 9 billion  in loans to the sector, equivalent to 23.3% of all outstanding loans to the Senegalese government.  
 
BOAD recognises  the potential of the ASER program to scale- up and cont ribute to the B ank’s ambition to promote rural electrification 
and development in its target region, hereby both tackling climate change mitigation and strengthening the resilience of the most 
vulnerable communities. In 2014, BOAD provided a medium -term (2 year) loan valued at FCFA 5 billion (USD 9.06 million) to the


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 
 
 Senegalese government, which was used to support the initial development phase of the ASE R program. In 2015, a second longer -
term loan valued at FCFA 10 billion (USD 18.12 million) was issued to the government, to be serviced by the pro ject.  
 
BOAD promotes the balanced development of its member countries and fosters economic integration withi n West Africa by financing 
priority development projects. BOAD has identified the off -grid renewable energy generation component of the ASER program as a 
highly relevant and viable investment opportunity given its transformational mitigation impacts. BOAD’ s contribution of FCFA 10  
billion ( EUR  15 million) to this project  is conditional upon the provision of concessional co- finance by a partner financier. This will 
enable BOAD to offer debt finance with more attractive terms to the targeted concessionaires by a) lowering the cost of capit al by 
2.4%; and b) softening the repayment terms by extending the loan tenors and introducing longer grace periods – two barr iers 
currently hampering scaled -up investments by  the private sector in the domestic energy market.   
 
Figure 17 : Visualisation of the financing plan of the project


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 
 
 Figure 18 : Visualisation of the flow of funds of the project  
 
Eligibility criteria  
EPCs  Operators  MFIs  
Detailed technical selection criter ia to be 
developed as part of the Technical  
Assistance in component 1   existing conce ssionnaires 
Licensed by the Ministry of 
Energy  
 ability to  invest 5% of the 
total cost per minigrid   approv ed by the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance  
 regulated and licensed for the duration of 
the guarantee  
 number of years of experience and 
operation in the target rural areas & products ,  
 financial situation over the last three (03) years through  
 pre-agreed effective lending rate cap to be 
applied to end -users  
Beneficiaries under Activity 3.1.1  and Output 1.2  Partner Financial Institution  
 geographic location within a village 
where electricity is available from the 
concessionaire,  
 first electrification of  woman -led or youth-
led enterprise  with productive use 
intention,  or social service need    
 compliance with the technical conditions 
required by the concessionaire   the identification of 
beneficiaries of the coupons distribution will be 
empowered to the gender -
mainstreaming communities in selected villages once 
informed about the rules and 
objectives, to build  Rating of BB or higher or industry 
recognition as a key player in the 
microfinance sector  
 Reputable and sound ownership, 
management, and governance standards  
 Status as a duly registered, regulated, 
and licensed entity in Senegal


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 
 
  
28 GESTO 2018 SE4ALL Rural Electrification Program for Senegal | Action Plan & Investment Prospectus  
  priority to women and you th (below 40 
years old)  ownership and commitment 
among beneficiaries   Acceptable underwriting systems and 
servicing platforms in place  
 3 years of experience in lending to MFIs  
 
Applicable tariff structure  
Senegal has completed a tariff harmonization proc ess since 2019 that brings all electricity tariffs in the country in line with those 
charged by the national utility SENELEC , on the basis of the Prepaid WOYOFAL category described below.  
 
Tariff Option  1st tranch e 2nd tranch e 3rd tranch e 
UD-PP From 0 to 150 kWh  151 - 250 kWh  > 250 kWh  
UD-MP From  0 to 50 kWh  51 - 300 kWh  > 300 kWh  
UP-PP From  0 to 50 kWh  51 - 500 kWh  > 500 kWh  
UP-MP from 0 to 100 kWh  101 - 500 kWh  > 500 kWh  
 
Tariff CATEGORIES  Electricity Price in  FCFA/kWh  Fixed monthly 
prime  FCFA/kW  1st Tranch e 2nd Tranch e 3rd Tranch e 
 Domesti c usage  (UD) 
 Domesti c Small Capacity  (DPP)  90.47 101.64 112.65   
 Domesti c Medium  Puissance (DMP)  96.02 102.44 112.02   
Profession al Usage  (UP)  
 Profession al  Small Capacity (PPP)  128.85 135.68 147.68   
 Profession al  Medium Capacity (PMP)  129.81 136.53 149.24   
Prepaid (WOYOFAL)        
 Domesti c Small Capacity (DPP)  90.47 101.64 101.64   
 Domesti c Medium  Capacity (DMP)  96.02 102.44 102.44   
 Profession al Small Capacity  (PPP)  128.85 135.68 135.68   
 Profession al Medium Capacity  (PMP)  129.81 136.53 136.53   
  
Street Light  118.16 3,007.21 
Source  : CRSE decision on SENELEC new applicable tariff  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Senegal is a regional leader for West Africa, with a reputation of economic and political stability and a long track record of peaceful 
democratic elections. The country is expected to maintain its strong rate of economic growth, having registered over 6%  per annum 
for the last four years.  However,  it is facing delays and difficulties in realizing its universal access milestones and associated NDC 
contributions for the rural electrification sub- sector, especially i n the most remote and smallest vulnerable villages where grid 
extension is not feasible.  
It is noted that in rural areas,  due to high investments costs,  concessionaires charge high electricity tariffs. The differentiated tariffs 
between SENELEC (the national utility company) and concessions have generated a lot of resistance to electrification in rural areas. To enable the government to reach universal (and equitable) energy access by 2025, an adapted financing approach that enables  
access to affordab le finance and creates investor confidence needs to be adopted.  
 
According to the study funded by the European Union to help Senegal define the appropriate procedure for the harmoni sation of 
tariffs  (aligning the cost of electricity for rural consumers to grid -connected terms) , a compensation mechanism  towards  the 
concessionaires ’ initial tariff levels  as a consequence of the reduction in retailed tariffs amounts needs an effort of 11 billion FCFA 
(USD 19 millio n) per year. The analysis showed that 100% solar systems  – if funded by grants or other sources of funding –  could 
be profitable, since the vast majority of costs are related to the investment.
28 
 The requested GCF contribution has a dual aim:


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
B 
B 
B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 
 
  
 
 
29 Rural Electrification lenders round table expected in April  2020 
30 UNFCCC CDM energy sector  expected return on equity  threshold in Senegal 
(https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am -tool-27-v10.0.pdf ) • GCF’s concessional  contribution is required to ensure that , in combination with BOAD’s loan  and other nationally mobilized  
resources , the average cost of capital of outstanding debt does not exceed 4%.  Without GCF financing, the Senegalese 
government will have to borrow more from international financial institutions29 at unfavourable terms and delays. Hence the 
need for external support becomes more urgent if climate change mitigation  is to be achieved within the ambitioned 
timeframe.   
 
With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average cost of capital is reduced by 2. 4% (to a level of 3. 9%, instead of 
6.3% without the GCF)  thus lightening its debt obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years 
further optimizes its debt servicing schedule to viable instalments.  
 
• Furthermore, by providing a mix  of long- term concessional debt and grant to ASER, BOAD and the GCF wi ll make the 
investment proposition significantly more attractive for  private sector investors, who are required to contribute 5% of the 
total investment cost in equity. This lowered contribution level  is necessary to an acceptable rate of return to equity investors 
above 12.6 %30 and strengthen the debt service coverage ratios of new investments , in the most remote and vulnerable 
villages that would otherwise not be financially viable on the private sector’s own funding.  
 
Based on the limited upfront concession fee levied from the local operators and the applicable compensation from harmonized 
tariffs, private sector profitability can be expected at 1 2.6%, when full equity investment from operators in the same context would 
return a negative IRR (unless governmental tariff compensations payable to operators are increased fivefold to reach a comparable 
return, given the communities limited ability to pay which translated in tariff harmonization).  
 
The GCF’s grant contribution will fur ther de- risk the investment by reinforcing capacities and stimulating productive anchor demand  
through components 1 and 3.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
Beyond the GCF intervention, the project benefits will be sustained throughout the Universal Access Completion Program as follows:  
• The estimated cost reduction from the diversification from imported fossil fuels through the introduction of renewable power 
generation will reduce the cost of grid- based rural electrification and will free public resources that will be redirected to rural 
electrification. In the medium- term, this will result in improved public debt conditions and lower the cost at which Senegalese 
entities (both public and private) will be able to secure debt. Lowered cost of capital will, in turn, strengthen the case for 
investments in the domestic renewable energy sector, mobilising  private sector capital.  
• The Technical Assistance  component will contribute to ensure that  a stable regulatory framework is created to oversee the 
national electricity tariff regulation.  ASER being a state body , the loan will be made to the Government  of Senegal  which 
will be the Executing Entity , represented by  ASER as the delegated project owner ; this arrangement will avoid legal 
problems. Long- term certainty concerning the tariff policy will further strengthen investor confidence in the domestic energy 
sector, creating an investment environment where by 2025 new investments in the decentrali sed power generation projects 
can be supported on a purely commercial basis.  
 
Project sustainability and exit provisions will also be embedded in contractual arrangements  (cf. draft  ministerial order relating to the 
conditions and modalities of realization and operation of off -network rural electrification projects in Senegal ), entailing:  
- operating titles with a duration of 2 5 years  
- provision for the renewal of equipment included in the rate base provided that these provisions are used to fund an escrow 
account  
- case of extension of the network of SENELEC  or of a concessionaire in the perimeter of an  off-grid electrification  project 
before the end of the current operating permit on said perimeter


---
*Page 34*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 29 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
75.445176  million euro (€)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  73.623231  40 years  10 years  0 % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  -    
(iii) Equity  -    
(iv) Guarantees  -    
(v) Reimbursable grants  -    
(vi) Grants  1.821945     
(vii) Result s-base d payments  -    
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
123.247006 million euro (€)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
BOAD  Senior Loans  15.244902  million 
euro (€)   10 years  
3 years  7.6 %31 senior  
Senegalese Government  Grant  5.606169  million 
euro (€)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
KfW Senior Loans  102.395935  million 
euro (€)   10 years  
0.5 years  6.14  % senior  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
198.692182  million euro (€)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)  With regards to the tenor between the GCF and BOAD , it should be noted that BOAD 
funding has already been approved by its board of directors for the project , mobiliz ing 
resources from States and on the international financial market according to 
characteristics which are reflected in the cost of the resource. Each year, the 
characteristics of the resources are fixed by the senior authorities of the Bank 
accordingly. As the cost of BOAD resources  is higher , the request for  GCF 
concessional  resources is meant at  reduc ing the project's WACC for the Senegalese 
State which is the borrower , and lighten its debt servicing in smaller instalments to 
improve viability . 
Private sect or parallel equity financing will amount to EUR 9. 6 mln, which will be 
channeled for the tariff harmonisation funding (result -based compensation), beside  
their operational expenditures and batteries replacement cost to be provisioned 
yearly in escrow account .  
Tax exemptions will be granted to rural electrification equipment supply by framework 
convention between ASER and the Ministry of Finance.  
C.2. Financing  by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million euro 
(€) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million euro 
(€) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million euro 
(€) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
 
31 Fixed  interest rate, on top of which a commitment fee (0,5%) and a service fee (1%) are due.


---
*Page 35*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 
   
 1. Technical 
assistance to 
the solar rural 
electrification 
stakeholders  1.1 Capacity 
building of rural electrification 
stakeholder  0.94 0.23  Grants  0.24 
0.47 Loan  
Grant  BOAD  
GoS  
1.2 Gender 
action plan 
implementatio
n 1.23  0.61 Grants  0.61 Grant  GoS  
1.3 
Environmental & social downstream 
activities  1.57 0.5 Grants  1.07 Grant  GoS 
2. Procurement 
and Installation 
of solar 
powered mini -
grids  2.1 
Preparation of 
detailed 
Engineering 
studies  3.49  0.58  Loan  0.24 
 
2.660  Grant  
Loan  GoS 
 KfW  
2.2 Supply, 
installation 
and 
commissionin
g of 
equipment  177.16   70.81  Loan  2.91 
 
89.36  
 
14.09  Grant  
Loan  
 
Loan  GoS 
 
KfW 
 
BOAD  
2.3 Modern 
public lighting  6.10    6.10  Loan  KfW 
2.4 Control 
and 
supervision of 
work  5.48 0.29  Loan  4.27 
 
0.91 Loan  
 Loan  KfW 
 
BOAD  
3. Incentives 
for Social &  
Productive Use of Electricity
 3.1 Gender & 
social 
connections  0.39  0.39  Grants  -   
3.2 
Microfinanced 
productive equipment credits  
guarantees   1.94  1.94  Loan  -   
Project Management 
Cost - 
0.39 0.09 Grants  0.30 Grant  GoS 
Indicative total cost  (EUR)  198,692,182  75,445,176  123,247,006  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer?  Yes ☐      No ☒ 
GCF -funded Technical Assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders will amount to EUR 3.7 mln, including 
among others, Gender action plan implementing activities, Monitoring of ESMP implementation and environmental 
and social support, Subsidy for setting up a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics) and 
Training on procurement procedures and GCF requirements


---
*Page 36*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 
   
  
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potenti al (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
In terms of mitigation , the project will contribute to climate action in the g enerati on of  emission reductions of 1. 13 M. 
tonnes  of CO 2 equivalent by 204 5. The estimated emission reduction potential arises from the implementation of  
renewable energy -based  rural electrification replacing  the continuous , alternative use of fossil fuel -based solutions.  
ASER rural electrification initiatives  are registered under a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Programme  of 
Activities  (PoA) , including technological distinctions32 between Project Activities of Mini- Grids , Grid Extension , Solar 
Home Systems  and (upcoming) Portable Solar Lamps . 
Approved Methodology  applied is AMS- III.BL. - Integrated methodology for electrification of communities33. 
 
Figure 19: Flow diagram for baseline and project scenario showing emissions sources  
 
 
Figure 20: UNFCCC CDM simplified emission reductions determination approach  
 
 
Summary calculations:  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵=Σ(𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝑥𝑥,𝐵𝐵×𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 2,𝐸𝐸) 
Where :  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸,𝐵𝐵  =  Baseline emission from consumers Types in year y (tCO 2)  
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝑥𝑥,𝐵𝐵  =  Annual electricity consumption of consumer Types in year y (MWh)  
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 2,𝐸𝐸   • If EC T,x,y is equal to or less than 0.055 MWh, then a default value of 6.8 (tCO 2/MWh);  
• If EC T1,x,y is less than or equal to 0.250 MWh but greater than 0.055 MWh, then:  
o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh, a default value of 6.8 (tCO 2/MWh);  
o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh, a default value of 1.3 (tCO 2/MWh);  
• If EC T1,x,y is greater than 0.250 MWh but less than or equal to 0.500 MWh, then:  
o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh a default value of 6.8 (tCO 2/MWh);  
 
32 UNFCCC (2018) Senegal Rural Electrification Program. CDM programme documentation is available here  
33 N.B. Under this CDM methodology’s eligibility requirements, at least 75% (by number) of the project consumers shall be 
households  
Power consumed 
per facility 
(kWh/year)User type:
Households55 kWh 
Lighting Mixed uses Energy service
BaselineKerosene 
pressure lampMicro -generation
Default Emission 
factor6.8 (tCO2/MWh) 1.3 tCO2e/MWh250 kWh 
1.0 tCO2e/MWhMixed uses


---
*Page 37*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 
   
 o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh and less than 0.25 MWh/y a default value of 1.3 
(tCO 2/MWh); and  
o For the portion greater than 0.250 MWh a default value of 1.0 (tCO 2/MWh);  
• If EC T1M,j,y  is greater than 0.500 MWh then a default value of 1.0 (tCO 2/MWh) for the entire 
portion (i.e. default values of 1.3 (tCO 2/MWh) or 6.8 (tCO 2/MWh) are not eligible for any of 
the portions)  
  1 2 3 4 5 ->25 
 year 2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  years  
Households connections  #  11 675  23 350  38 917  38 917  38 917  38 917  
PREM completion  #  374 1 122 2 617 3 739  3 739  3 739  
Electricity demand growth  %/y 3.2 percent per annum  
Baseline emissions  tCO 2e/y 7 782  19 932  33 220  34 272  35 357  1 127 447  
Project emissions  tCO 2e/y - - - - -  
Emissions reductions  tCO 2e/y 7 782  19 932  33 220  34 272  35 357  1 127 447  
 
Table 7: Underlying mini -grids beneficiaries’ specific consumption  breakdown  
User type  Specific consumption (kWh/day)  Emission factor ( kgCO 2/kWh)  
School  2,5               1,0  
Mill 15               1,0  
Dispensary  7,68               1,0  
Health center  15,28                1,0  
Health shop  4               1,0  
Boutique  8               1,0  
Sewing maching  0,5               1,0  
Borehole pump  33               1,0  
Public lighting  0,3               1,0  
Religious center  1,5               1,0  
Socio -educational house  1,5               1,0  
Household  1,2             2,67  
 
In terms of adaptation  co-benefits34, the programme  will contribute to fostering resilience and sustainable 
development in the following ways:  
• Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, with a particular focus on women and children as the key 
beneficiaries , with  equalized gender roles  and enhanced access to education and information (a dedicated EUR 
1.2 million gender equality promotion program will target this development ). 
• Diversifying energy generation portfolio in relation to scattered geography  (decreased vulnerability to disasters), 
fuel use needs  (no fuel supply at risk of extreme weather events), cooling/refrigeration needs and water use needs 
(removed dependence on water challenges), supporting a more climate- resilient power system  
• Climate- resilient productive assets deployment thanks to the revolving guarantees of up to 40% of nominal loans 
of 3-y average duration (the GCF funding being worth EUR 20 mln total borrowings), i mproving reliability of water 
and food chains, as well as services in health, education and social institutions, through out 3,739 ‘Projets 
Energétiques Multi -sectoriels’ in cluding farmers, entrepreneurs,  schools and clinics lacking electri city 
• Providing employment opportunities and supporting economic growth in rural areas. Affordable renewable 
electricity will further strengthen the economic resilience of rural households as it will improve community income 
levels  and reduce migration patterns . 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
The project  is designed to produce a paradigm shift by supporting the transition away from a traditional energy 
pathway that would otherwise continue to be dependent on imported fossil fuels35 especially in the most remote and 
smallest vulnerable villages where grid extension is not feasibl e, to a progressive, low -carbon and sustainable 
 
34 see CCKN and IISD (2014) case study on adaptation benefits from rural solar electrification projects in Senegal  
35 Senegal i mported 655 ktoe of oil in 2015 and used 305 ktoe of it to generate electricity, according to the African Energy 
Commission


---
*Page 38*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 
   
 pathway that prioritises  decentralized energy generation and gender involvement, focus ing both on electricity for 
economic development ( value- added productive use) and for improved access (community adaptativ e capacity ) of 
marginalised  rural areas . The project  intends to achieve the following paradigm shift  potentialities : 
 
• Crowd in private sector capital and expertise  
Given the lack of technology track -record and the financial sector’s limited know -how of clean energy 
investments (particularly when it comes to decentralised  power generation), private capital for the targeted 
investments is prohibitively expensive. The proposed financing package offers a solution to incentivise  
participation of the private sector by increasing investor confidence. Confidence is enhanced by making 
available concessional finance and grant funding that significantly lower the WACC  by over a third (2.4%), 
thereby strengthening debt -service coverage ratios and increasing overall profitability in the long run. The 
private sector, which is required to contribute 5% of the total investment in equity  (concession fee) , furthermore 
brings in much- needed technical expertise to operate these assets cost -effectively and sustainably. This 
collaboration will greatly improve the business environment in the energy sector, which,  according to the IMF, 
currently stands out as the weakest of all economic sectors in Senegal .36  
 
• Improve the investment framework and disseminate knowledge through knowledge- sharing and learning  
The TA component will focus on designing and implementing productive use- targeted de- risking tools that both 
satisfy the capacities of the final beneficiaries and reflect the needs of private sector operators , which is 
expected to generate a powerful trickle- down effect on the national economy. Combined with the gender 
equality promotion plan, the programme  is expected to have significant positive co-benefits  on the economic 
resilience of the most vulnerable communities in Senegal.  
 
• Moderni se the rural economy through increased solar -powered productive use  
The demonstration of transformative  potential of productive uses leveraging solar energy  will provide a 
compelling case for their adoption in agriculture  and other sectors of activity . The vast majority of Africa’s off -
grid households are in rural areas and largely engaged in agricultural activities –  for sustenance, for  income, 
or both. Most are smallholder farmers, often without access to electricity to power electrical appliances which 
would help them increase their yields , water access and sanitation.  Solar rural electrification is an effective way 
of improving community assets through chea per delivery of services (health, education, water  & agriculture) , 
increas ing quality of life and enhancing the adaptive capacity of communities . 
 
• Enhance Senegal readiness for leveraging further climate  finance opportunities  
Senegal already has a proven leadership in accessing climate finance for adaptation purposes – Centre de 
Suivi Ecologique ( CSE),  a public utility association based in Senegal , was the first national institution to access 
international climate finance ( as the nominated National Implementing Entity for the Adaptation Fund since 
2010) , based on a proposal from the National Committee for Adaptation to Climate Change (COMNACC) 
through the Designated Authority  (MEDD, which is also the GCF NDA for Senegal).  
The Technical Assistance embedded in this project will contribute to building expertise in public -private 
mitigation activities coordination and implementation in the rural electricity sector, backed by a robust MRV 
system, which will also help to further attract public and private climate finance, including from carbon markets . 
 
• Encourage regional replication by advancing fossil -fuel grids to clean energy and low -carbon development  
Senegal’s electricity access rate is 68% nationally and it stands only at 42% in rural areas. Senegal is a Least 
Developed Country and lacks the resources to finance the roll -out of the planned rural electrification activities. 
Under a business -as-usual scenario, any improvements in the rates of rural electrification are likely t o be met 
through diesel -powered generators (due to its relatively low upfront cost). Neighbouring  countries, including 
some of BOAD’s other member countries, face similar obstacles. The financial package proposed by BOAD 
and complemented by the requested G CF contribution will enable ASER to mobilise  private sector investment 
in the domestic energy sector by facilitating access to affordable, long- term finance. Without this concessional 
finance, private sector concessionaires will struggle to get their projects financed or will only do so against 
excessively high tariffs to end- customers. Such business -as-usual scenario would lock  in carbon intensive 
infrastructure – a pathway that the Government of Senegal aims to avoid.  
 
 
36 IMF African Department (2015) Making Senegal a Hub for West Africa


---
*Page 39*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 
   
 The ambition of this program is to demonstrate a blueprint to a clean -energy future that can be followed by 
other nations. The shift from BOT regional concessions to a public pre- financed concession fee model will 
lower long- term power generation costs and secure improved energy access for all segments of the 
population.37 Proof of concept will allow other countries in the ECOWAS region to replicate this sovereign 
approach, with a higher likelihood of commercial financiers stepping in to provide the required pre- finance 
directly to the privat e sector project developers. Collection of the concession fee s (5% of the solar mini -grids 
CAPEX) will contribute to funding tariff harmonisation and off -grid renewable electrification through the Special 
Support Fund for the Energy Sector (FSE) , which in turn support the country’s NDC implementation plans 
without needing to rely on international, concessional (climate) finance.  
 
Lessons learned throughout the project  lifetime (2021 – 2025) will be disseminated regionally. The ambition of these 
activities will be to encourage replication of best -practice approaches both within WAEMU member states (e.g. Benin, 
Burkina, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, and Togo) as well as across the entire ECOWAS region. This will 
be achieved through the development of knowledge products, delivery of regional workshops, and publication of 
relevant resources targeted at partner countries that face similar technical, financing and institutiona l issues.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The implementation of ASER project  will place Senegal on a sustainable, climate -resilient development pathway  in 
relation to several Sustainable Development Goals:  
- SDG 7 (ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all),  
- SDG 1 (poverty reduction -  Improved Productivity and economic diversification)  
- SDG 3 (health improvement –  Avoided use of  diesel/kerosene/paraffin)  
- SDG 5 ( gender equali ty and empower ment of  women and girls ) 
- SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth)  
 
It will contribute to these sustainable development benefits in the following ways:  
 
Economic co -benefits  
• Enabling productive uses of electricity and income- generating activities through improved reliability of power 
supply, including for irrigation and climate -resilient  agriculture practices  
• Improving the country’s energy security budget deficit which is negatively impacted by the import of  fossil fuels in 
foreign denominated currencies  
• Lowered operating costs for enterprises benefitting from the generated renewable energy, including clinics and 
schools that will reduce or eliminate their dependence on diesel  
• Direct creation of employment opportunities including construction and maintenance provision services, highly 
relevant given the decentralised  nature of the rural electrification program  
• Indirect creation of employment opportunities by creating possibilit ies for shop owners and entrepreneurs to 
manufacture or import new technologies that can be powered by  electricity.  
 
Social co -benefits  
• Improved health conditions, as renewable energy -powered lights will reduce the use of kerosene lamps and 
eliminate indoor air pollution which causes eye irritation and lung injury  
• Enhanced conditions in educational and social institutions  
• Poverty reduction through the promotion of income- generating activities  
• Improved access to potable water and water pumping for crop irri gation.  
 
Environmental co -benefits  
• Reducing the risk of ground -water contamination caused by leaking diesel generators  
• Reduction in local air pollution and noise disturbances  on local communities by  eliminating the use of diesel -
generated electricity (by 2025 no diesel -only mini -grids will remain in Senegal).  
 
Gender co -benefits  
 
37 Gesto Energy Consulting (2016) Programme d’électrification rurale pour le Sénégal 2015- 2025 : Plan de Financement


---
*Page 40*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 
   
 • Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, ensuring that men and women are equally benefitting from 
the initiative. ASER will offer special support t o promot e equal opportunities arising from the rural electrification 
project  through the TA component  for both men and women  
• Freeing up time for women (previously allocated to household tasks , through the use of mills and access to drinking 
water supply  among others) and children (increasing light time available at night) to engage in productive and 
education activities that improve income generation and strengthen social standing.  
• Positive dis crimination will be made against women's microenterprises by setting up mechanisms to take better 
advantage of the energy opportunities that will arise: training of target groups in trades, design of business plans 
around activities identified beforehand and access to micro -financing for equipment and provision of connection 
coupons to the most vulnerable, support for a good organizational and institutional structuring of women's 
organizations  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability of recipients  
The electricity sector in Senegal (a Least Developed Country) is mostly exposed to mitigation- related climate risks 
through (i) decreased/variable water availability for hydropower generation and thermal power generation cooling, (ii) 
increased damage to hydropower infrastructure from flooding and river sediment loads, and (iii) increased damage to 
power transmiss ion and distribution infrastructure from sea level rise and coastal erosion. Adaptation- related climate 
vulnerabilities of off -grid rural communities span  disruptions caused by natural disasters  like increasing mean 
temperatures, rainfall variability and droughts with consequences in terms of diseases, water scarcity, food insecurity, 
lower agricultural and economic productivity as well as disempowerment of  women and young populations from  build ing 
more resilient livelihoods . These water resources , agriculture, l ivestock and h ealth risks are further aggravated by the 
expensive fossil fuels, low income and limited employment burdens on development and wellbeing.  
 
Growing national debt level  
Senegal’s public debt currently stands at USD 7.5 billion, representing 57% of the country’s GDP. A combination of 
exchange rate depreciation and a dependence on foreign debt places the treasury at risk . The Ministry of Finance is 
committed to reduce debt ratios over the medium term by means of fiscal consolidation, improvements in the current 
account and improved debt management policies.38 With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average 
cost of capital is reduced by 2. 4% (to a level of 3. 9%, instead of 6.3 % without the GCF)  thus lightening its debt 
obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years further optimizes its debt servicing 
schedule to viable instalments  (further sustained by private operators’ 5% concession fee collection  towards the 
harmonization fund) . 
Local capital market constraints  
Given the pricing risk and lack of track -record of similar projects in the country, local financial institutions are unwilling 
to provide affordable f inancing solutions to project developers. High costs of capital force project developers to charge 
excessive electricity tariffs, denting demand and sustainability of investments. Lessons learned from the first phase of 
the initial 3 ‘pilot concessions’ indicate that investor confidence in off -grid renewable energy IPPs is still weak. 
Furthermore, there is a significant mismatch between the amount of money that  rural consumers can pay for electricity 
and the minimum tariffs that private concessionaires need to charge to meet their required rates of return. As such, a 
shift from the current BOT scheme to a concessional finance model is required to offer local financial lenders a de-
risked proposition and help the sector mobilise  private sector finance sustainably.  
Without the concessional co- finance extended through BOAD and the GCF, the investment hurdle for local financiers 
will continue to exist and access to affordable finance will remain an issue for the concessionaires. The result will be 
lagging rural e lectrification rates, highly variable electricity tariffs and the inability to meet  the government’s target of 
achieving universal access by 2025. By demonstrating successful engagement of private sector concessionaires in the 
proposed project , the perceiv ed risk of future interventions is expected to decline. Consequently, commercial funders 
will have more confidence to step in by the time GCF’s involvement comes to an end.  
 
38 In accordance with the ‘Plan Senegal Emergent’ launched in 2014 –  the country’s new development model aimed at 
accelerating its progress toward emerging market status –  low inflation and controlled public debt are key objectives to 
contribute to sustainab le long-term economic growth


---
*Page 41*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 
   
 Limited institutional capacities  
Despite the recent liberalisation  of the national energy market and allowance of IPPs to compete with SENELEC, 
institutional capacities in both the public and private sector s are still insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling 
environment. Technical support to strengthen the technical and gender capacity of the PMU , implementing partners,  
private concessionnaires  and community beneficiaries  with a focus on gender mainstreaming throughout the project 
cycle is necessary. Furthermore, outreach to national and regional commercial financiers is needed to maximise  the 
replication potential of the project  in neighbouring  countries. The proposed EUR 3.7 million TA component aims to 
overcome the current institutional gaps . 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The project  falls under the auspices of the Ministry of Energy and is fully endorsed and co-financed  by the Ministry of 
Finance , also processing all disbursement requests with BOAD acting as the Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants 
from the GCF . The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (the NDA) has been following the preparation 
of this project since its inception and assured BOAD and ASER of its willi ngness to support this GCF funding application 
due to its clear alignment with the following national strategies and development plans:  
• The Senegalese Nationally Determined Contribution submitted to the UNFCCC in September 2015, which lists 
rural electrification as  a key component of this action plan. The document refers to the commissioning of 392 
mini- grid systems (unconditional pledge) and up to 5,000 villages connected through PV mini -grids contingent 
on external support (conditional target)39 
• The government’s co mmitment to the SE4ALL initiative, which identifies rural electrification as one of the most 
important components of the global program. Senegal has committed to achieve universal access to electricity 
by 2025  
• The National Strategy for Economic and Social Development adopted in 2012 (SNDES), in which the 
government is committed to increase access to electricity in rural areas in an affordable and equitable way  
• Universal access to energy in rural areas is considered in the ‘ Plan Sénégal Emergent ’ as a fundam ental factor 
for economic development and for the fight against poverty. The main objective of the plan is the emergence 
of Senegal to promote economic growth as  a strong leverage for  human development  
• The ‘ ‘Plan Sénégal Emergent ’ also aims to reduce the c ost of generation to a value between 60 and 70 FCFA 
/ kWh (EUR  0.09-0.11) in the long- term. Investment in renewable energy generation will reduce the 
government’s dependence on fossil fuels which are expensive to import.  
• Fiscal exemption on VAT was granted by the State of Senegal  to all rural electrification related equipment . This 
agreement shall be subject to periodic renewal by mutual agreement.  
 
Implement ation of  these mitigation activities is slower than desired because of various constraints , includ ing absence 
of capital and insufficient institutional capacity and experience. However, the country has instituted the agencies and 
structures required to finalise and implement  these climate action plans/strategies.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The adequacy of the instruments proposed to the GCF (long term, subordinated project debt to be mixed  with private 
sector concessionaires ’ equity  and grant finance towards the public sector) is based on the following elements:  
• Given the relatively high CAPEX investment required by off -grid renewable energy technologies relative to 
other fossil -based alternatives ( which  offer lower CAPEX demands but  higher operational costs), there is need 
for project debt with longer tenors of at least 10 to 15 years. Local financial institutions, if at all willing to provide 
debt co- finance to the concessionaires, limit debt tenors to 5 to 7 years. Such short repay ment schedules, 
combined with high costs of capital, negatively impact the competitiveness of the concessionaires and dent 
scale -up potential.  
• The proposed financing plan, whereby a) BOAD’s loan and the GCF’s concessional loan contribution enable 
ASER to r educe WACC by over a third   for the overall project  CAPEX until 2025; and b) longer -term 
concessional debt offered to ASER subsequently lower  concessionaires  required equity investments ( down to 
5% concession fee, to be collected on the Special Support Fund for the Energy Sector  administered by CRSE 
for tariff harmonization and renewable energy development ) as well as commercial loans from local financial 
institutions. Lower upfront CAPEX demands combined with sof ter financing terms will strengthen the 
concessionaires’ debt service coverage ratios and profitability, a prerequisite to a maturing, private sector -led 
market space.  
 
39 UNFCCC (2015) Contribution Prévue Déterminée au Niveau National


---
*Page 42*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 
   
 • Experience in other countries indicates that extended debt tenors are capable of increasing returns on equity 
by 3%, or even higher. Such increase will positively impact the attractiveness of new investments to sponsors , 
and reduce the burden of tariff harmonization compensation for the Senegalese Treasury . 
 
The GCF’s total contribution of EUR 75.45 million will leverage a total public -private investment of EUR 208 million, 
representing a leverage ratio of  1.8.  In terms of c ost-effectiveness of the proposed intervention, the impact is estimated 
as follows:  
a) Total project financing EUR 198.7 million  
b) Requested GCF contribution of EUR 75.45 million  
c) Estimated emission reduction potential generated over the project lifetime is a cumulative 1.13 M. tonnes  of 
CO 2e 
d) Calculated cost per tonne CO 2e equals EUR 176.2 
e) Calculated GCF cost40 per tonne CO 2e equals EUR 28.8 
Although the estimated abatement cost of the project  may be higher  than the abatement cost of typical larger -scale 
renewable energy programmes , it should be noted that the project  aims to promote decentralised  systems with battery 
storage capacity in disperse and isolated areas with relatively low consumption where connection to the national 
network is not technically or economically justifiable.  
 
Best practices  
ASER “ Minima Techniques - Règles Environn ementales ” (Minimum Technical & Environmental Standards) including 
technical standards for low voltage and medium voltage distribution systems, and comprehensive standards for the 
solar components and systems (IEC 61215 and IEC 61646 for the PV modules, and a laboratory testing standard IECQ 
QC 001002)  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks  under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/ programme  contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co -financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
40 In grant -equivalent, i.e. concessional funding costs accounted at 5% discount rate  E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  45,098 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  1,127,447 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing  198.7 mln   Euros     
(b) Requested GCF amount  75.4 mln  Euros  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions   1,127,447   t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  176.2   Euros  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b40 / c) 28.8   Euros  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/ programme  as a 
result of  the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and (f) Total finance leveraged  132.8 mln   Euros  
(g) Public source co -financed  123.2   Euros  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  9.6 mln   Euros  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) 1.8


---
*Page 43*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 
   
  
E.3. Fund -level impacts  
 
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
M1.0 
Reduced 
emissions 
through increased 
low-emission 
energy access and 
power 
generation  M1.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced 
or avoided -  
gender -sensitive 
energy access power 
generation  Annual CO
2 
emission 
reductions 
Monitoring, Reporting and 
Verification  by 
independent CDM -DOE 
auditor or local 
carbon verifier  0 
(tCO
2eq) 44,324 tCO
2eq 130,563 tCO
2eq Renewable energy -based 
rural electrification replacing the continuous, alternative 
use of fossil fuel -based 
solutions  (CDM AMS -III.BL 
baseline methodology ) in 
households, commercial 
facilities such as shops,  
public services/buildings and 
small, medium and micro 
enterprises (SMMEs).  
 
 
41 http://www.ansd.sn/  private sources (mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  1.6  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  0.1  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  344,040  
172,208  of female s41 
Indirect  - 
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  4% of Senegal rural population                                                   
(2.2% of Senegal total population)   
Indirect  - 
 
E.4. Fund -level  outcomes  
 
Expected 
Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory 
systems  M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low -emission 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation   Micro -
Finance 
Institutions 
balance 
sheet 
summary 
verified by 
the Partner 
Financial 
Institution  No subsidy/  
guarantee 
for rural 
productive 
users 
[Emerging 
Senegal 
Plan]  2.5 mln  
Euros  
micro -
finance 
borrowings 
guaranteed 
for 
productive 
uses  3.3 mln  
Euros 
micro -
finance 
borrowings 
guaranteed 
for 
productive 
uses  Rural energy 
development 
success builds on 
extensive 
community 
mobilization, and 
capacity building 
for efficient 
electricity use  
Barriers  for 
mainstreaming 
solar PV  projects 
are


---
*Page 44*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 
   
  overcome , the 
capacity of  the 
stakeholders  
developed and 
the financial 
incent ives 
implemented  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission 
power suppliers  M6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF 
support    
ASER 
database & 
CRSE 
independent 
verification/cl
earance  0 19 MW  32 MW Private operators 
are interested in 
investing in the 
sector  
E.5. P roject/programme  performance indicators  
 
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Strengthened  
rural 
electrification 
stakeholders 
awareness, 
capacities and 
gender -inclusion Percentage of rural 
electrification 
procedures, 
communications 
and decisions 
reflecting women & 
youth priorities  Community -
based 
gender 
committees 
meeting 
minutes,  
gender -
sensitive  
communicati
on tools and 
PREM  
MoUs  0 
(no gender -
specific 
framework,  
communica
tion 
strategy  in 
use by 
ASER or 
Community
-Based 
Organizatio
ns) 50% 
  75% 
  Senegal politically 
recognized rural 
vulnerabilities to 
climate change 
and the interest of 
gender 
institutionalization  
at both national 
bodies and local 
committees levels  
Investment  
targets are  
achieved, less  
turnover and  
higher retention 
rate of trained  
agents  
Rural energy 
development 
success builds on  
extensive 
community 
mobilization, and 
capacity building 
for efficient 
electricity use  Number of 
additional 
vulnerable localities 
attributed to rural 
electrification 
operators  ASER 
database & 
CRSE 
independent 
verification  0  600 
localities  1,000 
localities  
Operational r ural 
solar -power new 
mini-grids 
increasing  
access to clean  MWh energy 
consumption from 
installed solar 
plants  Installation 
project  
reports and 
concessionn
aires billing  0 24,815 
MWh 74,879 
MWh GCF involvement 
brings down the 
WACC to an 
acceptable level 
to Senegalese 
treasury


---
*Page 45*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 
   
  
42 Baseline to be defined during inception and reported/agreed to the satisfaction of the GCF in the project inception report  energy and 
productive use  
 % of sales income 
from total productive 
use by SMEs and 
community services  
of clean energy  Local 
operators 
tariff 
harmonizatio
n requests 
breakdown, 
ASER 
aggregated 
database  Baseline to 
be 
surveyed 
according 
to the 
implementa
tion sites of 
the mini -
grids42 30% of total 
clean power 
sales from 
SMEs and 
community 
services   60% of total 
clean power 
sales from 
SMEs and 
community 
services   Appropriate 
micro -finance 
network is 
available in rural 
areas  and access 
coupons 
mechanism 
understood  
Energy -improved 
basic needs 
services for 
achieving 
resilience  Number of c oupon-
subsidized  
connect ions of  
eligible social 
services, women& 
youth- entrepreneurs 
to the PV mini -grids  ASER 
coupon 
distribution 
plans  & 
Subsidy 
Payment 
Confirmation
s database  Baseline to 
be defined 
according 
to the 
implementa
tion sites of 
the mini -
grids422 1,529  newly 
connect ed 
eligible 
social 
services, 
women& 
youth-
entrepreneu
rs to the PV 
mini-grids  2,548 newly  
connect ed 
eligible 
social 
services, 
women& 
youth-
entrepreneu
rs to the PV 
mini-grids  Access to 
electricity fosters 
agriculture 
productivity, 
health & 
community 
services, ICTs & 
lighting benefits   
E.6.  Activities  
 
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1. Technical 
Assistance to the 
solar rural 
electrification 
stakeholders  Capacity building of the 
project’s key 
stakeholders , to favour 
the implementation of a 
sustainable framework 
of the delivered services and benefits 
of the solar mini -grids, 
starting with the end-
user beneficiaries’ 
awareness and 
appropriation, the 
technical and 
administrative 
competencies of ASER 
Project Management 
Unit, and the 
environmental expertise and 
knowledge 
management required 
upstream and 
downstream  Activity 1.1.1 Trainings on procurement 
procedures, project management and GCF 
requirements  
Activity 1.1.2 -  Seminars and trips and 
workshops (technology watch, public 
consultations, conferences, sharing of 
experiences, etc.)  
Activity 1.2.1 -  gender -relevant community -
organizations mapping & tutoring  
Activity 1.2.2 -  gender -stakeholders training 
(PMU  – local operators  – community -based 
organizations )  
Activity 1.2 .3 - gender -oriented 
communication campaign  
Activity 1.3.1 -  E&S measures 
implementation and monitoring  
Activity 1.3.2 -  Establishment of a recycling 
unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics)  
 Project Launch workshops 
and public consultat ions 
report  
Gender committees 
creation MoU, trainings 
and communication 
strategy  
Entrepreneurship 
awareness and tutoring 
events 
attendance/minutes  
 
Operational facility for 
used batteries, CFL and 
electronic waste recycling  
 
Independent survey on 
income generating 
activities implemented by 
capacited rural women 
organisations  
2. Procurement 
and Installation of 
solar powered 
mini- grids  Financing the bulk of 
the technology 
investment to de- risk 
local operators ’ 
participation in competitive Request 
for Proposal to select the bidder who offers 
the best combination of Activit y 2.1.1 -  Site selection, engineering 
studies & Specific environmental and social 
analysis for each site  
Activity 2.2.1 -  Solar PV power plants 
construction and minigrid deployment : 
- PV energy equipment  
- Civil works  
- LV grids  Detailed e ngineering 
studies & specific 
environmental and social 
analysis reports  
EPC ToR s for 
procurement  
Contractualization of 
supply, factory inspection


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 
   
 tariff and service for 
solar energy 
production equipment, 
synchronisation and 
control tools, low -
voltage mini -grid 
networks and 
connections, civil 
engineering.  - Control & synchronisation  devices  
- LV connections  
- Indoor installations  
Activity 2.2.2 -  Smart meters installation & 
miscellaneous aleas  
Activity 2.3.1 - Deployments of solar street 
lighting  
Activity 2. 4.1 -Control and supervision of 
work  of first kits  and installation 
reports  
Commissioning reports of 
the 1,000 mini-grids  
implemented and handed 
over to local operat ors 
3. Incentives for 
Social & 
Productive Use of  
Electricity  Social services and productive equipment 
will lead to the 
development of  
sustainable livelihoods 
and enhance the 
capacity of villages to 
pay for solar power 
suppl y, strengthening 
mini- grids business 
model visibility while 
maximi sing social & 
gender inclusivity  Activity 3.1.1 -  
  Connection of eligible 
social services, women& youth-
entrepreneurs to the PV mini -grids   
Activity 3.2.1 -    Implementation of 
mechanism to facilitate access to 
productive equipment financing through 
microfinance   PREM baseline surveys  
Coupons design workshop  
Coupon software dashboard  
MFIs due- diligence  
Guarantee issuer 
selection and contract  
Micro-finances guarantee 
facility summary for the 
3,739 solar –powered 
SMEs and community services   
Final Monitoring and 
Evaluation Report  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Monitoring  
As with all projects supported by BOAD, this intervention will be monitored by BOAD project management team as per 
the relevant internal policies and proc edures. As the accredited entity  agency, BOAD will be responsible for supervising 
monitoring activities , implementation conditions and for reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to be defined 
by GCF and BOAD. The project progress will be monitored by the entity  responsible for M&E in the Project  Management 
Team based in Senegal.  
 
The present project will comply with the BOAD appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision standards and 
procedures involving all relevant teams (engineer, financial analyst, procurement expert, E&S specialist, climate finance 
specialist, financial management officer, and monitoring specialist). The implementation and monitoring of each stage of 
the project will be guided and managed by the BOAD project cycle management framework.  
 
Monitoring and reporting of achieved emission reductions will be conducted in accordance with the approved CDM 
methodology  AMS III.BL “Electrification of rural communities using renewable energy”. The CDM offers a UNFCCC-
approved MRV framework that will allow BOAD to transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time, and 
subsequently report progress to the GCF.  Moreover, using consistent baseline and monitoring methodologies across 
different climate finance programs enables NDC integration.  
 
The Division in charge of c limate finance will perform due diligence, implementation monitoring, risk monitoring and 
mitigat ion. For that purpose, the Division in charge of climate finance,  assisted by the Department in charge of 
Monitoring and Evaluation,  will be working closely with the project management team based in Senegal in order to 
monitor the progress of each component of the Project.  
 
Reporting  
Reporting by the project management team based in Senegal to BOAD will be in line with the standard loan agreement, 
and the BOAD will conduct a bi annual supervision. Reporting of the BOAD to GCF: The BOAD will comply with the 
relevant GCF policies in the reporting and evaluation arrangements for this framework. The BOAD will provide the 
annual performance report (APR) to the GCF during the four -year implementation period. In addition, during the sub- loan 
lifetime, semi - annual activity report on the status of the GCF -financed individual sub- projects will be provided.  
In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA,  an inception report, interim  and final evaluation reports, and  
financial information reports (semi -annually throughout the life of the loan) will be submitted.


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 
   
  
Evaluation  
The evaluation arrangements for this framework will comply with the related BOAD and GCF policies. The GCF funded 
activity interim and final evaluations will be conducted by an independent expert evaluator recruited by BOAD . The final 
evaluation is conducted 06 months after the reception of the project completion report.  
After two to five years of closing, the project will undergo ex -post evaluation that is guided by internationally accepted  
principles for the evaluation of development assistance, in particular, the Organisation  for Economic Co- operation, and 
Development Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) evaluation guiding principles, and the good- practice standards.


---
*Page 48*
---

F 
F 
F 
F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low High 
Description  
Awareness, capacity & marketing risk  
There is a risk that the solar power ed mini-grids ’ potential and their de- risked investment opportunity , which the project 
aims to create,  do not get sufficient communication and promotion and fail to mobili se the relevant local 
operators/investors. Similarly, beneficiaries (households and especially productive users and communities) require 
proper information, awareness raising and marketing efforts to overcome the lack of knowledge and sometimes 
negative perception that populations might have about solar technology as a permanent electrifi cation solution.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This is mitigated by t he implementation of component 1 Technical Assistance activities as well as component 3 to 
incentivi se productive use.  Besides, a two- level grievance mechanism (ASER & CRSE) will be available to all 
targeted customers : 
    i) in relation  to the selection of villages, sites, and the electrification process in general, the populations can 
address directly to ASER which will take the appropriate measures to remedy, in relation with its operational service 
providers in the field. For this purpose, a computerized system allowing a good feedback of information is being 
deployed, in addition to the classic system of referral and processing by administrative mail.  
 
    (ii) in relation  to the operation of the service in rural areas (quality of service, incidents, damage, safety, 
performance in providing the services described and validated in the concessionaire's service regulations), the 
population first addresses its complaints to the concessionaire, which is required to give a contact number to 
customers and to intervene in the event of  solicitation, according to the procedures described in the concession 
contract and its specifications. The concessionaire is also obliged to keep a register of complaints and to report 
regularly to the Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (CRSE). Nevertheless, if the operator's customer is not 
satisfied with the reaction of the concessionaire, it must refer the matter to the CRSE, which is mandated to monitor 
the implementation of the concession contracts and compliance with commitments on behalf of the State.  
 
    iii) in relation to  regulatory or legal claims made by the concessionaire who feel aggrieved or in danger in relation to 
the operating conditions, they  shall refer to ASER and the CRSE for handling the matter. For this purpose, activity 
repor ts are required by ASER and which the concessionaire is obliged to transmit at the intervals laid down in the 
concession contract.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Variable commercial risk  
The slow uptake or progressive ramp- up of rural electrification beneficiaries might impair the first year(s)’ financials of 
the local operators/investors. Similarly, all productive d emand load profiles  may not be suited to solar power solutions . 
Unlike non time- critical energy demand (e.g. irrigation and manufacturing/agro- processing), time- critical demand (e.g. 
cooling & refrigeration) involve surges in power neede d to bring and keep temperatures down regardless of the instant 
availability of solar power . 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 49*
---

F 
F 
F 
F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 
   
 Sound market assessment and modular sizing of the proposed technical solutions should be tailored to the 
circumstances of each mini -grid in order to cater for power demand extension as per the  grow th in demand; over -sizing 
of photovoltaic panels & storage capacities (batteries) shall be considered.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Operations & Maintenance  risks 
Underperformance of decentralised  renewable energy technologies could lead to lower production of energy and 
revenues , as there has been limited experience with financing decentralised renewable energy projects in rural parts of 
Senegal to date. Limited track record and data on nationwide historical performance implies that higher -than- expected 
variability in performance  can occur, impacting the revenue- generation potential of the concessionaires.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be mitigated by ensuring:  
- the choice of quality pieces of equipment at procurement & construction (cf. ASER “Minima Techniques” ). The 
concessionaires will minimise  risks by only sourcing commercially proven, independently certified solar panels, 
storage solutions and inverters  
- that the concessions are awarded t o entities that can demonstrate relevant experiences and/or capacity in the 
operation and maintenance of the implemented technologies in accordance with best industry practices. 
Furthermore, the concessionaires will be expected to manage maintenance reserve accounts to allow for timely 
maintenance and replacement of components, when needed.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Low 
Description  
Monitoring risk  
As per ASER’s experience with the 4 awarded PPER concessionaires, different data practices p ose a risk of improper, 
incomplete or unharmoni sed data collection and transmission to ASER ’s coordination structure (both technical, 
accounting and financial infor mation).  
As ASER rural electrification program signed an emissions reduction purchase agreement (ERPA) with the World 
Bank’s Ci -Dev program in 2016, which is  as of 17 May 2018 a registered programme  under the CDM, there is a need 
for a clear demarcation between the contribution of different climate finance sources  in order to prevent double- claiming 
of emission reductions . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate the risk of double- claiming or double- counting, ASER  will apply the CDM MRV framework (methodologies 
AMS III.BL) for GCF project  activities, yet  Emission reductions supported by the GCF will not be claimed elsewhere 
and not result in the issuance nor  transfer of any carbon credits. Therefore , the project ’s linkage with the CDM 
infrastructure adds transparency to the mitigation outcomes achieved and prevents any form of double claiming or 
double counting.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Low High 
Description  
Environmental/disposal risk


---
*Page 50*
---

F 
F 
F 
F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 
   
 Inappropriate dismantling/recycling of mini -grids components ( e.g. batteries)  could lead to environmental contamination . 
Communities in developing regions are already struggling with contaminated sites and soil pollution from unregulated 
car battery recovery and recycling. Unsound end- of-life management and recycling can cause severe lead poisoning of 
people and negatively affect the environment. There is a risk that inappropriate battery disposal under the project  will 
generate similar negative externalities.  
Wrong -doing and financial malversation risk  
No individuals or entities subject to United Nations Security Council Resolutions imposing financial sanctions will be  
involved in or benefitting from the activities of the project . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
While pollution caused by mishandling or disposal of batteries involved in mini -grids installations can be harmful, the 
end-of-life issues associated with the used batteries has been noted in earlier consultations and a management plan 
has been drafted to mitigate the risk of any spillage or inappropriate disposal of batteries. Specifically, concessionaires 
will be requested to a) regularly assess and maintain their entire portfolio of batteries, and b) together with ASER 
develop a collection and disposal scheme for expired batteries and equipment . ASER will carefully monitor the disposal 
process of used batteries to prevent any negative impacts to the environment.  BOAD will also ensure implementation 
of the environmental and social measures set forth by the project .


---
*Page 51*
---

G 
G 
G 
G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
 
The project falls under  Category B, according to the BOAD classification given that the project entails the installation 
and production of renewable energy , and given  the limited scale of the proposed interventions , i.e. installation, in each 
concerned village, of a solar power plant (power from 15 to 45 kWp) associated with low voltage (LV) lines .  
In practice, for projects with multiple sites and where the exact location of the sites is unknown, an ESMF was developed 
(Cadre de Gestion Environnemental  et Social  – CGES in French)  at the national PNER level43. To better optimi se the 
management of the environmental and social aspects of the solar  rural electrification project , a follow -up program and 
detailed recommendations concerning institutional arrangements have been proposed in the ESMF. Thus, monitoring 
will be carried out by the concessionaires; "internal" monitoring (or supervision) will be provided by PNER ’s 
Environmental & Social Experts ; “external” monitoring (inspection) will be carried out by the CRSEs and the DREEC; 
mid-term and final evaluation will be carried out  by independent consultants.  
 Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts for each mini -grid will be determined during the project  
execution based on a screening process that  will be undertaken according to the guidelines provided in the ESMF. For 
such small scale mini -grids, there is no need for a fully detailed ESIA, since the overall project is categori sed as having  
medium risk (B) , but only a simplified Strategic E&S assessment. Required studies (ESIA/analysis) for subprojects will 
be realized whe n specific sites are contracted before the installation of the mini -grids, and when the E&S documents 
are disclosed locally in the local administrative buildings (townhall, and local chief offices).  
 
The sites of mini solar power plants will not affect protected areas and reserves because they will be located at the  
village level; and in general , protected areas and reserves are far from villages. In addition, the project sites will be set 
up so as not to displace populations or destroy economic assets. The beneficiary communities will provide small sites 
in villages for small -scale solar plants as their contribution to the project. There is no need for a  resettlement plan since 
there will be no resettlement. Thus,  PS5PS 5 will not be triggered. PS  7 does not apply for there is no indigenous 
population as defined by the World Bank Group’s policy, on which those of BOAD and GCF are based, in the project 
area. Furthermore, PS  8 does not apply for activities related to the construction of such small is olated solar PV systems . 
Those systems will not need a great amount of excavation : thus, there will be no potential risk for cultural heritage 
degradation in beneficiaries’ communities.  
 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) documents  are attached to this Funding Proposal . 
 
Potential impacts and risks of the project  
 
The major potential positive consequences  of this type of project relate to  
• job creation and increased local income during the construction phase.  With the project, the construction works 
will have certain repercussions on the national and local economy . The employment  of Small and Medium -
sized Enterprises will lead to a high use of labou r (especially local) whose revenues will galvanize the economic 
activities of the loc alities concerned. In addition, the sites will develop certain related activities (catering, trade, 
etc.) in the areas concerned, which will help increase the income of the population;  
• improving the level of access to electricity in the area;  
• contributing to the achievement of Senegal's electrification objectives;  
• promoting economic development in polari sed areas;  
• promoting the development of local SMEs / SMIs by securing the electricity supply;  
• extending the coverage of the electricity network;  
• influencing  gender and poverty reduction strategies;  
• contributing to the fight against climate change – positive impact on global CO 2 emissions by limiting the use 
of fossil fuels  
 
Potential negative consequences  and mitigation measures for Project activities  
• Solar photovoltaic systems are considered to be one of the least environmentally harmful energy options. As a 
result, little environmental impact is anticipated from the implementation of this system. The main potential 
impact is the risk of pollution in the event of poor storage or uncontrolled dispos al of used batteries (leakage of 
 
43 MEDD 2016. PNER CGES


---
*Page 52*
---

G 
G 
G 
G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 
   
 lead and acid which can pollute soil and water) and which can constitute sources of accidents, especially for 
children.  
• During operation, the risk to the natural environment would firstly be caused by an accidental spill of  sulfuric 
acid during maintenance operations and during the packaging of defective or end- of-life batteries. ASER, in 
partnership with the Concessionaires, will facilitate the establishment of a battery recovery system.  
• Solar power plants are inspected by maintenance technicians. The risks incurred by the latter are those linked 
to the handling of the acid and the explosion of the batteries if the batteries used are with liquid electrolyte. In 
addition, there are risks associated with the presence of a batt ery in a living room (intoxication and explosion) 
if certain instructions are not followed.  
• There are also risks of theft and other deliberate damage to the solar panels, in the absence of security  
 
Mitigation / improvement, monitoring and institutional measures anticipated at this stage:  
Construction phase  Operation phase  
Social measures linked to loss of property and displacement 
of populations  Fire safety  
Measures to reduce the effects on natural resources  Measures against the development of pests  
Pollution control measures  Waste management  
Dust mitigation measures  Risk management for maintenance operations  
Water supply measures for construction sites  Management of noise pollution from installations  
Safety measures   
Measures to avoid and settle social conflicts   
Measures to combat the risks of STI / HIV / AIDS transmission   
 
Institutional arrangements  
For the monitoring of the implementation of the E&S measures, it is planned, through an agreement with the Ministry 
of the Environment and Sustainable Development,  to extend institutional support to the Department of Environment 
and Listed Establishments (DEEC) . DEEC will in turn  support the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) in 
the implementation of the environmental and social management component of the Project.  
 
A Public Consultation Plan will aim to ensure social acceptability of projects at the community level by putting all stakeholders in a network for sharing information on the project and its interventions.
 The strategic planning of  and the 
provision of information on the project should start by forums/gatherings in the form of Regional Development 
Committees (CRD) organized in the regions. In this context, Local Information and Monitoring Committees (CLIS) will 
be set up at the level of each community concerned. The role of these committees will be:  
- to support ASER in the social appropriation of the project at the local level;  
- to mobilize the different community actors for a peaceful implementation of the project;  
- to serve as a framework for the amicable resolution of any conflicts (land or other).  
An NGO or local association specializing in social mobilization could help facilitate the establishment and operations of 
these sectoral or socio- professional groups, but above all ensure quality and equity in representation (marginalized 
groups, gender, etc.).  
 
At the national level, the PNER program already complies with national regulat ions, including Law 2001- 01 of January 
15, 2001, on the Environment Code. It was already subject to a Strategic Environmental Assessment validated by the 
State of Senegal with the issuance of an environmental compliance certificate N° 05 AUG.2019 / 021963 to ASER.  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
The State of Senegal is committed to international conventions for integrating gender issues in policies, standards and 
programs to facilitate its transversality at the institutional level. A Ministry of Gender was created for the first time in 
2010 and during the same year, the law instituting absolute parity in totally or partially elected assemblies was adopted. 
It entered into force during the legislative elections of July 2012 and for the first time in the country's political history , 
the number of women MPs has increased from 19.2 to 42.6%. However, women are still affected by disparities at all 
levels and gender issues touch on poverty, health, education, access to finance, employment, access to land and the 
means of production, among others. Women ar e active in the production sectors, the small market economy and the 
informal sector. Any action tending to strengthen them in these sectors, reflects on their economic power, their


---
*Page 53*
---

G 
G 
G 
G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 
   
 participation at the strategic level and the well -being of the family. Acc ess to electricity can therefore constitute an 
important input, but also a bulwark against constraints that affect gender relations. However, until 2018, energy was 
not yet perceived by policies targeting gender equality as a factor which could improve wom en’s participation in the 
national economy, but rather as a sector beyond the scope of the Implementation Plan of the National Strategy on 
Equity and Gender Equality  (PMO -SNEEG)44. 
 
Cooking and motive power remain the main gender issues in the energy sector . The collection of wood is the exclusive 
domain of women and the use of biomass leads to considerations about their health and that of children, hence there 
are measures aimed at modernizing cooking fuels. As for electricity, its weight in the reduction of gender inequalities is 
important because of the opportunities in access to modern energy services instead of motive power.  
 
Before carrying out the diagnosis o n gender accounting in the rural electrification national program, ASER has been 
involved in gender audit s for policies and in energy programs conducted in 2005- 2007. After several attempts to develop 
a program impact monitoring framework, a gender -sensiti ve manual intended to strengthen the results -based 
management of electrification programs was produced in 2012. In addition, it should be noted that ASER recently 
completed (in 2019) its Strategic Plan for Development (PSD) 2020- 2023 where gender mainstreaming becomes a 
reality in the formulation of planned lines of intervention.  
 
However, many factors still constitute constraints to allow ASER achieve effective gender mainstreaming. These 
include:  
- the lack of sustained collaboration between ASER and the institutions in charge of the issues gender;  
- the pricing of electricity which does not integrate preferences towards women and poor people;  
- the beneficiaries' lack of resources for the initial investment necessary for start ing professional , revenue- generating 
activities and;  
- the lack of energy services for an optimized use of electricity at the productive and professional  level.  
 Based on the constraints and challenges identified, a gender action plan for the rural electrification program using solar 
mini- grids was developed focusing on three main results, from which a series of actions to be implemented were 
identified: (i) gender is institutionalized in ASER; (ii) the energy needs of men and women are understood and met; (iii) access to finance for the development of economic and professional activities is supported. The implementation of this 
action plan calls for the active involvement of ASER and the synergy between all partners and development actors.  
 The project will confer substantial ben efits on gender, due to its nature.  The objective of the project is not only limited 
to curbing climate change by bringing renewable electricity to the rural populations, but also it  greatly contributes  to 
creating wealth and consequently reducing, even el iminating poverty. Rural women, through access to electricity, will 
thus find an opportunity to make their activities profitable with the possibilities offered by electric current. For example,  
energy -powered pumps reduce all the drudgery women  endure to draw water. The socio- economic co-benefits  on the 
lives of populations and particularly on women is very certain. The project also creates wealth. It has strong cross -
sectoral links with various socio- economic sectors (agriculture, health and education). El ectricity could therefore bring 
about a lot of positive changes at almost every level of the various business sectors. These include:  
- promotion of income- generating activities;  
- the acquisition of household appliances (more comfort for the populations);  
- the reduction of exhausting chores of the rural woman, an increase in the schooling rate of the children, in particular 
the girls, and better school results;  
- the development of cultural and leisure activities.  
 
The full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan are provided as annex 8.   
The Accredited Entity will validate the terms of reference for the recruitment of the consulting firm which will be in charge  
of the activities in close synergy with ASER, and validate the moni toring reports on the implementation of activities and 
the final evaluation of the project.  
 
44 At least 75% of women with access to alleviating equipment have additional human energy to devote to productive, social 
and leisure activities in 2011


---
*Page 54*
---

G 
G 
G 
G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 
   
 • BOAD provided technical support for the development of the Gender Action Plan. In its implementation, it will 
monitor its implementation according to what is defined in the said action plan through field visits, review of reports 
submitted by the Senegalese side and recommendations for corrections to be made.  
• BOAD has recruited a Sociologist, Gender Specialist, who ensures compliance with the implementation of gender 
action plans developed in the context of projects under funding of the FVC; it is not covered in the project budget.  
• It was planned the training of a gender staff to ensure the implementation of the action plan. This specialist is 
supported in the project framework through the budget.  
• In operational side, women groups and enterprises will be targeted through the project as described in the gender 
assessment  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant BOAD rules and regulations, as 
well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed by BOAD and the GCF as part of 
BOAD’s accreditation to the GCF.  The provision of the grant proceeds (Technical Assistance and social & gender 
connection coupons funds) will flow from GCF to AE based on the agreed payment schedule, subsequently to the 
funded activities based on the Procurement Plan. The provision of the BOAD loan will be made to ASER through the 
Ministry of Finance (Senegal Treasury)  as per the Fund Flow Diagram (Figure 1 8), and subject to a reimbursement 
plan to be agreed.  BOAD will carry out financial transfers in accordance with its own policies, procedures and rules for 
which it has been accredited for.  Goods, and services financed from the GCF loans and the BOAD Loan will be acquired 
by either : 
 
- limited consultation after expression of interest for sub- components  
- international call for tenders for the components  
- open consultation on a WAEMU scale of specialized design offices for the realization of the sub- components  
- national call for tenders  
Procurement  
 
To ensure that financing is applied in ways that adequately secure the BOAD’s mandate while maximizing development 
effectiveness, the Bank encourages and promotes sound, fair, transparent and well performing procurement systems.  
 
BOAD’s Guidelines for proc urement of consultancy services financed by a loan or advance of funds (2016); and  
Guidelines for the award of works contracts, goods and services (other than consultancy services) (2016) will  be applied 
by ASER in the project’s procurement.  
 
BOAD  will con duct an analysis of the procurement files and give its no objection.  
AML/FT Due diligence  
As part of the prevention and fight against money laundering, BOAD has developed a Financial Security Policy (2016). 
This internal document constitutes the general framework of the control system covering all of BOAD's activities relating 
to the prevention, surveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks.  
 
BOAD's Financial Security Policy is inspired by the international standards defined by the United Nations through its  
specialized structures, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) whose recommendations 
are issued by the International Financial Action Group (FATF) and provisions of Directive 02/2015 / CM / UEMOA of 
02 July 2015 on the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing in the Member States of the  West African  
Economic and Monetary Union. ("WAEMU Directive").  
 
The policy requires to disclose information about its clients' transactions to the relevant authorities in cases where  
international rules and local law require regulated finan cial institutions to do so, including cases of  money laundering.  
 
Under its due diligence, the Bank will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists. The Bank  
also conducts also administrative investigations into corruption, frau d, coercion, collisions and inconvenient practices, 
and make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal investigations.


---
*Page 55*
---

G 
G 
G 
G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 
   
 The Bank integrates measures to combat illicit financial flows, the fight against money laundering and terrori st financing 
in the internal operations of the Bank Group.  
 
In the context of this project, concerning ALM/FT, the concerned stakeholder will:  
- ensure that the funds financing the Project are not of illicit origin and in particular are not related to frau d against 
Senegal's financial interests, corruption, organized criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and  
- forward to the Bank without delay any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in  
the company and in the Project;  
- notify the Bank without delay if it has known at any time of any information indicating the illicit origin of all or part of  
the funds of the structure;  
- not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, wit h persons or entities on the lists established by the  
United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the  
European Union in application of its Common Positions and / or by the African Union as well as  on any other relative 
or complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the fight against the Laundering 
of Capital and the financing of terrorism.  
 
AUDIT  
 
Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guideli nes for Financial Reporting and Auditing of Projects. The  
Financial Agreement with Senegal will require the submission of Audited Financial Statements to BOAD within four 
months after each year -end. An independent external auditor will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable 
to the Bank (not later than four months after effectiveness) for the entire duration of the project. The Financial 
Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing standards.  
BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, comments, and recommendations for improvements 
in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial Agreements. The 
cost of the audit will be met from project resources. BOAD wi ll ensure KYC standard- compliant  due diligence process 
including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors is followed thoroughly.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 56*
---

H 
H 
H 
H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 
   
 
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex  14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or eval uation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Other references


---
*Page 57*
---

H 
H 
H 
H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 
   
 
 Annex 16 –  map of proposed interventions


---
*Page 58*
---

H 
H 
H 
H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 
   
 
 Annex 22 – other references (bibliography)  
 
 2015, Ministère de l’Energie et du Développement des Energies Renouvelables.  SE4All  Action plan  
 2015, DFID‐ Literature Review on Energy Access and Adaptation to Climate Change  
 2016- 11 PNER - CADRE DE GESTION ENVIRONNEMENTALE ET SOCIALE (CGES)  
 2016 PNUD Cartographie secteur solaire entreprises inclusives Senegal  
 2017- 11 UFC -MCA Am élioration -de-l’accès-à-l’électricit é-en-milieux -rural-et-péri-urbain-  
 2018 _USAID ATLAS_ Climate Change Risk Profile –  West Africa & Senegal  
 2018 GESTO FR -Prog Inv Acces Universel SE4All Senegal  
 2018 Plan Senegal Emergent PAP 2019- 2023  
 2018- 09 Université Paris Dauphine, PSD. Accès universel et durable à l'électricité au Sénégal.  
 2019- 01 Projet coupons JAPPALE Report 3 -  Mise en oeuvre de la distribution -  FR _FINALv  
 2019 GETinvest -Market -Insights_SEN_PV_Guide_2019 
 2019 UE FR -Programme d’appui au développement des énergies renouvelables pour l’accès universel  
 2019- 02 MCC -willingne ss-to-pay-for-improved- electricity -services- in-senegal  
 2019- 09 report Market Opportunity for Productive Use Leveraging Solar Energy (PULSE)  
 2019- 10 USAID -Senegal -MarketAssessment -Final_508  
 2019- 09 Rapport FINAL_plan operationel SE4ALL acces universel  
  [draft] 2019 Projet Arrêté Ministériel Electrification Hors -Réseau Senegal  
 
 2014 CCKN & IISD -  Exploring Trends in Low -Carbon, Climate- Resilient Development


---
*Page 59*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or 
focal point(s)


---
*Page 60*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or 
programme 
title  ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project  
Existence of 
subproject (s) 
to be identified 
after GCF 
Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public 
or private)  Public  
Accredited 
entity  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)  
Environmental 
and social 
safeguards 
(ESS) category  Category B  
Location – 
specific 
location (s) of 
project  or 
target country 
or location (s) 
of programme  The project sites are located in 1,000 villages spread over seven (07) 
administrative regions of Senegal. They are Kaffrine, Kaolack, Fatick (in 
the Centre), Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda (in the South) , and Saint -
Louis (in the North).  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  Tuesday, May 5, 2020  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and French 
Explanation on 
language  French is the official language of Senegal. 
Link to 
disclosure  English translation:  
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
glish -translation_rev2403.pdf  
Fren ch:  
https://www.boad.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport -
provisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu -23032020.pdf  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements of a Category B project is 
contained in the “ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA): 
Preliminary Version ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on Tuesday, May 5, 2020


---
*Page 61*
---

accredited 
entity’s website  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  and French  
Explanation on 
language  French is the official language of Senegal. 
Link to 
disclosure  English translation:  
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
glish -translation_rev2403.pdf  
French:  
https://www.boad.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport -
provisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu -23032020.pdf   
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements of a category B project is 
contained in the  ESIA’s Chapter 8 titled “Environmental and Social  
Management Framework Plan” . 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosur
e on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on 
language  N/A  
Link to 
disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, May 5, 2020  
Place  The documentation made available on BOAD website, and in Senegal in 
locations that  are accessible for the beneficiary people, especially Agence 
Sénégalaise pour l’Electrification Rurale (ASER); Direction de 
l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés (DEEC) in Dakar  ; and at 
regional level within Regional Directorate for environmental  affairs 
(Direction Régionale de l'Environnement et des Eltablissements Classés – 
DREEC)  ; and within the BOAD national representation in Senegal.  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting Tuesday, June 23, 2020  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 62*
---

G
CF/B. 26/02 /Add.10 
Page 62 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP138 
Proposal name:  ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project  
Accredited entity:  West African Development Bank (BOAD)  
Country/(ies):  Senegal  
Project/programme size: Medium 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project  proposes  a public –private 
partnership business model  for investing and 
operating small -scale solar  mini-grids, which  
fits with  the country context . The shift from 
“Build , Operate, Transfer ” regional 
concessions to a public pre -financed 
concession model  will result in triple 
benefits : (1) increased energy access for 
remote areas of the country ; (2) private -
sector contribution achieved through 
lower ing the initial  investment cost; and ( 3) 
realizing a uniform tariff across the country, 
with a n electricity pric e that aligns with 
affordability  for the poorest.  It sets a good 
example in terms of  country ownership , with 
a significant level of co -financing by the 
country which then partners with the GCF in 
de-risking energy access  activities to reach 
levels acceptable to the private sector and affordable to the communities   
The project will promote productive use o f 
electricity along with wider access  to 
electricity , therefore ensuring the financial 
sustainability  of the project while bringing in 
significant economic and social co -benefits. 
The productive use of  electricity across 1 ,000 
rural villages will promote job creation and 
support grass  root s-level economic activities 
which , as well as being a sustainability pillar 
of the project,  would make it a green stimulus


---
*Page 63*
---

G
CF/B. 26/02 /Add.10 
Page 63 
package to support post -coronavirus  disease  
19 ( COVID -19) pandemic  recovery 
The project provides a solid framework for 
scalability and replication of public- sector 
investment into small -scale renewable 
energy mini -grid program mes in many sub -
Sahara n Africa countries where energy 
access rates are low and the socioeconomic 
characteristi cs are similar  to Senegal  
2. The Board may consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVIII , titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.
II. Summary of t he S ecretariat’s assessment
2
.1 Project background 
3. Although Senegal has been  steadily increas ing its national electrification rate , with
almost fully electrified urban areas, the majority of people in rural areas still do not have access
to electricity (approximately 58 per cent) . For basic energy needs, households mainly rely o n
f
uelwood for cooking, and kerosene lamps for lighting – which are expensive and cause health
and environmental hazards . The rural electricity sector has been characterized by high upfront
investmen t cost s and operation cost s that are too high for rural operators  to bear , which has led
to the need for recurrin g government subsidies  to help private -sector operators maintain
revenue levels that keep them in business. Meanwhile, the effects  of climate change are posing
challenges to the  livelihood s of the rural population .
4. The m ain barriers that have been identified as contributing to  low electricity usage rate s
in the rural areas of Senegal are high upfront investment costs , high levels of operational cost s
t
o run remote electricity assets, and the low level and widely dispersed nature of consumption ,
all of which have resulted in low interest for participation  by the  private sector. This project
aims to tackle these  barriers through a set of integrated interventions . GCF will provide the
concessional financing needed to mobilize  private sector participation in providing rural
households with access to modern solar- powered  mini -grids  in 1,000 isolated vi llages . The GCF
p
roceeds will also be used to subsidize connection s to the mini -grids through  a coupon/voucher
scheme, which will not only make the connection charge affordable , but also accelerates th e
co
mmercial viability of each mini -grid by catalysing “ anchor customers ”. This, together with the
promotion of  the use of electricity from a renewable source for income generating activities ( i.e.
p
roductive use ), which will be achieved together with local micro -finance institutions, has th e
p
otential to  considerably increase the financial viability of each private sector- operated solar
mini- grid . In addition, the capacity of  main rural electrification stakeholders will be
strengthened to enable the deployment of a network of solar mini -grids and facilitate project
implementation .
5. The project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas  (GHG) emissions by  approximately
1.13 million  tonnes of carbon dioxide equ ivalent  (tCO 2eq) over its technical lifetime by moving
away from the use of traditional energy resources. GCF finance will support the implementation
of the Government of Senegal’s plan to scale up and accelerate rural electri fication through
private concessionaires with  an acceptable risk -reward  ratio . It will also  greatly help the


---
*Page 64*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 64 
 
 
poorest and most vulnerable among the country’s population to adapt to an increasingly 
warmer climate.  
6. The total project cost is EUR  198.7  million. The project is structured around three 
components : an investment component ( component 2) and an incentives programme for 
productive use of electricity ( component 3) which together are funded by a GCF loan of EUR 
73.6 million ; and a technical assistance component (component 1)  that aims to build the  
necessary  capacity of energy stakeholders , to be funded by a EUR  1.8 million  GCF  grant , 
complement ed by co-financing from the Government of Senegal ( EUR 5.6 million  contribution ) 
and other partners, including loans from the German development bank, KfW  (EUR 102.4  
million), and the accredited entity (AE), the West African Development Bank  (BOAD ) (EUR  15.2 
million ). 
7. The environmental and social safeguards classificatio n of the project is c ategory B .  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : Technical assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders ( total cost: EUR 3  
million; GCF  cost:  EUR 1.65  million, or 55  per cent)  
8. This component will provide capacity -building to the project’s key stakeholders . The 
capacity -building includes operational support, training and technical assistance to build the 
capacity of a  project management unit hosted by the executing entity (EE), the Senegalese Rural 
Electrification Agency ( ASER ); for example, strengthening and standardizing its procurement 
process es and its institutional capacity for monitoring and quality control to me et GCF 
requirements. This component  will also support the implementation of a gender action plan to 
ensure women’s participation in and benefits from the project interventions.  Local 
concessionaires  will be trained  to operate the recycling unit for batteri es and other waste to 
minimize the potential environmental and social impact caused by the deploy ment  of solar 
mini- grids .  
9. This component includes the overall  project management cost , which amounts to EUR 
0.56  million  and is sufficiently justified.  
Component 2 : Procurement and i nstallation of solar -powered mini -grids (total  cost : EUR 188 
million; GCF  cost:  EUR 75.4  million or 40  per cent)  
10. Under this component, solar -powered  mini- grids  will be installed in 1,000 selected 
remote villages.  After  construction  of the mini- grids , current local private sector 
concessionaires  will take over the operation and maintenance of the assets  through an 
amendment to their current  concession  agreement, granting them the right to extend revenue 
collection to the newly electrified areas. Deployment of modern public lighting will be fully 
financed by KfW  to help provide suburban security and economic growth in the villages. The 
procurement and installation of solar -powered mini -grids  will absorb most  of the GCF 
concessional loan , which is to be lent to the Government of Senegal.  
Component 3 : Incentives for productive use of electricity  (total cost: EUR 21.5 million; GCF  cost:  
EUR 5.7 or 26.5  per cent)  
11. Rural customers that are currently served by S enelec, the national electricity company 
of Senegal , and are in the periphery of the concession areas enjoy lower tariffs than th ose within 
the remote concession  areas, therefore discouraging energy access beyond the areas covered by 
Senelec . Therefore the  application of a uniform tariff alone will not suffice to incentivize new 
connections.  With GCF proceeds , connections to the mini- grids will also be subsidized using a 
coupon/voucher which will not only make the conn ection charge affordable, but will also 
accelerate the commercial viability of each mini -grid by  drawing in larger customers . This way,


---
*Page 65*
---

G
CF/B. 26/02 /Add.10 
Page 65 
the pace of connections among rural households will increase and the project can  reach out to 
the poorest and most vulne rable rural population s.  
12. Another aspect of th is component is promot ing the productive use of electricity
generated from renewable sources  through the provision of a guarantee facility . The guarantee s
issued are designed to cover the loans extended by micr o-finance institutions to the
beneficiaries of electricity in the areas of mini- grids undertaking for the purchase of productive
use equipment. This will lower the cost of loans to rural entrepreneurs that support the
development of micro -businesses in the  areas served by the mini -grids.
13. Successful implementation of component 3 can boost private concessionaires ’
confidence and interest in the rural electrification investments , there by ensur ing the projec t
o
bjective is achieved. The innovative design of this component also has huge economi c
st
imulation benefit in the targeted area , further enhancing the climate resilience of the local
population  while facilitating recovery actions following the coronavirus  19 disease ( COVID -19)
pandemic .
III. Assessment of performance against in vestment criteria
3
.1 Impact potential    Scale: Medium  
14. The project achieves mitigation  impacts and considerable  adaptation  co-benefit s. The
uptake of renewable energy technolog ies will provide access to electricity through direct
household connection s, leading to GHG emission reductions amounting to  1.13 million tCO 2eq
throughout the project lifetime. Meanwhile , the project is expected to directly benefit 344,000
people and better prepare them to adapt to the potential impacts of climate change.
15. Overall, the impact of the project is assessed as medium . Its mitigation potential is
balanced  by a medium level of GHG reductions , which is an emb edded characteristic of levels o f
elec
tricity demands in the rural areas of Senegal. However, the project also achieves significant
adap tation co -benefits and paves the way for broader socioeconomic impacts across 1 ,000
villages .
3.2 Paradigm shift potential     Scale: High  
16. GCF concessional finance  is critical to crowd in the private sector, which at the moment
is limited and has low interest in the targeted areas where investment in mini- grids is not
commercially viable. The subsidized approach , which lowers the upfront investment cost s for
setting up the assets , plays a catalytic role by enabling the private sector to engage  in activities
that would otherwise  be unprofitable.  Increased electricity demand – made possible by the
increased number of connections and promot ion of productive use of electricity  – will in turn
allow t he local private concessionaires to reach a critical scale to make the concessions mor e
v
iable and sustainable. This model has the potential to be replicated in other African countrie s
th
at have  similar barriers in provision of electricity to remote subset s of population.
3.3 Sustainable development potential      Scale: High  
17. The proposal has the potential to generate relevant co -benefits, particularly for th e
e
conomy and society of Senegal , which rely on the development of the energy sector. In terms of
economic co -benefits, the promotion of productive use of electricity will likely produce gre ater
prosperity and generat e income for the communities, thus moving them out of poverty
(Sustainable Development Goal 1). This is particularly important in the light of the COVID -19


---
*Page 66*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 66 
 
 
pandemic,  if green stimulus is given  priority for almost all affected countries.  Moreover, moving  
away from traditional sources of energy (fuels) to clean solar electricity will result in 
environmental benefits such as reduction of local air pollution  and noise impacts on local 
communities. Component 3 also promotes access to electricity for social use, which widely 
contributes to the sustainable development potential of the project.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale: High  
18. The nee ds of the recipient are assessed to be high . Senegal is a least developed  country  
with a population  of 16.3 million, of which almost 55 per  cent live in rural areas . Senegal has 
steadily increased electrification rates,  with almost fully electrified urban areas ; however , the 
majority  (58 per cent ) of people in rural areas do not have access to electric ity and non-
electrification rate s in some remote areas can be as high as 90 per cent . For basic needs, 
households have to rely on fuelwood for cooking . This use of traditional fuel is expensive and 
poses both health and environmental concern s. Meanwhile, the impacts of climate changes are 
being  felt by the poorest people in the country .  
19. The Government does not currently have the full financial capacities and knowledge to 
achieve universal access to electricity. Senegal’s public debt currently stands at 57  per cent o f 
the country’s gross domestic product . This, together with the exchange rate depreciation and a 
dependence on foreign debt, places the treasury at risk and limit s its ability to borrow capital at 
the market  rate to implement its rural electrification program me. The GCF concessional loan 
will reduce the average cost of capital to 3.9  per cent compared with a rate of 6.3 per cent 
without GCF intervention.  
3.5 Country ownership                           Scale: High  
20. The project is properly align ed with national priorities concerning climate change  
mitigation and adaptation , including the Senegalese nationally determined contribution , the 
national strategy for economic and social development , and Plan Sénégal Emergent. Moreover, 
the national desig nated authority of Senegal communicated to GCF, through its country 
program me, that  it has placed  this project as  priority under the first replenishment period of the 
GCF .  
21. BOAD , as a direct access entity  to the GCF, has longstanding experience in Senegal as 
well as in the energy market . The EE, ASER , was created with the sole aim of promoting rural 
electrification and has been involved in various rural mini- grid/grid extension programmes.  
22. The project design took into consideration perceptions, concerns, expectations and 
recommendations received during the stakeholder consultations, including those of 
administrative and local authorities of the region, rural communities, and ASER. The nation al 
designated authority of Senegal was also supportive of this proposed project at its early stage 
and issued a no -objection letter at the funding proposal stage.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: Medium  
23. The efficiency and effectiveness of this project is assessed to be medium due to the 
resulting higher capital expenditure ( CAPEX ) per unit of GHG abatement achieved. The 
estimated cost of GHG abatement  for GCF  is EUR 28.8 /tCO 2eq (EUR 177/tCO 2eq for the ent ire 
project) , which could be seen as  on the high side compared with some benchmarks.  However, i t 
is worth mentioning that , because the financial instrument is a loan, it is fair to relate the cost of 
impact to the grant equivalent part of this loan only. It  is also worth noting  that access to clean 
electricity in the context of this project has considerable adaptation benefit s. The viability of the


---
*Page 67*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 67 
 
 
project will, however , broadly depend on the quality of the construction and the obligation 
passed thro ugh to the concession aires . Without GCF financing, the Government of Senegal 
would  have to borrow  at market rates, which w ould increase the costs  for the project  and stress 
the balance sheet of this least developed country . The AE and the Government are requested to 
pass on GCF concessionality to end -beneficiaries through a uniform  tariff.  
24. An economic analysis shows the project’s economic internal rate of return  (IRR) to be 
between 10.3 and 13.2  per cent,  depending on the tariff level and electricity consum ption level. 
The financial analysis shows that concession holders will be paying  5 per cent up front of CAPEX  
for the concession  rights,  but are obliged to make  reinvestments for inverters (every 15 years), 
batteries (every 7 years) and solar panels (every  25 years). With these re investments  and the 
operation and maintenance costs factored in, t he IRR is expected to be 1 2.6 per cent  at the 
subsidized tariff level. The financial IRR is sensitive to electricity consumption and tariff level, 
therefore the success of enforcing the tariff and component 3 in promoting the productive use of 
electricity  are key.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
25. Environmental and social risk category . The AE states that the project is risk category 
B. The Secretariat  agrees with this categorization , considering that the interventions on the 
ground involve installation s that are micro to small -scale (15 to 60 kW capacity) solar 
photovoltaic (PV) power grids in 1000 villages all over the country. The project sites are located 
in villages spread over seven administrative regions of Senegal, clustered into three zones, 
namely centre (Kaffrine, Kaolack, Fatick), s outh (Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda) and n orth 
(Saint -Louis).  
26. Safeguards instruments and disclosure . The AE has prepared an e nvironmental and 
social impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the requirements of a Category B project. The 
ESIA also contain s an environmental and social management framework plan in both English 
and French.  
27. The paragraphs below summarize the status of compliance and conformance of the 
project to  environmental and social safeguards (ESS) performance standards 1 to 8 of the GCF 
interim ESS standards.  
28. ESS 1: Assessment and m anagement of e nvironmental and s ocial risks and 
impacts . The ESIA provides  a description of the political, legal and instituti onal context of the 
project. It describe s the environmental and socioeconomic profile of the intervention areas and  
assesse s and propose s management strateg ies for the project’s identified potential risks and 
impacts. It present s the institutional arrangement s for implement ing the measures , including 
monitoring and reporting on environmental and social performance.  
29. ESS 2: Labo ur and w orking conditions . The project involves construction -related risks 
and impacts to occupational health and safety because  it will involve civil engineering works 
and the installation of solar PV plants, ancillary facilities and local distribution lines in the target 
villages. The project will follow national decrees on  labo ur and working conditions , and the 
environmental and soc ial management framework plan includes measures to monitor the  use of  
personal protective equipment during construction and operation and maintenance activities of 
workers.  
30. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and p ollution prevention . The ESIA covers  the 
management of wastes from construction activities. Regarding wastes generated during 
operation and maintenance, the ESMPF requires  the formulation of a waste management plan to


---
*Page 68*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 68 
 
 
ensure that wastes such as discarded lead –acid batteries and other potentially hazardous 
wastes (e.g. used oils and accumulators) are handled by authorized agencies.  
31. ESS 4: Community h ealth, safety and s ecurity . The target villages are the most 
remote, isolated and least financially attractive villages  in the country. Hence, there i s a risk 
during construction that construction worker behavio urs will clash with local customs and 
traditions and would expose the host community to non -endemic diseases. To minimize this 
risk, the project will give priority to the recruitment of local lab our and this will be incorporated 
in contracts with developers. The project will also facilitate the establishment of training 
programme s for local villagers to help them  acquire the skills needed for the construction, 
operation and maintenance of the faci lities.  
32. ESS 5: Land a cquisition and involuntary resettlement . The individual PV grids would 
require lands ; for example, up to 1 ,800 square metres for a PV panel field, plus a buffer zone of 
about 50 m and rights of way for the access roads. The project may incur temporary loss of use 
of agricultural land because of the opening of tracks and the installation of equipment and 
facilities on the construction sites. These activities could result in a reduction of land available 
for cultivation and may interfere  with agricultural land development. To mitigate this, the 
project plans to give priority to the use of marginal land for the installation of the power plants. 
The project will provide compensation to the owners of lands impacted by the activities,  using  
the guidelines on resettlement in the National Rural Electrification Programme’s Resettlement 
Policy Framework as the reference for all rural electrification interventions in the country.  
33. ESS 6: Biodiversity c onservation and s ustainable management of l iving natural 
resources . Some of the target villages are located near protected areas , but there is low 
probability that a PV grid, its facilities and/or access roads will fall within declared protected 
areas of natural habitat. Moreover, the power plants will be located within or in the immediate 
vicinity of the villages and the project will implement measures to avoid siting project facilities 
in areas with high biodiversity potential.  
34. ESS 7: Indigenous p eoples . In its assessment, the AE has declared that this 
performance standard is not applicable using the ESS standard definition of indigenous peoples. 
In circumstances where this would be triggered, the project will, prior to commencing any 
activities that have potential application of the AE’s environm ental and social standards on 
indigenous peoples, furnish to the GCF copies of such social assessment, its indigenous peoples 
policy and any associated management plans including , as applicable, evidence that free, prior 
and informed consent from the indig enous communities has been obtained for the purposes of 
the relevant activities. During the AE’s stakeholder engagement process there was a request that the project should take into account the local sociocultural context of the sites as well as 
provide compensation for affected people;  and it was noted that the local communities 
consulted expressed a desire for the project activities.  
35. ESS 8: Cultural h eritage . The project includes measures to  prevent  the installation of 
project components in areas that wou ld have a negative effect on cultural heritage sites. 
Nevertheless, a “ chance find ” procedure will be followed if and when items of cultural, historical 
or archaeological interest are discovered by the contractors in the course of construction 
activities.  
36. Institutional arrangements . The implementation of the institutional ESS requirements 
is described in the ESIA. It lists the entities that are responsib le for execution and supervision  
regarding the  formulation of environmental and social conditionality cr iteria for each project, 
validation of environmental and social cross -compliance criteria, integration of environmental 
and social provisions in the tender and work execution documents (which will be executed by 
ASER), and the execution of environmental wo rks and site -specific environmental and social 
management plans including monitoring by the respective companies.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 69 
 
 
37. Stakeholder engagement . The project conducted consultations with various 
stakeholders during the project planning phase (identification and preparation). Further, the 
project provides for stakeholder engagement in its implementation phase (technical execution 
of activities) including in its commissioning phase (infrastructure operation). Plans for 
consultation and engagement with stakeholders are provided in the ESIA.  
38. Grievance redress mechanism . The AE has an established grievance redress 
mechanism which will be supplemented by  project -level mechanisms as provided for in the 
ESIA. The grievance redress mechanism includes procedure s for receiving, handling and 
following up complaints and grievances,  which include the preparation of complaints booklets 
to be made available at the local level (village chief or town hall) so that complaints can be 
registered and resolved. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF I ndependent 
Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples focal point will also be available for affected local communities. At the company level, a health, safety and environmental manager will be responsible for processing grievances.  
4.2 Gender policy  
39. The AE through the EE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan 
therefore complies wit h the requirements of the Gender Policy  of the GCF .  
40. The AE , as per the gender assessment undertaken by the EE, provides information on 
the enabling environment for  gender equality and women’s empowerment. Senegal has ratified 
international treaties on gen der equality, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against W omen, while at the  country level various plans and strategies 
have been put in place, including  establish ing a Ministry of Gender. The plans and strategies that  
take gender into account are described in the national strategy  (SNEEG ), which  serves as a 
reference document on gender , and the National Action Plan for Women , which  take s into 
account the practical needs of women, such as the use of improved cookstoves by rural women.  
41. Despite the existence of an enabling environment in general, there is limited 
mainstreaming of gender issues in policies and programmes , and inadequate  sex-disaggregated 
data at all levels. Further , gender -related considerations are taken into account  to a very limited  
extent  in the energy sector. Efforts by the sector to address gender issues have not developed 
based on critical assessment ; instead they  have been  done without in -depth analysis (e.g. simply 
mentioning the use of improved cookstoves by rural women in the strategy document ). Gender 
mainstreaming was not taken into consideration  during the design of the national rural 
electrification program me, which is a program me that is meant to cover  all forms of 
electrification . For example,  the intervention on the use of butane gas for cooking had benefits 
and was used by communities, but the uptake was skewed towards urban populations, whereas  
the rura l areas – where use of wood and charcoal  predominate – would have benefited from 
increase uptake of butane, to reduc e continued exposure to smoke and hazards.  
42. Throughout its assessment, t he EE indicates that women in the country are affected 
disproportionately by higher levels of poverty, poor health, lower levels of education, training 
and literacy, lack of access to finance and employment, lack of access to land and means of production , among other  thing s. In addition, women face various obstacles to equitable access 
to efficient and affordable energy. In  rural Senegal, given the prevailing gender -based family 
role s, women are mainly involved in cooking and use of motive power. Wood colle ction and its 
use for cooking is their exclusive domain and the use of wood and other forms of biomass for 
cook ing has adverse effects on women’s  health and that of their children. Based on the 
assessment , there is evidence that women are at risk of aborti on and are exposed to fumes from 
the use of wood, cow dung, crop residues and other alternatives, affecting their health and well -
being. The energy needs of women and men are  not the same because  their roles in society are 
different. Women are generally fo cused on domestic roles such as the management of the


---
*Page 70*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 70 
 
 
household , cooking, fetching water, looking after and educating children, maintaining the home, 
health, and participating as labo urers in agricultural production , and have minimal role s in 
decision -maki ng. The u nderlying reasons for this are  the prevailing sociocultural, religious, legal 
and political beliefs that justify and maintain the unequal position of women and men in the 
society and limiting women’s  ability to access and benefit, equally. Women h eads of households 
may also be disproportionately affected by the lack of access to energy, given the lack of 
understanding of their particular interests , needs and priorities , as well as  the need for them to 
assume productive roles which might render them more vulnerable. Access to energy for 
women -headed household in particular can be further hindered by their location, levels of 
income, employment, age, number of dependents, financial support by family members to name a few.  
43. Despite what is described abo ve, women have active role s in the productive sectors, 
albeit in the small market economy and the informal sector. They play a  significant role in the 
agricultural value chain and they are found in the processing industries,  organized in groups or 
enterpri ses and in small -scale  trading. Within  enterprises , women  still face challenges in 
accessing energy  resources, which  limits their ability to invest in growing their trade (e.g. 
through engaging in transformative activities, storage of raw materials, conservation and packaging of finished products)  including the high cost of energy.  
44. Although  the assessment identified various issues relating to  energy access by women 
as individual s, women who  head households and women who  belong to groups and enterprises, 
the assessment  also mentions the  importan ce of carry ing out consultations with communities in 
order to better integrate women and young people in the governance of the project. It  also sees 
the importance of managing  possible disputes arising from the provision of energy  via mini-
grids , through a complaint s mechanism, in order to correct any gender inequalities that might 
arise as a result of project intervention s. 
45. The AE, through the EE submission of the g ender action plan , has fulfill ed the 
requirements of the G ender Policy of the GCF in that it has provided a gender action plan. The 
gender action plan includes activities that are aimed at improving access to clean energy from solar mini- grids to meet the differentiated energy uses  of men and women in the target villages 
and to increase their resilience. The activities have corresponding baseline s, indicators, targets, 
budget and a timeline. Some targets will be determined after th e consultation at the community 
level and will be put in place by year one. The activities in the action plan include  capacity -
building initiatives targeted at ASER and other project entities, men, women and young people,  
and management committees and women ’s umbrella organizations with a bid to sensitize, and 
raise awareness of  gender and energy,  and gender institutionalization issues. It also describes  
the existing energy potential and productive uses of mini- grids that can meet gender and 
community infrastructure demand s, and gender -differentiated and preferential tariffs for 
households based on needs. The action plan also contains activities that will provide meters for poor women -headed households to help manage costs; and, for young peop le, provides training 
in various trades and provides subsidies for adequate equipment for economic activities The 
plan  also provid es business opportunities for energy efficiency enterprises owned by women ’s 
groups with agro -processing units,  as well as pro viding subsidies for solar kits and equipment 
to the groups.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall proposal assessment (medium risk)  
46. GCF is requested to provide a 40 -year sovereign loan of EUR 71.1 million and a grant of 
EUR 3.7 million to support the development of solar photovoltaic  mini- grids , providing a total of  
32 MW across 1,000 villages in Senegal. The AE is co -financing a 10 -year loan of EUR 15.3


---
*Page 71*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 71 
 
 
million. O f the o ther co -financiers , KfW will provide  a loan of EUR 102 million and the 
Government of Senegal will contribute EUR 5.6 million. The concession agreements will be 
signed between  the Government and private -sector operators for operation and maintenance of 
the mini- grids . 
47. The success of the project depends on the capacity of the AE and EE to select suitable 
mini- grid construction companies and the quality of the concessions. The project includes 
training and technical assista nce for the tender and procurement process, environmental and 
social safeguards  and gender under component 1 (grant) and support for p roductive use of 
electricity under component 3 (grant) . 
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
48. BOAD, as a direct access entity , has been operating in the West African region for 40 
years and has experience in financing solar -based rural electrification projects in Senegal, and in 
Mali , the N iger and Togo since 2015 . The AE has a team of engineers and specialists with 
expertise relevant  to implement ing the project , and has been building a track record in the 
energy sector by managing an energy development fund. BOAD has an ongoing financing 
relationship with the Government of Senegal, and made available a total sum of 12.22 billion  
Communauté financière africaine franc s (CFAF)  (USD 22.00 million) through longer -term loans. 
The AE has gained GCF approval for a proposal with a similar structure i n Mali (approved at the 
twenty -second meeting of the Board ).  
49. ASER is the EE for this project : it was formally created in 1999 with the sole aim of 
promoting rural electrification. ASER  is autonomous ; however , it functions under the auspices  
of the Ministry for Energy and the Ministry of Finance. In its role as EE , ASER will supervise  the 
project from procurement and construction of all mini -grids until the installations are 
transferred to concessionaires  (end-beneficiar ies). 
4.3.3.  Programme -specific risks (mediu m risk)  
50. Construction and technical risk . In terms of the technical risk, the procurement of 
high -quality materials and using a proven technology will be critical , as will the  quality of the 
contractor s. It is recommended that the AE require the use of an independent engineer to report 
on installations to ensure quality. The AE and EE are important for overseeing procedures and 
providing the technical assurance of the connections to the end users . 
51. Operat ions and maintenance risk . Underperformance would  reduce the impact of the 
projects , as well as the financial viability of the project for the concession holders. The latter 
could influence the long -term  viability of the project. Concession holders  are exp ected to 
reinvest in the grid. It is recommended that cash flows for such investments be placed in a 
separate account and that the concessions be granted for a minimum of 15 years.  
52. Credit risk and foreign exchange risk . GCF will provide a sovereign loan to  the 
Government of Senegal to be provided and repaid in euros . The source of the repayment of the 
loan is the Government treasury and not the cash flow from the subprojects. Senegal is currently rated Ba3  by Moody ’s. The CFA F is pegged to the euro , thus he lping the Gov ernmen t of Senegal 
to mitigate the currency fluctuation risk related to GCF financing.  
53. Affordability . The financial model expect s the concession -holder tariff to  be around 
EUR 0.30/kWh ( in CFA F equivalent ) but the end user will benefit from a lower tariff based on 
the harmonized tariffs of CFA F 91–97 (EUR 0.14 –0.15) per kWh. The difference is the result of a 
subsidy by the G overnment. GCF financing is expected to help reduce the subsidy over time 
because GCF financing could allow for lower concession -holder tariffs. The feasibility study 
notes that an analysis of households ’ ability to pay was conducted , and concluded that th e


---
*Page 72*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 72 
 
 
assumption of a penetration rate of 85 per cent of households living in the target villages was 
reasonable for the project’s coverage .  
4.3.4.  Project viability and concessionality  
54. The viability of the project depends on the quality of the construction and conc essions.  
Without GCF financing, the Government of Senegal would  have to take loans at market rates, 
which will increase the cost of  the project. The AE and the Government are requested to pass on 
GCF concessionality to end -beneficiaries through a reduced t ariff.  
55. The financial analysis shows that with concession holders will pay 5 per cent up front of 
CAPEX  for the concession but are obliged to make reinvestments for inverters, batteries and 
panels. The IRR is expected to be 12.6  per cent  at the subsidized t ariff level. It should be noted 
that the IRR is determined for a horizon longer than the 15 -year concession and is heavily 
influenced by the reinvestment costs. Without those  reinvestment s the IRR for would more than 
double for the concession holder s. Addi tionally, reinvestment costs are assumed to remain 
stable , although  costs of batteries, inverters and solar panels show a declining trend.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
56. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results areas and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Compliance risk  (medium risk)         
57. Regarding  due diligence checks for money laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited 
practices, the AE has developed a Financial S ecurity Policy (2016) which constitutes the general 
framework of the control system covering all BOAD activities relating to the prevention, 
surveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks.  
58. BOAD has indicated that its  Financia l Security Policy incorporates international 
standards defined by the United Nations, the Organi sation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, the recommendations issued by the Financial Action Task Force ( FATF)  and the 
provisions of d irective 02/2015/CM /UEMOA of 2 July 2015 on the fight against money 
laundering and terrorist financing in the member States of the West African Economic and 
Monetary Union (UEMOA) . The policy requires the  disclos ure of information about its clients’  
transactions to the relev ant authorities in cases where international rules and local law s require 
regulated financial institutions to do so, including cases of money laundering. Under its due diligence, BOAD  will assess against its civil/criminal and regulatory antecedents and sa nctions 
lists. BOAD  also conducts administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coercion, 
collisions and inconvenient practices, and make use of the relevant national authorities for 
necessary criminal investigations. BOAD  integrates measures to co mbat illicit financial flows, 
money laundering and financing  of terrorism  throughout  the internal operations of the BOAD  
Group.  
59. In the context of this project, concerning money laundering /financing of terrorism , the 
concerned stakeholder will:  
(a) Ensure that the funds financing the p roject are not of illicit origin and , in particular , are 
not related to fraud against Senegal's financial interests, or to corruption, organized 
criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and without delay forward to B OAD 
any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in the 
company and in the p roject , or notify BOAD of any information indicating the illicit 
origin of all or part of the funds of the structure;  and


---
*Page 73*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 73 
 
 
(b) Not enter into a business r elationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on 
the lists established by the United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant 
to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the European Union in application of its 
Common Posi tions and/or by the African Union as well as on any other relative or 
complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the 
fight against money  laundering and the financing of terrorism .  
(c) The AE has further indicated that it s “know -your -customer” standard -compliant due 
diligence process , including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors , is 
followed thoroughly.  
60. Based on this information, c ompliance risk assessment is rated as Medium . 
4.3.7.  Recommendation  
61. It is recom mended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
 
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  Projects are exposed to construction and  
operation and maintenance risk. The q uality 
of materials used, the contractor and the 
concession holders will drive project success. 
The Government of Senegal (rated Ba3 by 
Moody’ s) will be the borrower of GCF funds  Accredited entity/executing 
entity  capability to implement 
this programme  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary   
62. The AE for the project is BOAD which will be responsible for the overall management of 
this project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; ( iii) ensuring funds are 
effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project 
monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure 
and evaluation.  
63. The EE is the AS ER. In its role as EE, ASER will ensure the operational supervision of the 
project from procurement and construction of all mini -grids until end -beneficiary installations.  
64. The project implementation unit will be integrated at ASER general management level, 
with a Project Coordinator acting under the supervision of a Steering Committee (Comité de 
Pilotage – CP). The project implementation unit will be complemented by other coordination 
functions such as the: (i) the Technical Monitoring Committee (CTS) which will support the 
coordination and monitoring of the project work implementation; and (ii) the operational 
structures (management units) of ASER General Management which will be responsible for the 
implementation of the project. The ASER Project Managemen t Unit will be comprised of the 
following professionals: Project Coordinator, Expert Engineer in the Renewable Energies (Solar), Financial Analyst, UN Procurement Specialist, a person in charge of Monitoring and Evaluation and an Environmental and Social S afety Officer.  
65. Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant 
BOAD rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA) signed by BOAD and the GCF as part of BOAD’s accreditat ion to the GCF. The 
provision of the BOAD loan will be made to ASER through the Ministry of Finance (Senegal 
Treasury) as per the Fund Flow Diagram described in the FP, and subject to a reimbursement


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 74 
 
 
plan to be agreed. BOAD will carry out financial transfers in accordance with its own policies, 
procedures and rules for which it has been accredited for.  
66. Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting 
and Auditing of Projects. The Financial Agreement with Senegal will requ ire the submission of 
Audited Financial Statements to BOAD within four months after each year -end. An independent 
external auditor will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable to the Bank (not later 
than four months after effectiveness) for the  entire duration of the project.  
67. The Financial Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing 
standards. Furthermore, BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, 
comments, and recommendations for improvements in ac counting records, systems, controls 
and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial Agreements. The cost of the audit will be met from project resources. 
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
68. As a mitigation project, the intervention expects to reduce or avoid 1,127,447 tCO 2eq for 
the lifespan of the asset , and it will provide co -benefits to 344,040 beneficiaries of which 
172,208 are women.  
69. Overall the funding proposal and log ical frame work  sufficiently apply GCF f und -level 
(impact and outcome) results management framework /performance measurement framework  
indicators, and the project has built in baselines and data collection that can inform progress reporting on expected results. At the project performance level, as a technical 
assistance/training -based grant project, measurements for behavioural change have been 
integrated that are essential to deliver the expected project results.  
70. Regarding section E.1 -E.6 of the funding proposal , overall the logic al framework 
complies with GCF standards,  and it has been cleared through Secretariat r eview. 
71. The funding proposal  theory  of change could benefit in implementation from further 
details reflecting on  the causal pathways at the project level and in relation to  the climate 
rationale (which ideally are tested in implementation either with project performance management indicators or impact data/evidence generated to attribute changes to GCF 
investment).  
72. Under section E.7 of the funding proposal, and as compl ement ed by the information in 
the monitoring and evaluation plan ( annex 5 of the FP ), information for implementation has 
been provided with initial information on data collection, evidence generation and assessments , 
not only of quantitative metrics, but also of the behavioural changes necessary for the 
quantitative results to be realized . As a good practice the project will apply an innovative 
approach in assessing result trends through the timing of the final evaluation to increase the 
meaningfulness and utili zation  of the evaluation. This will enable the project to assess not only 
general evaluation criteria but also the accuracy of results achieved against the results expected, 
as calculated using the methodology from the funding proposal, and in relationship  to the 
results as reported at the project completion to verify if the assumptions of the forecasted trend 
have been realized .  
4.6 Legal assessment  
73. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 3  April 2017 and it became effective on 31  August 
2017.  
74. The AE has not provid ed a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all its 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It is


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/ 02/Add.10  
Page 75 
 
 
recommended that, prior to submission of the f unding proposal to the Board ( 1) the AE  has 
obtained all its internal approvals and ( 2) the GCF  has received a certificate or legal opinion 
from the AE  in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF  confirming that all final internal 
approvals by the AE  have been obtained and that the entity has the author ity and capacity to 
implement the project.  
75. The proposed project will be implemented in Senegal, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileged and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropria tion in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The Secretariat submitted a draft of the privileges and immunities agreement to the 
Government of the Republic of Senegal on 30 September 2015. On 16  February 2017 the 
Government of the Republi c of Senegal sent a communication to the GCF stating  that the draft 
privileges and immunities agreement was under review by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. No 
further communication has been received by the GCF Secretariat to date.  
76. The Heads of the Indepen dent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges  and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunitie s. 
77. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Delivery by the AE  to the GCF  of a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all its internal approvals within 120 days of the Board approval;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date on which the 
AE has provided a certificate or legal opinion confir ming that it has obtained all internal 
approvals, whichever is later; and  
(c) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 76 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP138 
Proposal name:  ASER  Solar Rural Electrification Project  
Accredited entity:  West African Development Bank (BOAD)  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                                                Scale : High  
1. In a 2017 publication, the World Bank  reported that 61.7  per cent  of the population of 
Senegal,  on average,  had access to electricity. This national average mask s the differences in 
access between the urban and rural areas and between  different rural areas in the country. In 
the same World Bank report, the average rural electricity access in 2017 was quoted as 35.4  per 
cent,  while the urban area average was as high as 91.7  per cent  in the sam e year .1 The 
percentage quoted in the f unding proposal reviewed  from a recent year  showed that rural 
access in Senegal has improved very slightly in the last few years to an average of about 42  per 
cent . This current average rural access percentage hides the disparity between different rural 
areas. For example, it was stated in the fund ing proposal  that electricity access in in rural areas 
like Médina Yoro Foula, Ran érou, Salé mata  and Saraya are each less than 10  per cent . The slight 
improvement in access to electricity in rural Senegal in recent years reflects  the aggressive 
effort of the G overnment of Senegal to improve electricity access in rural areas in its effort to 
stay on its declared path to universal access by 20 25. 
2. In the last few years, the Government of Senegal  has pursued an aggressive rural 
electrification strategy through its Senegalese Agency for Rural Electrification ( Agence 
Sénégalaise d’Électrification Rurale ) (ASER) . ASER is  aimed at improving th e low level of rural 
access to electricity , especially after the country join ed the U nited Nations  Sustainable Energy 
for All (SE4All)  initiative , which actually catalysed Senegal to pursue the path of 100  per cent  
electrification of at least 90  per cent  of rural households by 2025 . The electricity access results 
obtained so far w ere achieved via a com bination of  implement ing grid extension projects to 
selected rural communities; building isolated secondary and regional power plants that are 
operated with diesel fuel; and develop ing solar photovoltaic /diesel generation -based 
micro grids in selected rural  villages . Key achievements of ASER to date (2005 –2019) can be 
summarized as follows: delivery of 174 m ini-grids  and 12 grid extension projects , enabling the 
electrification of 3,000 rural villages. These achievements  fall short of what is expected to put 
Senegal on a  path towards  its SE4ALL electricity access objectives. The  unsustainable 
operations and maintenance ( O&M ) cost s of these rural electrification facilities have been 
identified  as the key  reason w hy the pac e of the programme has not been as fast as expected. 
Non -reflective tariffs, grids of a suboptimal size  and a lack of metering have been identified as 
common problems. The n ational harmonization of tariff s between the rural consumers and 
those in the u rban parts of Senegal as well as aggressive consumer metering were introduced to 
ameliorate these problem s; however , these responses created a fiscal -financial burden for the 
Government of S enegal , necessitating alternative strategies.  
 
1 See < Data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=SN >.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 77 
 
 
3. From experience gathered  in recent years, if the declared intention of universal access 
by 2025 is to be met, effort s will need to be ramp ed up. Apart from the reasons adduced for  the 
unsustainable O&M  of the rural electrification projects in Senegal,  the inadequate availability of 
domestic funds (public and private) to  accelerat e the effort s has been noted as a key barrier to  
achieving  universal access by 2025.  The Government of Senegal  is highly aware of the need to 
remove these barriers in order to realize the  dire ct and indirect benefits of improving electricity 
access . These benefits include  the direct benefit of impro ving  the quality of life of consumers 
connected to the electricity access facilities; improv ing the productivity  of these consumers ; 
and, when renew able energy generation is utilized in the rural energy access facility  instead of 
the fossil fuel -fired facility, delivering  additional benefits apart from reduced greenhouse gas 
(GHG)  emissions, including  improved reliability of the electricity supply facility, reduced 
emissions of noxious gases and particulates , and a reduced import bill for fossil fuel s for a net 
fossil fuel importer  country like Senegal. In addition, the intervention may deliver improved 
resilience of the power facility to extreme event s, which may affect alternative power sources as 
co-benefits of the intervention.  Therefore, the strategy of the conditional intervention in 
Senegal’s  nationally determined contribution (NDC) , which  requir es external financing to 
support the efforts of the Government of Senegal , is considered  to be  a good way forward.   
4. Further to its expressed commitment to address the low access to electricity of rural 
communities in Senegal through ASER, t he Government of S enegal conceptualized this proposed 
intervention . The main goal of the proposed project is to uphold the renewable share of 
Senegal’s ambition to reach universal energy access by 2025 by fos tering solar -powered mini -
grid development in isolated villages th at are not connected to the national electricity grid . The 
aims of the project can be summarized as follows:  
(a) Develop of off -grid renewable energy mini -grids to reduce  carbon dioxide  emissions 
from the Senegalese power sector;  
(b) Contribute to achieving Senegal’s electricity access objectives;  
(c) Promote gender balance in the promotion of balanced rural economic growth;  
(d) Catalyse, expand and strengthen  the participation of the private sector in financing the 
electricity access program me; 
(e) Develop the capacit ies of key stakeholders and institutions in Senegal needed to grow 
the electricity access program me of the country through a de -risking of the invest ment 
platform;  and 
(f) Create an enabling environment in Senegal that will energi ze the country’s journey on 
its path to wards  universal  electricity access.  
5. The proposed project has been conceptualized, designed and organized to be 
implemented with the following components , outputs and activities . 
6. Component 1:  Technical assistance for solar rural electrification stakeholders : 
(a) Output 1.1:  Capacity -building of rural electrification stakeholders : 
(i) Activity 1.1. 1: Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and 
GCF requirements ; and 
(ii) Activity 1.1.2 : Seminars , trips and workshops ( technology watch,  public 
consultations, conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.) ; 
(b) Output 1.2:  Implementation of the g ender action plan : 
(i) Activity 1.2.1: Gender -relevant mapping and tutoring  of community  
organizations ;


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 78 
 
 
(ii) Activity 1.2.2:  Gender  stakeholders training for the  project management unit  
(PMU ), local operators  and community organizations ; and 
(iii) Activity 1.2.3 : Gender -oriented communication campaign ; and 
(c) Output 1.3 : Environmental and social downstream activities:  
(i) Activity 1.3.1 : Implementation and monitoring of environmental and social 
measures ; and 
(ii) Activity 1.3.2 : Establishment of R ecycling unit for batteries and other waste 
(compact fluorescent lamps, other electro nics) . 
7. Component 2:  Procurement and i nstallation of solar powered mini -grids : 
(a) Output 2.1 : Preparation of detailed engineering studies ; 
(i) Activity  2.1.1 : Site selection, engineering studies and  specific environmental and  
social analys es for each site ; 
(b) Output 2.2 : Supply, installation and commissioning of equipment ; 
(i) Activity 2.2.1 : Solar photovoltaic ( PV) power plant  construction and minigrid 
deployment;  and 
(ii) Activity 2.2.2 : Smart met re installation and  miscellaneous;  
(c) Output 2.3 : Modern public lightin g; 
(i) Activity 2.3.1 : Deployment of solar street lighting;  and 
(d) Output 2.4:  Control and supervision of work ; 
(i) Activity 2.4.1 : Control and supervision of work  
8. Component 3: Incentives for s ocial  and productive use of e lectricity : 
(a) Output 3.1:  Gender and social connections ; 
(i) Activity 3.1.1 : Connection of eligible social services  and women  and youth  
entrepreneurs to the PV mini -grids ; and 
(b) Output  3.2: Microfinanced productive equipment credit guarantees ; 
(i) Activity 3.2.1 : Implementation of  a mechanism to facil itate access to productive 
equipment financing through microfinance . 
9. The total financing requested (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is EUR  
198 .692  million . This is expected to be contributed as follows:  
(a) GCF:  EUR  75.445  million, made up of: 
(i) Senior loans: EUR  73.623  million with a 40 -year tenor , 10-year grace period  and 
a concessional interest rate of 0.0 per cent  per annum;  and  
(ii) Grants: EUR  1.822  million;  
(b) Co-financing:  EUR  123.247  million, made up of :


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 79 
 
 
(i) A senior loan from the West African Development Bank ( BOAD ): EUR  15.245  
million with a 1 0-year tenor , 3-year  grace period  and an annual f ixed interest 
rate2 of 7.6 per cent ;3 
(ii) A senior loan from KfW : EUR 102.396 million with a 10 -year tenor, 0.5 -year 
grace period  and an annual interes t rate of 6.14  per cent ; and  
(iii) A contribution  from the Government of Senegal: EUR  5.606 million .  
10. Table 1 below provides information on the plan for the appropriation of the funds 
presented above for the different activities of this project . 
Table 1:  Financing by component  
Component  Indicative 
cost  in  
EUR m illion  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  in 
EUR m illion  Financial 
instrume
nt Amount  
in EUR 
million  Financial 
instrument  Institution  
names  
1.Technical 
assistance to 
the solar rural 
electrification 
stakeholders   
3.33   
1.17   
Grants   
2.16   
Loan/  
contribution   
BOAD / 
Government 
of Senegal 
2. Procurement 
and installation 
of solar 
powered mini-
grids   
192.23   
71.68   
Loan   
120.5 5  
Loan/ 
contribution   
KfW, BOAD / 
Government 
of Senegal 
3. Incentives for 
social and 
productive use 
of electricity   
2.33   
2.33   
Loan/ 
grants   
-   
Project 
management 
cost 0.39  0.09  Grants   
0.30   
Contribution   
Government 
of Senegal 
 
Indicative total cost (EUR)   
198,692,182   
75,445,176   
123,247,006  
Abbreviations:  BOAD = West African Development Bank  
11. The potential mitigation benefits and co -benefits that will be delivered by this project 
are described below : 
(a) The proposed project will involve the implementation of renewable energy -based rural 
electrification  projects that will displace the baseline facilities,  which may include 
energy supplies in a village without existing microgrid connections and/or villages 
connected to existing microgrid s with electricity supplies coming from fossil fuel -fired 
power plants. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  approved 
baseline and m onitoring methodology AMS -III.BL  (integrated methodology for 
electrifica tion of communities) ,4 which was utilized to estimate GHG emission 
 
2 Fixed interest rate, on top of which a commitment fee (0 .5 per cent ) and a service fee (1 .0 per cent ) are due.   
3 As the cost of West African Development Bank resources is higher, the request for GCF concessional resources is 
meant to reduce  the project's weighted average cost of capital (for the Government of Senegal, which is the 
borrower, and divide  the project’s  debt servicing in to smaller instalments to improve viability. 
4 Nota bene:  under this clean development mechanism methodology’s eligibility requirements, at least 75  per cent  
(by number) of the project consumers shall be households .


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 80 
 
 
reductions that will emanate from this kind of project , is applicable for the project 
circumstances in the targeted rural villages in Senegal. When the proposed project is 
implemented, it w ill deliver renewable energy  microgrids in about 1,000 villages, which 
will lead to emission reductions of about 1.13 million  tonnes of carbon dioxide  
equivalent by 2045 ; 
(b) The funding proposal also contained c onvincing arguments that  adaptation co -benefits  
of the proposed project will contribute to fostering resilience and sustainable 
development in the following ways : 
(i) The increased access to electricity that will be delivered by this project 
intervention will promote equalized gender roles for women and  enhance access 
to education and information  for school children at all levels in the remote rural 
communities where the proposed project will be implemented. T he cause- effect 
argument of the impact of climate change and variability on gender and children may be difficult to make analytically for Senegal, however , these kinds of impacts 
have been reported in other regions of the w orld, where the most vulnerable 
people are women and children. Therefore, this co -benefit may be delivered;  
(ii) The implementation of this project as proposed will deliver decentralized power 
systems to these villages, which will mitigate  the pre -project weakness , 
characterized by : scattered consumers (due to the geography of the 
settlements ); fuel supply systems, that is usually at risk  during extreme weather 
events ; and at risk from unstable international prices of  crude oil (which affe cts 
negatively the price of diesel, when fuel -based technology is utilized . All these  
which will not be the case when the infrastructure of the proposed project is 
delivered;  
(iii) Climate -resilient productive assets will be provided to selected consumers that 
will be connected to the microgrid and whose loan facilities  are already at 
concessional levels, will also have revolving guarantees of up to 40  per cent  of 
nominal loans of  an average duration  of three years  will improv e the  reliability 
of water and food chains, as well as services in health, education and social institutions, farmers, entrepreneurs, schools and clinics lacking electricity ; and 
(iv) The following arguments were also convincingly made in the funding proposal  
about the resilience -strengthening co -benefit of the project intervention: t he 
project  will provide employment opportunities and support the economic 
growth of the rural areas; and a ffordable renewable electricity  will further 
strengthen the economic resilience of rural households as it will improve 
community income levels and reduce migration patterns ; and  
(c) These co -benefits, which are likely to be delivered in addition to the estimated GHG 
emission reduction of this project , and the fact that a total of about  344,000 people will 
directly benefit from the successful implementation of this project. Furthermore, not 
only will the project enhance the capacity of local private concessiona ires who will be 
contracted under an O&M agreement  to run these microgrid facilities, it will also create  
an enabling environment and capacity for the local financing of  the future replication of 
the projects. This will ensure  Senegal is on a path towards  universal energy access for 
the rural part of the country.  
12. With these observations from the review of the project, the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel (TAP)  came to the  conclusion  that this project intervention will deliver high 
climate impact potential.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential              Scale:  High


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 81 
 
 
1.2.1.  Comprehensiveness  
13. In the absence of this project intervention, energy access projects in  many of the 
smallest and most remote  vulnerable villages where grid extension is not feasible  in Senegal 
would continue to be dominated by  the fossil -fuelled microgrid. This traditional energy 
pathway would otherwise continue to make Senegal dependent on imported fossil fuels .5 The 
proposed proje ct, when compared to this baseline strategy , will deliver  faster penetration of 
cleaner energy , thus reducing the need for imports of diesel fuel .  
14. The project will deliver a progressive, sustainable, low carbon and decentralized power 
system that will replace the status quo ante strategy described above. This will be a paradigm 
shift in that the structure of the intervention will produce an enabling environment for the 
success of the project as well as develop in -country capabilit ies for the technical delivery of the 
project under a strengthened institutional framework. This will facilitate the replication of the 
idea in similar villages in the country  that are  not covered by this proposed project . 
15. In the absence of the proposed project, the status quo ante situation with the electricity 
access programme of the country, which has been adjudged as  not proceeding at a pace 
sufficient  to enable the achievement of uni versal access by 2025 , will continue. The success of 
the proposed project will not only put Senegal on a  low-carbon pathway, but it will also 
contribute to  reducing the fossil fuel dependence of Senegal and assure the acceleration of the 
access programme  towards the national objective of the Government of Senegal to achieve the 
SE4ALL access by 2025 . This will deliver the needed paradigm shift . 
16. In the status quo ante situation, Senegal’s domestic private financial sector had  limited 
know -how o n clean energy  investments , particularly when it comes to decentralized power 
generation , as most of the systems successfully implemented were  fossil fuel -based microgrids. 
In addition , these local financial institutions had prohibitively expensive  financing packages, 
which rendered such  projects infeasible , especially  the more capital -intensive renewable energy  
alternatives. The result is that private sector investors  were discouraged from investing. The 
proposed financing package offers a solution to incentivize  the participation of the private 
sector by increasing investor confidence  through the offer of  concessional finance and grant 
funding . The proposed funding structure for these private sector  investors will facilitate their 
contribution to the required concess ion fee required for financial closure . When this is coupled 
with strong capacity -building activities on  operating and m aintain ing these assets, it will 
establish a business environment that will ensure the success of this proposed intervention in a 
cost -effective and sustainabl e manner. This will cataly se the effective replication of the concept 
in the remaining villages not covered by the current intervention, resulting in the effective 
crowding -in of private sector investment and expertise at a level muc h higher than in the status 
quo ante. This will deliver a significant paradigm shift .  
17. For many renewable energy  microgrid investment s in developing countries, the ability 
to attract productive -use consumers to the service area of the mini- grid is often a necessary 
condition for success. Like many such projects in developing countries, earlier efforts in Senegal 
also accentuated the need to include strategies  in the scheme to enhance the development of 
such consumers with the se planned microgrids. Therefore, another convincing argument 
offered by the accredited entity ( AE) in the document reviewed by the independent  TAP is the 
importance of the  technical assistance  component of the proposed intervention, which is 
expected to g enerate a powerful trickle -down effect on the national economy.  It is argued  in the 
funding proposal  that this  will be delivered through the  focus on  the design and implement ation 
of productive use de -risking tools that are  expected to  satisfy the capacities of the final 
 
5 Senegal imported 655 kilotonnes of oil equivalent  in 2015 and used 305 kilotonnes of oil equivalent to generate 
electricity, according to the African Energy Commission .


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 82 
 
 
beneficiaries and reflect the needs of private sector operators . This will be a strong co -benefit 
that will also support the high paradigm shift characteristics of this proposed project . 
18. In the status quo ante, the economy of the rural areas where these micro -grids will be 
implemented are rudimentary and far from modern , with very low productivity in  the main 
economic activity  of agriculture. In most African countries, a substantial percentage of rural 
dwellers are farmers who practice subsi stence agriculture. For many of these rural dwellers, 
electricity is not available,  or, when it is available, it is not reliable  for providing energy for  their 
productive venture,  which is farming.  These smallholder farmers  often  don’t have  access to 
electricity  or to reliable electricity  to power electrical appliances , which would help them 
increase their yields  through access to  water irrigation and to clean portable water  sources that 
will enhance their health situation and sanitation . This pre -proj ect situation will be changed 
very significantly with the success of the proposed project , which will deliver improv ements in  
community assets through cheaper  provision  of services (health, education, water and  
agriculture) ; improvement s in quality of life ; and enhanc ement in  the adaptive capacity of the 
communities. Thus,  the project will deliver a more modernized rural economy compared to the 
status quo ante . 
1.2.2.  Innovation  
19. Innovation is partially delivered when changes are made to the way things are done in 
the status quo with a value creation , and the ultimate creation of a better way of doing what is 
failing and its survival with  better delivery of results. The status quo situation of  electricity 
access in rural Senegal before this proposed intervention was  conceptualized has not  been  
yielding the expected results, which  will facilitate  the plan of Senegal to achieve universal 
electricity access by the year 2025. The  successful implementation of the proposed project is,  
however , likely to accelerate the process of bringing  electricity access to  these rural villages as 
many of the barriers discussed in the funding proposal  – fund scarcity; high cost of fund s when 
they are available from private sources in the country; a weak institutional base to ensure the 
success of the intervention; etc.  – are ameliorated by the proposed intervention. These barriers 
will be positively addressed through the interventions built into th e proposed project via grant 
funding that will build the skills of pertinent stakeholders  (technical, planning, management, 
policy and regulatory frameworks) that are  usually needed to deliver such changes to the 
business -as-usual situation . Thus, the prop osed project structure is expected to change the 
status quo in which decentralized , rural electrification projects are being carried out. Key 
changes that will be delivered will include:  
(a) The concessional GCF fund ing will crowd  in more public and private f unds at much 
higher levels than at the status quo , thus making the financial feasibility of renewable 
energy  projects more favourable,  accelerat ing the implementation of such lower -carbon 
generation assets for the rural microgrids;  
(b) The proposed project  through the financial tools and mechanisms built into the concept, 
especially the grant funding available for financing the capacity building for some 
relevant stakeholders (activities in components 1 and 3 ), ensure that key skills 
necessary to deliver the success of these microgrid projects in the many rural villages 
are successfully delivered  to these stakeholders  . This will ensure the  successful delivery 
of decentralized microgrid s in these villages and allow them to utiliz e clean solar PV 
technologies a t an implementation speed that  could not have been achieved by the 
status quo ante strategies while also achieving reductions in carbon emission s. This will  
deliver a very innovative paradigm shift in Senegal;  
(c) In the status quo programme in Senegal, it was  observed that a key consumer type that 
were scarce  in many of the villages was anchor loads. The proposed project will utilize 
some of the financial tools to facilitat e the uptake of productive applications to serve as


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 83 
 
 
anchor loads , thus making the projec t more viable than the situation in the baseline. 
This will contribute to the feasibility of the proposed strategy and hence deliver an 
innovative paradigm shift;  and 
(d) The success of the proposed project will catalyse the replication of the idea in other 
villages in Senegal, which are not included in this target batch (about 1,000 in number) , 
thus improving the  quality of the project  through learning by doing and , when this is 
replicated in other countries, further expand ing the paradigm shift capacity of th e 
project . 
1.2.3.  Enabling environment/ sustainability of outcomes  
20. The AE for this project , the regional development bank  BOAD , will provid e co-financing 
for part of the systems that will be implemented in components 1 and 2 . The setup of a PMU for 
this project will be covered by grant funding from GCF  and a contribution from Government of 
Senegal. The c apacities of relevant staff members of the PMU  will be built through  some of the 
capacity -building activities of c omponent 1. Some of these capacity -building activities will be 
focused on developing the technical understanding of the PMU and the ability  of its members to 
operate and maintain  the solar PV  micro grid facilities. The capacities thus  built  at the level of all 
relevant stakeholders , especially for ASER , which  will spearhead  the implementation of the 
proposed project , and they will eventually create an enabling environment for the sustainable 
success of this concept . BOAD already has an ongoing financing relationship with the 
Government of Senegal , which,  coupled with the capacity of ASER (which  will be strengthened 
by the various capacity -building activities i n component 1 ) should reduce any inherent 
weaknesses in the abilit ies of the critical stakeholders . The independent TAP is therefore of the 
opinion that  the project will create an  enabling environment  for the sustainable planning and 
implementation of this project and its repli cation in other parts of Senegal and beyond . 
1.2.4.  Replicability and scalability/knowledge and learning  
21. Currently, a ccording to information provided in the funding proposal , of the 14 regions 
of Senegal, 9 have an electrical coverage rate of less than 60  per cent . All of these regions with 
lower electricity access have localities that  are yet to be electrified at all. It has been reported in 
the funding proposal  that over 14,000 localities remain to be electrified , with  a population of 
3,372,458 to be covered by 2025 . Thus,  if the objective of the Government of Senegal  to achieve 
universal electricity access in the country by 202 56 is to be achieved, then the status quo ante 
speed of the national rural electrification pr ogram me must be accelerated. The entire package of 
this BOAD proposal will put in place a sound platform that will ensure  the following  availability 
of local financing – bolstered through this project by the concessional GCF loan –;  domestic 
capacity that will include  technical  design , planning,  and management  of mini -grid systems; and  
create very informed stakeholders , including electricity consumers. These will altogether boost 
the success of the proposed project and its replication to the several thousan d localities in the 
country yet to be electrified. The capacity -building program me, the documentation of its 
accomplishment s and its knowledge  base  of information that can then be disseminat ed in 
Senegal and the sub region will catalyse the replication of this proof of concept in other 
countries in the subregion . Although there is  no information in the funding proposal  or the 
annexes on information dissemination beyond Senegal on the successes of this concept, 
information on the performance of this proof of concept should be internationally disseminated during and after the project to facilitate replication beyond Senegal.  
22. The proposed project will deliver a comprehensive and innovative paradigm shift as 
discussed above. It will also  create an enabling environment that will make the tangible 
 
6 According to its SE4ALL objective.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 84 
 
 
outcomes of this intervention sustainable while also enhancing  the replicability of the proof of 
concept to other parts of Senegal. Therefore , the independent TAP has concluded that the 
paradigm shift po tential of th is project is high.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential            Scale : High  
1.3.1.  Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals  
23. The project will directly contribute to the following Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG s): 
(a) SDG 7 : Affordable and clea n energy – ensur e access to affordable, reliable, sustainable 
and modern energy for all . By increasing electricity access and enabling Senegal to 
achieve universal access by the target date of 2025;  
(b) SDG 1 : No poverty – end poverty in all its forms everywhere . By increasing the income of 
rural dwellers through increased access to electricity, w hich will enable the financial 
capacity of rural income, including farm -level income s, and by reducing out -migration 
from rural areas due to loss of livelihoods dependent on agriculture and other 
productive activit ies that need electricity to thrive ; 
(c) SDG 3: Good health and well -being – ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all 
at all ages . Improved electricity access in the rural areas will gradually erase the use of 
diesel/kerosene/paraffin, which poses health hazards to the people in such commun ities due to emissions of noxious gases and particulates from the combustion of 
the fuels for energy in the baseline scenario . Health will also be improved  in these 
villages , as rural health provision will become more effective with the availability of 
electricity;  
(d) SDG 5 : Gender equality  – achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls . By 
means of a gender action plan that has been put in place and that is  targeted at the 
inclusion of w omen in the capacity -building program me as well as the provisi on of 
financial and technical support to women artisans and other stakeholders;  
(e) SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation  – ensure availability and sustainable management of 
water and sanitation for all.  Although not a directly delivered benefit of this project, the 
availability of electricity in the villages will eventually lead to better quality sources of potable water from , for example,  cleaner aquifer s compared to , in many cases, polluted 
surface water  in the status quo ante. This will also improve the sanitation situation in 
these rural communities;  and 
(f) SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth – promote sustained, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all . 
Improved electricity access will also lead to the introduction of tangible business 
venture s that will provide decent work for village communities . This will enhance the 
economic growth of the rural communities . 
1.3.2.  Economic co -benefits  
24. The project will enable the productive uses of electricity and income -generating 
activities through the improved reliability of the power supply. The project will also contribute 
to improving the country’s energy security budget deficit , which is negatively impacted by t he 
import of fossil fuels  into the country.  The a vailability of electricity in these rural areas  to be  
covered by this project will contribute to reduced operating costs of consumers , including 
clinics and schools that will reduce or eliminate their depend ence on diesel . The construction, 
operation and maintenance of the microgrid of this rural electrification program me will deliver


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 85 
 
 
direct employment in these rural areas where the decentralized facilities will be implemented. 
Indirect employment opportuniti es will also be created  by businesses that will provide services 
as a result of the proposed project , (for example, entrepreneurs who will commence the 
manufacture or import of new technologies that can be powered by electricity ).  
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits  
25. Social co -benefits that will be delivered by this project will include : improved health 
conditions, as renewable energy -powered lights will reduce the use of kerosene lamps and 
eliminate indoor air pollution , which causes eye irritation and lung injury ; better condition s for 
students in the community thanks to  available and reliable lights, which will provide  a better 
environment for longer period s of learning, thus enhancing education and social institutions; 
and income generation that will be cataly sed by greater  access to electricity , which  will also 
contribute  to poverty reduction. The project will also  improve access to potable water and 
water pumping for crop irrigation.  
1.3.4.  Environmental co-benefits  
26. Key environmental co -benefits that are likely to be delivered by this proposed electricity 
access project will result specifically from the complete elimination of the use of fossil fuel for 
electricity generation in the microgrid compared to the baseline situation. Key environmental 
co-benefits will include reducing the risk of groundwater contamination caused by leaking 
diesel generators  and reduc ing local air pollution and noise disturbances in local communities 
by eliminating the use of diesel -generated electricity .  
1.3.5.  Gender -related co-benefits   
27. Gender -related co -benefit s will include i ncreasing access to electricity in (remote) rural 
areas, which  will ensure that men and women benefit equally  from the initiative. In addition, 
ASER will offer special support to promote equal opportuni ties arising from the rural  
electrification project through the technical assistance  component for both men and women.  
The project will also free up time for women ( previously allocated to household tasks ) through 
the use of mills and the provision of acce ss to drinking water suppl ies, among other  things,  and 
for children (increasing light time available at night) to engage in productive and education al 
activities that improve income generation and strengthen social standing . The project plan 
include s preferential support for women -owned  microenterprises through the training of target 
groups in trades, the design of business plans around activities identified before hand, access to 
microfinancing for equipment , the  provision of connection coupons to the most vulnerable,  and 
support  in the  organizational and institutional structuring of women's organizations . 
28. In view of the above -mentioned contributions to various elements of sustainable 
development, the independent TAP has conclude d that the project  will generate significant 
sustainable development potential as about 344,000 people will directly benefit from the 
successful implementation of this project . Therefore, the sustainable development potential is 
deemed to be “ high ”. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
1.4.1.  Needs of the c ountry and the r ural populace  
29. About 55  per cent  of the population of Senegal lives in the rural part of the country. 
According to the information available in the funding proposal  and its annexes , rural access to 
modern electri city is as low as under  10 per cent  in some areas , and national rural electr icity


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 86 
 
 
access is currently averaging 42  per cent . As discussed in several parts of this evaluation report, 
low access to electricity in these rural part s of the country has been know n to cause and 
continuously contribute  to  poverty, cause poor health among  rural inhabitants, present 
barriers to the economic development of the areas, and  result in  many other issues that do not 
foster  the welfare of rural inhabitants. The Government of Senegal  recogni zes the negative 
impacts of poor access to modern electricity and its debilitating impact on the welfare of people 
and the economy of the nation , especially in rural Senegal , where access is still very low . This is 
why the country very aggresively pursued the  policy of achieving  universal access by 2025. 
Unfortunately, the first phase of th ese efforts, if the course is not changed, is likely to fall short 
and result in the continuation  of fossil fuel generation , which is bad for the environment and the 
climate . Not only will this strategy cause  higher environmental pollution, it will also not deliver 
universal electricity access. Therefore, the proposed project will satisfy the needs of the country 
while also delivering improved access to the rural populace.  
1.4.2.  Economic and financial needs of the c ountry  
30. Senegal incur s a remarkably high  cost in its fiscal budget annually for the importation of  
fossil fuel to satisfy consumer energy needs. A significant portion of this import cost  goes to 
diesel for the generation of power, especially for the thousands of generators connected to 
microgrids serving off -grid communities and for some of the generation assets supplying 
electricity to the national grid . The estimated cost reduction from the diversification fro m 
imported fossil fuels through the introduction of renewable power generation will reduce the cost of grid -based rural electrification and free public resources that will be redirected to rural 
electrification. In the medium -term, this will result in impr oved public debt conditions and 
lower the cost at which Senegalese entities (both public and private) will be able to secure debt. 
Lowered cost of capital will, in turn, strengthen the case for investment in the domestic 
renewable energy sector, mobilizing  private sector capital. The proposed project’s financing 
origination  includes very concessional debt from GCF, which is expected to crowd in some funds 
from BOAD and from the private sector, thus ameliorating the financial barrier that usually 
exist s for infrastructure projects in the country, by developing the capacities of local project 
financiers for this project and hence creating an enabling environment for  the financing of 
projects in other sectors of the economy. Thus,  the project , if successfu lly implemented , will 
provide a proof of concept that will contribute to the satisfaction of the economic and financial needs of Senegal. Reduc ing the financial needs of the country to import diesel fuel will also help 
contribute to reducing the country’s
 public debt , which  currently stands at about USD 7.5 
billion, representing 57  per cent  of the country’s gross domestic product .  
1.4.3.  Strengthening the local capital market  
31. The concessional loan from  GCF is expected to crowd  in other financing from other 
source s, in addition to grant funding from GCF , to build various capacities. This strengthening of 
the financial market will be essential for changing the baseline situation , in which pricing risk s 
and the lack of  a track  record for similar projects in the country  made local financial institutions 
unwilling to provide affordable financing solutions to project developers. For the few projects 
that w ere implemented in the rural off- grid market, the high costs of capital force d project 
developers to charge excessive electricity tariffs, denting the demand for and sustainability  of 
the investments . Thus, a shift from the baseline situation , which was promoting fossil -fueled 
microgrids and at an inadequate speed to deliver the required pat hway to universal access to a 
concessional financial model will accelerate the speed to universal access in Senegal. This 
model, will offer local financial lenders a de -risked proposition that will  help the sector mobilize 
private sector finance sustainably  to ensure that the country will firmly be on the universal 
access pathway that will be delivered by the target time.  This will be very crucial for the 
replication of this proof of concept in other rural villages not included in this current project.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 87 
 
 
1.4.4.  Institutional needs   
32. The baseline institutional capacities in both the public and private sectors of Senegal are 
still insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling environment , despite the aggressive rural 
electrification programme that was being pursue d by the Government of Senegal . Under this 
programme , the  recent liberalization of the national energy market that allowed  IPPs to 
compete with SENELEC , especially in the rural off -grid market, in spite of institutional support 
for the programme , did not  deliver an acceptable performance, hence the need for this proposed 
project . Technical support to strengthen the technical and gender capacity of  the PMU, 
implementing partners , private concessionaires and community beneficiaries with a focus on 
gender  mainstreaming throughout the project cycle will be financed by the grant funding that 
will be made available by GCF. This will build the necessary private and public institutions 
needed to guarantee the success of the proposed project. Furthermore, outrea ch (also to be 
funded by the grant)  to national and regional commercial financiers will help to optimize efforts 
to replicat e the potentials  of the project in neighbou ring countries.  
33. The various needs of the country and especially those of the rural dwelle rs regarding 
access to modern electricity will be  positively promoted by the success of this project as 
discussed above. In addition to th e successful implementation of this project and its replication 
in other rural villages not covered by the proposed in tervention,  will contribute to some of the 
economic and financial buoyancy of Senegal, while the capacity -building  portion of the  
intervention, facilitated  through grant funding from GCF , will contribute to institutional 
strengthening, especially of public  and private institutions that are relevant to  the electricity 
access of Senegal. All the metrics discussed in sub -sections 1.4.1 – 1.4.4 above indicate that the 
need s of the recipient country, its people and institutions will be very well  met by the successful 
implementation of this project , and  TAP thus score s this metric as “high ”. 
1.5 Country  ownership               Scale:  High  
1.5.1.  High -level  government support  
34. The first key  indication  of country ownership of this project is the willing support that a 
key public sector agency of the Government of Senegal gave to this project . BOAD  (the AE of this 
project , which  will also act as the  as Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants from GCF ) and 
ASER (the government -owned entity set up to plan, develop and manage the rural electrification 
activites of Senegal)  have both obtained the endorsement of the Ministry of  Energy and 
Petroleum , which  will exercise direct oversight for this project , and the Ministry of  Economy 
and Finance, which will provide co -financing for the project on behalf of the Government of 
Senegal. In addition, t he Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ( national 
designated authority ) has been following the preparation of this project since its inception and 
has assured BOAD and ASER of its willingness to support this GCF funding application due to its 
clear alignment with some key  national strategies and development plans  of Senegal. This is 
robust evidence of the support of the Government of Senegal for this project and an indication 
of strong country ownership.  
35. Alignment of the p roject with  relevant national strategies: some of t he key national 
plans and policies that this project is aligned with can be summarized as follows:  
(a) The Senegalese NDC  submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in September 2015  has rural electrification as a key component of i ts 
contribution to international efforts to mitigate climate change . Through its  NDC , 
Senegal pledged that it  will unconditionally implement 392 mini -grid systems utilizing 
domestic/national funds. The NDC document also communicated Senegal’s  intention to 
connect  up to 5,000 villages to  solar PV mini- grids  if it can get  external support


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 88 
 
 
(conditional target) .7 This proposed project is in alignment with the conditional pledge 
in the country’s NDC ; 
(b) Following the declaration of the United Nations General Assembly, which considered 
2012 “The International Year of Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL)”, the United 
Nations launched  an initiative called “global access to sustainable energy for all by 2030” 
in collaboration with several development partners. Senegal joined this initiative and 
worked to achieve appreciable r esults in terms of access to electricity:  a 64 per cent  
national access rate and a 33.2  per cent  rural access rate  in 2016. Although this  
programme ’s plan  was to achieve a rural electricity acce ss rate of 60  per cent  by 2019, 
the current estimate stands at 42  per cent , indicating that the protocol put together 
under the country’s SE4ALL programme is not on target to deliver Senegal’s goal of 
universal access by 2025. It is expected that the propo sed project , by mitigating the 
various barriers that has made this target look as if it w ould  be impossible to meet , will 
set this goal back on course ;  
(c) The National Strategy for Economic and Social Development adopted in 2012 , in which 
the government comm itted to increase access to electricity in rural areas in an 
affordable and equitable way , will also be promoted by the implementation of this 
proposed project ; 
(d) Universal access to energy in rural areas is considered in the “Plan Sénégal É mergent ” as 
a fun damental factor for economic development and the fight against poverty. The main 
objective of the plan is the emergence of Senegal to promote economic growth as 
significant  leverage for human development ; and  
(e) The “Plan Sénégal Émergent ” also aims to reduce the cost of generation to a value of 
between  FCFA  60 and 70/ kilowatt -hour (EUR 0.09 –0.11 /kilowatt -hour ) in the long  
term. Investment in renewable energy generation will reduce the government’s dependence on fossil fuels , which are expensive to import.   
1.5.2.  Implementation capacity  of the accredited entity  
36. BOAD , a regional development bank , will act as the AE for the proposed project.  BOAD 
will also act as the Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants from GCF . BOAD, in its role as AE, 
will be responsible for the overall management of this project, including : (i) all aspects of 
project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver 
results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the 
timeliness and quality of reporting to GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. This AE is 
well suited and prepared for these roles. BOAD  has been active in Senegal since its inception 
and has cooperated with both the Senegalese Ministry of Economy and  Finance and the ASER 
program me (ASER rural electrification program  – grid extensions, solar home systems and 
distinct mini- grids  – that is clearly demarked from the proposed GCF project , being already 
registered under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM),
8) for a long time. As of December 
2019, BOAD has a total of XOF  128.8 billion in public sector loans in Senegal, supporting 191 
projects an d initiatives. BOAD is also closely engaged in the Senegalese energy market, 
managing an aggregate amount of XOF  239.9 billion in loans to the sector, equivalent to 23.3  per 
cent  of all outstanding loans to the Senegalese G overnment. From this information,  it can be 
 
7 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (2015) Contribution Prévue Déterminée au Niveau 
National. 
8 UNFCCC (2018) Senegal Rural Electrification Program. CDM programme documentation is available here . Note that 
none of the grids to be developed under this project will be included in the CDM PoA.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 89 
 
 
concluded that it is equipped, prepared and has the experience to perform the roles earmarked 
for it in this proposed project.   
1.5.3.  Executing capacity of t he executing entity  
37. The executing entity for this project will be ASER, an agency of the Government of 
Senegal.  ASER was formally created by decree in 1999 as an autonomous body with the sole aim 
of promoting rural electrification  in Senegal. The agency  functions under the oversight  of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy and the Ministry of Economy and Finance whil e also 
reporting to the Senegalese Electricity Sector Regulator y Commission  (CRSE ). During the period 
2005 –2019, ASER coordinated about 174 m ini-grids in Senegal, which were mostly funded by 
bilateral donors. During the period 2000 –2019, ASER was responsible for  more than 12 grid 
extension projects that enabled  the electrification of more than 3,000 villages. Many of the mini-
grid projects , whose implementation s were managed by ASER during the period mentioned 
above , used  fossil fuel (diesel). ASER can therefore be said to have demonstrated competency in  
the planning and management of mini-grids supplied electricity by diesel fuel , but it does not 
have much exper ience when the generation asset of a mini -grid is dominated by solar PV. This 
weakness will , however , be ameliorated through carefully designed capacity -building  measures  
that will involve key personnel from ASER, who will eventually serve as the PMU of th is planned 
project. This PMU will be an important department in ASER at the end of the implementation of 
this project.  
38. The project has been designed through a consultative process involving state and 
federal government agencies, non -government organization s, representatives of trade 
organizations and professional bodies , and a host of local -level stakeholders , including women , 
representing the target communities  where the mini-grids will be implemented . The gender -
specific interventions in the proj ect are  a mere  reflection of thorough consultations that have 
been organized at the grassroots level. The federal- level stakeholder s who participated from the 
early conceptualization of this project will consist of personnel representing several key 
ministries, who  will ensure that the project is provided with the right institutional guidance and 
government counterpart funding  as and when needed. This is also a strong indication of country 
ownership.  
39. The national designated authority , the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable 
Development , sent a  no-objection letter to the Secretariat to convey  that the Government of 
Senegal supports the project to the highest extent on 27 March 2020. This is  more  strong 
evidence of country ownership . 
40. Based on the abo ve analysis, the independent TAP considers the country ownership of 
the project to be “ high ”. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale:  Moderately high  
1.6.1.  Financial strucure  
41. The project seeks debt and grant financing from GCF to implement mini-grid facilities in 
about 1,000 rural communities in Senegal as part of the country’s electricity access activities,  
and to carry out capacity -building activities at the institutional and stakeholder levels. The GC F 
concessional debt contribution  request will be  combined with  co-financing from KfW and BOAD 
at a co-financing ratio of  1:1.60, considering only the debt portion . The total funding for this 
project of EUR  198.692 million  is expected to be provided by GCF and co -financing from KfW, 
BOAD  and the Government of Senegal . The breakdown of funding contribution s from the se 
sources, the types of fund ing and the total that will be provided for the project are presented in 
table 2.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 90 
 
 
Table  2:  Project  funding  details  
S/N  Source  Type of fund  Amount  (EUR million ) 
1. GCF  Loan   73.623  
Grant       1.822  
2. KfW  Loan 102.396  
3. West African 
Development Bank  Loan   15.245  
4. Government of Senegal  Contribution      5.606  
TOTAL  198.692  
42. About 37 per cent  of the total fund ing of the project is requested from GCF as a s enior 
loan (EUR 73.623 million)  while about 1  per cent  (EUR  1.822 million ) is required  for grant 
funding. The senior loan from GCF will come  with a 40 -year tenor, a 10-year  grace period and a  
concessional interest rate of 0.0  per cent  per annum . The required grant funding ( EUR. 1.822 
million, slightly <1 per cent  of the total project fund) has been earmarked to build the capacity 
of stakeholders in the country, which is expected to serve as one of the several actions that will 
be delivered by the project intervention to mitigate many of the barriers identified  earlier  as the 
cause of the sluggish  delivery of electricity access in the status quo. The capacity built by this 
proposed project wil l help create an  enabling environment in -country to plan and implement 
more electricity access minig rids in the country in the future . 
1.6.2.  Co-financing /leveraging  
43. The effectiveness of the concessional loan from GCF can be measured by the fact that 
each EUR 1.0  from GCF will crowd in about EUR 1.6 of co -financing. The co-financing that will be 
crowded in will include : a senior loan (EUR 102.396 m illion) with a 10 -year tenor, a 0.5-year 
grace  period  and an annual interest  rate of 6.14  per cent ; and another senior  loan (EUR  15.245 
million ) with a 10 -year tenor, a 3-year grace  period  and an annual f ixed interest rate of 7.6  per 
cent . The counterpart funding contribution of about  3 per cen t the total project cost from the 
Government of Senegal  is tangible evidence of its support for the project.  
44. The s uccessful implementation of this proposed project will benefit all the consumers 
currently connected to the m ini-grids and those who will be connected after the commissioning 
of the project. It will also establish a platform for the replication of the proven concept 
(engineering, financing and management) in other villages in Senegal that are not included in 
this project.   
1.6.3.  Financial viability and b est practices  
45. The financial viability of the project during and beyond GCF support has been designed 
around the proper  implementation of the infrastructure of the mini-grids and the  building of the 
capacities needed in -country for different aspects of project planning a nd implementation. 
These capacities will include:  
(a) ASER  (PMU): the ability to finance, plan and implement such projects , which is expected 
to be built into the capabilit ies of the professionals who will  form the core  of the PMU. 
The continuity of their wor k is expected to be enhanced by their becoming a special 
project unit within ASER  at the close of this GCF support. It is expected that best


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 10 
Page 91 
 
 
practices in project financing and execution will be acquired by these  PMU  professionals 
during the implementation of the m icro grid system s at each of the sites covered by this 
intervention; and 
(b) ASER and the concessionairres : these w ill be funded through a loan from the blended 
financing to implement the s olar PV  micro grid system and carry out O&M duties in close 
colla boration  with  and supervis ed by the PMU  under  a well structured O&M contract 
with ASER , the entity with national mandate for the development of baseline off-
grid/rural electrification projects in Senegal.   
46. The capacity of ASER  to design, build and implement the s olar PV system – probably 
through the PMU – will also be part of the capacity -building program me for this proposed 
project. The training that professionals from ASER/PMU  will receive during c omponent 1 of this 
project w ill include international best practices in all aspects of their work . The now better 
trained, financially stronger and more technically equipped concessionaires – thanks to the 
financial support incorporated into this GCF -led funding  under a better structured O&M 
contract with the Government of Senegal through ASER – will be contracted to  operate and 
maintain the minigrid systems  that will inject clean electricity into the m inigrid facility in each 
of the covered village s and dispatch it to connected consu mers.  The independent TAP believes 
that this setup will deliver effective and efficient m inigrid facilities in each of the villages. 
Lessons learned  from this practical proof of concept will , if properly documented and 
disseminated , play a role in fosterin g the replicability of t he concept for  other villages not 
covered under this project in Senegal. It will also play a role in the replication of the project in 
other countries in the subregion.  
47. The interconnected structure of working together described above, the capacity -
building activities that will be carried out as part of this proposed project , and the fact that 
international best practices will be followed  in all the activities will ensure that the project , as 
planned and presented in  the funding proposal,  will deliver the targeted objectives . The 
independent TAP therefore concludes that the efficiency and effectiveness of this proposed 
project implementation will be “ high ”. 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
48. The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project.  
49. The independent TAP recommends that the Secretariat include in the funded activity 
agreement with the AE the requirement:  
(a) For the AE to report to the GCF in the annual performance reports (APRs) on the lessons 
learned by the key stakeholders who will be involved and/or carry out all  project 
activities, in order to ensure that the lessons learned can be applied during the 
implementation of this project as well as in any subsequent r eplication of the project in 
Senegal or outside Senegal;           
(b) For the AE to report annually to the GCF on  the GHG emission reductions (ER) achieved 
by the operating project covering the duration of the project lifetime. This ER reporting should cover:  
(i) Project parameters monitored by name, value and confidence interval;  
(ii) ER calculation methodologies utilized;  
(iii) The procedures used to achieve the; and  
(iv) The quality assurance/quality control methods used in preparing and reporting 
the data and the emis sion reduction  calculations.


---
*Page 92*
---

G
CF/B.26/02/Add.10  
Page 92 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical  
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 138) 
Proposal name:  ASER Rural Electrification Project  
Accredited entity:  West African Development Bank (BOAD) 
Country/(ies):  Senegal  
Project/programme size: Medium 
Impact potential  
Thank you for this assessment 
Paradigm shift potential  
Thank you for this assessment 
Sustainable development potential  
Thank you for this assessment 
Needs of the recipient  
Thank you for this assessment 
Country ownership  
Thank you for this assessment 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
Thank you for this assessment 
 Overall rema rks f rom the independent T echnical A dvisory Panel: 
Thanks for the remarks.


---
*Page 93*
---

République du Sénégal  
-------  
Un Peuple – Un But – Une Foi  
 ------------
 
 
 
ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
-------------------  
Rural Electrification Project by Mini -grids of 1000 villages in seven 
(07) regions of SENEGAL.
-------------------
Fatick, Kaffrine, Kaolack, Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda and 
Saint -Louis 
-------------------  
Gender Action Plan  
Revised  Version  
PREPARED BY : 
PYRAMIDE ENVIRONNEMENTAL CONSULTANTS  
Cité Keur DAMEL 3e étage – Appt 3, Dakar- SÉNÉGAL /  
Tél. : 77 645 38 73  /  
E-mail : pyramideconsultants@gmail.com  
March  2020 
Gender documentation for FP138


---
*Page 94*
---

2 AGENCE SENEGALAISE D’ELECTRIFICATION RURALE  
SENEGALESE AGENCY FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION  
(ASER)  
Incorporating the gender dimension into 
ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project


---
*Page 95*
---

3 Table  
I. Introduction 4
II. Reminder of the context of gender mainstreaming in energy
development policies and strategies in Senegal 4
II.1 The policy framework 4
II.2 Operationalisation of policies 5
III. Diagnosis of gender 6
III.1 Gender situation in Senegal 6
III.1.1 The vision and institutional mechanisms 6
III.1.2. Gender disparities in Senegal 7
III.2 Gender in Energy Policy 9
III.3 Gender in the National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER) 10
III.4 The socio -cultural underpinnings of gender inequalities in the energy
sector, discriminatory factors and their  socio -economic implications 11
III.4.1 Access to energy in the face of socio -cultural realities 11
III.4.2 Socio -economic and environmental impacts 11
III.5 Gender in implementation at household and community level 13
IV. Constraints and opportunities for gender mainstreaming 16
V. Challenges to achieving gender equality 18
VI. Gender Plan of Action 19
VII. Logical Framework of the Project Action Plan 23


---
*Page 96*
---

4 I. Introduction
Senegal's National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER), piloted by ASER, aims to make 
electricity an instrument in the fight against poverty through the creation of wealth and jobs in 
rural areas. To achieve this, it wants to adopt a dynamic strategy, p articularly with regard to 
alternative energies to hydrocarbons, which have an invaluable potential.  
Statistics show that the share of renewable energy in Senegal's total energy production is still very 
low: 10.66% in 2017, with a target of 40% in 2030 .  In a context of climate change, it is important 
to develop strategies including the installation of mini -solar networks for the benefit, in 
particular, of vulnerable groups that tend to take more wood resources than nature is capable of 
regenerating.  
Howe ver, when formulating the programme, ASER did not take into account from the outset a 
differentiation between groups of men and women and their needs, taking as a reference the 
neutrality of energy policy. Projects have been designed specifically for women 's groups to 
respond to the lightening of work, without this being part of a gender mainstreaming logic.  
To remedy this, ASER, following a diagnosis of the level of gender mainstreaming in the PNER, 
recently decided to systematize gender mainstreaming in  all its projects and programmes.  
To this end, an action plan for the integration of gender in the national rural electrification 
programme using mini -solar grids has been drawn up accordingly.  
For ASER, gender mainstreaming is a means of contributing to  the achievement of sustainable 
development objectives by Senegal, through the PES, which considers rural electrification among 
its priority programmes.  
II. Reminder of the context of gender mainstreaming in
energy development policies and strategies in Seneg al
II.1 The policy framework
Energy occupies a central place in the national development strategy up to 2035 and 
electricity is one of the most effective factors of production for reducing poverty among 
the population.  
Senegal, like the international community, has committed itself to a new agenda setting 
out the SDGs (Sustainable Development Goals) towards 2030 after the evaluation of the 
MDGs in 2015. These SDGs cover all the development issues, including climate change, 
biodiversity, e nergy, water, poverty, gender equality, etc.  There are 17 SDGs, all of which 
are well articulated with the three strategic axes of the Emerging Senegal Plan (ESP).  
SDGs 5 and 7 converge in terms of a good management of gender and energy aspects.  
In additi on, Senegal has ratified international treaties on gender equality, namely the 
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against


---
*Page 97*
---

5 
 Women. Thus, several legislative and regulatory provisions have been adopted to punish 
gender -based violence, the most recent of which relating to the criminalization of rape 
and paedophilia was passed by the National Assembly in December 2019 and the 
promulgation decree was signed on 10 January 2020.  
As for the empowerment of women, a number of prerequisites for the fulfilment of needs 
must be met in order to achieve this. Four types of needs exist: (i) practical needs, the 
satisfaction of which contributes to domestic well -being; the provision of mini -solar kits 
could well contribute to the impr ovement of women's living conditions; (ii) social needs, 
which refer to education, health, transport and training; (iii) productive needs which 
contribute to the integration of the target groups into the economic fabric, generally 
through income -generating  activities such as product processing. For these three types of 
needs, energy can prove to be more than a service but a factor of production and 
development entering the process of the value chain; it ensures the operation of cold 
chains by guaranteeing t he quality required for their good start -up; (iv) the fourth type 
of need is strategic because it is inherent to decision -making, participation in the life of 
associations or environmental protection. In our case, management committees of 
women and young p eople could be set up in the target villages of our project for a co -
management of the solar networks. Several studies carried out in Senegal have shown 
the primordial place of women in the governance of natural resources based on the 
concept of gender and  development.  
II.2 The operationalization of policies  
To operationalize the orientations and policies, the State of Senegal has developed 
framework documents (PSE 1 and 2; SNEEG 1 and 2) and LPSDs (sectoral development 
policy letters).  
The challenge is to  understand that energy in all its forms offers a wide choice to the 
population in terms of the technologies to be used and that its absence reinforces 
inequalities between men and women.  
Currently, there is a timidity in taking gender into account in the energy sector. 
Admittedly, practical needs were taken into account in the National Action Plan for 
Women (PANAF 1997 - 2001), but it is with its evaluation in 2003 that the 
recommendations of Beijing (1995) were recorded in the national strategy: the SNEEG  
which today serves as a reference document on gender (SNEEG 1 and 2).  
In this platform  – PANAF  1997 -2001, adopted as part of the implementation of the 9th 
Economic and Social Development Plan (PODES 1996 -2001), whose Strategic Orientation 
No. 9 took the gender dimension into account  – the use of improved cookstoves by rural 
women was mentioned instead. Performance was also achieved in the use of butane gas 
for cooking, but it was found that this programme had benefited urban rather than rural 
populati ons that use traditional energy (wood and charcoal), which greatly increases 
their vulnerability by exposing them to health problems related to smoke that is harmful 
to women and their children.


---
*Page 98*
---

6 
 Ultimately, the concerns of men and women in vulnerable comm unities to access reliable, 
low-cost energy services and productive uses of energy are compounded by the lack of 
gender mainstreaming in the design, planning and implementation of most projects.  
(Example: Local Rural Electrification Plan of the concession of "Matam - Ranerou -Bakel", 
Project of Sustainable Development through Renewable Energies - South East Senegal -
DPER -SE Senegal).  
ASER wants to take up the challenge of gender and energy issues by proposing a 
programme including mini -solar grids for the b enefit of 1000 villages far from existing 
power lines. This programme aims to reach 34 0,000 men and women disadvantaged by 
their isolation and affected by poverty by improving their living conditions through 
productive uses of electricity managed by women and young people.  
 
III. Gender analysis  
 
III.1 Gender situation  in Senegal  
 
III.1.1 The vision and institutional mechanisms  
 
By signing international conventions, Senegal has committed to incorporate the gender 
dimension into policies, standards and programmes. The aim is to recognise gender 
mainstreaming as a cross -cutting issue at the institutional level.  A Ministry of Gender1 was 
created for the first time in 2010 and during the same year,2 the law instituting absolute parity in 
the totally - or partially -elective assemblies was adopted. This law was tested for the first time 
during the elections for the deputies on 1 July 2012, during which there was a high representation 
of women. From 22% (33 deputies) for the 2007 -2012 legislature, the number of women deputies 
increased to 43.3% (64 deputies) for the 2012 -2017 legislature.  
 
The institutionalization of the gender dimension in public policies is effective through Decree No. 
2017 -313 of 13 February 2017  which  creates and attaches gender units to t he General Secretariat 
of each ministry. Moreover, in 2016, a gender -sensitive budget document will be annexed to the 
Initial Finance Act. In 2017, 12 sectoral ministries adopted the gender -sensitive budget, compared 
to 4 ministries in 2016.  
 
However, desp ites these highly political decisions, women are still affected by inequality at all 
levels and gender issues affect poverty, health, education, access to finance, employment, access 
to land and means of production among others. Women are active in the pro ductive sectors, the 
small market economy and the informal sector. Any action aimed at supporting them in these 
sectors has an impact on their economic power, their participation at the strategic level and the 
well -being of the family. Access to electricit y can therefore be an important input, but also a 
bulwark against the constraints that affect gender relations.  
 
 
 
1 Within the same government, three ministries were in charge of women's issues: the Ministry of Gender; the Ministry of Family , 
Women's Groups and Child Protection; and the Ministry of Women's Entrepreneurship and Microfinance. However, the multiplicity  
of mechanisms has not always been conducive to decision -making on women's expectations and gender.  
2 14 May 2010


---
*Page 99*
---

7 
  
III.1. 2 Gender inequalities in Senegal  
 
Senegal has made great strides in mainstreaming gender in the various development 
sectors, but there is still a long way to go, particularly in terms of translating intentions 
into practice.  
 
Nevertheless, it must be noted that some achievements have been made, particularly 
with the adoption of the National Strategy for Gender Equity and Equality (S NEEG), 
which has seen many programmes initiated with a view to contributing to the alleviation 
of women's work. For example, in terms of women's access to modern energy services, 
the Multifunctional Platform Programme in Senegal, launched in 2002 for the p eriod up 
to 2015, has helped to strengthen women's The programme has also supported them in 
the economic management of a processing unit. During the pilot phase started in 2001, 
40 units were installed throughout the regions of Kédougou, Tambacounda and Th iès. 
 
To this end, women have been able to benefit from the allowance: (i) equipment for 
processing agricultural products (millet mills, rice huskers, threshers, oil presses and 
groundnut paste mills); (ii) hydraulic equipment (motor pump units, sinking an d 
rehabilitation of wells, water supply, boreholes, water towers, standpipes and electric 
pumps); (iii) equipment to support income -generating activities (sewing machines, carts 
and equipment, market gardening equipment). In parallel with these initiatives , access 
to land, credit, information, capacity -building, economic promotion, etc., have been 
strengthened through other partners such as NGOs. These initiatives have helped to 
strengthen women's participation in sustainable development.  
Notwithstanding t hese improvements, it must be recognized that some approaches are 
still the concern of development partners, rather than a well -thought -out, well -
considered national strategy integrated into the process of implementing a coherent 
policy. Gender mainstreami ng as well as the march towards women's empowerment 
still suffer from certain constraints, in particular:  
- weak gender mainstreaming in policies and programmes ;  
- the inadequacy of sex -disaggregated data at all levels of activity for the 
development of indicators;  
- the weak involvement of the private sector and professional associations in the 
advancement of women;  
- the low level of education, training and lite racy among women;  
- high maternal mortality and morbidity;  
- the high vulnerability of women and adolescent girls to STIs/HIV/AIDS.  
 
The table below provides an overview of gender disparities in Senegal with respect to 
several socio -economic variables relating to the productive sectors, basic social services, 
well -being and quality of life.  
 
Determinants  Women (%)  Men (%)  
Access to property  13,40  86,603 
Agricultural exploitation  21 79 
Rural activities (agriculture, livestock 
farming, fishing)  82,6 79,4 
 
3 Senegal - FAO, National agricultural census 1998 -99


---
*Page 100*
---

8 
 Literacy rate 15 -24 y/o  48,8 65,74 
Net attendance rate in primary school  56,1 52,3 
Gross primary school enrolment rate  83,30 (2011)  80,50  
Completion rate in primary school  58,5 (2011)  60,2 
Unemployment rate  28,2 - 13,3 (2011)  17 - 7,7 (2011)  
Working population  45 54,91  
Employer positions  0,7 1,2 
Female employees in the non -agricultural 
sectors  21,6 (2001) - 26,5 
(2005)  - 
Maternal mortality rate (‰)  401 (2005)  - 
HIV -AIDS prevalence rate (15 -49 y/o)  0,8 0,5 (National)  
Members of Parliament  19,2 (2005) - 42,6 
(2012)  80,8 - 57,3 (2012)5 
Source : OMD II  and OMD 2011, ESPS 2005, Labo genre -Unifem  
 
III.2 Gender mainstreaming in energy policy  
 
Senegal's energy policy considers the population as a whole and it uses as references the 
indicators relating to the rates of access, service and rural electrification. The household is the 
basic reference that unites gender and energy as it is the first level of collection and use of energy 
data and the first level of ge nder analysis.  
The proportion of the population with access to electricity has changed significantly; in 2017 - 
2018, it is 68% (88% in urban areas and 38% in rural areas) against 62% in 2015 and 26% in 1990.  
Important steps have been taken with the implementation of concessionaires that have made it 
possible to connect 14941 rural households by the end of 2017.  
 
In spite of the lack of proven attention to gender, the government has adopted the strategy of 
linking economic growth, human development an d poverty alleviation through increased access 
to modern forms of energy, in particular electricity.  
In addition, with the Emerging Senegal Plan , particular emphasis has been placed on increasing 
human capital through job creation and reducing inequalitie s through the potential of 
individuals, grassroots communities and regions.  Connecting the target villages to solar grids 
would open up job opportunities for young people in various electricity using trades such as 
metal carpentry and electrical repairs.  
 
For rural women, cooking and motive power remain the main gender issues in the energy sector. 
Wood collection is their exclusive domain and the use of biomass has adverse effects on their 
health and that of children, hence measures to modernize cooking fue ls. As for electricity, its 
weight in mitigating gender inequalities is important because of the opportunities in access to 
modern energy services against the use of motive power. The programme would pave the way 
for productive uses of energy based on the gender -specific needs of households; it will no longer 
be a question of simple access to electricity for lighting but rather of a dynamic of individual and 
community development associated with improved energy efficiency.  
 
III.3 Gender mainstreaming in the  National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER)  
 
 
4 OMD Indicators, EDS -MICS Senegal 2010 -2011  
5 Legislative elections, July 2012


---
*Page 101*
---

9 
 Gender mainstreaming was not taken into consideration in the design of the national rural 
electrification programme, which provides for all forms of electrification (grid and off -grid). 
Energy documents have remained silent on the issue and individuals, bo th men and women, are 
not cited. At the institutional level, gender and social issues are not integrated into the more 
technically - and financially -oriented missions of ASER, something confirmed by indicators6 that 
do not provide information on the real impacts of the programme in communities and 
households. Moreover, it is not discussed in the course of the activities and there is no defined 
strategy on the participation of target groups. These groups are cons idered as passive 
beneficiaries who therefore do not contribute to the decision -making process on the setting up of 
projects. The organisation and its implementing partners (concessionaires) do not have sufficient 
expertise to take gender mainstreaming int o account in its action strategy. ASER’s staff is very 
unbalanced according to gender, with twice as many men as women and very few women in 
decision -making positions.  
 
The table above provides an overview of the distribution of ASER staff by status in rel ation to 
gender issues.  
 
Breakdown of staff by status as of 31 December 2012  
 
Status of staff with a permanent contract  Men  Women  Total  
Employees  24 03 27  
Supervisors  06 14 20  
Executives   28 06 34  
TOTAL  58 23 81  
Source: ASER  
 
III.4 The socio -cultural underpinnings of gender inequalities in the energy sector, 
discriminatory factors and their socio -economic implications  
 
III.4.1 Access to energy in the face of socio -cultural realities  
 
There is a very strong inequality in access to energy because the needs of men and women are 
not the same and the roles are not the same either. The sexual division of labour by society assigns 
women different social roles from those of men. Thus, women ar e confined to the reproductive 
role, i.e. the management of the household: cooking, fetching water, looking after and educating 
children, maintaining the home, health, and participating as labourers in agricultural production. 
In community life, she rarely  occupies decision -making positions. And it is influential factors 
such as socio -cultural, religious, legal and political beliefs that justify this state of affairs. There is 
also the economic dimension: if we look at the profile of access and control, we notice that women, 
given the roles assigned to them, have very little access to energy in a global way and to 
productive energy in a specific way.  
 
In other words, men and women use energy differently because their roles, needs and 
responsibilities in soci ety are different. Also, depending on whether one is in the rural or peri -
urban or urban environment, the production factor "energy" does not intervene in the same way 
in the functions that men and women occupy; men have more of an economic role which allo ws 
them to access and control resources, in this case energy; they determine the allocation of energy 
 
6 Rural ele ctrification rate, coverage rate and geographical coverage rate, calculated on the basis of the number of electrified 
households, households in electrified rural localities and households in rural localities. (Mission letter of the ASER Director General 
2007-2012.)


---
*Page 102*
---

10 
 which, more than a production factor, is a development factor in the implementation of activities. 
Men's activities are generally remunerative (in Senegal , men are present in the production of cash 
crops: groundnuts, market gardening, fruit trees: mangoes, while women are in the domestic 
sphere and engage in arduous and low -valued tasks.  
 
A specific category is made up of women heads of households who, apar t from their traditional 
functions linked to their social status and the role assigned to women in society, in relation to the 
sexual division of labour, may find themselves assuming productive functions for the upkeep of 
the household, which makes them mo re vulnerable. However, there may be differences between 
them in terms of access to energy, which may arise from their location (town/country; whether 
they are connected to the electrification grid or not), levels of income, employment, age, 
dependents, fi nancial support by family members or relatives, etc.  
 
III.4.2 Socio -economic and environmental impacts  
 
- Socially:  
In terms of socio -economic consequences, the first constraint for women is the lack of time to 
carry out heavy and repetitive tasks using o nly their muscular strength. Thus, they devote 
themselves successively to milling cereals, collecting firewood, fetching water, working in the 
fields, preparing meals, etc., for 13 to 16 hours during the day. These tasks are unpaid and 
contribute to the la ck of balance between the activities of men and women in society.  
 
In the absence of services to facilitate these activities, women completely lack autonomy. The only 
alternative for them remains the support of their daughters who accompany them in carryin g out 
these tasks. Girls are no longer able to attend school regularly, if they are enrolled, and thus find 
themselves in a situation of dropping out of school.  
 
The heavy workload of women's activities leads to real health problems in a context where the  
health needs of the population are still very poorly met. Women are at risk of abortion and are 
exposed to fumes from the use of wood, cow dung, crop residues and other alternatives, at a time 
when the use of gas is widespread in urban centres.  
 
The lack of time and services to facilitate women's activities leads to their exclusion from local 
decision -making spheres and obscures the development of productive activities to enable them 
in the long run to acquire income. However, the trend is evolving positiv ely due to the gender 
dynamic.  
 
- On the economic level :  
In Senegal, women are very active in the agricultural value chain, as shown in Table 1, and 
increasingly, they are found in the processing and petty trade segments. In the processing chain, 
they are organized into women's promotion groups (GPF) or economic interest groups (GIE) or 
micro enterprises to jointly address the challenges and issues of empowerment. They face many 
constraints, especially those related to the correct supply of inputs and o ther factors of production 
such as energy.  
 
This poor access to productive energy limits their activities of transformation, storage of raw 
materials, conservation and packaging of finished products.


---
*Page 103*
---

11 
 There is interference or even complementarity between t he different sectors and the high cost of 
energy is a burden on the operating accounts of many women's microenterprises, which 
inevitably limits their market share.  
 
- On the environmental front:  
The predominance of biomass in the satisfaction of household energy needs cannot evolve 
without consequences on the environment, whose regeneration capacities have been largely 
hampered by a number of factors, including: large forest extraction, successive droughts, soil 
degradation, reduced rainfall and t he unsustainable practices of populations.  
 
III.5 Gender mainstreaming in the implementation at the household and community levels  
 
Gender mainstreaming is not taken into consideration in rural electrification concessions, which 
are characterized by a diversity of electrification modes and managed by private operators. Here, 
the beneficiaries' preference is for continuous electricity service guaranteed by the grid. The needs 
for electricity services are varied and huge.  
  
In the place s selected by our study, the process of rural electrification raises specific gender issues, 
notably on:  
- the priority given to technical aspects in household access to electricity;  
- the difficulties encountered in accessing electricity to stimulate regional  development at 
the productive, economic, entrepreneurial and social levels;  
- the lack of electricity for certain services and infrastructure in electrified localities;  
- difficulties in accessing finance to strengthen the economic capacities of women and men  
through electricity;  
- the lack of participation of the beneficiary populations in the electrification process due to 
the lack of a predefined role, with women feeling less concerned because they assume that 
men should take care of electricity -related issue s; 
- the privileged position of men to be the interlocutors of technicians and their decision -
making power on taking out subscriptions because of their status as heads of the 
households;  
- the very limited number of women heads of households and their economic  situation, a 
parameter to be considered when it comes to connecting households and payment of bills;  
- the travel made by women to electrified villages to meet the needs for milling, sewing, 
ice, etc., and the arrival of men because of the establishment of their professional activities 
(metallurgy, carpentry, vulcanization, etc.);  
- the need for capacity building of men, women and youth, interested in the maintenance 
of indoor facilities, participation in infrastructure management, and the role of the focal 
point to ensure proximity between ASER and the beneficiaries;  
- the pricing of electricity in off -grid areas, considered expensive by the beneficiaries 
because of the discontinuity of the service and the very low level of development of 
services and economic activities;  
- the scope of ASER's actions limited to access to electricity for the population without 
taking into account paramount needs not related to electricity such as domestic fuel for 
women;


---
*Page 104*
---

12 
 - the incomplete coverage of some villages by the network, whi ch does not reach outlying 
neighbourhoods.  
Therefore, a good key to the distribution of productive uses of energy among men, women, young 
people and even communities needs to be defined. Within the framework of the project, positive 
discrimination should b e made against women's microenterprises by setting up mechanisms to 
take better advantage of the energy opportunities that will arise: training of target groups in 
trades, design of business plans around activities identified beforehand and search for fina ncing 
(credits, subsidies), capacity building in equipment and provision of connection coupons  to the 
most vulnerable, support for a good organizational and institutional structuring of women's 
organizations.  
In addition, in view of the energy issues contained in the SD Gs, the guidelines of the PES (Senegal 
Emerging Plan) and the letters of the Sectoral Policy for the Development of the Energy Sector 
(LPDSE), several measures have been taken since 2013 to improve the performance of the energy 
sector at  lower cost, even though households still consider energy to be too expensive. In the rural 
world, faced with the problem of deforestation, several strategies have been designed with the 
popularisation of improved stoves, solar cookers or bio -digesters thr ough programmes such as 
biogas or with the support of NGOs. The prepayment meters (commonly called Woyofal) 
instituted in recent years are working towards a good rationalization of electricity charges. If 
household members want to engage in economic activi ties, they usually use this option to better 
manage their electricity consumption and thus avoid resorting to loans that can be costly or to 
moratoria on bill payments.  
Furthermore, taking into account current issues such as sustainable development, climat e change, 
and gender issues related to energy in a dynamic of poverty reduction, it is important in energy 
communities to increase the resilience of women and girls. They must access and control energy 
services to better play their part in economic and soc ial development.  Hence the opportunity to 
study the multisectoral nature of energy with a cross -cutting approach that would consist in 
meeting both the practical needs related to the tedious nature of certain works and strategies 
(health, education/traini ng/learning, business development, access to credit, transport, product 
marketing, leadership etc.).  
Local energy communities have emerged all over the world both technically (use of renewable 
energy) and organisationally (definition of a mode of governanc e of the resource) involving all 
households in energy production; the motivations are both economic and environmental. It is a 
trend towards energy transition that facilitates local cooperation and the involvement of all 
citizens in the fight against clima te change. In our project, the technologies based on mini -solar 
grids, once implemented and operational, will make the price per kWh produced competitive. 
And women grouped in micro enterprises should make important investments in order to reduce 
costs and  risks and to add value to local products.  
A reinforcement of the capacities of the system that will be put in place and will include :  
- Energy networks; in our case, it will be mini -solar networks interconnected by cables;  
- A system of governance in whi ch women and girls will play a key role; their specific needs listed 
above will be prioritized and the card will be played of optimization in the productive uses of


---
*Page 105*
---

13 
 energy. With such a model, energy communities will expect to improve living conditions by 
meeting productive needs.  
In addition, it would be advisable before the intervention of the project to carry out popular 
consultations in order to better integrate women and young people in the governance of this 
project. Like the local natural resource man agement committees that define the different uses of 
wood in the communities and where rural women have an important role to play, within the 
framework of this project, inequalities in terms of access to and control of energy must be 
discussed so that :  
- Men and women no longer resort to abusive wood cutting (timber and firewood) and that this 
renewable energy is the right alternative ;  
- All gender -specific needs are taken care of and met.  
As a strategy, much emphasis will have to be placed on advocacy, awareness -
raising/communication and training on gender issues in particular:  
➢ Advocacy by administrative (governors, prefects, sub -prefects) and local (mayors) 
authorities in favour of the most vulnerable groups for a good distribution of energy is 
necessar y; 
➢ Awareness raising of the men and women concerned by the project on the differences, the 
position of people in relation to decision -making bodies, the roles and potential impacts 
of project interventions on the lives of populations in general. In a gende r mainstreaming 
dynamic, for each category of resources likely to be concerned and on which inequalities 
of access such as factors of production (including modern energy) weigh, awareness 
sessions on equitable distribution will be conducted. Also, in order  to better manage 
possible disputes arising from the provision of this modern type of energy, a complaints 
management mechanism will have to be put in place; this is a relevant tool for correcting 
gender inequalities;  
➢ Technical training on the different ty pes of economic activities listed should be provided 
to women, as well as training on gender & development, gender & energy issues.  
Finally, it should be noted that Senegalese society has been hit hard in recent years by recurrent 
acts of violence perpetra ted against women and girls. Women who are victims of violence are 
very weakened psychologically. As such, both families and society should support them and help 
them to meet the challenges at all levels. However, it should be noted that, given the socio -cultural 
realities, these cases of violence are very rarely known to the public when they do not reach a 
certain level of seriousness. Consequently, it would be advisable to establish a complaints 
management mechanism that would make it possible to identify  this category and to include it 
in awareness -raising programmes, in order to ensure positive discrimination in favour of these 
persons.  
However, the intervention of the project could have advantages related to :  
➢ education of children;  
➢ lighting and security in public and private spaces;


---
*Page 106*
---

14 
 ➢ the promotion of economic activities of women's groups and 
consequently the strengthening of their leadership/participation in 
decision -making bodies;  
➢ a proper water supply for the population (rural hydra ulics)  and other 
social actions that could be taken care of (electricity supply for health centres: 
maternity, paediatrics, etc.).  
 
IV. Constraints and opportunities to incorporate gender 
considerations  
 
Prior to the conduct of the analysis of gender mainstrea ming in the national rural electrification 
programme, ASER was part of the audit of gender mainstreaming in energy policies and 
programmes conducted in 2005 -2007. The audit exercise was initiated by the International 
Network on Gender and Sustainable Energ y (ENERGIA) in 5 pilot countries for the adoption of 
a more gender -oriented approach in the energy sector, which is known for its high degree of 
neutrality. Previously, two of its executives had been involved in discussions and all activities on 
gender and  energy at the national level. After several attempts to develop a framework for 
monitoring programme impacts, a gender -sensitive manual to strengthen the results -based 
management of electrification programmes was produced in 2012. It is also a good opport unity 
for the institutionalization of gender in the agency.  
The appropriate tool is the web that allows, from a diagnosis of the problems of a target group, 
to make a declination of gender management at the macro, meso and micro social levels taking 
into account the different spheres of influence.  
From the perspect ive of our programme, ASER must use this tool (the gender institutionalization 
web). In our case, it will be necessary to question the gender roles of men and women who will 
be impacted by the connection to the mini -grids; To this end, ASER must ask itself  a certain 
number of questions in this case: with the change that will take place, how will the situations of 
men and women evolve and how will the various actors in the villages concerned interfere? Faced 
with the stakes, what will be the pressure groups at the community level in relation to access and 
control of the electricity generated?  
Also, at the household level, what will be the price to be paid to be able to widen the range of 
priority activities born of the opportunity (energy) offered? These are all sensitive gender issues 
that will challenge ASER and to which solutions must be sought by strengthening the 
intervention teams in terms of gender.  
 
In addition, it should be noted that the ASER has recently (in 2019) completed its Strategic 
Development  Plan (SDP) 2020 -2023 where gender mainstreaming becomes a reality in the 
formulation of planned intervention axes.  
 
However, many factors still prevent ASER from achieving effective gender mainstreaming. These 
include the following:  
- lack of sustained col laboration between ASER and the institutions in charge of gender 
issues; At this level, it is important to create a synergy of actions between ASER, the 
programme's implementing agency, and the projects initiated by the Ministry of Family 
and Gender and th e Ministry of Agriculture (women and young people are very present 
in agricultural production, artisanal dairy and fisheries processing and throughout the 
value chain.


---
*Page 107*
---

15 
 - lack of means of the beneficiaries for the initial investment necessary to start up 
professional activities and IGAs; the pooling of means between the various stakeholders 
is necessary.  
- electricity pricing that does not include special tariffs for women and the poor;  
- lack of energy services for an optimized use of electricity at the productive and 
professional level.  
During workshop which presented the initial results of the analysis to the ASER management 
and technical staff7, a gender target identification exercise was carried out. The exercise was 
carried out in groups using defin ed indicators8 correlated to ASER’s implementation tools.9 
Compared to the missions of the agency, it emerged that the achievement of the well -being of the 
populations, which obtained the score of 42%, constitutes a primary objective to be achieved 
throu gh access to electricity. Moreover, the increase in productivity (26%) and the efficiency of 
the project (25%) clearly raise more concern than promotion of gender equality, which only 
obtained 7% of the scores.  
 
 
  
 
V. Challenges to incorporating gender mai nstreaming into 
ASER’s energy projects  
 
ASER will focus on the effects and impacts of electrification on households, groups and the 
community at large. Significant imbalances still exist in gender relations, particularly in terms of 
access to work opportun ities, employment and access to electricity. The process of gender 
mainstreaming poses several challenges to ASER:  
• Collaborate closely with institutions (decentralized and deconcentrated) support and 
advisory structures; Producer Organizations, men and women, CSAs, resource persons, 
local NGOs in charge of gender issues for an overall vision of the gender roles and needs 
of women, men and vulnerable groups in relation to energy, for a local approach to 
development sensitive to prio rities.  
• Increasing women's leadership as a prerequisite for women's socio -economic 
empowerment.  
 
7 The workshop was attended by 17 people, including 10 executives from ASER and the Director.  
8 Practical Handbook, Volume 2: Resource Pack. Elizabeth Cecelsky  and Soma Dutta, ENERGIA International Network on Gender 
and Sustainable Energy. Draft May 2010 . 
9 Local initiative electrification projects (ERILs), priority rural electrification programmes (PPER), multisectoral projects ( PREMs) and 
the State Emergency P rogramme (PUE).  
42%
26%7%25%ASER's gender goals
●Improve life quality and 
wellbeing
●Increase productivity and 
revenues
●Promote gender equality
●Ensure efficiency and viability 
of the project


---
*Page 108*
---

16 
 • Strengthen the gender capacity of ASER staff, implementing partners, CIMES members, 
focal points, and social organizations with a focus on gender mainstreaming throughout 
the project cycle and gender -sensitive indicators.  
• Strengthen the communication strategy in the different stages of project implementation 
and identify a contact or focal point, intermediary between ASER and rural populations 
for continuous info rmation of actors with appropriate supports (in local languages using 
community radio).  
• Collect and appropriately use disaggregated statistics (gender, age, income) on men, 
women and youth in all areas.  
• Put into practice the monitoring framework and gender -sensitive indicators with a 
disaggregated database and reconsider each time the unsatisfied demand in electrified 
localities;  
• Manage from upstream to downstream the entire technical process up to the indoor 
installations for household access to electricity by respecting the programming for the 
rapid promotion of productive uses at the community level in order to accelerate the 
changes that can eradicate poverty and give added value to electricity.  
• Create multi -stakeholder committees responsible f or supervision in the management of 
the networks.  
• Promote energy sectors according to the economic potential of each region and support 
the establishment of a mechanism for access to microcredit for the development of 
productive activities.  
 
Based on the i dentified constraints and challenges, a gender action plan for the rural 
electrification programme using solar mini -grids was developed. It will focus on three main 
outputs for which a series of actions to be implemented were identified: (i) gender is 
institutionalized in ASER; (ii) the energy needs of men and women are understood and met; (iii) 
access to finance for the development of economic and professional activities for access to income 
is supported. The implementation of this action plan calls for th e active involvement of ASER and 
a synergy between all development partners and actors.   
 
 
VI. Gender Action Plan for the solar mini -grids programme  
 
• General objective  
Improve access to clean energy from mini -solar grids to meet the differentiated productive u se 
needs of men and women in the target villages and increase their resilience.  
 
• Results  
R1: Capacity building with the following activitie s on the technical, organizational and 
managerial levels : 
✓ Training and sensitization of ASER and other project entities on Gender & Development, 
Gender & Energy and gender institutionalization issues.  
✓ Elaboration of a gender sensitive communication strategy with emphasis on information 
and sensitization campaigns;  
✓ Sensitization of men, women and young people on th e existing energy potential, on the 
existing opportunities for : (i) meet the gender needs of different groups and the 
community, (ii) set up preferential tariffs for households below the poverty line, (iii)


---
*Page 109*
---

17 
 support the introduction of easy metering and pa yment systems, (iv) raise awareness 
among the public on security issues related to the risks of tampering with lines (or 
batteries) or fraud.  
✓ Sensitization of management committees and women's umbrella organizations on all 
cross -cutting issues such as gend er, local governance of electricity services, climate change 
in order to achieve productive uses of mini -grids that can meet gender and community 
infrastructure demands.  
 
R2: the Community's energy needs, in particular :  
✓ health centres  with the induced effects of reducing maternal and infant mortality and 
population morbidity;  
✓ schools impacting on the education of boys and girls, training ;  
✓ water works such as boreholes and households are satisfied.  
 
R3: the energy needs of vulnerable  men and women are understood and met  :  
✓ Installation of meters for poor female -headed households and for young people exposed 
to clandestine emigration: provide them with training, trainers in trades such as food 
processing, metal carpentry, silk -screen p rinting etc.; provide them with subsidies for 
adequate equipment for economic and professional activities   
✓ Improved business opportunities for X energy efficiency enterprises owned by women's 
groups with agro -processing units; provide subsidies for solar kits and equipment to 
encourage them to increase their production and market share.  
 
The implementation of this action plan calls for the active involvement of ASER and synergy 
between all partners and development actors ( see action plan in the form of a l ogical framework in the 
Excel table ). 
 
R4: A program management unit is set up and is functional, namely :  
✓ Updating the ASER monitoring and evaluation system and integrating and monitoring 
the project's gender indicators;  
✓ To carry out the follow -up of the implementation of the gender action plan;  
✓ Carry out an evaluation of the project's gender action plan.


---
*Page 110*
---

Gender Action Plan  
Components  Results  Activities  Indicators  Baselin
e Targe
t Calendar  Roles  Budge
t 
the solar rural electrification project using mini -grids targets a total of 1,000 villages remote from existing power lines where mini -grids will be installed to provide access to 
electricity to 344,000 persons among which 50.2% {ANSD, 2017] of women disadvantaged by their isolation and affected by pover ty. 3,739 productive uses managed by women will 
have access to electricity (including boreholes, schools and health infrastructures ), thus improving the living conditions of women and young people.  
Gender results:  * Gender is intitutionalized in ASER and other implementing entities of the programme  
* the energy needs of men and women are understood and taken into account in the dimensioning of equipment  
* access to facilitated financing for the development of economic and professional activities  
Capacity Building  The 
capacities 
of ASER and 
its partners 
are 
strengthene
d Establish a 
sectoral 
committee 
headed by a 
focal point 
responsible 
for 
monitoring all 
activities 
related to 
gender 
mainstreamin
g Memorandum establishing committee  0 
1 2020, T1  ASER  10 000  
- Targeting 
women and 
girls as a 
priority, 
during 
training 
sessions in 
the trades 
proposed by 
the Project's 
capacity 
building 
programme, 
in order to 
enable them 
to apply for At least half of the enrolments per 
region in the vocational training 
programmes offered as part of 
capacity -building are women and girls.  0 
  2020, T4  ASER/Lo cal 
stakeholders 
(local 
authorities, 
administrative 
authorities, 
beneficiaries' 
associations)  -


---
*Page 111*
---

19 
 jobs, during 
works and 
commissionin
g. 
- To set up a 
recruitment 
mechanism 
favourin g 
young people 
and women ;  
- 
Representatio
n of women 
and youth in 
local 
recruitment 
committees ;  
- Identify and 
support CBOs 
managed by 
women and 
young people 
in the villages 
targeted by 
the program.  
- Set up 
management 
committees of 
women and 
young people 
in the target 
villages or 
local 
structures 
with a strong 
focus on 
women and 
young people, 
in line with 
the - List of CBOs identified by village  
- 100% of the communes have local 
committees or structures that give a 
large place to women and young 
people, created among the target 
villages and their operationality.  0 
TBD 2020, T4  ASER  85 000


---
*Page 112*
---

20 
 organizational 
and 
operational 
mechanism 
defined in the 
stakeholder 
engagement 
plan, in which 
vulnerability 
aspects are 
given sp ecial 
attention.  
A training 
programme 
for all 
stakeholders 
(ASER, 
operators, 
CBOs, etc.) is 
developed 
and 
implemented.  Training programme and number of 
people trained  0 
TBD durant le 
projet  
ASER  132 
000 
Develop and 
implement a 
gender -
sensitive 
communicatio
n campaign 
on the project 
and its various 
components.  Communication strategy and number of 
campaigns carried out  0 
TBD durant le 
projet  
ASER  50 000  
Detail engineering study (e xecution)  The 
Community
's energy 
needs for 
improved 
access to 
basic social 
services are Gender -
sensitive 
survey forms 
are used for 
demand 
analysis  
A detailed 
preliminary - Standard Gender Mainstreaming Form  
- Gender mainstreaming in the 
technical design and implementation 
modalities of the project  0 
2 2020, T4  ASER, UGP  -


---
*Page 113*
---

21 
 understood
, taken into 
account 
and met.    design and 
specifications 
for the 
creation of 
1,000 mini -
solar arrays, 
integrating 
gender -
specific needs 
is produced  
Mini solar 
power plants 
and LV 
networks are 
designed to 
meet the 
energy needs 
of households 
and 
productive 
and socio -
community 
uses.  Planned plant capacity vs. demand  0 
TBD 2020, T4  Consultant, 
Aser  - 
Carrying out the work and connecting 
customers  Realization 
of 1,000 
mini -grids 
and 
connection 
of 39,000 
households, 
and 4,500 
productive 
and social 
uses  In the 
targeted 
households, 
men and 
women are 
consulted 
during the 
construction 
of indoor 
facilities and 
the 
subscription  The number of positively impacted 
female heads of household subscribing  0 
TBD 2021, 2022  opérateur, Aser  - 
A mechanism 
to facilitate 
the 
subscription 
of productive The number of connected productive 
usgers  0 
TBD 2021, 2022  opérateur, Aser  -


---
*Page 114*
---

22 
 uses managed 
by women is 
set up 
(Coupon 
system).  
An easy 
access to 
financing 
allowing 
productive 
users to 
acquire 
production 
equipment is 
set up and 
operational 
with the MFIs.  Number of productive users benefiting, 
60% of whom are women and young 
people.  0 
TBD 2021, 2022  Aser, IMF  225 
000 
Programme management, monitoring and 
evaluation  A 
programme 
manageme
nt unit is 
set up and 
is 
operational
. The ASER 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation 
system is 
updated and 
the 
programme's 
gender 
indicators are 
integrated 
and 
monitored.  ASER Monitoring & Evaluation System 
is updated  
- Existence of a performance 
framework  0 
1 2021, T1  ASER  - 
Monitoring of 
the 
implementati
on of the 
gender action 
plan is being 
carried out  Periodic monitoring reports  
- Updated Performance Framework  0 
6 2021, 2022  ASER  43 000  
A gender 
action plan 
evaluation of Program evaluation report  0 
1 2023  ASER 
Consultants  70 000


---
*Page 115*
---

23 the 
programme is 
carried out.  
____________________