=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20200724143958+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/ModDate: D:20200724143958+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
18 – 21 August 2020  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 135 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six  parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean – EBA 
IO"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.26/02 /Add.07 
Page b 
3 
66 
71 
85 
94 Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s)  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  96


---
*Page 3*
---

1 Previously entitled “Strengthening Ecosystem- based Adaptation to climate change in Island States 
through Civil Society”.  Programme  title: Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean – EBA IO1 
Countries:  Comoros, Madagascar , Mauritius  and Seychelles  
Accredited Entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Date of first submission:  2020/01/ 23 
Date of current submission 2020/0 5/14 
Version number  V1.6, 28 May 2020


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 0 OF 61  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 61 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Programme  or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:     
☐ Low-emission transport:      
☐ Buildings, cities , industries and appliances:    
☐ Forest ry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:      
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
 
 
 
   
13% 
  
87% 
A.5. Expected m itigation 
impact  Not applicable  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  698,000 beneficiaries , of which 
88,000 are direct beneficiaries  
2.4% of targeted population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  49.2 million  USD  
A.9. Programme  size Small (Upto USD 50 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  38M USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒ Grant  USD 38 million   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  2021 -2030. 10 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20+ years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval    
6/30/2020  A.14. ESS category  I-3 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No  ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 61 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Conservation International Foundation (“CI”)  is the unique Executing Entity for 
the Programme.   CI manages  a program me named The Critical Ecosystem 
Partnership Fund (“CEPF”) . Therefore, CI will be responsible for GCF funding 
received under this Programme.  CI is a non-profit public benefit corporation 
organized under the laws of the State of California, U.S.A. C I is one of 
CEPF's  global donor organizations  (so is AFD) . CI hosts the  CEPF secretariat  
and provides supporti ng legal and financial services but the CEPF has it s own 
governance system and its own specific sub account within CI main bank 
account .  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
 
Like all island developing states, the four Programme countries ( Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and 
Seychelles ) are extremely vulnerable to climate change. Their populations, agricultural lands and 
infrastructure are highly exposed to climate change because they tend to be concentrated in coastal zones2 
where sea -level rise and increased frequency and severity of extreme weather is most damaging3. All the 
Programme  countries report recent climate change such as increased temperatures, rainfall changes, sea-
level rise and increasing ocean acidification. C limate models, even under the most optimistic scenarios, 
project that existing changes are going to become more pronounced in the future , putting people, 
infrastructure, agriculture, natural ecosystems and people’s livelihoods at risk. Increased air and sea surface 
temperatures, changes to seasonal rainfall and increased numbers of extreme weather events including 
both droughts and flooding are expected. Cyclones are already a significant threat to life  and assets and are 
expected to intens ify.  
While the c ombined effects of projected climate change mean that many people are at risk, t he populations 
and economies of the Programme  countries are highly dependent on natural resources and therefore 
ecosystem services. However , the natural ecosystems that provide  these  services are already under severe 
threat from human activities in all the Programme  countries, which are within a biodiversity hotspot  – a region 
of high biodiversity  importance but with e xtreme ly threat ened natural ecosystems. As a consequence, the  
resilience and ability  of ecosystems  to provide essential ecosystem  services  necessary for people to adapt 
to climate change is diminished, further exacerbating climate change vulnerability. The most significant 
impacts are expected to include: decreased provision of freshwater due to degraded watersheds;  increased 
flooding due to conversion of ecosystems that provide natural flood regulation;  loss of coastal protection due 
to damage to coastal ecosystems such as m angroves and coral reefs; declines in the productivity of fisheries 
due to loss of nursery habitats; and decreased agricultural production due to heat stress and drought.  
Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) measures have been identified as high priorities in the climate change 
strategies of all the Programme  countries  (see section D) . EbA encourages conservation, improved 
management and restoration of ecosystems to provide the essential services that people need to adapt to climate variability . However, beyond a few pilot projects, financing for EbA is currently insufficient  in the 
Programme countries despite the urgent need and opportunity to scale up EbA action. While there has been 
a focus on strengthening government programmes to address climate change impacts, there has been less attention on harnessing the capacity of civil society to address these challenges. Despite their potential to 
play an effective role in addressing EbA, CSOs are typically under -utilized, under -valued and under -financed 
by development actors.  
In this context, t he Programme  will provide specific funding for EbA through the Critical Ecosys tem 
Partnership Fund (CEPF) to mobilize Civil Society Organizations  (CSOs) . CEPF was established in 2000 as 
a mechanism to enable CSOs to support conservation of critical ecosystems within biodiversity hotspots . 
CEPF is a joint initiative of AFD, Conservat ion International  (an international NGO) , the European Union, the 
Global Environment Facility, the Governmen t of Japan and the World Bank. Since inception, CEPF has 
 
2 Madagascar, due to its size, is the exception but still has significant coastal populations and offshore islands 
that share the same characteristics as the other countries.  
3 https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 61 
 granted more than USD  232 million for biodiversity conservation to over 2,300 CSO grantees in 24 
biodiversity hotspots. CEPF current ly funds biodiversity conservation actions in the four countries of the 
biodiversity hotspot and so there is an immediate opportunity to use its  existing CSO networks to address 
climate change issues at scale.  Integrating biodiversity and climate change issues are at the heart of the 
international agenda this year  and t his is exactly what this proposal is about.  
CEPF do not have any legal status  of its own . It is a program of Conservation International. Conservation 
International Foundation (“CI”) is then the Executing Entity for the Programme.  As said above, CI  is one of 
CEPF's  global donor organizations  (so is AFD). CI  hosts the CEPF secretariat  and provides supporti ng legal 
and financial services but the CEPF has its own governance system and its own specific sub account within 
the CI main bank account.  
The goal of the Programme  is to reduce the vulnerability of island populations by securing the critical 
ecosystem services they need to be resilient to climate change.  The Programme  will use tried -and-tested 
tools and methodologies that CEPF has developed over the last 20 years for strengthening and engaging 
civil society actors in ecosystem conservation. CEPF’s current model , which prioritises biodiversity 
conservation,  will be modified to direct investments to geographic and thematic areas of highest priority for 
EbA. The Programme  will work through CSOs, help to build their capacity and help them develop 
partnerships with the private and public sector. The Programme  includes a component to achieve long- term 
sustainability and encourage replication of best EbA practice. The Programme  has three components:  
Component 1: Developing strategic plans for EbA in the small island biodiversity hotspot that are well aligned 
with national climate change strategies ; 
Component 2: Supporting EbA activities through grants to CSOs;  
Component 3: Ensu ring long- term sustainability and replicating success through knowledge products and 
tools for EbA.  
The Programme  is expected to make a significant contribution to the climate change and sustainable 
development strategies of the Programme  countries by incr easing resilience and reduc ing the vulnerability 
of ecosystems and people.  High level impacts of the Programme  include: decreased vulnerability for at least 
698,000 people through access to more resilient ecosystem services and livelihood options ; restoration or 
improved management of at least 1.83 million hectares  of coastal and terrestrial ecosystems that play critical 
roles in ecosystem service provision; and increased c apacity of at least 25  CSOs, thereby  enabling them to 
make further contributions to EbA.  While EbA is the main focus of the Programme , the proposed protection 
and restoration of ecosystems is expected to have important mitigation benefits  through avoided e missions 
from deforestation and sequestration linked to ecosystem restoration activities.   
By financing the Programme, GCF will be supporting CEPF to replicate the EbA tools and approaches 
developed in the four countries .  
It is also important to note that the Programme will also allow the CEPF to replicate the EbA tools and approaches developed in other Small Island Developing States , Least Developed Countries and other 
countries in the biodiversity hotspots where CEPF work s. This replication throughout CEPF’s portfolio ( CEPF 
disburses approximately USD 16 million per year to CSOs globally ) will be both during the Programme 
period,  and beyond. For avoidance of doubt, replication activities in countries other than the four 
Programme countries fall outside the scope of the Programme.  
In this way , the Programme will have a lasting impact and scaling up far beyond the scope of the one- off 
Programme in the four countries of the Indian Ocean.


---
*Page 8*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 60 
 
  
4 More precisely, hotspots are distinguished by: (i) harboring at least 0.5% of all species of vascular plants, and (ii) contai ning 30% or less 
of their original primary vegetation.  
5 Comoros is also an LDC  
6 https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/conveng.pdf  
7 UN-OHRLLS, 2015. Small Island Developing States in Numbers.  
8 WGI AR5 Chapter 14; Table 29- 1 
9 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/04/building- madagascars -climate -resiliency -to-ensu re-food- security -and-preserve-
livelihoods  
10 World Bank, 2017. ‘ South West Indian –  RAFI  https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/116342- WP-PUBLIC -52p-SWIO -RAFI -
Summary -Report -2017- Publish- Version.pdf  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
The GCF funding for the Programme will target the Indian Ocean: Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles , a region 
where CEPF has current investments . The region,  recognized as a biodiversity hotspot , is among the most 
biologically diverse yet threatened ecoregions in the W orld4. It is also one of the most vulnerable to climate change 
(see below). The goal of the Programme  is to reduce the vulnerability of populations in island states by securing 
the critical ecosystem services they need to be resilient to climate change. Three of the four proposed Programme 
countries are Small Island Developing States  (SIDS). Madagascar is  a Least Developed Country (LDC)5 that is 
much larger than the other islands , but its coastal areas and offshore islands share many of the same environmental 
and socio- economic features  as SIDS .  
Climate Change rationale  
The specific  vulnerability of  SIDS and LDCs are recognized by the climate convention (see UNFCCC6). Warming 
temperatures (both sea surface and air temperatures), sea -level rise and the increased frequency and severit y of 
extreme weather events  have,  and will continue to have,  significant and profound effects on island populations, 
agricultural lands and infrastructure, which tend to be concentrated in coastal zones. With one- third of their 
population living on land less than 5m above sea level, the threat of sea- level rise and  destruction from storm surges 
means that significant parts of Islands , and in some cases entire nations, may become uninhabitable7. These 
climate risks, combined with their particular socio- economic situations, make SIDS and LDCs some of the most 
vulnerable countries in the world to climate change.  Large parts of the populations of SIDS and LDCs also rely 
directly on natural resources, and therefore directly on ecosystem services, for their livelihoods.  
All the countries included in the Programme are faci ng broadly similar challenges related to climate change. The 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5 -2014) indicates with high confidence that current and future climate- related 
drivers of risks for small islands –  including Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles –  during the 21st century include 
sea level rise, cyclones, increasing air and sea surface temperatures, and changing rainfall patterns8. Likewise, 
climate change in Madagascar induces more frequent droughts and floods, sea level rise and increasing 
temperat ure, which also have increasing impacts on livelihood, food security, economic development, and 
infrastructure9. Figure 1, presenting average annual temperatures in the four countries, highlights the warming 
trend. More detailed presentation of climate dat a, and model projections is provided in Annex 2, the Feasibility 
Study.  
In addition to temperature rise, several  national climate change documents (e.g. UNFCCC National 
Communications, Nationally Determined Contributions and other national climate strategy documents , based on 
scientific reports)  report s ea-level rise (e.g. + 0.6 cm/year in Madagascar (1994- 2008)) and increasing ocean 
acidification  as climate threats . Moreover, w hen looking at historical scientific data over the Indian Ocean, trends 
are showing more floods and droughts based on a comparison of periods 1961- 1990 and 1991- 201610.


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 60 
 
  
11 As reported in national climate strategy documents  
12 Randrianalijaona T.million . 2018.  Measuring the economic  impact  of cyclones  in Madagascar.  Reliefweb.  
https://reliefweb.int/report/madagascar/measuring- economic -impact -cyclones -madagascar . 
13 World Bank, 2017. ‘South West Indian –  RAFI  https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/116342- WP-PUBLIC -52p-SWIO -RAFI -
Summary -Report -2017- Publish- Version.pdf  
  
 
 
Figure 1: Annua l average temperatures in the Programme countries showing the  warming trend between 1908 and 
2018.  
 
Note: E ach stripe represents the mean annual temperature averaged over a year. For each country, the average temperature 
for the 1971- 2000 period is set as  the boundary between blue and red colours, and the colour scale varies from +/ - 2.6 
standard deviations of the annual average temperatures between 1901- 2000. Data source: Berkeley Earth temperature 
dataset; www. Showyourstripes.info).  
 
In the future, a ll Programme  countries are expected to experience increased annual average temperatures, with 
project ed increases ranging from approximately 0.6 to 3.5°C by 2090 depending on assumptions about future GHG 
emission scenarios11. There is less consensus from cl imate models about projected rainfall patterns and there is 
more variation between countries expected for rainfall. However, seasonal rainfall changes (increases or 
decreases) are predicted in many of the countries, or specific regions of countries , and mo st countries are also 
expected to have a greater number of extreme weather events including both droughts and flooding. Natural 
disasters such as cyclones, and tropical depressions already cause significant damage in the region. For example, 
cyclone Ava, w hich hit Madagascar in 2018, killed 51  people, displaced 50,000, and caused USD 156 million in 
losses - equivalent to 2.5% of GDP12. This was just one of several cyclones in the region in 2018.  Overall,  the 
number of affected people - estimated at 14.4 mi llion for the 1964– 2014 period - and the physical damages 
associated to climate -related hazards in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles - estimated at USD 3.1 
billion over the same period - are expected to further increase in the context of climate change13. For instance , The


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 60 
 
  
14 IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H. -O. Pörtner, D.C.  Roberts, V. Masson- Delmotte, P. Zhai, 
M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. 2019 
15 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10211  
16 Kulp S., A., & Strauss B., H. 2019. New elevation data triple estimates of global vulnerability to sea- level rise and coastal flooding. 
Nature Communications 10, Article number:  4844 (2019)   
17 Magnan, A.K., M. Garschagen, J. -P. Gattuso, J.E. Hay, N. Hilmi, E. Holland, F. Isla, G. Kofinas, I.J. Losada, J. Petzold, B. Ratter, 
T.Schuur, T. Tabe, and R. van de Wal, 2019: Cross -Chapter Box 9: Integrative Cross -Chapter Box on Low -Lying Islands and Coasts. In: 
IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H. -O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson- Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. 
Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. In  press 
 Special Report on Ocean and the Cryosphere from IPCC (2019)14 states that, overall, cyclones  are expected to 
become less frequent but more intense . 
Another manifestation of climate change that will have very important impacts on the Region is sea-level rise, which 
is expected to rise in all the Programme countries . Based on spatial trend patterns from January 1993 to May 2019, 
the Indian Ocean region and in particular East of Madagascar has the strongest regional sea level rise trend of the 
World (see figure 9 of the WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 201915). However, the magnitude 
of sea level rise remains uncertain in climate change projections because how processes such as the melting of 
large ice sheets near the poles will impact sea levels  are not precisely known. Larger sea level rises than the 
projected average rises of up to 2m being reported by 2090 in the national climate strategy documents of the 
Programme countries  could therefore occur. In addition, extrapolating from average sea level rises to predict the 
consequences for  coastal populations to rising sea levels is challenging. A recent study suggests that even under 
current projections of sea -level rise, the vulnerability of coastal populations has been greatly underestimated and 
that 630 million people worldwide will live on land below projected annual flood levels by 210016. In addition, 
increased ocean acidification is expected in the waters around all Programme countries, which will lead to additional 
stress to the health of coral reefs17. 
Under the projected scenarios for future climate change, threats to coastal areas will be exacerbated by temperature 
rise, increased storms, sea- level and wave action. The main climate risks facing the P rogramme countries and their 
potential impacts on water resources, agricultural production, fisheries, ecosystem services and human health are 
summarized in Annex 2 (Feasibility study).  The most significant impacts are expected to include coastal erosion 
with damage to (and potential loss of) mangroves, coral reefs and other habitats; declines in the productivity of 
fisheries that people depend on; and displacement of human communities leading to subsequent conversion of 
natural vegetation. Agriculture remains a major socio- economic activity in the hotspot. Under likely scenarios of 
climate change, especially with temperature increase and modification of precipitation regimes, traditional crops will 
be affected. This will have implications for changing agric ultural systems, as new crops are introduced that are 
better suited to the altered climatic regime. Storm surges and inundation of seawater on low -lying coastal areas will 
damage staple agricultural crops and make land unsuitable for agriculture. Increased  temperatures will cause heat 
stress on many agricultural plants . Flooding and  droughts are likely to be more frequent due to more extreme 
weather.  
 
The above- mentioned risks will directly impact the economies, the populations and the ecosystems of the countries 
of the Programme, which aim to reduce their vulnerabilities. In that regard, h ealthy coastal, freshwater and terrestrial 
ecosystems of islands  are crucial  for adaptation to climate threats. Coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs, 
mangroves, salt marshes and seagrass meadows play important roles in reducing coastal erosion, and provide a 
range of additional services such as supporting fisheries and tourism that are important to support local livelihoods. Coastal ecosystems stabilize shorelines by reducing wave energy, trapping sediments and filtering nutrients. When healthy, these ecosystems also keep up with sea level rise through soil accretion,  thereby countering challenges 
such as saline intrusion and erosion. Healthy coastal ecosystems have also been credited with reducing 
vulnerability to extreme weather events such as cyclones, since altered or degraded coastlines are more prone to


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 60 
 
  
18 McIvor et al. 2012. Storm Surge Reduction by Mangroves. Natural Coastal Protection Series: Report 2. The Nature Conservancy & 
Wetlands International.  
19 Ecosystem services are the benefits people obtain from nature, such as flood regulation, storm protection, food, clean water, fuel, shelter, 
soil formation, nutrient cycling, recreational and spiritual benefits, etc.  
20 Griscom et al. 2017 Natural Climate Solutions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A. 114: 11645- 11650 
21 Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF) 2014. Ecosystem Profile of the Madagascar and Indian Ocean Islands Hotspot.  
22 Data summarised from CIA World Factbook  and references except where noted otherwise . https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -
world -factbook/   Accessed 18 Oct. 2019  significa nt impact18. Terrestrial and wetland ecosystems also play an important role in delivering services that help 
people adapt to climate change. For example, forests can reduce the effects of flooding in catchment areas, protect 
sources of freshwater and facili tate replenishment of groundwater. Good watershed management is important for 
water retention, prevention of landslides and reduction of flash- flooding and protection of downstream infrastructure. 
Ecosystem protection and restoration, including elimination of invasive alien species, can be important actions to 
improve the resilience of island ecosystem services.  
EbA solutions to climate change ar e particularly relevant for Islands . EbA integrates the conservation and 
restoration of biodiversity and ecosyst em services19 into broader climate change adaptation strategies. EbA 
encourages conservation, improved management and restoration of ecosystems to provide essential services that 
people need to adapt to climate variability. The aim is to maintain and increa se resilience and reduce the 
vulnerability of ecosystems and people. EbA can be less expensive to implement than infrastructure -based 
adaptation, and can generate important social, economic, biodiversity conservation and cultural co- benefits. The 
UNFCCC ha s recognized the role that sustainable management of natural resources can play in building resilience 
of socio- economic and ecological systems as part of climate change adaptation strategies. In addition, many EbA 
measures also bring climate change mitigation benefits. Natur al climate solutions , such as conservation and 
restoration of natural ecosystems, could provide as much as a third of mitigation measures needed by 2030 to limit 
global warming to 2°C20.  
Context  
The islands of the Madagascar and Indian Ocean island hotspot share biogeographical features but Madagascar, 
an island- continent, makes up about 95 percent of the hotspot‘s land area and is home to about 92 percent of the 
population21. There are also significant economic disparities. Seychelles and Mauritius can be considered as upper -
middle income economies  with high human development , while Madagascar and Comoros are categorized by the 
United Nations as among the world‘s Least Develo ped Countries. In these two countries, the economy relies mostly 
on subsistence agriculture and fishing, while the services sector, and in particular tourism and financial services (in 
Mauritius), dominates the economy of the more developed islands. Notwit hstanding, tourism, fisheries and 
agriculture are all heavily dependent on natural resources and their preservation and sustainable management is critical for these countries.  Although they have small land areas, both Seychelles and Mauritius have huge areas 
of ocean in their Exclusive Economic zones and are therefore  Large Ocean States  with important marine resources.  
 
Table 1. Summary of key information  for Programme  countr ies22 
Country  Land area 
(km2)a Coastline (km)  Population 
sizeb 
(2019 
estimates)  Human 
Development 
Index (Global 
Rank) - 2019 GDP (USD  
billions )c GDP (USD per 
capita)  GDP composition 
by sectord 
Comoros  2,235  340 850,886   
 0.538 (156)  1,179 (173)  $1,600   
(2017 est.)  Agriculture 47.7%  
Industry 11.8%  
Service 40.5%  
Madagascar  587,041  4,828  26,969,307  0.521 (162)  12,550 (132)  $1,600   
(2017 est.)  Agriculture 24%  
Industry 19.5%  
Service 56.4%  
Mauritius  2040  322 1,198,575  0.796 (66)  14,391 (123)  $22,300  Agriculture 4%  
Industry 21.8%


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 60 
 
 (2017 est.)  Service 74.1% 
Seychelles  455 491 97,739  0.801 (62)  1,644 (169)  $29,300  
(2017 est.)  Agriculture 2.5% 
Industry 13.8% 
Service 83.7% 
Notes:  a) Includes inland water bodies ; b) 2019 population estimates by Population Division of UN Economics and Social Affairs ; c) source: IMF, 2019 ; d) 
estimate for 2017.  
 
All of the countries in the Programme  are signatories of the main international environmental treati es including the 
UNFCCC and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). All of the countr ies have indicated in national climate 
plans that EbA activities are part of their priority national climate adaptation strategies  (see section D5) . A limited 
number of projects focused on EbA and climate change mitigation have been started in some of the c ountries and 
provide opportunities for synergy with the proposed Programme . Similarly, a greater number of projects and 
program mes focused on biodiversity conservation objectives are ongoing that also provide opportunities for 
synergies. Further details of  relevant projects are provided in the F easibility Study in Annex 2, but some of the most 
important current projects on EbA are described in the table below.  
 
Table  2. Summary of some important current/planned projects adressing EbA in the Programme  countr ies 
Project name 
(Promoter/donor)  Countries  
included  Brief description  
Ensuring climate resilient 
water supplies in the 
Comoros Islands  
(UNDP/GCF)  Comoros  Strengthen water resources management and environmental monitoring, 
improve groundwater management and preservation, expand hydrological 
and meteorological monitoring infrastructure, protect ecosystems and 
regulate stream flow, and integrate local populations into water resources 
management.  
EbA to climate change in 
Seychelles 
(UNDP/Adaptation Fund)  Seychelles  Watershed management and coastal protection.  
Restoring Marine Ecosystem 
Services by Rehabilitating 
Coral Reefs to Meet a 
Changing Climate Future 
(UNDP/Adaptation Fund)  Seychelles , 
Mauritius  Reef restoration, establish coral farming and nursery facilities, and actively 
restore degraded reefs  
Blue Action Fund (KfW/GCF)  Madagascar  Enhance, through coastal zone management, ecosystem services that 
contribute to reducing climate change- related risks for vulnerable coastal 
communities  
AFD Comoros, 
Madagascar, 
Mauritius and 
Seychelles  AFD finances several other projects in the region that address similar themes 
and for which there are additional opportuni ties to create synergies, including 
RECOS (promoting coastal resilience and adaptation; financed by AFD for 
EUR 8.5 million  and FFEM for EUR 1.5 million ), support to the Moheli 
National Park in Comoros (E UR 3 million ), the Kobaby  project  in Madagascar 
which finances the strengthened management of terrestrial and coastal 
protected areas (EUR 7 million ) and the Talaky/Talaky Be project (EUR 3.5 
million ) that addresses deforestation, low emission rice agriculture and the 
creation of a protec ted area and support to the FAPBM -  Madagascar’s 
Biodiversity  and Protected Areas Foundation  (EUR 8 million) .   
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages  plus diagram )


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 60 
 
  
23 Hannah L, Ikegami million , Hole DG, Seo C, et al. (2013) Global Climate Change Adaptation Prior ities for Biodiversity and Food Security. 
PLoS ONE 8(8): e72590. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0072590 
http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0072590   The goal of the Programme is to reduce the vulnerability of island populations by securing the critical ecosystem 
services they need to be resilient to climate change. This goal will be achieved by harnessing the capabilities of 
CSOs to accomplish EbA to c limate change in the Programme countries and then replicating this experience to 
other island countries that face similar challenges, with a particular emphasis on SIDS and LDCs. While there has been a focus on strengthening government program mes to addres s climate change impacts, there has been less 
attention on harnessing the capacity of civil society to address these challenges. Despite their potential to play an 
effective role in addressing EbA, CSOs are typically under -utilized, under -valued and under -
financed by 
development actors.  
The Programme will support EbA actions that protect, restore or promote the sustainable use of critical ecosystems 
providing ecosystem services to vulnerable people, beginning with demonstration subprojects in four island 
countries in the Indian Ocean, which CEPF will then be able to expand to other parts of its global grants portfolio. 
As shown in Figure 2 , healthy ecosystems provide a range of services that are essential for human well -being and 
for improving adaptive capacity by increasing resilience to stresses. This is especially the case in SIDS  and LDCs , 
which are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts, such as sea level rise and extreme weather events. 
Individuals, communities, businesses and s ociety as a whole benefit and are more resilient when these ecosystem 
services are of sufficient quantity and quality because they are better able to survive, adapt and improve conditions 
in the face of stresses and shocks from climate change and other sources.  
EbA is a nature- based solution that is gaining significant importance in the context of both climate change (e.g. 
within the UNFCCC processes, included in Nationally Determined Contributions and a growing number of National 
Adaptation Plans) and biodiversity conservation (e.g. integration into the CBD Strategic Plan 2011 -2020 and Aichi 
targets). EbA makes important links between biodiversity conservation and sustainable economic development as 
part of an overall strategy for helping people adapt to the risks associated with climate change. EbA is an emerging 
concept with an increasingly documented scientific basis, implementation of pilot projects globally, as well as 
emerging guidelines, tools and standards. Nevertheless, there remains a lack of EbA pilots and studies from island 
countries, where the potential for the approach is great. For example, four of the ten highest global priorities for 
adaptation of agriculture and biodiversity in the face of climate change are located in island biodiversity hotspots.23 
 
Figure 2. The pathway between EbA actions and increased human resilience to stresses and shocks from 
climate change and other sources


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 60 
 
  
 
To achieve its overall goal of reducing the vulnerability of island populations by securing the critical ecosystem 
services they need to be resilient to climate change, the Programme will need to overcome several key barriers:  
 
• Lack of costed long- term vision and strategies for EbA . To be effective, EbA needs to focus on the most 
important ecosystems and ecosystem services for vulnerable people. The priority geographical areas for 
action are not necessarily the same as those traditionally captu red in biodiversity conservation plans, 
because their focus is usually on areas of the highest biodiversity value. The importance of natural 
ecosystems in providing essential services is often overlooked and therefore not integrated into 
development plans and spatial planning tools. Currently the priority themes and areas for EbA action are 
not defined for any of the Programme countries (this will be addressed through Component 1 of the 
Programme).  
 
• Lack of financial resources for CSOs to engage in EbA . Once EbA priorities have been identified and 
planned, it is necessary to understand their costs and have strategies for covering those costs both during 
the Programme period but also beyond, to ensure sustainability and continuity of support to CSOs for furt her 
EbA action.  While donors are committed and engaged in ecosystem conservation and climate change 
issues, national governments remain the recipients of the majority of related funding. Meanwhile, the private 
sector is able to generate its own resources to engage in environmental protection. Civil society, despite its 
indispensable role in achieving ecosystem conservation and climate change goals, remains the least funded sector. In addition to a general lack of funding opportunities, EbA activities often  
include ecosystem 
restoration activities, which have significantly higher costs than protecting existing natural ecosystems. 
There is, therefore, a tendency to focus on protecting remaining natural ecosystems rather than engaging in the challenges of ecos ystem restoration.  
 
• Limited institutional capacity and financial sustainability for EbA. Achieving long term sustainability of 
EbA requires institutional and financial capacity that is currently a challenge for some CSOs. While there 
are many CSOs working in each of the Programme countries, there is a broad range of institutional and 
technical capacity among them and their ability to access and manage funding also varies widely. 
Developing the capacity of the CSO sector as a whole and encouraging collaborat ion and exchange 
between larger, international NGOs and smaller, local CSOs is needed.   
 HEALTHY 
ECOSYSTEMS
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
Supporting Services
Nutrient cycling, Soil formation, Primary production, ...
Provisioning 
Services
Food
Freshwater
Wood and fiber
Fuel
Regulating 
Services
Climate regulation
Flood regulation
Disease regulation
Water purificatio n
Cultural 
Services
Aesthetic
Spiritual
Educational
Recreational
Increased Resilience –better capacity to survive, adapt and 
improve conditions in the face of stresses and shocks
Security
 Basic materials
forlife
Healt h
 Good social
relation sEcosystem -based Adaptation actions
Protect, restore and use sustainably
Examples of important ecosystems and 
ecosystem services in the Project countries
•Mangroves –coastal protection, fish 
nurseries, food provision
•Coral reefs –coastal protection, food 
provision, nature -based tourism
•Forest watersheds  -freshwater provision, 
flood regulation, soil stabilization
•Forests –provision of building materials, wild 
food and traditional medicine
•Rivers and lakes -provision of food, 
freshwater, flood regulation


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 60 
 
 • Limited track record of CSOs at influencing public policy or at establishing effective partnerships 
with private companies in sectors with a large footprint on coasta l and terrestrial ecosystems. CSOs 
collectively possess important organizational and technical capacity to be effective advocates for 
sustainable development and EbA, but they are not always considered as equal partners with governments 
and the private sec tor regarding decision making to achieve sustainable societies and economies. There is 
a need for new models to demonstrate effective partnerships between CSOs and public sector agencies as 
well as with private sector companies to achieve EbA outcomes.  
 
• Incomplete scientific knowledge on the best EbA approaches to use for some ecosystems and 
limited methodologies for measuring success . The scientific underpinning of EbA needs to be 
strengthened globally, but also within each country. There are many applied research questions about the 
best approaches to use to achieve specific EbA outcomes. Similarly, science has an important role to play 
in improving the way in which ecosystem services and EbA impacts are measured.  
 
• Limited knowledge, awareness or application/replication of successful approaches.  Although 
promising EbA projects have been undertaken around the world and there is a growing scientific literature about it, the concept is still relatively new for many organizations and governments. Many CSOs could 
replicate successful EbA approaches if there was greater knowledge about how to achieve successful EbA 
activities. Where existing publications and EbA tools do exist, they are not always easy to access in the 
Programme countries and may not be in a for m that is appropriate for end- users. In particular, Community 
Based Organizations (CBOs) often have very good knowledge of their local natural resources and could 
play an important role in achieving EbA action if the necessary technical information is pres
ented in an 
appropriate and accessible form.  
 
The proposed Programme is designed to address these barriers, which are similar to the barriers CEPF addresses 
to achieve biodiversity conservation outcomes. The Programme will therefore benefit from CEPF’s successful  
previous experience and well -established networks of government and civil society partners. Based on the barriers 
that have been identified, five expected Programme outcomes  have been identified. The outputs necessary to 
achieve the Programme outcomes  have been grouped into 3 Programme Components. Figure 3  shows how the 
Programme outputs will address the barriers so as to achieve the Programme outcomes  and ultimately the goal. 
Further detail on the activities needed to achieve each output is given in section B3, with further detail on sub-
activities provided in section E6.  
 
Figure 3.  Theory of Change showing the relationship between the Programme  goal,  Programme 
Outcomes, C omponents and Outputs. See narrative for activities under each output in section B3.


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 60 
 
  
Critical assumptions:  
1. CSOs are willing to engage constructively with public and private sector actors  
2. Governments provide political space for civil society to operate and engage in EbA  
3. EbA remains a priority for national governments during P rogramme period  
4. Investments by other donors support complementary activities to maintain and restore ecosystems  
 
The proposed approach to the Programme is hi ghly complementary to AFD’s broader activities in the Indian Ocean. 
AFD’s operations in the region are coordinated by  its Indian Ocean Directorate based in Saint -Denis (Réunion). 
The Directorate supervises AFD’s activities in two LDCs (Madagascar and Comor os), Mauritius, Seychelles, and 
three overseas French territories (Réunion, Mayotte and the French Southern and Antarctic Territories). AFD has 
disbursed EUR 2.4 billion between 2015 and 2018, mostly in the overseas French territories. AFD provides loans 
and grants based on the specific needs of each country in the region, which vary greatly in terms of human 
development. AFD’s grant portfolio in the region has increased from EUR 336 million in 2018 to EUR 539 million in 
2019 and it is e xpected to reach EUR 560 million in 2020. In the four Programme countries, AFD works in 
cooperation with the French embassies and in partnership with other financial partners . The group’s regional 
strategy in the Indian Ocean aims at addressing common chal lenges faced by all territories in the basin. Through 
its network of local agencies, AFD finances cooperation projects that contribute to sharing common resources and /or expertise and experiences on subjects of common interest, reducing the spread of nega
tive externalities, 
increasing resilience of population and territories to climate change and natural disasters. The Group aims at 
strengthening its actions to preserve, restore and sustainably manage biodiversity, improve living conditions for 
vulnerable people and to strengthen the capacity of the population to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate 
change. Thanks to its strong local networks, AFD’s Indian Ocean Directorate is able to catalyze cooperation 
between countries of the region, for example in priority areas of mutual interest such as disaster risk reduction, 
responses to natural disasters, health monitoring and the protection of biodiversity.  The Programme will support 
and catalyze  future activities of AFD in the Region through the process of capitalization and learning by doing which 
will be part of the Programme .    To reduce the vulnerability of island populations by securing 
the critical ecosystem services they need to be resilient to 
climate change.
Lack of costed long -term visions and 
strategies for EbALack of financial 
resources for 
CSOs to engage in 
EbALimited institutional capacity 
and financial sustainability of 
EbA, and limited track record 
of CSOs influencing public 
policy or establishing effective 
private sector partnershipsIncomplete scientific 
knowledge on the best 
EbA approaches to use 
and limited 
methodologies for 
measuring successLimited knowledge, 
awareness or 
application/replication of 
successful approachesPriority sites for provision of ecosystem 
services identified and adopted by 
stakeholders in the four Programme 
countriesCritical ecosystem 
services are 
maintained and 
enhanced through 
EbA activities at
priority areasEffective EbA techniques 
replicated through use of 
knowledge products developed 
by the ProgrammeLocal livelihoods at 
priority sites are 
diversified and 
improved through 
EbA activitiesFinancial and institutional 
sustainability of EbA
programs strengthened, 
including through 
enhanced public and 
private partnerships Programme
GoalBarriers
addressedProgramme
Outcomes
Component 1: Developing Strategic 
Plans for EbA that are well aligned with 
national climate change strategies
Outputs:
1.1 Ecosystem Profile updated in the  
hotspot to identify and prioritise EbA
actions by CSOs
1.2 Long term vision developed for EbA;
1.3 Financing plans for EbAdeveloped;
1.4 Policy targets for EbA set;
1.5 Strategies for engagement with private 
sector set.Components and 
OutputsComponent 2: Supporting EbA activities 
through grants to CSOs
Outputs:
2.1 Priority EbA activities by CSOs supported 
through grants;
2.2 EbA action impacts quantified through 
cutting -edge scienceComponent 3. Ensuring long -term sustainability and 
replicating success through knowledge products and 
tools for EbA.
Outputs:
3.1 Models, tools and best practices are widely available and 
inform other actors implementing EbAglobally;
3.2 Ensuring the financial and institutional sustainability of 
multi -sector programs for EbA including through enhanced 
public and private partnerships.


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 60 
 
 B.3. Programme /programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
 
In the four Programme countries, the Programme  will address the key barriers noted in section B.2 by using tried-
and-tested tools developed by CEPF since its inception in 2000 to engage civil society actors in ecosystem 
conservation. Under this Programme , CEPF’s model will be modified to direct invest ments to geographic and 
thematic areas of highest priority for EbA. The Programme  will work through CSOs, help to build their capacity , and 
help them develop partnerships with private and public sector actors to achieve EbA. The Programme  will also 
ensure long- term sustainability and replicat e best practice during the Programme and also in the long term across 
the hotspot . The tools and approaches developed under the Programme will be designed to allow replication of 
EbA by other organizations , but also by CEPF, for whom this Programme will be important support towards 
integrating EbA more systematically into its global portfolio of grants to CSOs. The Programme  has three 
components , described below : 
Component 1: Developing strategic plans for EbA in the small island biodiversity hotspot that are well 
aligned with national climate change strategies.  
Expected Programme outcome  (see section E5) :  
• Priority sites for provision of ecosystem services identified and adopted by stakeholders in the four 
Programme countries.  
Under this component, detailed plans will be developed to guide CEPF investment in the hotspot  and ensure that 
it is well aligned both with national climate change strategies  and major investments by other donors. These 
strategic documents will explicitly identify the priority climate adaptation challenges in each Programme  countr y, as 
well as the specific EbA actions needed to address them.  For the hotspot, several documents will be developed 
with distinct, complementary purposes.  The outputs and activities of this Component 1 will be implemented in all 
four Programme countries.  
As mentioned in its Operational Manual  (Annex 21) , CEPF’s investment in a hotspot is guided by an ‘Ecosystem 
Profile’: a five years investment strategy framed by an analysis of the environmental, economic and political context 
for conservation of biodiversity , including an in- depth analysis of conservation priorities, and threats to biodiversity 
and their drivers. Each ecosystem profile is developed through an extensive consultation process involving a wide 
range of stakeholders, from academic institutions, NG Os, government agencies, donors, indigenous people’s 
organizations, community groups and private companies. In this way, priorities for CEPF investment are established 
in a bottom -up manner, establishing a foundation for future collaboration, and paving the way for the partnerships 
that are the hallmark of the fund’s approach.    
An Ecosystem Profile for the hotspot focused on biodiversity conservation was published in 2014. It needs  to be 
updated, both to take account of the evolving context and to establi sh priorities for investment in EbA. This will be 
done by CEPF through extensive  consultation process es, involving stakeholders from civil society, government, 
private sector and the donor community.   The updated document will consider the gender implicati ons of climate 
change, including how men and women may be impacted in different ways, and how they can best be engaged in developing and implementing EbA activities  under Component 2 . Another  key exercise will be to identify priority 
areas for support to EbA activities. The existing Ecosystem Profiles identify priority sites for CEPF investment based on Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs): sites that contribute signficantly to the global persitence 
of biodiversity. This 
analysis will be extended to incorporate ecosystem service values, to focus site -level investments at coastal , 
freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems that play critical roles in provision of ecosystem services. This so -called 
“KBA+” me thodology has been piloted in Madagascar  (see Chapter 8 of Annex 2) , and will be updated and 
replicated in the other Programme count ries. 
The KBA+ methodology assesses  the value of KBAs and their surrounding areas for ecosystem services, thereby 
identifyin g geographical areas that contain natural ecosystems of high importance for biodiversity as well as for 
provisioning, regulating and cultural services. For example, in the KBA+ pilot for Madagascar, areas were identified 
on the basis of their importance fo r food provisioning, freshwater provisioning, climate mitigation, disaster risk


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 60 
 
 reduction  and cultural values. These multiple ecosystem services from terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems were 
then combined based on the results to give an overall prioritiz ation of KBAs in terms of their ecosystem service 
provision.  Once the KBA+ sites have been identified, they will  be prioritized for investment by CEPF through the 
consultation process mentioned above so as to arrive at a broad vision shared by the different stakeholders 
regarding the priorities for CEPF funding of EbA.  
 
Table 3. Types of Ecosystem services and the measures used for the KBA+ pilot in Madagascar  
Provisioning services  Measures of Ecosystem Services  
Food provisioning  Average landed values of fish catch; number of food insecure people living 
within 10km of mangroves or coral reefs; number of food insecure people 
living within 10km from natural terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems  
Freshwater provisioning  Relative importance of KBAs for freshwater for domestic use; relative 
importance of KBAs for freshwater for irrigation; relative importance of freshwater for hydropower  
Regulating Services   
Climate change mitigation  Average biomass carbon stock per hectare; potential avoided carbon 
emissions from deforestation 
Disaster risk reduction  Number of people vulnerable to climate change -driven increases  in storm 
surges that are potentially protected by mangroves; relative importance for 
flood risk protection  
Cultural Services   
Cultural values  Number of visitors to protected KBAs  
 
The updated Ecosystem Profile will guide CEPF investment during the first five- year phase of the Programme , and 
then be updated again, by CEPF,  before the second five- year phase, to take account of the evolving context and 
lessons learned in the first five years. Ecos ystem Profiles provide a detailed strategy for investment in conservation 
and restoration of critical ecosystems over a short timeframe but, in order to plan CEPF investment into the long-
term and to allow for eventual transition to other sources of suppor t, a “long- term vision ” will be developed.  
Long- term visions recognize that CEPF should not be a permanent presence in each hotspot but, rather, should 
define and work towards an end point where local civil society transitions from its support with suffici ent capacity, 
access to resources , and credibility to respond to future ecosystem conservation challenges. CEPF’s e xperience 
shows that reaching such a point will take more than five years. Thus, the long- term vision will set clear transition 
targets that individual investment phases (typically of five years) will work towards, guided by the Ecosystem Profile. 
The long- term vision will be developed along with a financing plan for the Ecosystem Profile as a whole, describing 
the funding requirements for their implementation (i.e.  the best estimate of the funding needed to achieve the 
transition targets).  This financing plan will inform fundraising efforts by CEPF and other donors, and will explore 
potential sources of long- term financing for EbA activities led by civil society, including from non -traditional sources, 
such as the private sector.  This is critical to achieve a successful exit strategy  (see section B.6) . 
In addition to sustainable financing, other avenue s for ensuring that EbA approaches developed in the hotspot are 
continued and replicated beyond the end of the Programme will be explored. In particular, the Programme  will 
promote the uptake of effective EbA approaches demonstrated by CSOs into public pol icy, including but not limited 
to national climate change strategies and adaptation plans. To this end, opportunities for mainstreaming EbA into 
public policies will be identified in consultation with relevant government agencies in each country and integr ated 
into the Ecosystem Profile and long- term vision  (with related CSO subprojects being supported under Component 
2). The Programme  will also promote uptake of EbA approaches by private companies in sectors with a large


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 60 
 
 footprint on coastal and terrestria l ecosystems, such as agriculture, fisheries, forestry and tourism. Strategies for 
CSO engagement with leading companies in these sectors will be developed and incorporated into the long- term 
vision for the hotspot.  
AFD and CEPF’s experience is that Ecosys tem Prof iles, long -term visions and the accompanying financing plans 
are very useful planning tools broadly used by  other donors , national governments , and various other actors 
engaged in activities related to sustainable management of natural resources . Updating these documents with a 
strong EbA  component  will indirectly impact all the different actors who will take into account these documents . To 
do this effectively, th ey must be well aligned to national climate change strategies and adaptation plans.  Currently , 
the Programme  countries differ greatly in the level of detail of their strategies for EbA. Where detailed national  (or 
subnational)  EbA strategies exist already, this component will draw on them rather than creating new or competing 
vision s for EbA. This component of the Programme  will be funded by co- financing from CEPF.  
The outputs and activities of this component are:  
Output 1.1 Ec osystem Profile updated in the hotspot to identify and prioritise EbA actions by CSOs.  
Activity  1.1.1 Identification of important Ecosystem Services and areas for EbA.  
Activity 1.1.2 Stakeholder consultation to set priorities for CEPF investment in EbA.  
Activity 1.1.3 Develop and publish updated Ecosystem Profile for the hotspot.  
Output 1.2 Long- term Vision for civil society enagagement in Ecosystem -based Adaptation developed for the 
hotspot with participation of government, civil society, donor and private sector actors.  
Activity 1.2.1. Use multi -sectoral participatory processes to collect data needed for the long- term vision.  
Activity 1.2.2. Define targets for CSO capacity building for the hotspot.  
Activity 1.2.3. Develop and publish Long- term Visi on for the hotspot.  
Output 1.3 Financing Plan developed for the long- term vision document.  
Activity 1.3.1. Establish financial targets for identified EbA actions.  
Activity 1.3.2. Develop financing plan for the hotspot.  
Output 1.4 Sector and/or development policy targets set for addressing key drivers of ecosystem service loss in the 
hotspot.  
Activity 1.4.1. Identify opportunities for CSOs to engage in mainstreaming EbA into government policies 
(results are integrated into Ecosystem Profile and Long- term Vision; support to CSOs to be provided under 
Component 2).  
Output 1.5 Strategies for eng agement with private sector actors for mainstreaming EbA into business practices of 
industries driving ecosystem service loss complet ed for the hotspot.  
Activity 1.5.1 Identify opportunities for private sector partnerships with CSOs to deliver EbA (results are 
integrated into Ecosystem Profile and Long- term Vision; support to CSOs to be provided under Component 
2). 
 
Component 2: Support ing EbA activities through grants to CSOs . 
Expected Programme outcomes  (see section E5) : 
• Critical ecosystem services are maintained and enhanced through EbA activities at  priority areas   
• Local livelihoods at priority sites are diversified and improved through EbA activities  
The majority of Programme  activities will take place under Component 2. Under this component, grants will be 
provided  by CEPF  to CSOs to undertake and complete the EbA activities during the Programme implementation


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 60 
 
  
24 To ensure consistency with CEPF’s existing environmental and social safeguard policies and a category C Environmental and Soc ial 
safeguard designation according to GCF’s criteria.   period (10 years), which are aligned with the geographic and thematic priorities identified in the Ecosystem Profile 
updated under Component 1.   CEPF uses a very broad definition of civil society, to encompass all organi zations 
that are not government entities. To be eligible to apply for CEPF grants, g overnment -owned enterprises or 
institutions are eligible only if they can establish i) that the enterprise or institution has a legal personality 
independent of any governm ent agency or actor, ii) that the enterprise or institution has the authority to apply for 
and receive private funds, and iii) that the enterprise or institution may not assert a claim of sovereign immunity.  
Applications for grants from CSOs will mainly  be generated through open calls for proposals , based on the priorities 
defined in the Ecosysystem Profile .  These calls for proposal s will be  widely advertised through online and 
mainstream media, as well as a local dissemination of the information.  If persistent gaps emerge in the grant 
portfolio, they may be addressed through targeted use of grants by invitation (see section 4 of Annex 21 –  CEPF’s 
Operational  Manual for details of grant management process) . The grant selection process will involve external 
peer reviewers and be supported by a single Regional Implementation Team (RIT) for the hotspot  (with CEPF 
retaining responsibility for grant approvals) . The RIT will be hosted at an established CSO  in the region, sel ected 
through a competitive process, and will provide detailed knowledge of the local context. As well as supporting the 
grant  selection process, the RIT will have important roles in monitoring and oversight of grants, capacity building 
for grantees, and ensuring that the CEPF grant portfolio remains well aligned with national strategies and other 
initiatives in the climate adaptation space.  An important part of CEPF’s objective, and an important task for the RIT, 
is to strengthen local CSOs, most of which are small or medium sized and so CEPF grants tend to be relatively 
small. For the Programme, grants to CSOs are expected to be in the range of USD 200,000 on average and for a 
period of 2 to 4 years.  
Eligibility criteria  
The grant  selection process will have an important emphasis on ensuring that proposed EbA activities are gender 
sensitive and that women are equitably engaged in the activities supported. In  addition, CSOs  applying for grants  
will need to demonstrate how vulnerable people (such as migrants and young adults with limited opportunities) are 
considered and integrated into Programme  activities. As part of the grant  selection process, all proposals will be 
screened against CEPF’s environmental  and social  safeguard policies , which are consistent with , and fulfil the 
requirements of,  GCF’s policies . Detailed information on the grant making  process is provided in CEPF’s Operational  
Manual - Annex 21. To access funding from CEPF, prospective grantees will need, at minimum, to demonstrate 
that their subprojects : 
• Are in line with EbA thematic and geographic priorities identified in the Ecosystem Profile developed under 
Component 1;  
• Contr ibute to achieving the GCF’s  investment criteria;  
• Demonstrate that the proposed EbA activity addresses vulnerability based on a clear climate change risk;  
• Adopt EbA approaches that increase the resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services that are critical 
to local or national populations;  
• Reflect on  the climate change mitigation potential of the subproject;  
• Address priorities identified in national climate change policy or strategy documents;  
• Avoid or fully mitigate negative environmental and social impacts24; 
• Meet the requirements of GCF environmental and social safeguards and all relevant GCF policies ; 
• Meet the due diligence requirements of CEPF (included in Annex 21, Operational Manual) ; 
• Demonstrate positive gender impacts;  
• Demonstrate effective and efficient use of funds;  
• Demonstrate a clear strategy for achieving financial sustainability ;  
• Will be implemented during the Programme period.  
Grants  cannot be used for:  
• The purchase of land ;


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 60 
 
 • The removal or altera tion of any physical cultural property (including those with archaeological, 
paleontological , historical, religious or unique natural values) ; 
• The relocation of people or any other form of involuntary resettlement ; 
• The capitalization of trust funds ; 
• Any other purposes agreed between GCF and the Accredited Entity.  
 
Priority will be given to subprojects that are the closest fit to the investment strategy set out in the CEPF ecosystem 
profile. Preference will also be given to subprojects that demonstrate a leading role for local organizations and/or 
an explicit focus on capacity building for local civil society. Subprojects that show that they will coordinate with other 
organizations to prevent duplication of efforts are preferred, as are subpr ojects that work with partnerships and 
alliances.  
Other considerations that will strengthen an application include:  
• Endorsement from relevant government authorities ; 
• Clear plans for continuing the subproject after the CEPF funding is complete;  
• Support for indigenous and local communities in community -based or co- management activities for EbA 
and actions that enhance local communities’ tenure and resource use rights .  
 
CEPF maintains a public subproject database ( https://www.cepf.net/grants/grantee -projects ) that can guide 
applicants on the types of subprojects that have been successful in securing funding in the past.  
In addition, all grants for site-based EbA activities must be located at priority sites identified in the updated 
Ecosystem Profile , following the KBA + methodology . It is expected that these sites will be concentrated in coastal 
ecosystems , given the nature of climate change threats  to small islands, but f reshwater, f orests and other terrestrial 
ecosystems will also be consider ed, based on  their critical role in supporting climate resilient livelihoods and the 
delivery of essential ecosystem services. Because many communities have li velihood strategies that depend on 
coastal and terrestrial resources, particular attention will be given to sites that present opportunities for “ridge- to-
reef” approaches to conservation and restoration of ecosystems and ecosystem services.  
Through this process, a portfolio of grants to CSOs will be developed in each country that aim s to increase the 
resilience of local communities to climate change through restoration and improved management of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services that are critical for local or national populations. There will be variation within and among countries with regard to the specific EbA approaches adopted but these are likely to include interventions to:  
• Protect and restore wetlands, mangroves, coral reefs  and seagrass meadows that deliver protection against 
storms and sea  level rise, and provide food and incom e to coastal communities.  
• Protect and restore watershed forests that perform critical flood prevention, soil stabilization and catchment protection functions.  
• Pilot and replicate climate- resilience agroforestry models, using native plant species for shade,  ground cover 
and nutrient fixing.  
• Preserve and restore traditional and indigenous knowledge and natural resource management practices, 
including ones related to building materials, wild foods and traditional medicines.  
• Diversify, strengthen and protect li velihood assets and strategies, including through sustainable fisheries 
management, nature -based tourism, value chains for natural products, etc.  
• Restor e small island ecosystems through eradication and control of alien invasive species.  
This component also  recognizes that work on the science underpinning EbA approaches is needed within the 
biodiversity hotspot, which will be particularly relevant for associating academic institutions with the Programme . 
Applied research activities will be supported during the Programme implementation period to improve 
understanding of the role of specific ecosystems and to test the eff ectiveness of promising EbA techniques . The 
research will generate important information to guide policy decisions about EbA  in the Programme  countries and 
globally . This component will also include activities to ensure rigorous, science- based quantificati on and verification 
of the impacts of the grant portfolio on ecosystem services .  As specified in CEPF’s standard grant agreement 
(provided in the Operational Manual - Annex 21), intellectual property of any creative work developed as a result of


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 60 
 
 CEPF fund ing will remain with the grantee. However, the funding sources (including the GCF) would have rights to 
publish or use any works for non -commercial purposes.  
The outputs and activities of this component are:  
Output 2.1. Prior ity EbA activities by CSOs supported in priority areas as defined in the Ecosystem profile.  
Activity 2.1.1. Select and contract Regional Implemention Team (RIT).  
Activity 2.1.2. Manage the grant making process.  
Activity 2.1.3. Administer EbA grants for CSOs.  
Activity 2.1.4. Superv ision, Monitoring and evaluation of grant portfolio.  
Output 2.2 EbA action impacts quantified through cutting- edge science.  
Activity 2.2.1 . Support a pplied research activities to improve understanding of the role of specific 
ecosystems and to test the effectiveness of promising EbA techniques.  
Activity 2.2.2 . Support research activities that provide quantification and verification of the impacts of grant 
portfolio on ecosystem services.  
 
Component 3: Ensuring long -term sustainability and replicating success through knowledge products and 
tools for EbA.  
Expected P rogramme outcomes  (see section E5) :  
• Effective EbA techniques replicated through use of knowledge products  developed by the Programme  
• Financial and institutional sustainability of EbA programs strengthened, including through enhanced public 
and private partnerships   
This component aims to replicate success through knowledge products and tools and ensure the financial and 
institutional sustainability of the Programme for ecosystem -based adaptation, including through enhanced public 
and private partnerships.  
Component 1 of the Programme includes development of the Ecosystem Profile, and it is at this stage that CEPF 
will identify the topics for knowledge products that would be most useful  to change the course of EbA  in the hotspot 
and beyond.  
In Component 2 of the Programme, grants will be awarded to CSOs to adopt and demonstrate successful EbA 
activities in the hotspot.  
In Component 3, CEPF will take the successful models and tools developed and demonstrated under the first two 
Programme comp onents, and produce innovative knowledge products that will allow wider replication of these best 
practices by other organizations and also by CEPF in other hotspots where it is active  (currently 9 hotspots).  The 
knowledge products will be developed under professional service contracts. Requests for proposals for these 
contracts  will be issued by CEPF to ensure a competitive process that complies with procurement policy .  
Globally, CEPF manages a grant portfolio of approximately USD 16 million per year and therefore there is enormous 
potential for the Programme to create leverage, both during the Programme period and beyond, by helping CEPF 
to systematically integrate EbA into its global grant -making.  
Knowledge products will be innovative and varied, and tai lored to deliver to a specific audience, which will affect 
the format of the knowledge product. A knowledge product could be a manual, guidebook, video, website/portal, drama, webinar or other approprate means to share best practice to stimulate its uptake elsewhere in the hotspot 
and in other hotspots globally. Means of delivery can go beyond the actual product, or even be “the product”, and could include learning exchanges, partnerships between CSOs and private sector actors, a demonstration event 
for pil ot activities, or informative panel discussions, among others. Knowledge products developed under this


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 60 
 
 component will include at least one related to gender and at least one on the role of local communities in EbA.  
Emissions -free approaches to share lessons will be prioritized and, to this end,  exchanges will use teleconferencing 
where possible. The ultimate goal is to ensure that best practice for EbA activities is documented, shared and 
replicated both in the hotspot and beyond, enabling learning by CEPF grantees as well as by organizations that 
may not be current partners of CEPF.  GCF funds will not be used for the replic ation work outside of the four 
Programme countries and CEPF costs for this have not been included in co- finance or parallel finance for the 
Programme.  
The second part of this component is to ensure financial and institutional sustainability of action on EbA in the Indian 
Ocean hotspot, via several means, including: creation of a long -term implementation structure; building the capacit y 
of civil society; and developing resource mobilization strategies and innovative models for private sector finance to support CSO EbA actions in the hotspot. The aim of a long- term implementation structure is to become the steward 
of the long- term strate gic vision for the hotspot, able to coordinate and support civil society organizations, connect 
them with government and private sector partners, and help them prepare for future challenges. This long term 
implementation structure  is not intended to be a new legal entity but an informal platform for collaboration hosted 
by a consortium of CSOs covering the four Programme countries. The Regional Implementation Team (RIT) is a 
temporary structure, in place for  the duration of the Programme. The long- term impl ementation structur e will be 
established by the end of the Programme, so that it can maintain key functions of the RIT, as well as build a resilient 
civil society capable of understanding the global context and trends, and charting a course to meet the challenges 
of the future. Funding will be leveraged to support the long- term implementation structure, based upon opportunities 
identified in the financing plan for the long- term vision, developed under Component 1.  Both the RIT and the long-
term implementati on structure  that will supercede it  aim to enable conservation-
focused civil society actors in the 
biodiversity hotspot to achieve sufficient levels of capacity, credibility and resourcing to ensure they remain effective agents of change, unreliant on cont inued external funding support. This objective will guarantee they have both the 
capacity and the access to resources necessary to respond to emerging challenges, to demonstrate effective EbA models, and become trusted, long- term advisors to government and  private sector actors in EbA. This has been 
the experience of CEPF in other hotspots, for example, Indo- Burma, where local CSOs have grown significantly in 
capacity and credibility over the last decade, thanks to support delivered via the RIT/long- term im plementation 
structure, and are now entering into constructive engagements with government and private sector actors to 
mainstream biodiversity in ways that would have been unthinkable a decade ago. In this case, the RIT has gradually evolved into a long- term implementation structure, and created new platforms to engage CSOs in the long- term 
development of the regional conservation effort, thereby building accountability and wider ownership. A similar 
transition is anticipated in the Madagascar and Indian O cean Islands Hotspot, and this will be informed by 
experience elsewhere in CEPF’s global portfolio.  
This component wi ll also include development of a resource mobilization strategy  for EbA pro jects in the hotspot 
and innovative models for private sector fi nance of EbA. Private sector finance models will be innovative and varied, 
and could for example be modelled on biodiversity offsets, where a company provides long- term financial support 
to an area not currently managed for conservation to compensate for t he residual impacts of its operations that 
could not be fully avoided or mitigated. Several examples of this exist with mining companies in Madagascar, and could serve as models to learn from. These activities will form an important part of the long- term s trategy to sustain 
the Programme’s impacts.  
The outputs and activities of this component are:  
Output 3.1 Models, tools and best practices developed under the Programme are widely available and inform other actors developing and implementing EbA actions globally.  
Activity 3.1.1 Develop innovative knowledge products documenting models, tools and best practices 
developed under the Programme (including at least 1 on gender and 1 related to local communities).  
Activity 3.1.2 Support the replication of successful policy demonstrations .


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 60 
 
 Activity 3.1.3 Support the replication of EbA action through innovative partnerships between CSOs and the 
private sector.  
Output 3.2 Ensuring the financial and institutional sustainability of multi -sector pr ograms for EbA, including through 
enhanced public and private partnerships.  
Activity 3.2.1 Support the creation of long- term implementation structures to serve as a steward for the 
hotspot’s Long- term Vision.  
Activity 3.2.2 Build organizational and technic al capacity of CSOs for EbA in the hotspot.  
Activity 3.2.3. Develop resource mobilization strategies to generate additional revenues for EbA programs 
in the hotspot.  
Activity 3.2.4. Develop innovative models for private sector finance to support CSO EbA ac tions.  
The Programme is proposed to have a duration of 10 years. This will cover two five -year phases of investment in 
the hotspot . Based on CEPF’s  long experience working with CSOs in the biodiversity hotspot, a duration of three 
to five years is too shor t to achieve sustainability. A longer  duration will provide sufficient time to build capacity 
among CSO partners to implement EbA actions, develop a robust scientific basis for quantifying impacts, and 
achieve technical and financial sustainability. A 10- year duration will also allow successful approaches to EbA to 
be refined if necessary, documented and amplified, through replication by other CSOs and integration into 
government policies and program mes. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500  words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams ) 
 
Programme  Execution  
• AFD is the GCF Accredited Entity. It is a long- standing me mber of the CEPF Donor Council. Since its first 
contribution to the CEPF in 2007, AFD has granted it with a total of  USD 58 million . It is actively involved in 
the Indian Ocean Region and aims at strengthening its actions to preserve, restore and sustainably manage biodiversity, improve living conditions for vulnerable people and to strengthen the capacity of the population to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change.  AFD will sign a grant agreement –  the Subsidiary 
Agreement with the Executing Entity.  
 
• Convervation International Foundation (CI) is the unique Executing Entity of the Programme . From a 
technical point of view , CI will act through the CEPF (hosted by Conservation International, the signatory of 
the Subsidiary Agreement with the AE  (AFD)) . It is important  to note here that CEPF has its own governance 
system (CI being part of it alongs ide AFD and other CEPF donors) and its own specific sub account at  CI’s 
main bank account (see the CEPF’s Operational Manual -  Annex 21) .  
CEPF was established in 2000 as a mechanism to enable Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) to support 
conservation of critic al ecosystems within biodiversity hotspots.  CEPF is a joint initiative of l'Agence Française de 
Développement (AFD) , Conservation International  (CI), the  European Union, the Global Environment Facility  
(GEF) , the Government of Japan  and the World Bank .  
CEPF has no legal status  of its own . It is legally  a program of Conservation International Foundation (CI). 
Conservation International Foundation is a  non-profit public benefit corporation organized under the laws of the 
State of California, U.S.A. Conserv ation International is one of CEPF's  global donor organizations. It hosts 
the CEPF secretariat (a team of around 25 conservation, finance, grant management and communications 
professionals ) and provides supporting legal and financial services but the CEPF has its own governance system 
(CI being part of it with neither  more nor less power of decision than the others Donors of the CEPF) and its own 
specific sub account in CI’s main bank account (see the CEPF’s Operation al Manual - Annex 21).  
Since its inception, CEPF has granted more than USD  232 million to over 2,300 CSO grantees in 24 biodiversity 
hotspots. Since its establishment in 2000, CEPF has adopted a targeted approach to biodiversity conservation,


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 60 
 
  
25 CEPF’s website, www.cepf.net  includes  reports on CEPF’s impact, evaluation reports and other important resources for prospective and 
current CSO grantees such as Ecosystem Profiles, case study documents, a grants database and information on applying for funding for 
subprojects.  
26 The Donor C ouncil consists of representatives from CEPF’s donors: AFD, Conservation International , the European Union, the  Global 
Environment Facility , the Government of Japan and the  World Bank .  focusing on the most threatened species (following the IUCN Red List), the sites importa nt for them (following the 
Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) standard), and the corridors that connect them. With a small fraction (less than 0.5%) 
of funding for biodiversity conservation in developing countries, CEPF has had a disproportionately high impact. I t 
has helped: address threats to 6% of globally threatened vertebrates (550 of 9,013 species); strengthen the 
protection of 4% of KBAs (691 of 16,000 sites) covering 46 million hectares; and expand protected area coverage by 15.3 million hectares (equivalent to 7% of the expansion of terrestrial protected areas in developing countries). 
Within the target countries of the Programme , CEPF has supported the creation and expansion of protected areas 
covering 1,587,400 hectares and strengthened the management of  
biodiversity within production landscapes 
covering 971,085 hectares25.  
The Programme  will be executed through CEPF’s well established procedures  described below (summarized in 
Figures 4 and 5 and detailed in the CEPF’s Operational  Manual - Annex 21).  The Programme will make use of 
CEPF’s existing structure, governance arrangements, CSO networks, procedures and tried- and tested tools for 
engaging CSOs in EbA actions .  
The CEPF Secretariat  (hosted by Conservation International and based in Arlington, USA)  will be responsible for 
the Programme  execution. It  will be accountable to the AFD for the GCF funding it receives under the Programme , 
and also to the CEPF Donor Council26, for contributions  from its global donor partners . The flow of funds for the 
Programme is indicated on Figure 4  by the solid arrows.  The Donor Council will function as the Programme  Steering 
Committee (PSC). The Donor Council is the key governance mechanism for CEPF, with authority to select hotspots for investment, allocate budgets for grant making, and approve changes to CEPF’s Operational Manual.  Decision 
making by the Donor Counc il is by consensus, meaning that decisions related to the Ecosystem Profile approval / 
RIT selection require the favourable votes of both AFD and CI . Technical staff representing the global donors form 
the CEPF Working Group, which reports to the Donor Cou
ncil and provides technical guidance to the CEPF 
Secretariat.  
The Programme  will be executed by the CEPF Secretariat  (see Annex 2 for information on CEPF structure and 
staffing) . The CEPF Secretariat supports and oversees grant -making in the hotspots, ensu ring compliance with 
donor policies, and monitoring and communicating results. Coordination and support in each hotspot are provided by a Regional Implementation Team (RIT), based locally, selected through a competitive process.  The NDAs in 
each country wi ll also be involved in the selection of CSO subprojects (with country -specific arrangements to be 
put in place), ongoing monitoring and evaluation of Programme  progress , and will participate in supervision visits 
made by AFD and CEP F (see section E7).  
Figure 4. Proposed governance structure for the Programme showing the relationships between the 
different entities involved.


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 60 
 
  
The majority of Programme  activities will be executed via subprojects funded by grants to CSOs.  
Grants to CSOs will be of three types.  
1. First, CI will engage with the Regional Implementation Team (RIT) for the hotspot  through a  Grant 
Agreement . The RIT plays a leading role in deliver ing strengthened local CSOs that can effectively 
participate in opportunities made available through CEPF grant making, facilitating communication among  
stakeholders, establishing  and strengthening  networks and alliances for EbA implementation , and 
monitor ing Programme impacts. The R IT is usually a n NGO of medium or large size or even composed of 
a consortium of NGO s. By engaging with the RIT, CEPF is already  implementing its mandate. It is 
strengthening CSOs and the Programme will strengthen the capacity of the RIT regarding EbA chal lenges.  
As such, CEPF regards the RIT as being programmatic, rather than administrative in nature.  CI then does 
not sign a Procurement agreement with the RIT but a Grant agreement.  Note that t he RIT will be chosen on 
a transparent and competitive basis, based on a n open call for proposals  (see Annex 21 section 4.2 for 
terms of reference of the RIT and description of the RIT selection process).  Approval of selection of the RIT 
is done by the CEPF D onor Council . The RIT is responsible for  supporting and coordinating the CEPF 
activities on the ground.  The RIT is not el igible for further subgrants for activities under the Programme 
(other than to fulfil its role as the RIT).  The RIT will become responsible for managing the grant -making 
process within the hotspot. It act s under the supervision of CEPF. The RIT will receive training in CEPF’s 
policies and procedures  within 90 days of appointment.  It is also in charge of managing the small grants 
(see below).  
2. Next, two types of grant s will be made for implementation of subprojects consistent with the investment 
strategy set out in the Eco system Profile for the hotspot:  Working
Group
Conservation InternationalAFD
(GCF AE) 
Regional
Implementation
Team
Civil Society Organizations
Local 
NGOsInternational 
NGOsAcademic 
InstitutionsCommunity -
based 
OrganizationsDonor Council
AFD  CI  EU  GEF  GoJ WB  
Public
sector
partnersPrivate
sector
partnersProgramme
fundsGlobal funds
Large grants
Small grants
Reporting (dashed arrows), Funding (thick arrows) and Partnership (two -way 
arrows)National 
Designated
Authorities
The CEPF Secretariat is a programme of CIGCF


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 60 
 
  
27 For example, https://www.cepf.net/sites/default/files/cepf_institutional_assessment_report_comissioned_by_the_world_bank.pdf  • Large grants refer to grants above a threshold amount  of USD 50,000 ; 
• Grants below the threshold amount are referred to as small grants.  
Approval of all grants will be done by CEPF.  Typically, large grants are used to engage international and larger, 
more established local CSOs, while small grants are used to engage local CSOs with less experience of receiving 
international donor funding, such as grassroots NGOs  and community -based organizations.  All grants awarded and 
activities supported with CEPF funding must be in compliance w ith the policies and procedures outlined in the CEPF 
Operational Manual (Annex 21), including all financial protocols . The CEPF procedures conform to the requirements 
of all its donors (and GCF) in terms of anti -terrorism screening, risk analysis, procurement procedures . Despite the 
complexity of the requirements, CEPF has developed spec ific tools and tailored its grant -making processes to 
facilitate access to funding by small CSOs. AFD has modified its own programmes destined for NGOs with 
inspiration from CEPF’s tools and procedures. Financial audits of CEPF are conducted annually but t he World Bank 
also commissions periodic institutional assessments27, which have shown that CEPF funds are used in conformity 
with the procedures in place and that CEPF’s funding is particularly important for small NGOs.     
Grant cycle  
The typical grant cycle for CEPF will be followed and is indicated in Figure 4 below . Further details are provided in 
Section 4 of Annex 21 and at  https://www.cepf.net/grants /before -you-apply/life -cycle -of-grant . The grant cycle 
comprises the following steps:  
• CEPF opens a Call for Proposals. Calls for Proposals will be advertised on CEPF’s website and through 
local media in the Programme  countries . 
 
• Submit a Letter of Enquiry. Prospective grantees will submit a letter of enquiry to CEPF (for large grants) 
or the RIT (for small grants) . See section 4.3.1 of Annex 21 for details of content of a letter of enquiry.  
 
• Prepare Full Proposal ( Large grants only).  Based on the letters of enquiry, prospective grantees for large 
grants will be invited to proceed to develop a full proposal. In addition to the proposal, documents such as 
anti-terrorism screening, financial questionnaires and supporting documentation and cash flow esti mates 
for the initial months of the subproject will be requested to allow due diligence.  
 
• Additional information (Small grants only).  Successful small -grant applicants will not need to submit a 
subproject proposal  in addition to the letter of enquiry . However, the RIT will request additional information 
relevant to the subproject (e.g., detailed budget, work plan, financial questionnaire, bank details, etc.)  and 
they will be required to undergo the same set of screenings and checks, including anti -terrorism screenings, 
environmental and social safeguards as for large grants (refer to Annex 21 for details of checks) . 
• Prepare safeguard documentation  (if required).  All subprojects (large and small) will be screened 
against the CEPF safeguard polic ies (which address GCF safeguard policies  – see Annex 6).  If a 
subproject triggers one or more safeguard policies, the grantee will be asked to prepare the relevant 
safeguard document(s) and incorporate related measures into the subproject's design. Safeguard documents will be prepared by the grantee in parallel with proposal design and must be approved prior to 
approval of the subproject.  
• Applicant signs grant agreement . Successful applic ants for large grants will sign a grant agreement with 
CEPF. Successful applicants for small grants will sign a grant agreement with the RIT for the hotspot.  
 
• Orientation training . Large- grant recipients will be required to attend a CEPF online orientation training 
within the first three months of their subproject's start date. Details on this training will be provided shortly 
after countersigning the grant agreement.   All small grant recipients will benefit from a new -grantee 
orientation, either by completing the online course or by participating in a training organized by the RIT.


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 60 
 
 • Gather baseline monitoring information . New grantees need to submit baseline monitoring information 
within three months of the start date of their grant. The precise information required will depend upon the 
purpose of the grant,  and will need to include relevant indicators in the Programme ’s Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan (Annex 11), b ut the following tools are commonly required:  
o Gender mainstreaming tracking tool  – required for all grantees (one per organization)  
o Civil society organizational capacity tracking tool  – required for all grantees registered in one of the 
countries of the hotspot where the project will take place (one per organization)  
o Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT)  – required for grantees working to strengthen 
management of protected areas (one per protected area)  
• Implement and report on subproject . Recipients of large grants must submit financial reports each 
quarter and progress reports every six months through CEPF’s online grants management software, 
ConservationGrants . Additional reports may also be requested for compliance with financial and saf eguard 
policies. The reporting requirements for small -grant recipients will vary depending on the subproject , and 
will be outlined in the grant agreement.   All small- grant recipients will be required to provide interim and 
final technical and financial reports, either online, or through the RIT. They will also be required to 
complete the same tracking tools and safeguard monitoring reports as large grantees. The frequency of report s and requirements for supporting documents will vary among sub -grantees, and  be defined in the 
individual sub- grant agreements.
   
• Site visits . Members of the CEPF Secretariat and the RIT will perform financial supervision missions and 
programmatic site visits to selected grantees each year.  Members of AFD, the AE , will also take part  in 
these visits  (AFD has regional staff based in Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius –  also responsible for 
covering AFD’ s programmes in Seychelles) . 
• Address delays and challenges . CEPF recognizes that due to unforeseen challenges, subproject delays 
may sometimes happen. When this occurs, grantees may request an extension to the duration of the grant (“no-cost extension”) or other changes to the deliverables or budget.  CEPF and the RIT will try to 
accommodate reasonable requests supported by adequate justifications; however, they do reserve the 
right to reject any amendment request  and no extensions will be made beyond the end of the Programme 
period.


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 60 
 
 Figure 5. Typical Grant cycle for CEPF  subprojects  
 
 
Table 4. Role and responsibilities of key entities involved in the Programme  
Entity  Role  Programme  responsibilities  
AFD GCF Accredited Entity  Overall responsibility for ensuring that the Programme  is implemented in 
accordance with GCF requirements . 
NDAs  National Focal Point  Ensur e that the Programme  addresses national adaptation priorities by 
coordinating government technical agencies’ participati on in the activities of 
Component 1, including development of the investment ‘Vision’ and ‘Ecosystem 
Profile’ documents (which will also require NDA endorsement) , financing plans and 
identifying opportunities for CSOs to contribute to public policy and opportunities 
for partnerships between CSOs and the private sector . Monitoring and evaluation 
of Programme progress on behalf of governments of the Programme countries, 
including subproject site visits  (country -specific arrangements to put in place) . 
Participate with CEPF and/or RIT with the selection of CSO subprojects.  
CI, 
through 
CEPF  Executing Entity  Programme  execution – responsibility for the delivery of the Programme  results 
through financial management and planning, oversee development of grant 
portfolio development and management (including contracting, risk assessment, 
oversight of administrative compliance by grantees), overall monitoring of results, 
dissemination of results and oversight of RIT.   
RIT Regional 
representative of CEPF  Regional oversight of grant portfolio within the biodiversity hotspot including 
contracting for small grants (with CEPF retaining responsibility for grant approval) 
and technical moni toring of all grants . 
CSOs  Grantees  Development of grant proposals, execution of EbA grant activities  Call for 
Proposals
Submit letter of 
Inquiry
Applicant prepares a Full 
Proposal (large grants only)
Applicant submits additional 
information if required (small 
grants only)
Applicant prepares safeguard 
documents if required
Applicant 
signs grant 
agreementLarge grant 
recipients 
receive 
orientation 
trainingGrantees gather 
baseline 
monitoring 
informationGrantees implement 
and report on 
subprojectsCEPF and/or RIT 
make site visitsCEPF and RITs help 
grantees address 
delays and challengesGrant closes


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 60 
 
  
CEPF will use its existing tools to manage the Programme : the ecosystem profiling process; the grants management 
procedures; and the monitoring systems. These are useful for developing and promoting the strategies for hotspots, 
managing a large and dynamic portfolio of grants, and tracking progress in grant -making and achieving goals. 
These tools will enable CEPF  to focus on achieving EbA impacts on the ground.  
CEPF carries out its mission through a gender equity lens. This means that staff of the CEPF Secretariat, Regional 
Implementation Teams and grantees will understand and take into account the different roles of men and women 
in CEPF -related activities at al l scales (e.g., Regional Implementation Team training, proposal design, Programme  
implementation and reporting).  See Annex 8 for a Gender Assessment covering the Programme  countries and the 
Programme’s Gender Action Plan. Gender issues and considerations w ill be actively incorporated throughout the 
grant -making process and progress on gender -related outcomes will be monitored using CEPF’s gender 
mainstreaming tracking tool (see section 4.4.4 of Annex  21). 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)  
 
The Programme  contributes to GCF’s aim of supporting paradigm shifts to move developing countries towards 
climate -resilient sustainable development. B y targeting SIDS and island LDCs, the Programme  will focus on some 
of the highest priority nations for climate change adaptation action (see section B1) . EbA has been identified as a 
priority  in national climate change strategies in all of the Programme  countries  (see section D5) , but actions to date 
have been limited to a few valuable pilot projects  that need scaling up and replicating.  EbA needs specific funding 
beyond what is available through existing nature conservation initiatives that are themselves underfunded in the Programme  countries  and where the focus of activities is often different to t he needs of EbA . The Programme  will 
therefore help the Programme countries to implement priority climate change actions that they have identified in 
national plans but are currently unable to achieve because of financial barriers. Furthermore,  the Programme  will 
mobilize civil society to work alongside government agencies and the private sector to address EbA needs. CSOs 
have important contributions to make to EbA but have not been fully utilized due to lack  of funding opportunities 
since  most international  
donor funding is directed to governments, while the private sector can access private 
finance.  CSOs remain the least funded organizations working to protect and restore ecosystems.  
The Programme  will make important contributions to all of GCF’s Investment Criteria and to advancing the climate 
strategies of the targeted countries. The funding will be used to undertake tangible on- the-ground action that will 
provide multiple benefits and ultimately 698 ,000 people will have more resilient livelihoods due to protection and 
restoration of critical ecosystem services.  In addition, because the Programme  will work in biodiversity hotspots  - 
areas of globally important biodiversity that are highly threatened - significant co -benefit s for biodiversity 
conservation are also expected through improved protection and management of at least  1.83 million hectares of  
coastal and terrestrial ecosystems that play a crucial role in securing ecosystem services for vulnerable people.  
The protection, restoration and improved management of natural ecosystems is also expected to lead to  significant 
climate change mitigation co- benefits through avoid ing emissions related to habitat loss and increased carbon 
sequestration in restored and recovering ecos ystems.  
The Programme  countries have small economies with dependence on narrow resource bases  and have high public 
debt. This situation is typical of SIDS and LDCs, which also suffer disproportionately from climate -related disasters 
because the costs are important  in comparison to the size of their economies. GCF’s governing instrument 
recognizes that SIDS and LDCs should be eligible to receive full agreed costs to enable and support action on 
adaptation. Given the existing financial challenges  of government budgets for environmental action in the 
Programme  countries , significant public funding for this Programme  from the Programme  countries is not realistic . 
Although there is some funding from other donors for environmental projects, including ones addressing climate change, these only cover a small proportion of the identified needs (see section B1).  
In addition, there are few 
opportunities for CSOs to acces s the existing funding from other donors. Activities under Component 1 have been


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 60 
 
 designed to ensure that EbA priorities for funding under this Programme  do not duplicate work supported by other 
donors and indeed that opportunities for complementarity are i dentified.  There are currently not enough other 
donors in a position to provide funding at the scale proposed by the Programme .  There will be opportunities for 
partnership between CSOs , government agencies and other projects and these will be encouraged under 
Component 3 of the Programme . Funding leveraged in this way will be tracked and considered as co- financing. 
However, significant co -finance for this Programme  will be coming through CEPF from its public donors – AFD, the 
EU, GEF, the Government of Japan and the World Bank . This is funding originally  intended for biodiversity 
conservation and the Programme  will therefore be using the co- finance to support initiatives that achieve both EbA 
and biodiversity conservation.  
In Madagascar and Comoros, private sector finance for the Programme  is also not currently realistic since EbA 
activities are unlikely to generate revenues and business activities that support environmental and social objectives 
are not widespread. By  contrast , the private sector is larger in Mauritius and Seychelles , environmental and social 
standards are more widely adopted and there are already successful partnerships between companies and NGOs 
to achieve biodiversity conservation . These partnerships can ser ve as important models that can be built upon and 
replicated for EbA objectives  in the other Programme  countries. Developing and replicating these partnerships 
between CSO organizations and private companies is part of the strategy for ensuring long- term s ustainability of 
the Programme ’s objectives under Component 3. Again, funding leveraged in this way from the Private Sector will 
be tracked by CEPF and considered as co-finance.  
The Programme  targets  four countries where it is difficult for CSOs to access finance for EbA activities . As described 
in section B. 3, CEPF will use grant -making to finance on- the-ground EbA activities by the CSOs. The grant 
instrument being requested by AFD will therefore be passed on to CEPF and ultimately to the CSOs  who w ould be 
unable to access non- grant funding for E bA work.  
 
In addition to the direct expected impacts of the Programme in the four countries, the Programme will also have a 
very important impact on the replication and scaling up of EbA elsewhere and over the long term , because it will 
allow CEPF to develop and use new tools specifically for EbA that it can  integrate throughout its global portfolio 
(currently approximately USD 16 million  per year ). In this way, CEPF will be able to use its knowledge and expertise 
of working with CSOs to catalyze action on EbA  throughout the biodiversity hotspots where it works . For the 
avoidance of doubt, all such replication and scaling up outside of the four Prog ramme countries falls 
outside of the scope of the Programme.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The Programme aims to engineer a paradigm shift to EbA in the Programme countries, by pioneering new models 
and adapting global best practice to the local context of SIDS and LDCs. Hence, the exit strategy requires EbA 
activities to continue at priority sites beyond the end of the Programme, and EbA techniques with demonstrated 
effectiveness to be amplified through integration into public policies and private sector practices related to climate 
change adaptation. To this end, the following strategies for sustainability are interwoven into the Programme design:  
• Preparation of long- term visions with financing plans to transition EbA activities to other funding sources.  
• Strengthening CSO engagement, capacity and credibility in EbA implementation.  
• Evaluation of the effectiveness of promising EbA techniques.  
• Development of knowledge products and tools to facilitate replication.  
• Mainstreaming of EbA techniques into public policy and private sector practices.  
• Leveraging additional funding from traditional and non- traditional sources.  
This section describes each of these strategies in turn.  
 CEPF is not intended to become a permanent presence in any hotspot but to define and work towards an end point 
at which local civil society transitions from its support with sufficient capacity, access to resources and credibility to 
respond to future con servation challenges. To this end, CEPF introduced a framework for preparation of long -term


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 60 
 
  
28 https://www.cepf.net/sites/default/files/resources/Donor%20Council/DC25_5A_LongTermVision.pdf . visions28.  This framework sets out five target conditions, which need to be met before civil society in a hotspot 
could be considered to have transitioned from the fund’s support: (i) priorities and best practices are documented, 
disseminated and used by public, private and civil society actors; (ii) local CSOs collectively possess sufficient 
organizational and technical capacity to be effective partners of private s ector and government agencies influencing 
decision- making in favor of sustainable societies and economies; (iii) adequate and sustained financial resources 
are available; (iv) supportive public policies and private sector business practices are in place; and (v) mechanisms 
exist to identify and respond to emerging challenges.  
A costed long- term vision for civil society engagement in EbA will be prepared under Component 1, which will 
provide a detailed exit strategy for the Programme. The long- term vision will establish criteria to track the progress 
of CSOs and EbA activities towards a point at which they can transition to other sources of funding. One advantage 
of the 10 -year timeframe for the Programme is that it allows these transitions to be staggered ov er several years, 
so that, by the end of the Programme, many EbA activities will have already moved to other funding sources, 
thereby avoiding a hard stop.  
Ownership of the long- term vision will be built among key stakeholders in each country, especially t he long- term 
implementation structure, which will be put in place under Component 3 as an informal platform for collaboration 
hosted by a consortium of CSOs covering the four Programme countries . The long- term implementation structure 
will be the steward o f the long- term vision beyond the end of the Programme; to this end, funding will be leveraged 
to support the long- term implementation structure after the end of the Programme . It will help build a resilient 
community of CSOs that have the tools, capacity and funding to address future EbA and ecosystem conservation 
needs.  CEPF’s experience from other hotspots is that the key RIT staff become very committed to the subgrantees 
and want to continue their involvement in the work beyond the formal end of the RIT grant. CEPF has seen, in 
several hotspots, the RIT host institution going on to play a long- term role in coordinating former CEPF subgrantees, 
either as a long- term implementation structure or more informally. In some cases, for instance the Western Ghats  
in India, the RIT leveraged additional resources, which it used to provide small grants to CSOs beyond the end of 
the CEPF program. In such cases, CEPF may help to leverage resources but step back from direct involvement, 
thereby enabling the former RIT host institution to graduate to a direct funding relationship with donors.   
The work of the long- term implementation structure will be a continuation of a thread running throughout the 
Programme, to strengthen CSOs’ institutional and financial capacity to implement EbA programs. Under 
Component 3, a comprehensive capacity development program for CSOs will be implemented, informed by a needs 
assessment in each Programme country. Training sessions will be held in various formats, including workshops, 
lectures  or hands -on mentoring by the RIT. The focus of these activities will be on ensuring that CSOs achieve 
sufficient levels of capacity, credibility and resourcing, to maintain their involvement in EbA implementation beyond 
the end of the Programme.  
 As well as leaving a legacy of capacitated CSOs, the Programme will also develop EbA techniques that are adapted 
to the local social, economic and environmental conditions of Madagascar and the Indian Ocean islands. These 
techniques will provide a “toolbox” of ecosystem -based solutions to future climate change adaptation challenges in 
the Programme countries, as well as other LDCs and SIDS. To this end, under Component 2, the Programme will 
deploy cutting- edge science to evaluate promising EbA techniques, and ident ify those that are most effective with 
the greatest potential for replication.  Once CEPF has the tools and experience on integrating EbA into its grant -
making programmes, it has huge potential to replicate EbA action through its existing and future grant -making in 
countries in other biodiversity hotspots.  
Because EbA techniques have the potential to be greatly more cost effective than engineering solutions to climate 
change impacts, it is anticipated that there will be considerable interest in adopting techniques demonstrated by the 
Programme among governments, CSOs and funding institutions. However, experience from other Small Grants 
Programs shows that, where successful approaches have been demonstrated locally, CSOs have lacked the 
capacity to capture and  document good practice. As a result, broader uptake or amplification by government or the


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 60 
 
 private sector has been limited and opportunistic. The Programme will promote replication of successful approaches 
through promoting their integration in public sect or policies and private best practices. To this end, the individual 
EbA grants awarded under Component 2 will be designed as demonstration projects, giving attention not only to 
delivery of EbA results in their local contexts but to evaluation of the approach, documentation of good practice and 
dissemination to key audiences. Although the precise strategy for replication will vary among grants, they will have 
the following common elements: (i) establishment of partnerships between CSOs and relevant private and public 
sector actors; (ii) joint design and implementation of field demonstration and, where appropriate, research activities; 
and (iii) dissemination of results to key private and public sector actors through field visits, briefing papers, etc.  
As well as being engaged in the design and implementation of individual EbA field demonstration projects, private 
and public sector actors will be engaged from the very beginning in preparing the Ecosystem Profile, including the 
selection of priority geographies  and approaches. In this way, the CEPF grants will be well aligned with the priorities 
of potential private and public partners, which will increase the relevance of experience from the demonstration 
projects and the prospects of them being taken up and replicated. Moreover, under Component 3, the Programme 
will provide targeted support for the replication of successful policy demonstration models and innovative 
partnerships with the private sector. These strategies, combined with the capacity strengthening for CSOs 
described above, will creating an enabling environment for the replication of EbA techniques, resulting in policies 
and business practices that more effectively mainstream EbA and ecosystem conservation. The development of 
public -private partners hips engrained in long- term visions of sustainability will allow civil society to play the role of 
innovator, influencer and adviser to government agencies and private sector companies, facilitating the emergence 
of more sustainable, climate- adapted econom ies in the Programme countries . 
Finally, in terms of leveraging financial resources, the Programme proposes, under Component 1, to develop long-
term funding plans that identify traditional and non- traditional sources of funding, and to test models of non-
conventional funding mechanisms that can be amplified within the hotspot. Over the 10- year duration of the 
Programme, the availability of climate financing from institutional donors is anticipated to increase significantly, 
accompanied by the emergence of new funding sources. For example, in Madagascar, a new platform has been proposed to mobilize resources from international donors and private companies to implement the national strategy 
for reforestation set out in the presidential vision "Madagascar Ile V erte". The result of these trends will be greater 
availability of financial resources to continue to support EbA, conserve critical ecosystems and ensure the provision of goods and services for human well -being. To take advantage of these opportunities, Co
mponent 3 of the 
Programme includes an explicit focus on developing resource mobilization strategies to generate additional 
revenues for EbA programs in the hotspot, and developing innovative models for private sector finance.


---
*Page 34*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 60 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
38 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  38 million USD ($)      
(vii) Result s-base d payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co-financing information  Total amount  Currency  
11.2 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
CI (includes AFD’s contribution 
– see Annex 13)  Grant  11.2 million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
49.2 million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max.  250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) CEPF chooses to not typically require co -finance of its CSO grantees since it 
can be counter -productive – it discourages smaller NGOs and community -
based groups from proposing subproject s and therefore runs counter to 
CEPF’s objective of fostering the emergence of credible and effective CSOs.  
This is recognized by other donors, particularly those on CEPF’s donor 
council, and by grantees as being important and CEPF plays a unique and 
crucia l role in the funding landscape available to CSOs.   Nevertheless, CSO 
grantees  (particularly larger ones)  typically make significant in -kind 
contributions to achieve their subprojects (e.g. staff or volunteer time, use of buildings, materials, etc.). CEPF track s funding that is leveraged for 
subprojects and will do this for the Programme  and will count it towards co-
finance. This tracking will also include funding leveraged through partnerships 
with public and private sector sources during Programme  impleme ntation 
(see Component 3).
  
In addition to the finance for the Programme, AFD is one of the largest 
international donors for environmental action in the region and has commitments to provide EUR 31.5 million that is considered parallel funding to this Programme. These commitments are to support projects in the region 
that broadly support the climate change adaptation and ecosystem protection


---
*Page 35*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 60 
   
 objectives of the Program me. A list of the relevant AFD -funded projects in the 
region is provided in Section B1, table 2.  
C.2. Financing by component  
The table below provides a breakdown of GCF funding and co- financing for each Programme  component 
and output described in section B3.  Details of P rogramme M anagement Costs (PMC)  and assumptions are 
provided in Annex 4.  The total Programme  cost is USD 49.2 million  of which USD 38 million  is requested 
from GCF.  
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1: 
Developing 
strategic plans 
for EbA in the 
small island 
biodiversity hotspot that are well aligned 
with national 
climate change 
strategies  Output 1.1 
Ecosystem 
Profile updated in 
the hotspot to 
identify and 
prioritise EbA 
actions by CSOs  0.35 0 Grants  0.35 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Output 1.2 Long-
term Vision for 
civil society 
enagagement in 
Ecosystem -based 
Adaptation 
developed for the 
hotspot with 
participation of 
government, civil 
society, donor 
and private sector 
actors.  0.35 0 Grants  0.35 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
 Output 1.3 
Financing Plan 
developed for the 
long- term vision 
document.  0.07 0 Grants  0.07 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Output 1.4 Sector 
and/or 
development 
policy targets set 
for addressing 
key drivers of 
ecosystem 
service loss in the 
hotspot.  0.01 0 Grants  0.01 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Output 1.5 
Strategies for 
engagement with 
private sector 
actors for 
mainstreaming 
EbA into business practices of 
industries driving 
ecosystem 
service loss 
completed for the 
hotspot.  0.01 0 Grants  0.01 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Component 2: Supporting EbA activities Output 2.1. 
Priority EbA 
activities by 
CSOs supported 
in priority areas 39.43  30.36 Grants  9.07 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF


---
*Page 36*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 60 
   
 through grants 
to CSOs  as defined in the 
Ecosystem 
profile.  
 Output 2.2 EbA 
action impacts 
quantified 
through cutting-
edge science.  3.81 3.81 Grants  0 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Component 3: 
Ensuring long -
term 
sustainability 
and replicating success through knowledge products and 
tools for EbA.  Output 3.1 
Models, tools and 
best practices 
developed under 
the project are 
widely available 
and inform other 
actors developing 
and implementing 
EbA actions 
globally.  0.89 0.80 Grants  0.09 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
Output 3.2 
Ensuring the 
financial and 
institutional 
sustainability of 
multi -sector 
programs for 
EbA, including 
through enhanced 
public and private 
partnerships.  0.95 0.73 Grants  0.22 Grants  AFD and 
CEPF  
PMC  2.34 1.81  0.53 
Monitoring, Evaluati on & 
Learning  1.01 0.49 0.52 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  49.20 
million  38.00  million 11.20 million 
 
USD 38 million of GCF’s financing will be allocated to the four Programme countries over 10 years , including 
USD 30.5 million of subgrants to CSOs . USD  11.2 million will be invested in the Programme  as co-financing.  
The sources  of co -financing are funds channeled through C I for the CEPF Programme  and funds leveraged 
by the CSO recipients of individual EbA grants . The current donors to CEPF include AFD , CI, the  European 
Union, the  GEF, the Government of Japan  and the World Bank , plus several private philanthropies. Several 
donors to CEPF have made commitments of funding for periods overlapping with the duration of the 
Programme ; others are considering new commitments, while discussions are ongoing with a number of 
potential new contributors to the fund.  
Exact budget figures for each country will depend on the subprojects proposed by CSOs. Calls for proposals 
from CSOs will be at the scale of the hotspot and therefore some flexibility is needed to ensure that the best 
subprojects are supported. Based on past CEPF experience, some subprojects are also likely to be multi-
country /hotspot -wide initiatives. The funding allocation per country is therefore indicative but represents the 
target funding distribution. Minimum a nd maximum funding allocations for grants to CSOs per country are 
specified in Annex 22.  Fixing the range of funding to CSOs available for each country ensures that there is 
sufficient flexibility to support the best subprojects in the hotspot, but also that each country has clarity over 
the grant amounts that will be available to CSOs in thei r country. Further information on  total estimated 
funding allocations per country (inclusive of Programme  Management Costs) are provided in Annex 17 and 
summarized below.


---
*Page 37*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 60 
   
  
Table 5. Estimated GCF and co -finance per country (million USD)  
Country  Estimated GCF 
funding  Estimated co -finance  Total  
Comoros  6.33 1.87 8.20 
Madagascar  19.00 5.60 24.60 
Mauritius  6.33 1.87 8.20 
Seychelles  6.33 1.87 8.2 
    
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☐      No ☒ 
 
Capacity building of CSOs  is an important objective of the Programme  under Component 3. The aim is to 
contribute to transforming civil society into catalysts for effective agents of EbA in the Programme  countries 
and beyond to other hotspots where CEPF is active. This will be achieved by providing capacity building to 
improve organizational and technical capacity for civil society organizations. Women’s groups  and 
community -based organizations will be explicitly targeted for capacity building activities as they tend to play 
important roles in stewardship of ecosystems but are often economically margi nalized and under -
represented in development processes in the hotspot . 
During consultations, the main capacity barriers identified related to the organizational capacity of 
organizations, particularly community -based organizations and small NGOs. Technical  capacity to carry out 
EbA also varies and there is an opportunity through the Programme  to encourage cooperation and 
knowledge transfer between organizations . Larger national and international NGOs  have a particular role to 
play in mentoring smaller national organizations.    
Capacity building activities will be achieved through the CSO grantee subprojects and calls for proposals will specifically encourage EbA capacity building subprojects to address needs that will be further detailed during 
the Ecosystem Profile updates under Component 1. Based on CEPF’s experience, capacity building activities are also often parts of larger subprojects proposed by CSOs.  
The total requested from GCF for capacity building activities is captured by the  activities planned under 
Component 3 and totals USD  2.15 million . This figure however excludes the capacity that CSOs will gain 
directly through implementing the grants they receive. The capacity building benefits of managing and 
delivering on grants are significant but difficult to quantify financially. Nevertheless, CEPF will capture 
progress on the capacity of CSOs in the hotspots through the use of its capacity tracking tool (see section 
4.4.5 of Annex 21).


---
*Page 38*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 60 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERF ORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
 
The Programme  will protect and restore coastal, freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems that are providing 
critical ecosystem services for vulnerable people in the four Programme  countries. The resulting improved 
quantity and quality of the ecosystem services will improv e resilience because ecosystems and people will 
be better able to absorb and react to the stresses caused by climate change.  The exact mix of ecosystems 
to protect/restore and the resulting secured ecosystem services will be defined in detail as part of the 
Ecosystem Profile updating in Component 1. However, it is expected that the priority ecosystems will include 
coastal ecosys tems such as mangroves, coral reefs, salt marshes, sea grass meadows, freshwater lakes 
and river systems, and forests that play an important role in watershed catchments.  
Programme performance indicators are provided in more detail in section E and Annex 11 along with 
descriptions of how they will be achieved and measured.  The Programme  will contribute to the following 
high- level GCF performance impacts : 
• Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and 
regions  
CSO subprojects will focus on securing the critical ecosystem services that vulnerable people need to be 
resilient and to adapt to the impacts of climate change. In addition, based on CEPF’s experience,  many of 
the proposed subprojects are expected to have direct beneficial impacts on people’s livelihoods . The 
Programme is expected to b enefit at least 698,000 people through  increased climate change resilience, 
access to improved quantity and quality of ecosystem services and income . Of these  people, 88,000 are 
expected to benefit  directly from employment opportunities and/or from support to adopt diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood options  (See Appendix of Annex 2 and Annex 17 for details of estimates) . Based on past 
CEPF experience in the hotspot , roughly equal numbers of men and women are expected to benefit from 
the Programme  and a Gender Action Plan (see Annex 8) has been developed to maximize female 
participation in the Programme  activities.  
• Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services  
The Programme  will result in the r estor ation or improve d management of at least 1.83  million hectares of  
coastal , freshwater  and terrestrial ecosystems that play a critical role in climate change adaptation in the 
Programme  countries . Given that the Programme  is focused on a biodiversity hotspot, the conservation of 
globally important biodiversity in the areas  where EbA subprojects are conducted  will be an important co -
benefit of the Programme .   
GCF expected outcomes that will be addressed are:  
• Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and development  
The Programme  will support the development of innovative models for EbA that can be mainstreamed into 
public policy  and adopted by private sect or partners . Grants will be provided to CSOs to partner with public 
agencies and private sector companies with the objective of developing models for effective EbA that can 
be further replicated.  Adoption of Programme -supported EbA model s as part of broader public policy  will be 
an objective in each country and  at least one such policy target will be developed per country  (see section 
B3). In each country a strategy for private sector engagement on EbA will also be developed as part of the 
Programme .  
• Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks


---
*Page 39*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 60 
   
 Reduced exposure of 610,000 vulnerable people to climate  risks will be achieved primarily by securing the 
critical ecosystem services they depend upon as explained above. Based on the level of proposed 
investment and CEPF’s previous experience it is estimated that the Programme  will reduce exposure to 
climate risks for 2.4% of the population in the targeted Programme  countries.  In addition, it is expected that 
the Programme  will build the capacity of at least 25 CSOs, thereby  enabling them to make further 
contributions to EbA and ecosystem conservation.    
• Climate Change Mitigation Potential  
The Programme  has been designed to address climate change adaptation and priorities for investment will 
be set based on the potential to increase the resilience of vulnerable people. However, the focus on 
supporting EbA subprojects means there will be important mitigat ion co- benefits. Natural terrestrial and 
coastal ecosystems such as forests, wetlands and mangroves are important both for storing and 
sequestering carbon. Activities designed to improve management will result in less deforestation and habitat 
conversion l eading to avoided emissions. Ecosystem restoration activities will result in increased carbon 
sequestration. Globally, the conservation, restoration and improved management of tropical forests, 
mangroves and peatlands could provide a third of cost -effectiv e mitigation action needed  by 2030  to limit 
global warming to 2°C29. Most ( 53%) of the total land- based mitigation opportunity comes from protecting 
tropical forests, including those targeted in the Programme30. Furthermore, natural climate solutions provide 
the highest potential for mitigation in most tropical countries and in a quarter of tropical countries, cost 
effective natural climate solutions for mitigation are greater than national emissions. In Madagascar, for 
example, cost effective natural climate solutions have the potential to mitigate 163% of national emissions31. 
Coastal and marine ecosystems, including protection and restoration of mangroves, salt marshes, seagrass 
beds and seaweeds have been identified as one of the five most important ocean- based climate actions and 
could have a mitigation potential of 0.5 -1.38 GTCO 2e per year , making these activities an important part of 
achieving pathways to limit warming at 2°C or below.32 
Although the Programme  is primarily focused on adaptation, the mitigation co- benefits (tons of CO 2e 
emissions avoided/sequestered) of all the subprojects funded under the Programme  will be estimated once 
selected and reported to GCF as part of the Programme’s monitoring.  
Further detail on Programme  indicators is available in section E5, in the Programme  Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan (Annex 11)  and the M ulti Country Information Form (Annex 17) . 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
 
Over the last two decades, extreme weather events caused the deaths of around half a million people 
worldwide and economic losses amounting to around USD  3.5 trillion33. With the effects of climate change, 
the impacts of extreme weather events and the resulting increases in global adaptation costs are likely to be 
two-to-three times higher than current global estimates by 203034. There is, therefore, an urgent need for 
cost-effective and locally appropriate clima te change adaptation solutions, especially in SIDS and LDCs, 
whose human populations are disproportionately vulnerable to extreme weather events and other climate 
change impacts (for instance, Madagascar was ranked fourth on the most recent Global Climate Risk 
Index35) and whose governments lack the resources to implement costly engineering solutions.  
 
29 Griscom  et al. 2017. Natural Climate Solutions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (44): 11645- 50. 
30 Griscom et al. 2020. National mitigation potential from natural climate solutions in the tropics. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B  375: 20190126 
31 % derived from data provided in Griscom et al. 2020. cited above  
32 Hoegh- Guldberg. O., et al. 2019. ‘‘The Ocean as a Solution to Climate Change: Five Opportunities  
for Action.’’ Report. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute  
33 Ekstein , D. et al. 2020. Global Climate Risk Index 2020. Bonn: Germanwatch.  
34 UNEP. 2016. The Adaptation Gap Report. United Nations Environment Programme.  
35 Ekstein, D. et al. 2020. Global Climate Risk Index 2020. Bonn: Germanwatch.


---
*Page 40*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 60 
   
 In this context, EbA approaches have great potential. By taking advantage of the ecosystem services 
(coastal protection, soil erosion control, catchment prote ction, etc.) provided by natural ecosystems, EbA is 
recognized by many LDCs as a cost -effective, accessible way of reducing poverty and climate risk36. Many 
EbA techniques, such as mangrove planting, agroforestry and assisted natural regeneration, can be taught 
to rural communities, and adopted with locally available technology. In addition, because EbA approaches 
benefit from the natural capacity of ecosystems to regenerate, they entail limited recurrent costs, provided 
that appropriate natural resource gov ernance structures are put in place. Indeed, restoration of natural 
ecosystems can deliver significant economic benefits to local communities and economies, including by 
supplying freshwater for domestic use and irrigation, providing fuel, food and buildin g materials, and 
underpinning the development of nature -based tourism. Additional co -benefits include conservation of 
biodiversity and mitigation of climate change, through capture and storage of carbon.  
The Programme is premised on the belief that there i s significant potential to effect a paradigm shift towards 
EbA among public, private and civil society actors in the target countries, and its interventions have been 
designed with this in mind. In this way, the Programme will contribute to GCF’s paradigm -shift objective of 
increasing climate- resilient sustainable development in island territories. The Programme will transform 
critical ecosystems, that people depend on, from their current state of increasing degradation to a situation 
where they are able to maintain essential ecosystem services. By focusing on the ecosystem services that 
increase the climate resilience of the maximum number of people, identified through application of the KBA+ 
methodology (see section B3 and Annex 2), and by using cutting- edge science to evaluate impacts, the 
Programme will demonstrate the effectiveness of EbA techniques and their relevance to national climate 
change policy goals. By engaging with key public and private sector actors at all stages of implementation, 
the Progr amme will familiarize them with EbA techniques, promote their incorporation into national policies 
and corporate business practices, and, in this way, catalyze a paradigm shift towards EbA.  
By working through civil society, the Programme will particularly emphasize locally led, decentralized models 
for EbA, which are appropriate in LDCs and SIDS, where national government may have limited 
implementation capacity. CEPF’s experience from 20 years of working with CSOs on biodiversity 
conservation is that they are capable of offering useful and timely advice and support to both governments 
and private companies. CSOs can be extremely effective at: (i)  bringing global experience and good practice 
to local contexts; (ii) transferring skills and knowledge to govern ment agencies and the private sector, leading 
to better policy and business practices; (iii)  catalyzing innovation, testing new approaches and responding 
to emerging challenges and opportunities; (iv)  brokering partnerships among traditional and non -tradit ional 
conservation actors; and (v)  ensuring that conservation programs are beneficial to local people, such as by 
protecting vital ecosystem services and providing sustainable livelihood options. AFD and CEPF believe that 
these same capabilities that have been so effective at achieving biodiversity conservation outcomes can 
also be harnessed to contribute to climate -resilient sustainable development.    
While the Programme is ambitious in scale, and GCF funding will be directed to four countries, it will also 
generate knowledge and learning to enable wider replication, both by CEPF and others. The tools and 
approaches developed by the Programme will be used to address the technical limitations of CSOs within 
the hotspot but also to replicate the focus  on EbA in other biodiversity hotspots where CEPF is active and 
has CSO networks. In particular, CEPF will replicate EbA approaches in other SIDS , LDCs where the need 
for scaled up action on adaptation to climate change are greatest. This will create a shift in CEPF’s emphasis 
on setting priorities so that enhancing the resilience of vulnerable people to climate change becomes an 
important criterion alongside its traditional focus on biodiversity.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximat ely 1 page)  
 
By promoting sustainable development across multiple sectors, EbA is a unifying concept in national and 
international sustainable development frameworks . Most directly, it helps countries meet their obligations 
 
36 Colls, A. et al. (2009) Ecos ystem -based Adaptation: a natural response to climate change. Gland: IUCN.


---
*Page 41*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 60 
   
 under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity ( UNCBD) , both adaptation and mitigation 
targets under the UNFCCC  and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. In addition, EbA 
activities supported under the Programme  are expected to promote sustainability related to agriculture, 
forestry, energy, water, social justice, education and livelihood diversification, thus helping to achieve 
Sustainable Development Goals  (SDGs) . While it is not possible to quantify all social, economic and 
environmental co- benefits of the Programme because this depends to a large extent on the priorities that 
are determined through the priority setting in Component 1, a wide range of co- benefits are nevertheless 
expected. Once the Ecosystem Profile has been established under Component 1, CEPF will revisit the 
quantification of sustainable development co -benef its (such as number of jobs expected to be created, 
effects on food security, income and gender equality)  and integrate  them into the Programme monitoring.  If 
biodiversity co -benefits are at the heart of the actions under this project, as CEPF has been established 20 
years ago to tackle biodiversity challenges, t he Programme  will contribute to the following SDG indicators in 
the Programme  countries:  
• SDG 1. No poverty. The Programme  focuses on improving resilience for some of the planet’s 
poorest of the poor, living in rural areas and depending directly on ecosystem services for their 
livelihoods.  
• SDG 2. Zero hunger . Maintaining and improving Ecosystem Services linked to food production was 
identified during consultations as a priority for the Programme . 
• SDG 5. Gender equality . Both women and men are equally reliant upon, and engaged in 
stewardship of ecosystem servi ces. The Programme  includes tools to ensure that gender adverse 
impacts are avoided and that gender positive approaches to EbA are stimulated.  
• SDG 6 . Clean Water and sanitation . Watershed management for provision of water was identified 
during consultations as an important priority for EbA in most of the Programme  countries. Water 
availability and provision on many of the small islands involved in the Programme  is a major issue.  
• SDG 8. S ustainable economic growth . Principal  industries and economic sectors i n the 
Programme countries, notably fisheries , agriculture and tourism are reliant on healthy ecosystems 
and the ecosystem services they provide.  
• SDG 13. Climate Action.  In addition to adaptation outcomes, the Programme  will provide important 
mitigation co -benefits by reducing emissions from land- use conversion, including deforestation, and 
through habitat  restoration activities.  
• SDG 14. Life below water . Protecting and promoting sustainable use of coastal and marine 
resources was identified during Programme  consultations as a high priority in all Programme  
countries. Protection and restoration of mangroves and coral reefs are anticipated to be priorities in 
subprojects submitted by CSOs.  
• SDG 15. Life on land . The Program me will support the protection, restoration and sustainable use 
of terrestrial ecosystems. With its focus on biodiversity hotspots, the Programme  focuses on some 
of the planet’s most important ecosystems for preserving life on Earth.  
Two of the four countr ies w here GCF funds will be used have extreme rural poverty  where large parts of the 
population depend directly on the services provided by the same ecosystems that the Programme  will be 
protecting and restoring.  The Programme  will promote a range of activities that strengthen the resilience to 
climate change of local communities and their natural support systems, including watershed management, 
promoting traditional stewardship practices, improved management of natural resources, discouraging 
destructive and unsustainable practices, gathering baseline data for improved management, establishing 
zoning for sustainability, and creating jobs and alternative livelihoods.  
The Programme  aims to ensure that both men and women have equal opportunities to participate in and 
benefit from the Programme . A Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) has been developed to ensure that gender 
adverse impacts are avoided and that gender considerations are included in all key Programme  activities so 
that positive gender impacts are achieved. Through the measures outlined in the Gender Action Plan and 
Programme  design, the Programme  aims to ensure that approximately half of all direct and indirect


---
*Page 42*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 60 
   
 beneficiaries are women. For all indicators related to people, s ex dis aggregated data will be collected during 
project monitoring.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
With its focus on Small Island Developing States and Least Developed Countries, the Programme  includes 
some of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change as well as some of the poorest.  All the 
countries in the Programme  have already reported significant impacts of climate change with increased 
temperatures, rising sea levels, oc ean acidification, coastal erosion, flooding and droughts all being 
attributed to climate change. Climate change projections for the  region and the countries where the 
Programme  will work indicate that climate change impacts will continue to get worse over  the next century 
even under the most optimistic scenarios for cutting greenhouse gas emissions  (see Annex 2) . In addition, 
other anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems are reducing the availability and quality of important 
ecosystem services, further reduc ing the resilience of people, often the poorest and most vulnerable in 
society, that depend on them.   
The Madagascar and Indian Ocean i slands hotspot is among the biological wonders of the world, with 
globally significant levels of bio diversity and species endemism. Its ecosystems provide millions of people 
with fresh water, food and other ecosystem services that are essential to their survival. Despite their wealth 
in natural resources, the current pace of action in biodiversity conservation appears insuf ficient to ensure 
the hotspot inhabitants will sustainably benefit from their environment and the ecosystem services it provides 
for generations to come.  
EbA has been identified as a priority in the various climate change strategies of all the Programme  countries. 
All of the countries are concerned about the state of their natural ecosystems and the quality and quantity of 
ecosystem services that their people depend upon. Pilot  EbA initiatives have been started in all the 
Programme  countries meaning that t here is already experience to build upon, replicate,  and expand,  both 
within government , and within CSOs. Despite the existence of some other EbA initiatives, there is 
widespread recognition that much more needs to be done beyond the few existing pilots. The Programme  
will give an opportunity to a broad range of organizations to use their existing technical capacity on EbA and 
to build it further.  
Gender inequality remains a significant problem in Comoros and Madagascar , increasing the risks and 
burdens of climate change for women. In Mauritius and Seychelles, per capita national incomes are higher 
than the other countries and women enjoy greater equality in many , but not all,  aspects of society  (see Annex 
8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan) . However, in the two poorer nations included in the Programme, 
women are often unequal participants in decision- making, labor markets, legal processes and they face 
gender stereotypes due to socio- cultural norms. Women are also often poorer than men and therefore have 
less access to adaptation options when faced with risk events (e.g. poor crop yields, floods, droughts etc.). 
The Programme  seeks to address gender inequality and deliver gender positive impacts  (see Annex 8) . 
CSOs are active in delivering sus tainable development outcomes, including nature conservation and climate 
change projects in all the Programme  countries. Their experience, capacity and capabilities vary greatly 
reflecting their range in size from small community -based organizations to lar ge national and international 
NGOs. The Programme  will address the barriers of lack of finance and need for greater capacity that hinders 
this “third sector” from playing a greater role in climate change adaptation in the Programme  countries.


---
*Page 43*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 60 
   
 D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The important role of healthy ecosystems and ecosystem services for climate change adaptation is 
recognized in the key climate strategies of all four  countries targeted by this Programme  (see table below 
and further details in A nnex 2) . In addition, the link between ecosystem services and increased resilience to 
climate change is noted in numerous other policies and strategies in the Programme  countries – particularly 
those related to biodiversity conservation. At the time of Proposal preparation, the Programme  countries do 
not yet have published GCF Country Work Programmes37, however EbA is a clear priority for all four 
countries. Most of the countries have national climate change policies, strategies or implementation plans 
and key UNFCCC documents such as National Adaptation Programmes of Action (for LDCs) and Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs). All of these documents either specifically cite E bA as a priority or include 
specific examples of EbA (e.g. restoration of watersheds or mangroves) that are considered priorities. 
Madagascar has published a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) 38, in which both terrestrial and marine based 
EbA action feature pr ominently as priorities. D evelopment of the NAP i s ongoing for Comoros, where 
government agency staff responsible for these documents confirmed that EbA would be included as a priority  
(as it is in the existing NAPA) . Similarly, the current NDCs of all the  Programme  countries include Nature 
based Solutions to climate change and the enhanced NDCs currently under development are also expected 
to include Nature based Solutions . 
 
Table  6. Key national climate strategy documents  that include EbA as priorities  
Country  National Climate 
Strategy1 NDC  NAPA  Other  
Comoros  NAPA is the main 
document  ✔ ✔ Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development 
Strategy (SCA2D); The National Strategy on Biodiversity 
(2010); Strategy for Coastal Areas Integrated 
Management (2010)  
Madagascar  National Policy for Action 
on Climate Change  ✔ ✔ National Strategy for Biological Diversity and Action Plan; 
National Adaptation Plan  
Mauritius  National Climate Change 
Adaptation Policy 
Framework  ✔ NA National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategic Framework 
and Action Plan; Technology Action Plan for an 
enhanced Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation; 
Resilient Strategy under development through the Adapt 
Action Programme (expected April 2020)  
Seychelles  National Climate Change 
Policy  ✔ NA Coastal Management Plan (209-2024) ; National 
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2015-2020  
Note: Various titles are used for national climate strategy documents . Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) developed in 2015/16 and 
National Adaptation Programmes of Action were developed following UNFCCC guidance; NAPAs are only for Least Developed Countries; NA = 
Not Applicable.  
 
In addition to identifying EbA as a national priority in key policy and strategy documents, pilot EbA activities 
have been undertaken in all of the Programme  countries meaning that there is already a good understanding 
of the approach and capacity within government agencies and CSOs to execute EbA activities. Further, in 
all of the countries the role of civil society in delivering climate change resilience is recognized. For example, 
the NDCs of all four countries identify building community capacity for adaptation as a priority and several  
highlight the role that CSOs can play in addressing adaptation priorities.  
CEPF  is already operational in the hotspot and has provided 1 02 grants  for a total of USD 10 .3 million  to 
CSOs for biodiversity conservation activities since 2015. As such , CEPF  is already a well-known  donor by 
 
37 https://www.greenclimate.fund/projects/commitment . Last accessed 12 Feb 2020  
38 The UNFCCC’s NAP process is for Le ast Developed Countries –  Madagascar and Comoros in this Programme.


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 60 
   
 many of the CSOs operating in the Programme  countries. Nevertheless,  the emphasis on EbA, rather than 
biodiversity conservation, in this Programme  means that other CSOs who had not previously engaged with 
CEPF expressed an interest during the Programme  consultation in applying for EbA funding made available 
through the Pro gramme .    
Over the last 20 years, CEPF has demonstrated that it fills an important niche within global biodiversity 
conservation through its focus on CSOs. Over that time, it has developed a suite of policies, procedures and 
operating systems that are sim ple enough to allow even small community -based CSOs to benefit from 
funding while at the same time providing the rigor needed by its donors such as the World Bank, EU, GEF, 
Govt. of Japan and AFD. CEPF defines its investment priorities using an inclusive participatory process 
involving national, sub-regional  and expert consultations. The results, encapsulated in an Ecosystem Profile, 
provide a common vision developed by government agencies, donors, CSOs and the private sector that 
allows CEPF’s investments to be targeted at high priorities (whether thematic or geographic) while avoiding 
duplication with other donor and/or government investments. CEPF’s tried- and-tested approach that has 
worked so well for biodiversity conservation is easily transferable to s upport Ecosystem -based Adaptation. 
CEPF is also ideally positioned to support concrete regional collaborations among the CSOs  of the hotspot, 
maximizing the wealth and diversity of experiences developed and fostering the emergence of a regional 
EbA communi ty. 
Engagement with stakeholders is fundamental throughout all stages of investment in a hotspot.  CEPF and 
its regional partners have strong relationships with the ministries responsible for climate change and other 
environmental issues in each of the coun tries. AFD and CEPF shared the draft concept note with the 
Nationally Designated Authorities (NDAs)  in April 2019,  and presented the Programme  to relevant 
government agencies and civil society stakeholders during visits to the Programme  countries in August 2019. 
Stakeholder consultation workshops  were held in each country to elicit feedback on the Programme  design 
and identify initial EbA priorities  in each country. These workshops demonstrated that there is widespread 
support within relevant government departments and among civil society stakeholders for the proposed 
Programme . More than 150 individual stakeholders  (45% women)  from 87 organizations and institutions 
provided input and feedback on the proposed project (Annex 7 - Stakeholder Consultation R eport and Plan).  
The Programme  proposal has been developed taking into account the comments provided during the 
consultations and from NDAs.  As described in sections B4 and E7, the NDAs w ill be fully integrated into the 
Programme  governance and monitoring /evaluation.  NDAs will also play a critical role in ensuring that 
subprojects address national priorities since ecosystem profiles and long- term visions that define the 
Programme’s investment priorities will need to be endorsed by them.  All the NDAs have provided Non-
objection Letters (See Annex 1).  
Once the Programme  starts, there will be a phase of intensive engagement during preparation of an 
Ecosystem Profile, through a series of local, national and regional consultations. A wide range of 
stakeholders will be involved, including national and international experts, research institutions, NGOs, 
government agencies, women and women's groups, community groups and private sector representatives. 
CEPF’s experience is that threats to ecosystems are dynamic and therefore the ecosystem profiles 
identifying priority actions are most effective when developed just prior to CEPF’s investment so that they 
capture current priorities. It is therefore important that ecosystem profiles are completed as part of the project 
(as planned in Component 1) rather than part of the planning phase for the Programme .  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The financial structure of the Programme  will ensure efficient use of GCF funds. Additional funding of USD 
11.2 million co-financing is proposed . In addition, although not captured in the financing figures for the 
Programme  due to GCF’s policies on co -finance and parallel finance, CEPF will be investing in the rapid  
replication of the Programme ’s EbA priority setting and implementation approaches elsewhere where CEPF 
works  (CEPF’s global portfolio of grants is appro ximately USD 16 million per year) . Furthermore, the priority -


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 60 
   
 setting component of the Programme  (Component 1) will be funded entirely from co -finance, thereby 
ensuring more of the GCF funding is directed to implementation of EbA actions by CSOs.   
Grant fu nding is appropriate because the Programme  will secure ecosystem services that improve 
vulnerable people’s resilience and ability to adapt to climate change. These ecosystem services are public 
goods. Public financing levels in the Programme  countries are currently insufficient to protect and restore 
the natural ecosystems from which critical ecosystem services are derived. The Programme  countries 
already have significant foreign debt and a wide range of other public funding needs (health, education etc.), 
which means that environmental protection competes with other priorities. Loans to undertake the 
Programme  are therefore not a viable option. The Programme  activities are not expected to generate 
revenues and therefore there are limited opportunities for p rivate sector investment. The use of grant funding 
is therefore not going to discourage private investment . 
Although the Programme  could not yet be funded from the public or private sector in the Programme  
countries, CEPF is currently piloting approaches to develop and support partnerships between CSOs and 
the private and public sectors. This work is also accompanied by an increased emphasis on strengthening 
the role of CSOs in contributing to the developme nt of public policy. This proposed Programme  will benefit 
from these pilots and approaches to support partnerships will be integrated into the work in the hotspot 
through Component 3. Development of strong partnerships with the private and public sector is  also 
important for contributing to the sustainability of CSOs’ work beyond the life of the Programme . 
The biodiversity hotspots concept was developed by scientists and adopted by conservation practitioners in 
recognition of the need to prioritize expendit ure in a context of scarce conservation finance. By focusing 
attention and effort on large- scale areas where levels of biodiversity and threats are both high, the concept 
helps to channel expenditure into investments that will have a high long- term level o f cost effectiveness.  
SIDS and LDCs are recognized to be disproportionately impacted by climate change and therefore focusing 
investments in these countries that are also within a biodiversity hotspot is an efficient way to achieve climate 
change adaptati on goals in relation to vulnerable people and communities while also delivering food and 
water security, biodiversity and ecosystem service co- benefits.  
Many of the approaches needed to achieve EbA are the same, or can be modified, from best practice in 
biodiversity conservation. The Programme  will therefore benefit from the knowledge of the existing network 
of CSOs that CEPF works with. The emphasis on sharing best practice in Component 3 of the Programme  
will also help to replicate success across the hots pot and beyond.   
As a nature- based method for climate change adaptation, EbA can offer cost savings compared with 
traditional infrastructure adaptation approaches, as well as additional benefits such as provision of wild 
foods, carbon sequestration and bi odiversity conservation. There is a growing evidence base for the 
environmental, social and financial benefits of EbA and these benefits are often long term and occur across 
large landscape- scales. The combined ecological, socio -economic and financial bene fits of EbA often 
outweigh traditional infrastructure adaptation approaches in cases where detailed cost benefit comparisons 
have been made39,40, 41,42 but EbA can also be combined with engineering measures to amplify benefits43.   
Cost Benefit Analyses (CBA) of illustrative EbA subprojects of types expected to be proposed by CSOs 
under the Programme  are provided as Annexes 3a (Excel file) and 3b (narrative) . Two subprojects are 
 
39 Naumann et al. 2011. Assessment of the potential of ecosystem -based approaches to climate change adaptation and mitigation in 
Europe. Final report to the European Commission, DG Environment.  
40 Munang et al. 2013. Climate change and Ecosystem -based Adaptation: a new pragmatic approach to buffering climate change impacts. 
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 5, No. 1: 67  
41 Rizvi, Ali Raza, S. Baig, and million . Verdone. 2015. Ecosystems Based Adaptation: Knowledge Gaps in Making an Economic Case for 
Investing in Nature Based Solutions for Climate Change. IUCN.  
42 Narayan et al. 2017. Cost -Benefit Analysis of Mangrove Restoration for Coastal Protection and an Earthen Dike Alternative in 
Mozambique. Washington, DC: Climate Economic Analysis Development, Investment, and Resilience (CEADIR) Activity, Crown Agents  
USA and Abt Associates. Prepared for the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID).  
43 E.g. Brander et al. 2018. Cost -benefit analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation flooding in central Vietnam. ResilNam Policy Brief


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 60 
   
 considered: a subproject to restore mangroves, thereby reducing flooding risk for a vulnerable community 
and 2) a subproject to protect and restore a forested watershed, thereby reducing flood risk and improving 
freshwater provision for downstream agriculture and domestic users. Although they are illustrative examples, 
the values for cost s and benefits are based on published values (see input parameter tabs in Annex 3a  for 
details) from real mangrove and forest restoration projects.  
Both of the examples in Annex 3a/3b  show that the subprojects are cost effective and benefits significantly 
outweigh costs. For example, for the default values of the model, the mangrove restoration subproject has 
an internal rate of return (IRR) of 34% over a 25- year period. The Net Present Value (with a 12% discount 
rate) of the mangrove restoration subproject  scenario is USD 555,148 higher than the NPV of the ‘without 
project’ scenario over a 25- year time horizon. The sensitivity analysis included in the model shows that the 
subproject is robust to changes in costs and benefits. The IRR drops to 20% if total c osts are 30% higher 
than assumed and benefits are 30% lower, and it rises to 57% if costs are 30% lower and benefits 30% 
higher than assumed in the default model parameters. For the watershed example, the IRR is 28% over a 
25-year period, dropping to 20% i f costs are 30% higher and benefits 30% lower, and rising to 38% if costs 
are 30% lower and benefits 30% higher. The NPV over a 25 -year time horizon (with 12% discount rate) is 
USD 1,990,500 higher in the subproject scenario by comparison to the ‘without s ubproject’ scenario. The 
models in Annex 3a  also allow for comparison of two climate change impact scenarios (a best - and worst -
case scenarios). For both subproject examples, the subprojects remain cost effective and have higher NPVs 
than the ‘without proj ect’ scenarios irrespective of the climate scenario used.  
The aim of the CBAs  is to demonstrate that the subprojects are cost effective and represent value for money, 
rather than to provide accurate valuations of all subproject benefits. As such, a conservative approach was 
used for assigning values for subproject benefits and only a few of the local benefits from ecosystem services 
were included in the models. For example, although carbon sequestration will be an important global benefit 
of mangrove and terrestrial forest restoration and protection, this benefit has been excluded from the models. 
If more of the potential ecosystem benefits of the subprojects were included in the CBA s then they would be 
even more cost effective than the figures presented above suggest.  
CEPF’s other donors and CSO grantees will be providing USD 11.2 million of co -financing for the 
Programme ). Th e co-financing is primarily from funding earmarked by donors for biodiversity conservation 
so woul d not be prioritized for ecosystem -based adaptation unless the Programme  goes ahead. The 
Programme  will make 698,000 people more climate change resilient.


---
*Page 47*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 60 
   
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks  under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contr ibutes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co- financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please  select  the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  E.2. C ore indicator  targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project /programme . 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected tonne s of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided  (mitigation 
and cross -cutting only)  Annual  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lif etime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project  financing  49,200,000   USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  38,000,000  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  _____   Choose an item. / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed  
(e = b / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged          USD  
(g) Public source co- financed  _____   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____         
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) _____   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  _____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)   Direct  44,000 females; 44,000 males  
 
Indirect  305,000 females; 305,000 males  
 
See Annex 17 for disaggregation by country.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  0.3% of population of Programme  countries   
(of which 50% females and 50% males)  
Indirect  2.1% of population of Programme  countries   
(of which 50% females and 50% males)  
See Annex 17 for disaggregation by country.


---
*Page 48*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 60 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
 
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of males and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Independent 
socio -
economic 
survey results, 
disaggregated 
by sex .  
169 
females, 
389 
males  22,169 
females, 22,389 
males  
  
44,169 females, 
44,389 
males  
 
 Restoration of 
natural 
ecosystems 
leads to 
increased 
resilience and 
diverse 
livelihood 
opportunities.  
A4.0 Improved resilience of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change  Official gazette 
notifications of 
protected area 
expansion.  
Management 
Effectiveness 
Tracking Tool 
reports.  2.91M ha  3.82M ha  
 4.74M ha  
 
  Governments 
remain 
committed to 
increasing 
coverage and 
strengthening 
management 
(e.g. ensuring 
appropriate 
regulations are 
in place, staff 
are capacitated, equipment and 
budget are 
sufficient, and a 
management 
plan is 
developed and 
implemented) of protected areas 
and other 
effective area-
based 
conservation 
measures.  
E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
 
Expected  Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation    
Notifications 
of new laws, 
policies and 
regulations in  
4 policies, 
laws or 
regulations 
that 
include  
4  
  
12  
  
Governments 
provide space 
for CSOs to 
engage in 
formulation of


---
*Page 49*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 60 
   
   official 
gazettes.  EbA as a 
priority  climate policy. 
Opportunities to 
integrate EbA 
into public policy 
arise during the 
Programme.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of 
Fund- supported tools 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to 
respond to climate 
change and variability    
Report of 
independent 
evaluation of 
use of tools, 
techniques 
and 
instruments 
developed by 
Programme.   
0 
communities,  
businesses 
and/or 
public 
sector 
institutions 
who use 
EbA tools, 
techniques 
and 
instruments   
12   
25 
  
CSOs are willing 
to engage in 
EbA activities.  
Governments 
provide political 
space for CSOs 
to do so.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.2 Number of males 
and females reached 
by [or total geogrpahic 
coverage of] climate-
related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/strengthen
ed   
Independent 
socio -
economic 
survey results, 
disaggregated 
by sex.   
0 females  
0 males  
reached 
by climate 
risk 
reduction 
measures   
152,590 
females  
152,590 
males   
305,180 
females  
305,180 
males   
People in 
communities 
targeted by the 
Programme are 
receptive to EbA 
approaches to 
climate risk 
reduction.


---
*Page 50*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 60 
   
 E.5. Programme/programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Priority sites for 
provision of ecosystem 
services identified and 
adopted by stakeholders 
in the four Programme 
countries.  Number of coastal, freshwater 
and terrestrial Key Biodiversity 
Areas (KBAs) assessed as 
critically important for 
ecosystem service provision.  Inventory and 
maps of KBAs 
critically 
important for 
ecosystem 
services.  0 30  
 
 30  
 
 Data sets on 
ecosystem services 
are available at 
sufficient resolution 
to allow setting of 
site-scale priorities.  
Number of government, 
private sector and civil society 
organizations that formally 
adopt KBAs critically 
important for ecosystem 
services as  priorities for EbA.  Published 
national climate 
change plans, 
strategies and 
policies.  
 
Published 
private sector 
policies and 
commitments.  
 
CSO strategies 
and public 
commitments.  0 6 
 
 12 
 
 Government, 
private sector and 
CSO stakeholders 
in each country 
accept the KBA+ 
methodology as the 
basis for setting 
common priorities.  
Critical ecosystem 
services are maintained 
and enhanced through 
EbA activities at  priority 
sites Area of intact coastal 
ecosystems ( wetlands, 
mangroves, coral reefs and 
seagrass meadows ) with 
strengthened management.  Management 
Effectiveness 
Tracking Tool 
reports.  0.57M ha  1.18M ha  
 
 1.80M ha  
 
 Political instability 
does not create 
conditions where 
unsustainable and 
destructive natural 
resource use 
becomes rampant 
and uncontrollable. 
Government  
funding to  agencies 
responsible for 
management of 
natural resources 
does not decrease 
from current leve ls. 
Area of intact watershed 
forest ecosystems with 
strengthened management  
(e.g. through establishment of 
community fire brigades and 
community conservation 
teams, collaborative 
monitoring of protected area 
management plans, etc.).  Remote 
sensing data 
comparing 
deforestation 
rates between 
priority sites 
and benchmark 
sites.  
 
Management 
Effectiveness 
Tracking Tool 
reports.  2.34Mha  2.64M ha  
 
 2.94M ha  
 
 Political instability 
does not create 
conditions where 
unsustainable and 
destructive natural 
resource use 
becomes rampant 
and uncontrollable. 
Government  
funding to  agencies 
responsible for 
management of 
natural resources 
does not decrease 
from current levels . 
Area of degraded coastal 
ecosystems (wetlands, 
mangroves, coral reefs and 
seagrass meadows) restored.   Aerial photos 
showing 
change in 
ecosystem 
extent over 
time.  
 
Reports of 
Coral Health 
Index or other 91 ha 2,091 ha  
 
(i.e. 
2,000 ha 
more than 
baseline)  4,091 ha  
 
(i.e. 
4,000 ha 
more than 
baseline)  Natural resource 
rights at priority 
sites are sufficiently 
clear to allow 
restoration.  
Socially acceptable 
alternatives can be 
found for people 
whose livelihood 
activities (e.g.


---
*Page 51*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 60 
   
 ecosystem -
appropriate 
measures of 
ecosystem 
condition.    charcoal 
production) inhibit 
restoration.  
Area of degraded watershed 
forest ecosystems restored.  Aerial photos 
showing 
change in 
ecosystem 
extent over 
time.  
 
Reports of 
surveys of 
tree seedling 
survival rates 
or other 
appropriate 
measures of 
restoration 
success.  16 ha  1,016 ha 
 
(i.e. 
1,000 ha 
more than 
baseline)  2,016 ha 
 
(i.e. 
2,000 ha 
more than 
baseline)  Land -tenure at 
priority sites is 
sufficiently clear to 
allow restoration.  
Socially acceptable 
alternatives can be 
found for people 
whose livelihood 
activities (e.g. 
cattle grazing) 
inhibit restoration.  
Area of climate -resilien t 
agroforestry established.  Reports of 
surveys of 
canopy cover, 
ground cover, 
crop yield or 
other 
appropriate 
measures of 
climate 
resilience.  0 ha 1,000 ha  2,000 ha  Appropriate native 
species for shade 
plants, ground 
cover and nutrient 
fixing can be 
identified.  
Land- tenure at 
priority sites is 
sufficiently clear to 
introduce climate-
resilient 
agroforestry.  
Number of hectares of small 
island ecosystems  where 
alien invasive species  
inhabiting ecosystem 
restoration are removed.  Reports of 
pre- and post - 
removal 
surveys.  0 ha  1,000 ha  2,000 ha  Appropriate 
techniques can be 
found to control 
alien invasive 
species that inhibit 
restoration.  
Governments, 
communit ies and 
private landowners 
grant permission for 
alien invasive 
species control 
measures.  
Local livelihoods at 
priority sites are 
diversified and improved 
through EbA activities  Number of females and 
males with increased income 
as a result of ecosystem -
based livelihood activities 
(sustainable fisheries, nature-
based tourism,  harvesting 
natural products,  etc.).  Grantee 
reports with 
independent 
evaluation.  27 females 
and 66 
males   16,527 
females and 
16,566 
males  
 
(i.e. 16,500 
females and 
16,500 
males  more 
than 
baseline)  33,027 
females and 
33,066 
males  
 
(i.e. 33,000 
females and 
33,000 
males  more 
than 
baseline)  Cash benefits, 
including increased 
incomes due to 
livelihood support 
from the 
Programme lead to 
increased 
resilience  
Number of females and males 
receiving non- cash benefits 
other than structured training 
as a result of enhanced 
delivery of ecosystem 
services (provision of 
freshwater, protection from 
extreme weather events, etc.).  Grantee 
reports with 
independent 
evaluation.  7,711 
females 
and 6,627 
males  160,211 
females and 
159,127 
males  
 
(i.e. 
152,500 
females and 
152,500 
males more 
than 
baseline)  312,711 
females and 
311,627 
males  
 
(i.e. 
305,000 
females and 
305,000 
males more 
than 
baseline)  Strengthened  
management and 
restoration of 
natural ecosystems 
leads to increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods.


---
*Page 52*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 60 
   
 Effective EbA techniques  
replicated through use of 
knowledge products  
developed by the 
Programme  Number of subprojects in the 
CEPF global portfolio that 
integrate EbA techniques 
developed under the 
Programme (e.g. climate-
resilience agroforestry, assisted 
regeneration of denuded 
watersheds with native species, 
coral reef restoration with 
seeding units, etc.).  Grantee 
reports with 
independent  
evaluation.  0 5 20 The EbA tools and 
techniques 
developed by the 
Programme are 
applicable to other 
social and 
ecological contexts 
in the hotspots.  
Financial and 
institutional sustainability 
of EbA programs 
strengthened, including 
through enhanced public 
and private partnerships  Number of CSOs with an 
institutional capacity score of 
80% or more on CEPF’s Civil 
Society Tracking Tool.  Civil Society 
Capacity 
Tracking Tool 
reports.  3 15 
 
(i.e. 12 
more than 
baseline)  28 
 
(i.e. 25 
more than 
baseline)  Training, mentoring 
and grant funding 
will be sufficient to 
overcome CSOs’ 
main constraints.  
The political 
context in the 
Programme 
countries remains 
conducive to CSO 
operations.  
Amount of funding leveraged 
to support EbA activities 
identified  in the long- term 
vision . Signed 
financing 
agreements 
for EbA 
activities.  0 0 USD 10M Climate change 
adaptation will 
remain a funding 
priority for 
governments and 
institutional donors. 
Private companies 
will make voluntary 
commitments to 
climate change 
adaptation.  
Amount of capital invested in 
long- term financing 
mechanisms (endowment 
funds, revolving funds, etc.) to 
support EbA activities beyond 
the end of the Programme.  Audited 
financial 
statements of 
long- term 
financing 
mechanisms.  0 0 USD5 M 
 Governments, 
private companies 
and institutional 
donors able to 
capitalize funds of 
indefinite duration.  
Number of people receiving 
structured training as a result 
of the CEPF Programme.  
 Consolidated 
report of 
training 
activities 
conducted 
under the 
programme  142 
female s 
and 323 
males  5,642 
females and 
5,823 males  
 
 11,142 
females and 
11,323 
males 
 
 Structured training 
leads to enhanced 
capacity of civil 
society.  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Identification 
of important Ecosystem 
Services and priority sites for EbA  Analysis and mapping of 
important Ecosystem 
Services (ES) in each 
country , using the KBA+ 
methodology  Identification of ES; overlay 
with Key Biodiversity Areas 
(KBAs); analysis of 
opportunities for EbA, 
including gender -related;  4 KBA+ inventories and maps – one per country  
Activity 1.1.2 Conduct 
stakeholder consultation to 
set priorities for CEPF investment in EbA  Stakeholder consultation to 
develop a consensus on 
priorities for EbA , including 
gender priorities, based on 
analysis of threats to ES 
and opportunities to 
engage CSOs  Stakeholder consultation meetings in each country; 
coordination with 
government and donors to identify synergies and 
avoid duplication of efforts  4 consultation reports  – 
one per country


---
*Page 53*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 60 
   
 Activity 1.1.3 Develop and 
publish updated 
Ecosystem Profiles for the hotspot  Write, review  and acquire 
government endorsements 
of updated Ecosystem 
Profile s Collat ion of  information; 
drafting of documents; 
consult ations  with NDAs on 
draft documents; include 
gender disaggregated 
indicators  2 updated Ecosystem Profiles – two for hotspot  
(initial and after 5 years)  
Activity 1.2.1. Use multi -
sectoral participatory 
processes to collect data needed for long- term 
vision  Stakeholder consultation to 
develop a consensus on 
priorities for long- term 
investment in EbA, 
including gender -related 
priorities  Stakeholder consultation 
meetings in each country; 
coordination with 
government and donors to 
agree common vision  4 consultation reports  – 
one per country   
Activity 1.2.2. Define 
targets for CSO capacity building for the hotspot  Stakeholder consultation to 
develop a consensus on 
priorities for  CSO capacity 
building, including on 
gender  Stakeholder consultation meetings in each country  1 set of t argets for CSO 
capacity building in the 
hotspot  
Activity 1.2.3. Develop and 
publish Long- term Vision 
for the hotspot  Write, review  and acquire 
government endorsements 
of Long- term Vision for the 
hotspot  Collation of information; 
drafting of documents; 
consultation with NDAs on 
draft document  1 Long- term Vision  for the 
hotspot  
Activity 1.3.1. Establish 
financial targets for 
identifie d EbA actions  Set financial targets for 
actions identified in the Long- term Vision  Feasibility study of EbA 
financing mechanisms in the hotspot; calculation of 
financial needs for actions; 
setting financial targets; 
consultations with donors  1 sets of financial t argets 
for the hotspot  
Activity 1.3.2. Develop 
financing plan for the 
hotspot  Write, review  and acquire 
government and donor 
endorsements of  financing 
plan Collation of information; 
drafting of document; 
consultation with NDAs on 
draft document  1 financing plans  for the 
hotspot  
Activity 1.4.1. Identify 
opportunities for CSOs to 
engage in mainstreaming 
EbA into government 
policies  Identify, through b road 
stakeholder participation , 
innovative models of EbA, that can be amplified by 
mainstreaming them in 
public policy  Stakeholder consultations; 
identification of EbA models; identification of 
opportunities for 
mainstreaming; definition 
of policy targets  4 sets of policy targets  – 
one per country  
Activity 1.5.1 Identify 
opportunities f or private 
sector partnerships with 
CSOs to deliver EbA  Identify, through broad 
stakeholder participation , 
strategies for engagement with private sector actors 
for mainstreaming EbA into 
business practices  Stakeholder consultation; 
identification of EbA models and opportunities 
for mainstreaming; 
development of strategies 
for private sector 
engagement    4 strategies for private 
sector engagement –  one 
per country  
Activity 2.1.1. Select and 
contract Regional 
Implemention Team (RIT)  Selection of RIT through an 
open call for proposals  
process, followed by 
contracting and training  Development of terms of 
reference; request for 
proposals; selection based 
on technical and financial 
offer; contracting; training  1 RIT grant agreement  and 
terms of reference for the hotspot  
Activity 2.1.2. Manage the 
grant -making process  Solicit, review and select 
proposals from CSOs for 
EbA activities, in line with 
CEPF operational manual  Establishment of grant 
selection process; call for 
Letters of Inquiry (LOIs); 
review and selection of LOIs; proposal 
development workshops At least 190 approved grant proposals for EbA 
activitie s


---
*Page 54*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 60 
   
 for shortlisted applicants; 
review of full proposals; 
contracting of grants; gender training and 
systems in place  
Activity 2.1.3. Administer 
EbA grants for CSOs  Monitor and oversee 
awarded grants, providing 
capacity building and 
hands -on support to CSOs 
as needed  New grantee orientation 
courses; site visits; 
financial management 
training; mentoring by RIT; 
exchanges among CSOs  Reports of at least 15 
training courses and 
exchange visits for CSOs  
Activity 2.1.4. Conduct 
supervision, monitoring 
and evaluation of gr ant 
portfolio  Ongoing supervision and 
monitoring of the RIT and 
the grant portfolio by CEPF  Semi -annual RIT 
supervision missions; CSO site visits; assessment 
workshops; independent 
evaluations  10 annual portfolio 
overviews/assessment 
reports  
Activity 2. 2.1 Support 
applied research activities 
to improve understanding 
of the role of specific 
ecosystems and to test the 
effectiveness of promising 
EbA techniques  Grant support for applied 
research that improves the 
efficiency and/or 
effectiveness of the grant 
portfolio in achieving EbA  Calls for proposals; project 
selection; award of grant agreements; oversight, 
monitoring and evaluation 
of research projects; 
seminars to share results 
with national stakeholders  At least 5 approved grant 
proposals for research 
activities on the role of 
ecosystems/the effectiveness of EbA 
techniques  
Activity 2. 2.2 Support 
research activities that 
provide quantification and 
verification of the impacts 
of grant portfolio on 
ecosystem services Grant support for research 
that is speci fically designed 
to quantify and/or verif y the 
impacts of EbA 
approaches supported 
under the grant portfolio on 
ecosystem services  Calls for proposals; project 
selection; award of grant 
agreements; oversight, 
monitoring and evaluation 
of research projects;  
seminars to share results 
with national stakeholders  At least 5 approved grant 
proposals for research 
activities on the impacts of 
EbA approaches  
Activity 3.1.1 Develop 
innovative knowledge 
products documenting 
models, tools and best practices developed under the Programme  Creation of  knowledge 
products  (videos, websites; 
apps., etc.)  to disseminate 
effective  EbA models, tools 
and best practices  Identification of good 
practice within the portfolio;  
requests for proposals ; 
selection of consultants;  
development of  knowledge 
product s; dissemination  At least 6  knowledge 
products , includ ing at least 
1 on gender and 1 related 
to community based 
organizations  
Activity 3.1.2 Support the 
replication of successful policy demonstrations 
models within the hotspot  Provide grants to support 
South- South exchanges 
among CSOs within the 
hotspot (using surface 
transportation or 
teleconferencing wherever 
possible) to replicate policy 
demonstration models  Identif ication of  successful 
approaches ; identification 
of participants for  South -
South exchanges ; award  
and manage grant s to 
support exchanges; evaluate impact in terms of 
replication of approaches  Evaluation reports of at 
least 4 South- South 
exchanges  
Activity 3.1.3 Support the 
replication of EbA 
approaches through 
innovative partnerships 
between CSOs and the 
private sector  Provide grants to support 
CSOs to develop private 
sector partnerships to 
replicate successful EbA 
approaches   Identif ication of  successful 
approaches ; identification 
of participants for CSO -
private sector  partnerships ; 
award and manage grant s 
to support partnerships; evaluate impact in terms of 
replication of approaches  Evaluation reports of at 
least 2 CSO -private sector 
partnerships  
Activity 3.2.1 Support the 
establishment of a long-
term implementation structure to serve as a Support l ong-term 
implementation structure 
from the seco nd five-year 
phase of the project Identify potential long-term 
implementation structure; select appropriate CSO or 
partnership to function as Terms of reference for the 
long-term implementation 
structur e


---
*Page 55*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 60 
   
 steward for the Long -term 
Vision  onward, so that it continue s 
to support EbA actions led 
by CSOs beyond the end 
of the p roject , in line with 
the Long- term Vision  the structure; develop 
terms of reference for structure in cooperation with key stakeholders; 
leverage funding to support 
structure beyond the end of 
the Programme  
Activity 3.2.2 Build 
organizational and 
technical capacity of CSOs 
for EbA in the hotspot  Provide capacity building 
support for local ( national , 
subnational and 
grassroots)  CSOs , with a 
particular focus on 
Community based 
organizations and women’s 
groups  where these exi st Develop capacity building 
plan for the hotspot; 
provide capacity building 
activities  as identified in the 
plan; monitor progress 
using the civil society tracking tool (see Annex 21 
for details of  this tool) At least 25 local CSOs  
engaged in EbA with a c ivil 
society tracking tool score 
of 80 or more  
Activity 3.2.3. Develop and 
implement a resource mobilization strategy to 
generate additional revenues for EbA activities 
in the hotspot  Through a participatory 
approach, develop and 
implement a r esource 
mobilization strategy to 
support the program of EbA activities in the 
hotspot beyond the 
Programme period  Analysis of donor trends in 
the hotspot; analysis of 
innovative and non-traditional revenue 
generation opportunities;  
drafting of  strateg y; 
consult ation with 
stakeholders; 
implementation of  strateg y Resource mobilization 
strategy for the hotspot  
Activity 3.2.4. Develop 
innovative models for 
private sector finance to 
support CSO EbA actions  Provide support for 
identifying, developing and 
catalyzing innovative 
partnership models 
between the private sector 
and CSOs to support  EbA 
actions beyond the end of 
the Programme, including long-term financing 
mechanisms (e.g. revolving funds, payment for 
ecosystem services, etc.)  Identify countries with 
enabling legal frameworks 
and private sector actors 
with an interest in 
innovative partnership 
models; support CSOs to 
organize learning visits to 
successful  models; support 
CSOs to engage with 
private sector actors to 
develop innovative 
financing models  Evaluation reports of 2 
models for private sector 
finance  
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan is provided as Annex 11.  The Plan includes GCF- level Impact and 
Outcome indicators and Programme -level Out come  and Activity indicators, metrics for each indicator, 
methodology for data collection, baseline information, frequency of data collection, and indicative 
resources needed to complete the plan.  The Programme monitoring and evaluation will be conducted in 
accordance with CEPF’s established procedures. Key Programme partners, especially the RIT and the 
CSO grantees will be responsible for providing timely and comprehensive reporting including technical 
results and financial data as necessary and appropriate. T hese responsibilities will form part of the 
contractual agreements between CEPF and the Programme partners and detailed monitoring 
requirements will be established based on their roles. All monitoring data being collected at the ground 
level by these partners will be aggregated for Programme- level reporting by the CEPF Secretariat.  
The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan describes the following elements of project evaluation:  
• A Programme  inception workshop, involving AFD and CEPF will be held at the Programme  start to 
ensure the Programme  team understand and take ownership of the Programme’s objectives and results.  
• The CEPF Donor Council acts as the Programme Steering Committee for all CEPF projects. Meetings 
are held semi -annually  to review and approve Programm e annual budget and work plans, discuss


---
*Page 56*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 60 
   
  
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANA GEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
Risk factors associated with the Programme  include operational, financial, political and sustainability risks. 
Prominent risks that may affect the Programme  are:  
- Lack of interest among CSOs to undertake EbA activities  ; 
- Poor financial management impedes ability of CSOs to implement EbA activities ; 
- Politic al instability impedes implementation in Programme  countries;  implementation issues and identify solutions, and increase coordination and communication between 
key Programme  partners.  
• AFD, including staff from AFD’s three offices in the region (in Comoros, Madagascar and Maurit ius),will 
conduct annual supervision visits  to selected Programme  countries and to grantee field sites to assess 
Programme  progress at first hand.  
• The CEPF Secretariat will  organize semi -annual supervision missions to the hotspot to oversee 
development of grant portfolios and review the performance of the Regional Implementation Team (RIT).  
• The RIT will continuously monitor and evaluate the work of grantees. They will ensure quality of 
performance by grantees and verify completion of deliverables as set out in grantees’ proposals. To 
achieve this the RIT will organize regular site visits to grantees to monitor their progress, ensure 
outreach, verify compliance and support cap acity building. They will also provide guidance to grantees 
for the effective design and implementation of safeguard policies in compliance with guidelines detailed 
in the CEPF Operations Manual, which are consistent with GCF’s safeguard policies.  
• The NDAs  (or designated relevant technical agencies –  country specific arrangements to put in place) 
in each of the Programme  countries will participate in monitoring and evaluation of Programme  activities  
through participation at key meetings with AFD, the CEPF S ecretariat and RIT, and supervision visits to 
grantee subproject field sites to assess Programme  progress.  
• CEPF will prepare an Annual Performance Report  (APR) to monitor progress made  and report to AFD . 
The APR will summarize the annual Programme  results and progress.  
• CEPF will draft a final report  at the end of the Programme.  
• The Programme  will undergo an independent Interim Evaluation  after 5 years . The Evaluation will 
determine progress being made toward the achievement of outcomes and outputs and will identify course 
correction if needed.  It will include a socio -economic survey , to evaluate the Programme’s impacts on 
human well -being, in particular the relevant results at Fund and Progamme levels.  Recommendations of 
the Interim Evaluation  will be incorp orated into the design of the Programme  to secure maximum results 
and sustainability during subsequent Programme  implementation.  
• An independent  Final Evaluation  will take place at the end of the project, and will be undertaken in 
accordance with AFD guidance.  The Final  Evaluation will focus on the delivery of the Programme ’s 
results as initially planned (and as corrected after the Interim Evaluation , if any such correction took 
place).   Once again, it will include a socio -economic survey to provide independent evaluation of human 
well-being impacts.  
• Lessons learned and knowledge generation from the Programme  will be disseminated within and 
beyond the Programme  countries through information- sharing networks and forums developed by the 
Programme  as descr ibed under Component 3.  
In addition to the Programme  specific monitoring of the indicators noted in Section E , CEPF will apply its 
global monitoring framework that measures impacts related to biodiversity, civil society, human well -being 
and creating the enabling conditions necessary for sustained ecosystem conservation. The indicators used 
in CEPF’s monitoring f ramework will also allow easy reporting to the Governments of Programme  countries 
on SDG and Aichi targets (related to the Convention on Biological Diversity). Further details on the 
monitoring framework are provided in Annex 11.


---
*Page 57*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 60 
   
 - Political space for civil society to influence public policy constricted in Programme  countries;  
- Lack of suitable organizations to become long -term implementation structures;  
- Resources for long- term EbA financ ing sources not available.  
 
 
1. Lack of interest among CSOs to undertake EbA activities   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Operational risks are low for this Programme . The main risks come from the availability, capacity and interest 
of CSOs to engage in the EbA activities that are identified as priorities. Since CEPF has already worked in 
the hotspot targeted by the Programme  (by up to 20 years in the case of Madagascar) , the capacity and 
availability  of many CSOs  working in the environment sector  is already known (see Annex 2 , which includes 
descriptions of the state of CSO capacity in each country ). Nevertheless, EbA is a relatively new field, and 
EbA activities have yet to be implemented at scale in any of the target countries. Therefore, the level of 
interest among CSOs to undertake EbA activities and, thus, the uptake of opportunities under the 
Programme have yet to be tested.  However, CEPF has issued seven calls for proposals over the last five 
years in the Madagascar and Indian Ocean Islands Hotspot. Under these calls, CSOs in all four target 
countries have expressed an interest in undertaking EbA activities. In a few cases, where the objectives of 
these activities aligned closely with the biodiversity conservation goals of the current program me, they were 
supported. There is clearly unmet demand for funding for EbA activities. Based on the interest  expressed to 
date in EbA, AFD and CEPF judge that there is a “low” probability of the risk factor.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CSOs active in the environment sector in the target countries were consulted during the Programme 
preparation phase, and confirmed that the planned activities align with their interests and capabilities. More 
extensive consultations will take place during the preparation of the Ecosystem Profile, which will define the priority areas for the award of EbA grants under Component 2 of the Programme. One of the criteria for selecting priority areas will be availability of suitably experienced CSOs interested to 
implement EbA 
activities.  
2. Poor financial management impedes ability of CSOs to implement EbA activities   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
CSOs eligible for funding from CEPF range from small community -based groups to international NGOs and 
differ enormously in their experience and capacity in managing grant funding. Nevertheless, financial risks 
are “low” for the Programme due to the operati ng procedures CEPF has established and refined over the 
last 20 years of grant making to CSOs.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CEPF has well established grant management and oversight procedures that mitigate financial risk.  The 
organization selected to perform the role of the RIT must demonstrate significant experience in financial 
management and oversight of a small grant program. The RIT must follow all CEPF policies, terms and conditions and ensure that sub -grantees comply with these also. The CEPF Secretariat will provide training 
to the RIT to ensure that it is fully conversant with all CEPF operating procedures, as set out i n the operational 
manual.  The procedures to mitigate risk begin with thorough due diligence during the application process, 
to ensure that grantees have the necessary financial management policies, processes and personnel in


---
*Page 58*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 60 
   
 place skills before grants are awarded. A financial risk assessment is undertaken of all grantees, with higher 
risk grantees being subjected to more stringent oversight, such as review of detailed transaction reports and 
payment vouchers, project audits and financial site visits. CEPF a nd the RIT will also provide close 
monitoring of grantees, to ensure compliance with financial policies, and provide training and hands -on 
support to strengthen their financial management capacity. Detailed information on how CEPF manages financial risks in its grant making is provided in the Operations Manual, Annex 21.  
CEPF’s systems for 
managing risks, including financial risks, is an important part of the annual audits and periodic institutional 
assessments of CEPF that are conducted by the World Bank and serve all members of the CEPF donor 
council, including AFD. The World Bank evaluations have highlighted how successful CEPF has been at 
managing financial risks despite managing an extremely complex global portfolio that gets funding to small  
NGOs and c ommunity -based groups in countries that can have difficult working environments44. 
3. Political instability impedes implementation in Programme  countries  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Political risks are medium for the Programme. Some degree of political change in the target countries is 
inevitable over the duration of a 10- year Programme. It seems unlikely that there will be substantial policy 
changes that remove political support for EbA measures, particularly given the likelihood of more visible 
climate change impacts, which ought to raise adaptation up the list of government priorities. Nevertheless, 
the hotspot contains countries with a recent history of political instability, and political crises or coups could 
prevent work in a country or, at minimum, impede civil society’s engagement with government partners.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CEPF has wide experience of supporting civil society in countries undergoing or emerging from political 
instability, and will continue to engage in such countries, provided opportunities to deliver the Programme’s 
outcomes exist and the security situation does not present unacceptable risks to staff or partners. In practice, 
the focus on CSOs for the delivery of EbA activities means that implementation is less likely to be impacted 
by political events than is the case with projects or programs that depend o n significant government agency 
involvement.  The regional focus of the Programme provides another mitigation measure: if continued 
engagement in a target country became untenable, the Programme would focus activities in the other 
countries of the hotspot during the period of political instability.  
4. Political space for civil society to influence public policy constricted in Programme  countries  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The political space available for civil society is expanding in most countries in the hotspot, enabling them to 
have greater influence on public policy. However, relationships between government and civil society are dynamic, and political space for civil societies can be con
stricted if they are perceived as moving into 
sensitive areas. Therefore, this is considered a medium risk for the Programme.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
During the Programme preparation phase, the Nationally Designated Authorities and other government stakeholders in the target countries were consulted and confirmed that the Programme activities align with their interests and national priorities. Further and more extensive consultations with these stakeholders will take place during the development of the Ecosystem Profile and Long- term Vision under Component 1 of 
the Programme, to ensure that EbA grant making priorities align with priorities identified in NAPAs, NAPs, 
NDCs and other national cli mate change related strategies. Furthermore, the Programme will deliver 
 
44 https://www.cepf.net/sites/default/files/cepf_institutional_assessment_report_comissioned_by_the_world_bank.pdf


---
*Page 59*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 60 
   
 targeted capacity building to CSOs to develop the necessary capacity and credibility to engage constructively 
with government partners. This risk will be further mitigated through careful selection of civil society partners 
with a track record of constructive partnership with government, and by fully involving government partners 
in the framing of policy questions addressed by the Programme, as well as selection of demonstration sites, and the integration of the ensuing lessons into the policy process.
 
5. Lack of suitable organizations to become long -term implementation structures  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other - Sustainability  Low Medium  
Description  
CEPF has been working with the current RIT in the Madagascar and Indian Ocean Islands Hotspot since 
2015. However, the host organization does not necessarily have an institutional agenda sufficiently aligned 
with the objectives of the Programme or the capacity mix necessary to become a long- term steward of the 
long- term vision for EbA in the hotspot. Therefore, it will be necessary to find other organizations that are 
better placed to take on the role of long- term implementation structure. Given the large number of 
organizations working in the environment and natural resources sectors in the target countries, it should be 
possible to find a single organization or consortium of suitable organizations interested to take on this role.  
The target countries, and Madagascar in particular, are among the highest priorities in the world for the 
conservation of biodiversity. Consequently, they have attracted significant investment in biodiversity 
conservation for decades, enabling several international CSOs, as well as a growing number of national organizations, to establish capable programs. In recent years, the mandates of some of these organizations 
have broadened, in response to the climate crisis, and they have incorporated climate change mitigation and adaptation actions in their programs. It i s from this pool of organizations, that one or more will be identified 
to become the long- term implementation structure. Hence, the probability of this risk is assessed as low.
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate this risk, a detailed stakeholder mapping w ill be conducted as part of the work to choose a long-
term implementation structure. Suitably qualified organizations that express an interest in being part of the long- term implementation structure will be involved in the long- term vision exercise, so tha t they can take 
ownership of this vision and ensure that it is aligned with their missions. A model for long- term 
implementation structures has been developed by CEPF that accommodates differences in institutional 
landscapes among countries. Given the diff erences in development of the civil society sector among the four 
target countries, it may be necessary to build a consortium that brings together complementary skills from organizations across the hotspot.
 
6. Resources for long -term EbA finance sources not available  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other - Sustainability  Medium  Medium  
Description  
A key pillar of sustainability of the Programme will be to d evelop resource mobilization strategies to generate 
additional revenues for EbA activities led by civil society, including from non- traditional sources, such as the 
private sector. The availability of funding for climate change adaptation from institutional donors and other 
traditional sources of environmental financing is increasing in the target countries. To date, however, 
relatively little of this funding has been made available for EbA. Instead, most climate change financial 
resources have been directed towards mitigation activity and the energy sector in particular. Nevertheless, 
there appears to be a growing recognition of the importance of nature- based solutions to climate change, 
which should mean more financial resourc es to support EbA are availabl e in the future.  the risk of resources 
for long- term EbA financing not being available, applies to funds needed after the implementation period, to 
sustain and amplify EbA approaches through long- term financing mechanisms. It is anticipated that these 
mechanisms will be established towards the end of the implementation period (10 years) and continue at 
least until the end of the programme lifespan (20 years). These long -term financing mechanisms may not 
necessarily follow the model of an endowment fund, wh en significant funding must be mobilized up front.


---
*Page 60*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 60 
   
 Rather, they may follow payment for ecosystem services (PES), voluntary contributions for private 
companies or other similar models, where funding is mobilized at a lower level on a recurring basis. For this 
reason, the amount of funding that needs to be mobilized during the programme lifespan, to launch these 
mechanisms, may be relatively modest.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be mitigated through an analysis of the availability of traditional and non- traditional sources of 
EbA financing in the second five- year phase of the Programme, so that the available and potential resources 
are known. For example, there may be opportunities for partnership with the private sector that have not 
been adequately considered. One potential area to explore as part of Component 3 is whether there are 
policy incentives that could be used (or disincentives that can be removed) so that the enabling environment 
changes to encourage partnerships between CSO s and the private sector for long- term EbA implementation. 
The risk is further mitigated through the design of the Programme, which integrates strategies for 
sustainability throughout. For example, the development of a Long- term Vision and the associated f inancial 
plan will be done through participatory processes involving government, private sector and major donors operating in the Programme countries. This should ensure that there is a broad consensus on needs and institutional buy -in to provide long- term financial support to the effective EbA approaches developed under 
the Programme.
 
 
Programme Grievance Mechanism  
CEPF requires all subprojects to have in place a grievance mechanism that must make available the contact details of the RIT and CEPF Secretar iat, in case people affected by the project have concerns that they do 
not wish to raise directly with the grantee. Any grievances raised with the grantee should be communicated to the RIT and the CEPF Grant Director within 15 days, together with a proposed response. If the claimant is still not satisfied following the response, the grievance may be submitted directly to the CEPF Executive Director via the dedicated email account ( cepfexecutive@conservation.org
) or by mail. If the claimant is still 
not satisfied, the grievance may be submitted to AFD at their local office.


---
*Page 61*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 60 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
 
AFD, a long- term donor to CEPF, assesses CEPF’s activities as category C risk  (see certification provided 
as Appendix A of Annex 6) . Annex 6 includes an environmental and social risk screening of the Programme  
to check risk factors aligned to GCF’s environmental and social safeguards. Based on this screening, 
subprojects proposed by CSOs are expected to be Category C . Although some Programme  activities will 
occur in ecologically sensitive areas , the eligible activities will be ones to protect or restore natural 
ecosystems and therefore subprojects likely to have adverse impacts  will not be considered . Similarly, the  
Programme  will not support activities likely to result in adverse social impacts due to involuntary restriction 
of access to land or natural resources. Involuntary restrictions should be minimized  because CSO 
subprojects are expected to have strong buy -in from stakeholders in the communities where they are located. 
Nevertheless, CEPF has a Process Framework for Involuntary Restrictions that applies to all grants 
provided by CEPF, including those under this Programme , and i t is included in Annex 6.   
The Programme  will work through financial intermediation for the majority of its activities, including all on-
the- ground activities . CEPF will be responsible for providing grants to Civil Society Organizations  (CSOs) 
who will be responsible for the EbA activities. Therefore, following GCF’s categorization process the 
Programme  is considered to have a low-level  risk through intermediation, or  I3.  
CEPF applies its Environmental and Social Management Framework (E SMF) to prevent, minimize, and 
mitigate potential adverse environmental and social effects of individual subprojects ( provided as part of 
Annex 6). CEPF will appraise subprojects proposed by grantees not only on their technical merit, but also 
on their env ironmental and social ramifications. Therefore, procedures for addressing environmental and 
social issues are included in the subproject cycle management process. A driving principle of CEPF is to 
prevent and mitigate any harm to people and thus to incorporate environmental and social concerns as an 
intrinsic part of subproject cycle management.  
The ESMF explains the CEPF environmental and social assessment processes. It also includes a Pest 
Management Plan covering use of pesticides, a p rocess framework to further elaborate safeguards specific 
to Indigenous Peoples  (although this is unlikely to apply in the hotspot where there very few groups 
considered as Indigenous Peoples ), and a process framework to det ermine safeguard measures when a 
grantee subproject may result in restriction of access to natural resources.  
Environmental and social safeguards will be tracked during all stages of the subproject cycle with the main 
objective of ensuring that supported activities comply with the policies and guidelines laid out in the 
Operational Manual and with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguard policies. This includes 
confirming that measures are incorporated into subproject design to prevent, minimize, and m itigate potential 
adverse environmental and social effects of individual subprojects.  
CEPF has also adopted a best practice on stakeholder engagement  for grantees, which will also be used 
for this Programme  (provided as part of Annex 21). Stakeholder engagement is a fundamental principle of 
good subproject design, and best practice consists of involving all stakeholders, including local communities 
and other project -affected people, as well as government, private sector and civil society partners, as early 
as possible in the preparation process and ensuring that their views and concerns are made known and 
taken into account. The CEPF Secretariat will ensure that all CEPF- funded subprojects comply with this best 
practice. In the case of large grants, this will mean working directly with applicants and grantees. In the case 
of small grants, this will mean providing training and oversight to the Regional Implementation Team (RIT), 
to ensure that they are providing appropriate guidance to applicants and grantees.  A report on the 
stakeholder engagement  undertaken in the preparation of the Programme  has been provided as Annex 7 
along with the stakeholder engagement plan  for use during the Programme .


---
*Page 62*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 60 
   
 G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
 
CEPF carries out its mission through a gender equity lens and has an established gender policy (see Annex 
8). This means that staff of the CEPF Secretariat, the Regional Implementation Team and grantees will 
understand and take into account the different roles of men and women in CEPF- related activities at all 
scales (e.g., Regional Implementation Team training, proposal design, project implementation and 
reporting). Gender issues and considerations are actively incorporated throughout the grant -making process 
and progress on gender -related outcomes are monitored.  
A Gender Assessment and Action Plan is provided as Annex 8. Given that specific CSO subprojects have 
not been identified at this stage and will be the subject of further analysis and priority setting, it is not possible 
to identify specific vulnerabilities at this stage. The assessment therefore focused on identifying important 
gender related themes at the  national level for each of the Programme  countries , based on literature review . 
Further gender assessment and specific recommendations linked to identified EbA priorities will be done as part of the ecosystem profiling process in Component 1. Specific gender issues related to subprojects must 
be identified by applicant grantees at the subproject proposal stage.  
Gender inequality remains a significant problem in some of the countries in the Programme , increasing the 
risks and burdens of climate change for w omen. By contrast, in Mauritius and Seychelles, per capita national 
incomes are higher than the other countries and women enjoy greater equality in many aspects of society.  
However, in Comoros and Madagascar , women are often unequal participants in decisi on-making, labor 
markets, legal processes and they face gender stereotypes due to socio -cultural norms. Women are also 
often poorer than men and therefore have less access to adaptation options when faced with risk events 
(e.g. poor crop yields, floods, dr oughts etc.). Not only are women often disadvantaged in terms of human 
development indicators, many are also highly dependent on natural resource for their livelihoods. Women are often responsible within their households for securing water, food and fuel f or cooking. Their livelihoods 
are therefore those that are often first and most effected by climate change. In rural areas of all the 
Programme  countries, the different roles and responsibilities of men and women in society, and different 
gender norms mean that they can be impacted by climate change in different ways.  For example, in the 
agricultural context, women tend to care for household gardens and subsistence agriculture, while men are 
more likely to engage in cash generating activities. Women often therefore play an important role in 
sustainable resource management , which is particularly relevant for projects such as this one promoting 
improved environmental stewardship such as through EbA.  
Ensuring that both men and women have equal opportunities to participate in , and benefit from , the GCF 
Programme will be achieved through progressive and efficient mainstreaming of gender dimensions 
throughout the grant -making processes in the biodiversity hotspots. One of the goals of the Gender Action 
Plan is to ensure that, for relevant grants, any gender -related adver se impact is avoided, minimized and/or 
mitigated. Depending on the type of intervention and scope of activities, the degree of relevance of gender 
dimensions may vary. Similarly, depending on the capacities and interest of the grantees, the level of gender  
mainstreaming opportunity may vary. The objective of the Gender Action Plan (see Annex 8)  is to outline 
actions that will be specifically taken within the duration of the Programme .  
To ensure that all Programme activities (e.g., definition of investment strategies, training of the Regional 
Implementation Team, sub project design, implementation and reporting, monitoring and evaluation, learning 
and communication) are consistent with CEPF’s Gender Policy, the Plan is divided into three parts:  
1) Preparation of the organizational structure and necessary tools.  
2) Implementation throughout the G CF Programme .


---
*Page 63*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 60 
   
 3) Monitoring & Evaluation and dissemination of lessons learned (especially relevant to Component 3, 
which concerns replicating successful approaches to other  countries in the Programme  and beyond 
to other  hotspots  where CEPF is active).  
CEPF recognizes that grantees have different capacities, needs and experiences in integrating gender into 
their subprojects and operational structures. CEPF uses a gender tracking tool (see Annex 21 section OM 
4.4.4) that can be used by an organization to understand if , and to what extent , gender considerations have 
been integrated into its program and operations. It can then be used by CEPF to determine interest in 
learning about gender issues.  The Gender Action Plan  seeks to be practical in terms of feasibility given the 
broad geographical targets of the GCF Programme , the wide variation in capacities of the civil society 
organizations that are expected to be engaged and supported by the Programme , and the gender disparities 
among the countries involved in the Programme . 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
 
AFD, as the AE, will be responsible for the project implementation and activities carried out by  the EE. AFD 
will provide oversight of procurement function, prior review and approval,  and financial management of 
CI/CEPF  as detailed in the AMA.  AFD will also provide oversight of the financial management of the 
Programme . Procurement activities and processes will follow AFD procurement policy and standards, as 
detailed in the AM A.  
CI/CEPF’s financial management and procurement policies and systems are described in detail in the CEPF 
Operations Manual provided as Annex 21.  
Conservation International (CI) oversees internal control and financial management of CEPF in accordance 
with CI’s financial policies and procedures. CI uses Unit4 Business World as its accounting and human 
resources software for both its headquarters and field offices. Unit4 Business World’s financial management 
package is an industry leading integrated set of financial management and accounting applications. CI has 
established a coding structure within its general ledger to track CEPF funds. CI maintains CEPF funds in a 
segregated USD -denominated bank account .  
A separate audit of CEPF records, accounts, and financial statements is undertaken annually, in accordance 
with generally  accepted accounting principles. The purpose of this external audit is to provide assurance on 
the financial statements of CEPF. The audit will test CEPF’s compliance with certain provisions of the CEPF 
Operational Manual and consideration of its related i nternal control. This external CEPF audit will be 
conducted by independent auditors in accordance with Terms of Reference approved by the CEPF Donor 
Council (Annex 21, section 2.1.1).  
CEPF’s procurement policy is provided in t he CEPF Operational  Manual  (Annex 21, section  2.3). It is based 
on the principle that all purchases of goods and services must be made with complete impartiality based 
solely on the merits of supplier proposals, including criteria such as efficiency, quality, reliability, reputation, 
cost, delivery and payment terms.   Prior to undertaking any purchases of goods or services with CEPF 
funds, grantees/recipients are required to have institutional procurement policies in effect that are 
substantially the same as those of the CEPF procurement policy. CEPF also has a written ethics standards  
policy (Annex 21 , section 2.4 ) that applies to all persons and entities that receive, are responsible for the 
deposit or transfer of, or take or influence decisions regarding the use of Grant Funds receiv ed from CEPF.  
As a grant -making fund, CEPF applies various tools to assess and mitigate financial and procurement risk. 
These include assessment of the adequacy of prospective grantees’ accounting policies and procedures and 
grants management practices  and assessment to ensure various anti -money laundering and counter -terrorist 
financing legislation and related donor obligations. Prior to any grant award, CI must be assured that the 
proposed grantee has sound financial controls and reporting sy stems to ensure that all subproject funds are


---
*Page 64*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 60 
   
 expended prudently and accounted for appropriately.  CI must also be assured that the proposed grantee 
institution is able and willing to comply, and (as applicable) is able and willing to ensure compliance by any sub-
grantees, with CI policies, applicable donor terms and conditions, and local laws and regulations. CI may 
condition funding on the implementation of certain practices or improvements. CEPF also applies a risk 
assessment that has been developed to assess whether a proposed recipient of a large grant is low, medium, 
or high risk so that appropriate monitoring and audit procedures can be applied.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.   
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 65*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 60 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex es 
3a, 3b  Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  (3a) with narrative (3b)  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex es 
9a, 9b , 9c Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  (AFD procurement policies)  
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22 Note on distribution of Funding between Programme countries  
☒ Annex 23  Conservation International’s Procurement Policy (referred to in Annex 21)  
☒ Annex 24  Co-finance summary


---
*Page 66*
---

UNION DES COMORES 
Unite -Solidarite -Developpement 
Ministere de I' Agriculture, 
de la Peche, et de I 'Environnement, 
Ref. N°20 -11,t_/MAPE/GCF 
Moroni, le 16 Janvier 2020 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Re: Funding 
proposal for the GCF by Agence Frani;aise de Developpement (AFD) regarding 
"Strengthening Ecosystem-based Adaptation to Climate Change in Island States through Civil Society" 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
We refer to the project "Strengthening Ecosystem-based Adaptation to Climate Change in Island States through 
Civil Society" as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by AFD to us on 8 January 2020. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representat ivc of the National Designated Authority of Comoros. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, wchere by 
communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding 
proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Comoros has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Comoros's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the funding 
proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all activities to be implemented within the scope of the project. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Youssouf Hamadi 
GCF focal Point No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 67*
---

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY& CLIMATE CHANGE  
ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE DEPARTMENT  
 
Office of the Principal Secretary  
Botanical Gardens, Mont Fleuri ,  P.O. Box 445, Victoria, Mahe, Republic of Seychelles  
Tel. No. (+248) 4670568   Email: w.agricole@env.gov.sc  / w.agricole@meteo.gov.sc   
Please address all correspondence to the Principal Secretary – Mr Wills Agricole  
 
DATE:  20th January 2020  
 
Yannick Glemarec,  
Executive Director  
Songdo Business District  
 175 Art Center -daero  
 Yeonsu -gu, Incheon 22004  
 
Dear Sir  
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Agence Française de 
Développement (AFD) regarding “Strengthening Ecosystem -based 
Adaptation to Climate Change in Island States through Civil Society”  
 
Dear Sir  
, 
We refer to the projec t “Strengthening Ecosystem -based Adaptation to 
Climate Change in Island States through Civil Society” as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by AFD to us on 8 January 2020.  
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National 
Design ated Authority of Seychelles . 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to 
have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no -objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied  that: 
 
(a) The government of Seychelles  has no -objection to the project as included 
in the funding proposal;  
 
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with 
Seychelles ’ national priorities, strategies and plans;


---
*Page 68*
---

(c) In accordance w ith the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the 
project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant 
national laws and regulations.  
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the 
project as inclu ded in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
 
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the project.  
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF 
website.  
 
Yours Sincerely,  
 
 
GCF NDA FOR SEYCHELLES  
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/ENERGY & CLIMATE CHANGE


---
*Page 71*
---

G
CF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 71 
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP135 
Proposal name:  Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean – EBA IO  
Accredited entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Country/(ies) : Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles  
Project/programme size : Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks.
Strengths  Points of  caution  
The proposed pathway between ecosystem -
based adaptation (EbA)  actions and 
increased human resilience to stresses and 
shocks from climate change and other sources  contribute to the high impact 
potential , which will be achieved through the 
implementation of cost -effective EbA
 at scale 
in highly vulnera ble small island developing 
States, resulting in increased resilience for  up 
to 700,000 beneficiaries  The local partners (civil society 
organizations ), which will be implementing 
the activities through grants administered by Critical Ecosystems Partnership  Fund (CEPF) , 
may have limited technical capacity and institutional capacity . It is key for this 
programme to provide effective technical 
support, monitoring  and a knowledge 
management tools  framework . The proposed 
flexib ility in the design of activities 
adequately reflects this  
The programme has a strong chance to reach 
its sustainable development potential 
(defined as p otential for externalities in the 
form of expected improvements ), particularly 
through its contribution  to the resilience of 
hotspots of endangered biodiversity in partnership with CEPF, a key player which can help scale up successful approaches  The sustainability of each activity relies on 
the partnerships with the  private sector and 
revenue models that are to be generated. Replicating these is a key barrier to scaling  
up the  impact , as is  common to other small 
grants programmes. The small grants programme attempts to address the barrier by fostering partnerships in a  systematic 
manner through the proposed Component 3  
Paradigm shift potential: strong  focus  on 
knowledge generation to  enabl e local action, 
as well as a strong emphasis on partner ing 
with the private sector to leverage financing 
at scale in each country . The CEPF portfolio 
(USD 16 million/year) offers a good 
replication opportunity because 
mainstreaming EbA positively influences 
biodiversity conservation activities funded 
through the CEPF  EbA activities often include ecosystem 
restoration activities, which have significantly higher costs than protecting existing natural ecosystems. There is, 
therefore, a tendency to focus on protecting 
remaining natural ecosystems rather than engaging in the challenges of ecosystem restoration


---
*Page 72*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 72 
 
  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum X VIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of  the Secretariat’ s assessment  
2.1 Project background  and climate rationale 
3. Small island developing States  (SIDS) across the globe are highly vulnerable to climate 
change, which poses severe threats to livelihoods, infrastructure, and marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems. Ecosystem -based  adaptation (E bA) approaches have proven to be highly successful 
to cost -effectively reduc e the vulnerability of people and ecosystems to climate change by 
leveraging the value of ecosystem services ( from water resource management to coastal 
protection ), as well as by providing substantial environmental and social benefits such as the 
protection of biodiversity. This has led to EbA  interventions  being included in the national 
planning documents of many  SIDS.  There remain c hallenges  to mainstreaming such approaches : 
for example , in the ability to leverage private financing to complement country budgets and 
grant financing, and the technical capacity and knowledge to design effective EbA interventions 
which are highly specific to a country’s physical and in stitutional circumstances.  
4. The proposed  programme targets four island countries in the Indian Ocean – Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles – with a combined population of 29 million people. These 
countries  have identified  EbA interventions as high  priorities in the ir climate change strategies , 
and have a track record of international projects in the areas of ecosystem conservation and EbA, including projects funded by GCF (Blue Action Fund in Madagascar) and the Adaptation 
Fund . The four countries are part of the Madagascar and Indian Ocean biodiversity hotspot , with 
livelihoods highly dependent on the rich ecosystems and natural resources, whether dominated 
by agriculture and fishing (as in the case of Comoros  and Madagascar ) or tourism and the 
services sector (Mauritius  and Seychelles ).  
5. The funding proposal identifies key areas of climate v ulnerability in each of the 
countries . For example, r educed rainfall in the rain y season and increased temperatures are 
predicted to affect the availab ility  of water resources for agriculture, human consumption and 
ecological flows , as well as overall agricultural yields ; while the increased intensity of cyclones 
will impact critical w ater supply infrastructure, agricultural supply chains and coastal erosion. 
Coastal and marine ecosystems on which fisheries depend are also expected to suffer the 
impacts of rising water temperatures  and cyclone s, affecting in turn the livelihoods of the 
populations in the target countries. A summary of the impacts is provided in section 3 of the 
feasibility study.  
6. The pro gramme identifies several categories of EbA intervention that have proven 
effectiveness in mitigating against the adverse effects of climate change and increasing the 
resilience of popula tions and ecosystems. These include:  
(a) Protect ion and restor ation  of watershed forests that perform critical flood prevention, 
soil stabilization and catchment protection functions;  
(b) Piloting and replicat ion of climate -resilien t agroforestry models, using native plant 
species for shade, ground cover and nutrient fixing ;  
(c) Preservation of traditional and indigenous knowledge and natural resource 
management practices;  
(d) Diversif ication and  strengthen ing of  livel ihood assets and strategies, including through 
sustainable fisheries management, nature- based tourism, value chains for natural 
products, and so on ; and


---
*Page 73*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 73 
 
  
(e) Restor ation of  small island ecosystems through eradication and control of alien invasive 
species.  
7. The pro gramme  will be executed by  the Critical Ecosystems Partnership Fund (CEPF),  a 
key player in the field of biodiversity conservation, established in 2000 within Conservation 
International  Foundation  (CI) as a mechanism to enable c ivil society organizations (CSOs) to 
support conservation of critical ecosystems within biodiversity ho tspots . CEPF will leverage its  
strong network of partners and experience of working with CSOs and governments in the target 
countries , as well as its capabilities to generate and share knowledge and replicate successful 
interventions in other biodiversity hotspots. As a result of the project, CEPF operations will be 
able to incorporate the climate resilience angle using  the knowledge generated, increasing the  
capacity of local actors to implement EbA interventions in biodiversity hotspots around the 
world.  
8. The pr ogramme  will operate within the standard CEPF framework. The CEPF s ecretariat 
will support and oversee grant -making in the hotspots in line with the investment plans 
developed for each k ey biodiversity area in C omponent 1. CEPF will also ensur e compl iance 
with  GCF  policies, and it will be responsible for monitoring and communicating results. The  
regional implementation team, based locally  and selected through a competitive process , will 
provide support and local coordination, and will manage the process of  awarding , for small 
grants (under USD 50,000). National designated authorities ( NDAs ) will be involved in the grant 
awarding process in each country.  
Table:  Project financing  
GCF  38,000,000  Implementation of activities by civil 
society organizations , including grant -
making, supervision   
30,705,635  (80.8%) 
Of which , subgrants  
27.0  million   
Conservation 
International  11,200,000  Quantification of ecosystem -based 
adaptation impacts  3,84 7,958  (10.1 %) 
Total  49,200,000  Development of tools, models, 
sustainable partnerships  1,636 ,884  (4.3%) 
  Project Management Costs  1,809,524  (4.8%) 
2.2 Component by c omponent analysis 
Component 1: Developing strategic plans for ecosystem -based adaptation in the small island 
biodiversity hotspot s that are well aligned with national climate change strategies  (total cost : USD  
812,124; no GCF financing)  
9. This component , which will  be fully funded by a grant from CEPF and implemented 
directly by CEPF, will set up the main lines of intervention in each of the k ey biodiversity areas 
by updating the e cosystem profile , which  provide s a detailed strategy for investment in 
conservation and restoration of critical ecosystems over a short time  frame , based on 
identifying critical ecosystem services and consultation with local stakeholders, and which will 
be updated through activity 1.1 . Through the project , a long -term vision of  CEPF investment  will 
be developed , with the aim of an  eventual transition to other sources of support, and an exit 
strategy in which civil society has the capacity and credibility to carry out the work on its own. 
Critically, this will be developed along side  a financing plan for each  hotspot describing the 
funding requirements for the implementation , guiding fundraising efforts by CEPF and other 
donors , and including  potential non- traditional sources of long -term fi nancing for EbA activities, 
most importantly  the private sector. The identification of  opportunities for private sector


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 74 
 
  
partnerships with CSOs to deliver EbA , which will be the focu s of activity 1.5, is critical to 
deliver ing this vision and integral to th e paradigm shift of the programme . 
Component 2: Supporting ecosystem -based adaptation  activities through grants to civil society 
organizations (total cost : USD 43,903,614 ; GCF  cost:  USD 34,553,993, or 78.7  per cent ) 
10. This component will deliver EbA  interventions on the ground, in line with the strategies 
and eligibility criteria set out in the e cosystem profile  for each key biodiversity area, through 
subgrants provided to CSOs .  
11. The component will consist of two subcomponents. Subcom ponent 2.1 is aimed at 
setting up and operating the mechanisms for awarding grant s in each of the countries, including 
the se tting up of the r egional implementation team , which will support the mechanism in the 
country, the awarding of grants, and the supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the portfolio . 
Applications will mainly be generated through open calls for proposals, widely advertised 
through online and mainstre am media, as well as local dissemination of the informatio n; while 
imbalances in the portfolio w ill be addressed through t argeted grants. The selection of 
proposals will involve peer review by external reviewers and the participation of the NDA.  Of 
the total amount of the component, USD 30.4  million (69.2 per cent  of the grant amount for the 
component) will be in the form of grants to CSOs  for the implementation of EbA activities on the 
ground, and an additional USD 5 million (11.4  per cent ) will be for mon itoring and evaluation of 
activities.  Eligibility criteria for participation will be fine -tuned in component 1, but will include, 
in addition to the priority areas of intervention identified in the e cosystem profile and the 
priorities in national climate change policy, the following: the contribution to achieving the GCF 
investment criteria and particularly addressing climate vulnerability based on a clear climate change risk ; positive gender impacts;  efficient use of funds ; and a clear strategy for achievi ng 
financial sustainability . 
12. The second subcomponent aims to address knowledge gaps in the science behind EbA 
approaches in each biodiversity hotspot and the effectiveness of promising EbA interventions, 
in association with  academic institutions, through a pplied research activities. Th is 
subcomponent is expected to address a key barrier to EbA effectiveness globally by generat ing 
information to guide policy decisions about EbA in the p rogramme countries. This component 
will also include activities to ensure rigorous, science- based quantification and verification of 
the impacts of the grant portfolio on ecosystem services.  
Component 3 : Ensuring long -term sustainability and replicating success through knowledge 
products and tools for ecosystem -based adaptation  (total  cost : USD 2 ,141,405 ; GCF  cost:  USD 
1,636,884, or 76.4  per cent ) 
13. This capacity -building component  has two main aims. The fir st is to facilitate wider 
replication of successful models and tools demonstrated in a  hotspot under the first two 
components, including to other hotpots where CEPF is active , by disseminating the  knowledge  
through  South–South exchanges , partnerships between CSOs and private sector actors, and 
audio -visual products, such as short videos, webinars and websites. Significant value can be 
gained  by leveraging the central role  of CEPF  in the network of partners in biodiversity 
conservation to mainstream climate change adaptation principles in biodiversity conservation 
interventions, effectively linking both areas.  
14. The second aim of the component , responding to the significant technical and 
institutional challenges of implementing EbA in the lon g term (such as coordination among 
stakeholders, conflict resolution, etc .), is to provide CSOs and institutions with the capacity to 
implement the long -term visions described in component 1 . The project proposes to do so, in 
addition to more traditional c apacity -building of the CSOs to design and implement EbA 
activities, through the creation of long -term, multi -stakeholder implementation structures that 
act as steward of the strategies ; the development of resource mobilization strategies ; and the 
developm ent of models for private sector finance. If successful , the lines of intervention


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 75 
 
  
proposed can address key barriers to scaling up EbA and help to unlock sustainable finance 
flows towards climate change adaptation and ecosystem conservation, which would be  the key 
paradigm shift outcome of the project. Such partnerships have so far been limited; the project 
describes s everal examples  with mining companies in Madagascar that could serve as models,  
but it does not describe in sufficient detail how such partne rships coul d materialize. It is 
expected that, as with the innovative approach they represent, such activities may have varying 
levels of success, and it is important that adequate adaptive management and lessons learned 
are implemented for the benefit of similar future interventions.  
III. Assessment of  performance against i nvestment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                Scale: High  
15. The programme’s core objective is to  protect and restore coastal, freshwater and 
terrestrial ecosystems that are providing critical ecosystem services for vulnerable people in the 
four programme countries . The f unding proposal estimates that the programme, through the 
grants to CSOs,  will be  able to restore or improve the management of 1.89 million hectares of 
highly biodiverse ecosystems in the Indian Ocean hotspot , with 88,000 direct beneficiaries , 
through the employment opportunities generated and/or from support to adopt diversified, 
clim ate-resilient livelihood options . Including 610,000 indirect beneficiaries, a total of 698,000 
beneficiaries will see an increase in their climate change resilience, access to improved quantity 
and quality of ecosystem services and income . The large impact s expected on both the 
livelihood and ecosystem dimensions, based on the prior experience  of CEPF , justify a high 
rating for the programme’s impact potential.  In addition, research suggests that the protection 
of coastal and marine ecosystems such as mangr oves, salt marshes, seagrass beds and seaweeds 
may have a significant effect in reducing emissions from land use, although this impact has not 
been quantified.  
3.2 Paradigm shift                   Scale: Medium –High  
16. The programme has been designed with the objective of catalysing action on EbA by 
CSOs around the world, and  aims  to address the key barriers to design, finance and sustain 
interventions by local communities. The k ey features of the project to achieve the goal s are as 
follows : 
(a) A strong focus on research, through subcomponent 2.2, to address the knowledge gaps 
in relation to ecosystem functions or services, how communities benefit from those, and 
the effectiveness of EbA interventions in improving the provis ion of ecosystem services. 
To that end, the project will fund scientific studies partnering with local and 
international academic institutions amounting to USD 3.5 million in grants to CSOs ; 
(b) An embedded exit strategy at different levels  to ensure the susta inability of each key 
biodiversity area . At the strategic level, the ecosystem profile will be updated with a 
long -term vision that plan s investment by CEPF and the transition to fundraising capital 
and leveraging private sector finance. Long -term “steward ” institutions,  composed of 
diverse  stakeholders from g overnment, civil society and the private sector , will be in 
charge of seeing that vision through, and capacity will be built to enable stakeholders to perform their roles in the design and financing of  further interventions . At the 
subproject level, grantees will have to demonstrate a clear strategy for financial sustainability;  and 
(c) A plan to disseminate knowledge and lessons learned to CSOs, and directly build the  
technical capacity  of at least 25 CSOs , which is well suited to the preeminent status  of


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 76 
 
  
CEPF  in the network of organizations working on ecosystem and biodiversity 
conservation.  
17. The GCF contribution can deliver a paradigm shift on two fronts : first, by demonstrating 
how to create a sustainable enabling environment for civil society  to act on ecosystem 
protection and climate change adaptation,  with financial support from government s and the 
private sector ; and second, by leveraging the experience and netw ork of CEPF to disseminate 
results, while adding a climate adaptation dimension to their ample work on ecosystem 
protectio n. This paradigm shift should achieve replication at a larger scale, across a portfolio of 
approximately USD 16 million per year  (over  four times  the GCF investment  in a 10 -year 
period ), and result in an area under protection or sustainable management of 22.8 million 
hectares.  
18. The medium– high rating is based on the risk that there is some uncertainty in the 
capacity of the programme to fully deliver partnerships with the private sector and securing the 
financial sustainability of the interventions . If successful, the paradigm shift should be 
considered as high. However, CEPF has a strong track record re garding the upta ke of 
biodiversity conservation activitie s by local communities, with existing grant ees support ing 
14.8 million hectares of new protected areas, and improved management of 8 million h ectares  
of production landscape . 
3.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale: High  
19. The programme will promote the conservation and restoration of 1.89 million hectares 
in some of the most biodiverse island ecosystems on the planet in the four countries which 
jointly constitute the Indian Ocean biodiversity hotspot. It is expected that th e programme will 
deliver major benefits in terms of the preservation of ecosystems and the biodiversity that dwells in them. The interventions proposed will also help to preserv e water flows and water 
quality from climate change impacts , prevent soil erosi on, or avoid deforestation , and will 
support the four countries to fulfil their obligations under the United Nations Convention on 
Biological Diversity  and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction , and achieve their  
adaptation and mitigation target s under the U nited Nations Framework Convention on C limate 
Change . 
20. The preservation of ecosystem services has wide benefits over the multiple dimensions 
of sustainable development and , as such , it is expected to help countries move towards the 
fulfilment o f a number of sustainable development goals. The project will directly provide 
livelihoods and maintain access to ecosystem services for highly vulnerable rural populations 
(especially in Comoros and Madagascar) that often depend on ecosystems, and will promote 
sustainable economic growth by enabling the growth of business sectors that rely on healthy ecosystems (e.g. fisheries, agriculture, or tourism). It is  expected that 88,000 people will benefit 
from jobs or improved livelihoods as a result of the prog ramme . Although not quantified, due to 
the fact that specific interventions are yet to be defined, there is a high confidence that these 
benefits should be very relevant.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                   Scale: Medium –High 
21. The programme targets four SIDS  with high vulnerability to climate change, in particular 
Comoros and Madagascar, two least developed countries that rank among the most at risk 
according to the  Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative ( ND-GAIN ) index comprising 
readiness and vulnerability.  All countries have  already reported significant impacts of climate 
change , including  increased temperatures, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, coastal erosion,


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 77 
 
  
flooding and droughts , and c limate change projections  indicate a worsening trend over this 
century.  
22. Lack of finance is a key barrier to adaptation and biodiversity conservation actions, 
which are dependent on donor finance and are also subject to strong manmade pressures . GCF 
financing will contribute to cover t he financing gap while contributing to addressing capacity 
needs of civil society in the countries, as well as furthering their sustainable development and 
gender agendas.  
3.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
23. The programme is fully in line with the relevant climate adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation legislation, and it will help countries meet their obligations under the U nited 
Nations  Convention for Biological Diversity.  
24. The programme is designed to ensure that there is a strong level of involvement from all 
parts of civil society in the implementation of the actions, and indeed to empower civil society to 
be able to design, implement and finance EbA actions by the end of the programme. CSOs will be 
beneficiaries of subgrants and will be direct ly in charge of the design and execution of EbA 
interventions, while benefitting from capacity -building through training courses, workshops 
and South–South exchanges. NDAs  will be involved in the process of awarding  grants , building 
their capacity to manage a portfolio of interventions in the countries in the future. Finally, all 
sectors of society , including the private sector, will come together in the long -term 
implementation structures that will be responsible for safeguarding the plans for each key 
biodiversity area and ensuring their financial sustainability.  
25. The executing entity, CEPF, has a well -established presence in all the countries in the 
Indian Ocean biodiversity hotspot, having provided 102 grants for a total of USD 10.3  million  to 
CSOs f or biodiversity conservation activities since 2015 . As such, it is already  a donor that is 
well known to  many of the CSOs operating in the p rogramme countries.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness      Scale: Medium –High  
26. Existing studies agree that EbA interventions are highly cost -effective solutions in 
increasing the resilience of populations, while delivering significant social and environmental 
co-benefits. The programme expects to deliver high value for money, improvi ng the resilience of 
698,000 people while preserving and restoring 1.89 million hectares of highly biodiverse 
ecosystems, through the GCF grant of USD 38 million. 
27. The use of grants in this case is adequate because interventions will generally not be 
able t o generate substantial reflows and are aimed at increasing the resilience of the most 
vulnerable.  
28. Subgrants to CSOs , which form the core of the programme and amount to USD 30.4 
million,  will be financed by  GCF  and CEPF in a ratio of 2.6:1 , with GCF also financing the 
operation of the grant -making mechanism and the evaluation of EbA impact and effectiveness . 
Co-financing from CEPF will be mostly aimed at developing the ecosystem profiles in 
component 1, and for the development of knowledge tools to replicate successful interventions 
and improve the capacity of civil society to deliver EbA interventions at scale. An unspecified 
amount of finance from the private sector will also flow in as a result of partnerships with the 
private sector in each hotspot and sp ecific subprojects (where it will be part of the investment 
criteria but not mandatory), although this is not quantified and will be tracked as part of the programme’s results.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 78 
 
  
29. Although the direct overall co -financing ratio (USD 3.4 from GCF per USD 1 in co -
financing) may fall slightly short of GCF ambition  considering the participation of a well -
established fund in the field of biodiversity , the programme will unlock a much larger volume of 
finance globally for adaptation as  CEPF replicates EbA  interventions  following the principles 
developed and lessons learned in this project , adding a climate dimension to  its portfolio that 
already amount s to USD 16 million a year in biodiversity hotspots around the world . 
IV. Assessment of co nsistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
30. The accredited entity ( AE) has conducted an environmental and social risk screening of 
the programme in line with  the GCF environmental and social safeguards , and consider s the 
programme to have a low -level risk o f intermediation  3 (I-3). The Secretariat confirms the 
environmental and social risk categorization and that the programme is within the AE’s 
accreditation level of the AE . On the basis of  this assessment , subprojects pr oposed by civil 
society organizations (CSOs) are expected to be under category C classification.  
31. Although  some of the programme’s activities will occur in ecologically sensitive areas, 
the eligible activities are expected to conserve or enhance these ecosy stems;  and those activities 
that have interventions which  will potentially have adverse impacts will not be eligible. In 
addition, involuntary restriction s of access to land or natural resources are not expected 
because participation and support from stakeholders in the communities will have to be 
acquired. The programme has likewise established an e nvironmental and s ocial risk screening 
process and an e nvir onmental and s ocial management framework to ensure that proposals are 
continuously screened and that category A or B subprojects are excluded.  
32. An indigenous peoples planning framework is provided as an a nnex to the 
environmental and s ocial management frame work : it outlines the screening and consultation 
processes that need to be undertaken, and the key responsibilities for both the CEPF s ecretariat 
and the subproject applicants. The project excludes activities that require land acquisition or 
relocation of local communities, or that affect indigenous peoples without having obtained their 
free, prior and informed consent.  
33. The CEPF secretariat (hosted by Conservation International) and the RIT will implement 
the programme. T he programme will work through finan cial intermediation for the majority of 
its activities,  so any capacity -building and technical support to resolve issues that may  be 
identified will be provided to those  CSOs that have  less experience of dealing with 
environmental and social safeguards.  
34. The CEPF secretariat has also adopted a stakeholder engagement strategy for grantees 
of the programme , which will ensure that all the funded subprojects comply with best practice. 
Grievance redress mechanisms at the AE level as well as at the CEPF level are  available to be 
accessed by local communities and other interested stakeholders that may have concerns about  
the programme. Dealing with g rievances at the subproject level will also include local conflict 
resolution and grievance redress mechanisms for affected communities,  and these should be 
developed in culturally appropriate ways and ensure adequate representation from vulnerable 
or marginalized sectors. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF I ndependent 
Redress Mechan ism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples focal point are also available for 
affected local communities.  
4.2 Gender policy


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 79 
 
  
35. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan , and  therefore 
complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy  of the GCF .  
36. In the gender assessment , the AE  provides information on the enabling environment to 
pursue gender equality and women’s empowerment in the four selected countries. All four 
countries demonstrate , through their constitution s, their commitment to ge nder equality and 
equal opportunities for women in various aspects of each  country’s development agenda. The 
commitments are trans posed  into various country strategies, legislation and laws , with an 
overall commitment to mainstreaming gender across the var ious sectors in the countr ies, with 
some countries establishing a ministry of gender to be responsible for women’s rights, children 
and family issues. Of  the four countries targeted, two demonstrate better achievements in their 
gender equality status  and two of the countries still have considerable work to do  address the 
challenges of enabling  women to attain equality in the various sectors. Some of the countries 
have to contend with the background of prevailing traditions, customs and religion which define  
more broadly the day -to-day life and behavio ur of the people ; while others have achieved levels 
of equality in many aspects but lag in areas of employment opportunity, participation in decision -making and representation in the political arena.  
37. The gender assessment , which was  collated through  a literature review, provides  
evidence of the differences in the achievement s on gender equality across  the four countries ; 
however , it also demonstrates that it is still a challenge for all the counties to ach ieve  gender 
equality . Challenges and disparities still remain in women’s ability to participate in decision -
making, in labo ur markets, legal processes and stereotypes due to sociocultural norms. Further , 
women are often poorer than men and therefore are less able to adapt to risks in general and 
climate change risk s in particular. Women in these countries are also highly dependent on 
natural resources to fulfil their gender -based role s of care of families (e.g.  fetching and securing 
water, food, fuel for co oking ). Changes and impacts on the surrounding environment 
significantly and directly affect these traditional  roles and women’s ability to fulfil them. While 
this is generally be true for all women, those in women -led households tend to be more affected 
by climate change and its impacts because  these women tend to have less access to land, less 
access to diversified agricultural practices and less ability to engage in alternative employment 
opportunities. The assessment of the AE demonstrates the potential  gender -related challenges 
of climate risk, in that i ncreas ing temperatures and reduc tions  in rainfall will reduced the 
availab ility  of water in water points , rivers and streams , and this  will have direct impacts on 
women and girls in their role s of collecting and using water . Likewise, there are challenges 
because of the differences in access to and control over land and water resources in coastal zones , because  women tend to gain access through inheritance rather than tenure and formal 
tenure systems, which has an impact on women’s ability to make decision s on land use and 
development issues. This also affect s and has a negative impact on women’s ability to access 
credit and extension ser vices.  Lack of access to decision -making processes is not only limited to 
land -related issues : it extends to political decisions, and coastal zone and land -use management. 
In addition, there is  further segregation of activities,  particularly in the fishing  industry, where 
men fish offshore while women fish close to shore and are involved in post -harvest activities, 
particularly in small -scale fisheries.  
38. Women’s role s both within the households and outside impose time constraints and 
limit their ability to access information, capacity -related support and services. The assessment 
also identified that there is a lack of sex -disaggregated data for one country and , despite 
evidence that shows interlinkages between gender -based violence  and environmental factors, 
integration of this perspective remains limited in adaptation practice.  
39. Further, the assessment notes the challenges that are faced by women as a result of their 
current position and role s, point ing out that there are various op portunities  to influence the 
work of the project  resulting from the way  women interact and their knowledge of the 
resources. Women, as everyday users of natural resources, can easily identify changes to


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 80 
 
  
habitats, species abundance and distribution , and can  single out factors relating to these 
changes. Women therefore have a significant role to play in habitat restoration which is an 
important EbA activity.  
40. Given that the program me has not yet  determined  the priority of EbA themes and 
geographic sites where the program me will invest through CSOs, the re is a need for the  
program me to undertake  a further gender assessment. CSO s to be selected to engage in the 
project will be supported to address gender issues , because it is noted that the capacity of these 
vari ous CSOs varies significantly and there is a need to provide sustained support to them.  
41. The AE, as require d by the Gender Policy  of the GCF , has provided a gender action plan. 
The action plan contains activities, targets, indicators and timelines with cor responding 
budgets. The programme will include a gender expert who will be responsible for implement ing 
the gender action plan, working  with the gender focal point s in the RITs  and regional gender 
resource persons in the four countries. The gender action plan includes activities on identifying 
priority EbA activities that  will (1) address gender -based challenges to climate change 
adaptation ; (2) support the development of the g ender action plan as part of the l ong-term 
vision ; (3) provide training f or CSO s; (4) develop training manuals on gender ; and (5)  conduct 
further applied research to improve understanding of gender issues in EbA, and develop 
knowledge products and best practice on gender mainstreaming in EbA.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment  
42. The funding proposal is for a USD  38 million grant for a programme that will be 
executed by CI . CI, as the Executing Entity, will implement the Programme through the Critical 
Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF) , a platform jointly established and managed by CI . The goal 
of the p rogramme is to reduce the vulnerability of island populations in Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius and Seychelles by securing the critical ecosystem services. The accredited entity , 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) , is co -founder o f the programme . AFD and CI will 
arrange co -financing of USD 11 million in grants.  
43. The majority of programme activities will be executed via subprojects funded by grants 
to CSOs. The success of the program me depends on the ability of CEPF to attract and select high -
quality CSOs that implement high -impact projects.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity  capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
44. The accredited entity , AFD , is a public international financial institution. AFD is rated as 
AA by Fitch and by Standard and Poor’s , and has a strong track record of support by the French 
government. AFD has granted a total of USD 58 million  to CEPF since its inception.  
45. CI, acting t hrough the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund – (“CEPF”) shall be 
responsible for all the outputs and activities contained in the Funding Proposal . CEPF is a joint 
initiative of AFD, C I, the European Union, the Global Environment Facility, the Government of 
Japan and the World Bank. Implementation will be done via CSOs, whose capability will depend 
on CEPF’ s ability to select high quality entities. CEPF has a track record of sourcing and selecting 
over USD 232  million for biodiversity conservation to over 2,300 CSOs in 24 biodiversity 
hotspots. CEPF benefits from an established governance and operations.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific  execution  risks


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 81 
 
  
46. Project sourcing and selection . The impact of the programme will be driven the ability 
by CEPF to generate a strong pipeline of projects to be implemented by CSOs. Projects are to be 
sourced via a call for proposals. CEPF has experience in the target area of the programme and 
local CSOs , and earlier calls for proposals indicat e that there is a  good appetite  for participation . 
To access grants,  projects must contribute to achieving the GCF investment criteria  as per the 
initial eligibility criteria included in the Termsheet. CEPF will implement eligibility criteria 
consistent with the initial eligibility crit eria .  
47. Financial sustainability . The sustainability of the programme depends on the capacity 
of CI to generate additional revenues for EbA activities led by CSOs after the implementation period. Currently there is limited availability of such funding. Activities under C omponent 3 to 
support the long -term financial sustainability are intended to address this risk.  
48. Political risk . Some countries in the hotspot have a recent history of political instability. 
Loss of political support for  activities could reduce the ability of the programme to achieve its 
objectives. Comfort can be derived from the  ability of CI to locate funds to other regions within 
the programme and to reduce dependency on local governments as a result of working with 
CSOs.  
49. Co-financing risk . USD 8 million in co-financing still has to be fundraised. Inability to 
raise the funds would reduce the available funds and therefor e would affect the impact of the 
programme. It is advised that all co -financing be committed before FAA effectiveness.  
4.3.4.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)  
50. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)  
51. The proposed activities under this project do not necessarily, in and of themse lves, 
represent any unusually or unique high risk for money laundering or terrorist financing . 
Nevertheless , appropriate internal controls are necessary to ensure that any inherent risks for 
money laundering or terrorist financing , as well as for any prohi bited practices,  are properly 
identified, monitored, mitigated and corrected . The AE has indicated it has a strong internal 
control system in place to accomplish those obligations. Based on the information provided and 
in light of the proposed activities, the compliance r isk is rated as medium.  
4.3.6.  Recommendations  
52. It is recommended that the Board considers the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The majority of Programme activities will be 
executed via subprojects to be funded by 
grants to CSOs. The success of the program 
depends on the ability of CEPF to attract and 
select high quality CSOs that implement high impact projects.   Accredited entity/executing 
entity  capability to implement 
this programme  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 82 
 
  
4.4 Fiduciary  
53. The AE for the project is the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and it will have 
the overall responsibility for ensuring that the Programme is implemented in accordance with 
GCF requirements. As the AE, AFD will be responsible for the project implementation and 
activities carried out by the EE. AFD will provide oversight of financial management of CI/CEPF 
and of the Programme as detailed in the AMA.  
54. CI is the EE for the Programme and manages a programme named the Critical Ecosystem 
Partnership Fund (“CEPF”). Therefore, CI will be responsible for GCF funding received under this Programme. CEPF will have the responsibility for the delivery of the Programme results 
through financial management and planning, oversee development of grant portfolio 
development and management (including contracting, risk assessment, oversight of 
administrative compliance b y grantees), overall monitoring of results, dissemination of results 
and oversight of the Regional Implementation Team (RIT).  
55. The AE will sign a grant agreement (the Subsidiary Agreement) with the EE. The 
Programme will be executed by the CEPF Secretariat (hosted by CI based in Arlington, USA) and through CEPF’s established procedures, it will make use of CEPF’s existing structur e, 
governance arrangements, CSO networks, procedures and tried -and tested tools for engaging 
CSOs in EbA actions. In addition, the CEPF Secretariat will be accountable to the AFD for the GCF funding it receives under the Programme, and also to the CEPF Don or Council (consisting of 
representatives from CEPF’s donors: AFD, Conservation International, the  European Union, 
the Global Environment Facility, the Government of Japan and the  World Bank) for 
contributions from its global donor partners.  
56. The Donor Council will function as the Programme Steering Committee (PSC) and is the 
key governance mechanism for CEPF, with authority to select hotspots for investment, allocate 
budgets for grant making, and approve changes to CEPF’s Operational Manual. Decision makin g 
by the Donor Council is by consensus, meaning that decisions related to the Ecosystem Profile 
approval / Regional Implementation Team (RIT) selection require the favourable votes of both 
AFD and CI Technical staff representing the global donors form the CEPF Working Group, which 
reports to the Donor Council and provides technical guidance to the CEPF Secretariat.  
57. The CEPF Secretariat supports and oversees grant -making in the hotspots, ensuring 
compliance with donor policies, and monitoring and communicating results. Coordination and 
support in each hotspot are provided by a RIT, based locally, selected through a competitive process. The NDAs in each country will also be involved in the selection of CSO subprojects 
(with country -specific arrangements to be put in place), ongoing monitoring and evaluation of 
Programme progress and will participate in supervision visits made by AFD and CEPF.  
58. The majority of Programme activities will be executed via subprojects funded by grants 
to CSOs. All grants awarded and a ctivities supported with CEPF funding must be in compliance 
with the policies and procedures outlined in the CEPF Operational Manual including all financial 
protocols. Financial audits of CEPF are conducted annually in conformity with the procedures in 
place. 
59. CI oversees internal control and financial management of CEPF in line with CI’s financial 
policies and procedures. A separate audit of CEPF records, accounts, and financial statements is 
undertaken annually, in accordance with generally accepted accoun ting principles. The purpose 
of this external audit is to provide assurance on the financial statements of CEPF. The audit will 
test CEPF’s compliance with certain provisions of the CEPF Operational Manual and 
consideration of its related internal control.  This external CEPF audit will be conducted by 
independent auditors in accordance with Terms of Reference approved by the CEPF Donor 
Council.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 83 
 
  
60. The Programme monitoring and evaluation will be conducted in accordance with CEPF’s 
established procedures and wil l involve key programme partners providing timely and 
comprehensive reporting including technical results and financial data as necessary and 
appropriate. These responsibilities will form part of the contractual agreements between CEPF 
and the Programme pa rtners and detailed monitoring requirements will be established based 
on their roles.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
61. The results monitoring and reporting arrangements are assessed to be satisfactory. The 
funding proposal and logical framework have been found to adequately apply the results management framework and performance measurement framework indicators. After several 
rounds of feedback and iterations, the monitoring and accountability requirements are 
inculcated in the funding proposal and the revis ed log ical frame work  meets the GCF 
requirements on monitoring and reporting the anticipated results of the intervention. The 
project level results have now been aligned with the fund -level impact s and outcomes , which  is 
expected to provide sufficient basis  for measuring the delivery of results.  
62. Implementation timetable: t he implementation timetable has been provided in a format 
that would enable progress assessment during the implementation period. However, the 
milestones and deliverables are set for two i nstances , 5 years and 10 years into implementation, 
which is not ideal . Rather, they should be spread over the entire implementation period as they 
will lead up to the delivery of interim and final targets. Therefore, the implementation timetable 
needs to be revised with clear identification of appropriate and relevant milestones and 
deliverables throughout the implementation period. 
4.6 Legal  assessment  
63. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 11 
November 2017, and i t became effective on 16 January 2018.  
64.  The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed 
programme. It is recommended t hat, prior to submission of the Funding Proposal to the Board 
(a) the Accredited Entity has obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a 
certificate or legal opinion from the Accredited Entity in form and substance satisfactory to th e 
Fund confirming that all final internal approvals by the Accredited Entity have been obtained 
and that the entity has the authority and capacity to implement the proposed programme.  
65. The proposed programme will be implemented in Comoros, Madagascar, Maur itius and 
Seychelles, countries in which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means 
that, amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this 
country, which risks need to be further assessed.  
(a) Comoros:  The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with a background on 
privileges and immunities to the Focal Point on April 2016, which requested a French 
translation for purposes of consultation with the Council minister, which the Secretariat 
provided. H owever, no response on the draft has been received thus far;  
(b) Magadascar: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with a background note on 
privileges and immunities to the NDA on March 2016, and a meeting was held with the 
Malagasy NDA delegation d uring the Global NDA Conference held on October 2018. 
However, no response on the draft has been received thus far;


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add. 07 
Page 84 
 
  
(c) Mauritius: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with a background note on 
privileges and immunities to the NDA on April 2016, whi ch replied that review and no -
objection from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the State Law Office were necessary 
to sign such agreement. Notes Verbales were exchanged in March and June 2018 on the 
scope of the agreement and the protections sought by GC F, and a meeting were held on 
October 2016 with the Mauritian New York mission and on October 2018 with the NDA 
delegation during the Global NDA conference. However, ultimately, the Secretary of Foreign Affairs informed that it would not be possible to ent er into a bilateral privileges 
and immunities agreement with the GCF; and  
(d) Seychelles: The Secretariat sent The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with a 
background note on privileges and immunities to the NDA on April 2016; however, no 
response has been received thus far.  
66. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in co untries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
67. In order  to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Delivery by the Accredi ted Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion confirming 
that it has obtained all its internal approvals within 120 days of the Board approval;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat wi thin 180 days from the date of Board approval,  or the date in which the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals, whichever is later] ; and  
(c) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat


---
*Page 85*
---

G
CF/B. 26/02/Add.07  
Page 85 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP135 
Proposal name:  Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean – EBA IO  
Accredited entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Country/(ies):  Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles  
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential      Scale:  High  
1.1.1.  Adaptation impact  
1. The programme “ Ecosystem -based adaptation in the Indian Ocean ” involves  four
countries: the Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles . The programme target s the most
vulnerable population s of the coastal and rural areas , who  are highly dependent on natural
resources and ecosystem services,  and vulnerable to climate change. Climate models for the
region predict  increased mean temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns that would result in
increased risk of droughts and floods , and sea level rise. Through the development and
implementation  of ecosystem- based adaptation  (EbA)  activities, the p rogramme seeks to regain
and enhance ecosystem services, which include protection from the expected climate chang e
imp
acts and provision of food and income.
2. The programme consists of three main components: (1) d evelopment of strategic plans
for EbA; (2) i mplementation of EbA subprojects funded through a grant awarding mechanism ;
a
nd (3) a ctivities aimed at enhancing replication potential and long -term sustainability.
3. The funding prop osal states that project activities would b enefit  a total of  almost
700,000 people , of which 88,200 people would directly benefit from employment opportunities
and from support to adopt diversified, climate -resilient livelihood s. The  number  of indirect
beneficiaries  is based on the assumption that 2 .4 per cent  of the population of the participating
countries would be indirectly  reached by the various project activities. The  number of direct
beneficiaries was  estimated on the basis of  past ex perience of investments in the hotspot an d
t
he funding requested for this programme.1 The funding p roposal provides no further details o f
t
he calculation process  of direct or indirect beneficiaries , so it is not possible for the
independent Technical Advis ory Panel (TAP) to assess its validity.  However, taking a mangrov e
r
estoration cost of USD 1 4 per beneficiary2 as a representative value for all ecosystem
restoration projects, and a grant allocation of USD 1 5 million for this type of activity, the total
indirect beneficiaries could be in the range of 1 million people. This would demonstrate that the
estimation of the proposal is conservative.
1 Annex 2 – Feasibility study , appendix 1.  
2 This cost  per beneficiary value was calculated using  the data presented for the example taken from the applicant’s  
cost –benefit analysis. Cost/beneficiary = cost per ha x area / beneficiaries. Project cost for the first 5 years 
(excluding “Home damages after storm events ”): USD 5,738/ha; restored area: 22 ha; number of beneficiaries: 9,084.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 86 
 
 
4. The programme will be implemented by the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund 
(CEPF) through existing c ivil society organizations (CSOs), many of which already have 
experience of working with CEPF.  CSOs will be required to pre sent proposals in order to apply 
for grants to implement EbA subprojects, and will  receive capacity  building  and support in 
order to develop partnerships with private and public sector actors to achieve effective EbA.  
5. Component 1 comprises updating the existing e cosystem profile and developing the 
correspond ing financing plan, developing  long -term vision s, identifying opportunities for 
mainstreaming EbA into government policies,  and developing strategies for  private sector 
engagement . 
6. The ecosystem profile  is the strategic plan  that will guide EbA investment s in the 
targeted areas . The ecosystem profile will be updated  in order to include the value of ecosystem 
services and their relation ship  with climate change adaptation. The process of upd ating the 
ecosystem profile  includes a mid -term update to consider the evolving context and lessons 
learned in the first five years . The financing plan will describe the fu nding requirements for 
implementing the ecosystem profile.  The long -term visions,  which are intended to set clear 
transition targets to guide EbA investments after the end of the project ’s lifespan , may include  
targets for  building  the capacity  of CSOs , long -term financing requirements and potential 
sources of fi nancing for EbA activities . 
7. Examples of EbA activities include protection and restoration of coastal ecosystems 
(wetla nds, mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass meadows ) and watershed forests ; implementation 
of climate -resilient agroforestry models ; preservation of  traditional  and indigenous  knowledge 
and natural resource management practices ; development and implementation of d iversif ied 
climate -resilient  livelihood strategies ( including sustainable fisheries, ecot ourism, value chains 
for natural pro ducts, and so on ); and ecosystem restoration  through eradication and control of 
exotic  invasive species.  
8. Restored coastal ecosystems would provide communities with food, income and 
protection against storm surges that may  be aggravated by sea level rise and increased 
frequency of cyclones and storms . Restored watershed forests would help  to reduc e flood and 
drought risks by enhancing water absorption into the ground , thus reducing run -off and 
increasing groundwater recharge. Agroforestry systems have simila r benefits, in addition to  the 
provision of food and income. Diversif ied, strengthen ed and protect ed livelihood assets and 
strategies  would enhance food security and quality of life.  
9. The programme includes the development of strategies for private sector engagement 
and reports on successful partnerships , including platforms t o promote collaboration between 
CSOs and the private sector , which  would be developed in consultation with relevant 
stakeholders  once  the project starts.  
10. The table in section E.6 of the funding proposal  show s Activity 3.1.4, concerning grants 
for replication in other hotspots. However, the independent TAP  noted that this activity is not to 
be found elsewhere in the document . In response to comments from the inde pendent TAP , the 
proponent explained that “ There is an error in the version of the FP and this a ctivity should 
have been removed from the proposal. In a previous version of the proposal there had been an 
output and associated A ctivity 3.1.4 concerning repl ication in other hotspots. However, after 
discussion with the GCF Secretariat shortly before the f unding proposal package was shared 
with the independent TAP , it was agreed that this aspect of the p rogramme would be removed 
from the formal scope of the p rogramme. While it has been removed from elsewhere in the 
documents and importantly, the budget, unfortunately we failed to remove it from t able E.6. ” 
1.2 Para digm shift potential        Scale:  Medium  
1.2.1.  Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 87 
 
 
11. EbA is not considered innovative in the region because the four participating countries 
have experience on or are currently implementing projects of this kind.3 However, the EbA 
approach can still be considered as a relatively innovative practice in the region. 
12. The project includes the development of knowledge products for documenting lessons 
learned, best practices, models and tools, and evaluation reports on su ccessful South –South 
exchanges and CSO –private sector partnerships.  Moreover, Activity 2.1.4 involves o ngoing 
supervision and monitoring of the r egional implementation team s (RIT s) and the grant portfolio 
by CEPF , and  includes semi -annual RIT supervision missions, CSO site visits, assessment 
workshops  and independent evaluations . 
13. Focused on knowledge generation, A ctivit y 2.2 includes USD 3.5  million  in grants for 
CSOs to implement applied research activities aimed at understanding specific ecosystems and 
their environmental services, test ing the effectiveness of p otential EbA techniques , and 
provid ing quantification and verification of the impacts of the grant portfolio on ecosystem 
services.4 
1.2.2.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling envi ronment  
14. In order to support long -term sustainability, the programme would support the 
implementation of a long -term implementation structure ; provide technical and organizational 
capacity -building for CSOs ; develop and implement a resource mobilization str ategy to generate 
additional revenues for EbA activities;  and support CSOs on engaging  with private sector actors 
to develop  partnerships and  innovative financing models . 
15. The long -term implementation structure would play the role of the RIT s after the 
proj ect ends. The RIT s would be hosted by an established CSO  in each country , which would be 
selected through a competitive process , and each RIT would  have an important role in 
monitoring grants, support ing c ommunications and alliances between  stakeholders , providing 
capacity -building for  CSOs , help ing local CSOs to access resources from large institutional 
donors that they would be unable to access directly , and ensur ing alignment with national  
adaptation  strategies . It is expected that the each CSO that hosts an RIT will continue to 
implement the long -term implementation structure after project lifespan.  
16. Activity 3.2.3 focus es on developing a resource mobilization strategy to  finance the 
operation of the long -term  implementation  structure and provide funds to continue the 
implementation of EbA act iviti es. This activity  include s analysis of donor trends  and innovative 
and non- traditional revenue- generation opportunities , as well as consultation s with 
stakeholders . Potential sources for long -term funding include  bilateral and multilateral 
development dono rs, philanthropic foundations  and donations from private companies. 
Fundraising efforts would  begin at the start of the second half of the p rogramme  and would first 
be led by t he CEPF s ecretariat, with assistance from AFD and the other CEPF global donors.  
17. Potential subproject s applying for grants  would be asked to comply with the guidelines 
described in the CEPF Operational Manual .5 Concerning long -term sustainab ility, subprojects 
would be encouraged to demonstrate (1) the e xistence of co -financing or the a bility to leverage 
additional funds; (2)  the e xistence of partnerships or alliances with one or more other 
organizations; (3)  that they have endorsements from other rec ognized agencies or authorities; 
and (4) that they have c lear plans for continuation and /or replica tion after initial CEPF funding.  
1.2.3.  Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
 
3 Annex 2 –  Feasibility study , section 9.  
4 Annex 4 –  Budget.  
5 Annex 21.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 88 
 
 
18. Through Activity 1.4, the project will support the identification of op portunities  for CSOs 
to engage in mainstreaming EbA into government policies. Deliverables include a set of policy 
targets , for each country , on addressing key drivers of the loss of ecosy stem service s. 
1.2.4.  Scalability and replicability  
19. Knowledge products, evaluation reports and research activities will serve as the basis t o 
support replication  efforts in the region. Upscaling within the participating countries would be 
promoted by providing capacity  building to CSOs  and the achieved fund raising capacity of the 
long -term implementation structure.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale:  High  
1.3.1.  Environmental co-benefits  
20. Given the focus on EbA, environmental co -benefits are central to the p rogramme, 
especially to the subprojects th at are directly related to restoration and protection of natural 
ecosystems. Although each ecosystem and subproject will have  intrinsic characteristics, the 
programme -wide expected environmental benefits include reduced soil erosion and siltation ; 
enhanced water infiltration and groundwater recharge ; increased biodiversity ; and 
sequestration  of greenhouse gas emissions . The c limate change mitigation potential of 
subprojects would be estimated and reported to GCF as part of the p rogramme’s monitorin g 
processes . 
1.3.2.  Social co-benefits  
21. The most important social co -benefit is the enhancement of food and water security and 
the consequent improvement in the health of the population.  
1.3.3.  Econ omic co -benefits  
22. Economic co -benefits will come, on the one hand, from the avoided damage to 
households and public infrastructure caused by floo ding and storm surges,  which would be 
accomplished through the restoration of watershed forests and coastal ecosystems. In addition , 
restored and protected forests will have a positive impact on water quality and availability on 
downstream communities.  
23. On the other hand, subproject s related to the d iversif ication,  strengthen ing and 
protect ion of  livelihood assets and strategies , and the implementation of climate- resilient 
agroforestry models will generate additional income for the participating households.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development impact  
24. The programme’s gender action plan clearly describes actions  to achieve equal gender 
participation, to avoid any gender -related n egative impact and to  address  specific  gender 
issues.6 
1.4 Needs of the recipient         Scale:  High  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country , vulnerable groups  and gender aspects  
 
6 Annex 8 – Gender action plan.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 89 
 
 
25. The distribution of subgrants for EbA7 shows that the Comoros, Mauritius and 
Seychelles would  each  receive 17  per cent  of the funds for EbA , and Madagascar would receive 
50 per cent . The independent TAP  noted that Seychelles, which has a population of 
approximately 100,000 people and a gross domestic product ( GDP ) per capita of USD 29,300, of 
which only 2.5  per cent  depends on agriculture, would receive the same amount of grant funds 
as the Comoros, which has a population of 850,000 people and a GDP per capita of USD 1,600, of 
which almost 50  per cent  depends on agriculture8 (see table 1). It appears that vulnerabili ty 
was not  taken into account for the definition of funds distribution. In response to a q uestion 
from  the independent TAP  on this matter, the proponent responded that “ Despite the different 
socio -economic situations of the countries, all of them have thei r own specific vulnerabilities to 
climate change and adaptation needs as identified in their respective climate change strategies. 
CSOs have a role to play in delivering lasting adaptation solutions in all four of the countries and 
there is a funding need to do this in each of the countries .” 
Table 1 :  Summary of key information for programme countries  
Country  Land 
area 
(km2) Coast
-line  
(km)  Population  
(estimate, 
2019)  Human 
development 
index , 2019  
(global rank)  GDP 
(USD billions)  GDP 
(USD per capita)  GDP composition 
(%), by sector   
Comoros  2,235  340  850,886  
 0.538  
(156)  1,179  
(173)  1,600  
(2017 
est.)  Agriculture 47.7%  
Industry 11.8%  
Service 40.5%  
Madagascar  587,041  4,828  26,969,307  0.521  
(162)  12,550  
(132)  1,600  
(2017 
est.)  Agriculture 24%  
Industry 19.5%  
Service 56.4%  
Mauritius  2040  322  1,198,575  0.796  
(66)  14,391  
(123)  22,300  
(2017 
est.)  Agriculture 4%  
Industry 21.8%  
Service 74.1%  
Seychelles  455  491  97,739  0.801  
(62)  1,644  
(169)  29,300  
(2017 
est.)  Agriculture 2.5%  
Industry 13.8%  
Service 83.7%  
Source: funding proposal, section B.1 . 
Table 2: Estimated direct beneficiaries of the Programme  
 
Source: funding proposal, annex 2, appendix 1 . 
26. Mauritius and Seychelles are categorized as s mall island developing States  but not as 
least developed countries ; whereas  Madagascar is a least developed country and the Comoros is 
considered a s both . At first sight, GDP per capita values suggest that the Comoros and 
 
7 As defined in the funding proposal, annex 2 (table in appendix 1) . 
8 EbA activities may also benefit tourism, which is part of the service s sector. However, it would be logical to assume 
that people who  depend on the agriculture  sector  (small -scale farmers) are generally more vulnerable (resourceless 
and isolated) than people who  work in tourism services.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 90 
 
 
Madagascar possess a considerably  lower level o f resources to adapt to climate change than 
Seychelles and Mauritius.  
27. The selection process for EbA subprojects will  follow the guidelines in the CEPF 
Operational Manual.  CSOs applying for grants would  be required to  identify vulnerable groups 
and to include special  procedures and measures to guarantee th eir participation  in project 
activities.9 The CEPF  Operational Manu al also  encourages applicants to demonstrate that the 
project  promotes the involvement of i ndigenous communities.  
28. Regarding climate ch ange projections, the four countries face similar impacts: (1) 
increase in average temperatures of between approximately 1 and 3 °C; (2) change in rainfall 
patterns, with an increase in the rainy season and a decrease in the dry season; and (3) 
increased f requency of extreme weather events , such as cyclones and storms.10 
29. Through its central activity, which is the restoration and protection of strategic 
ecosystems (including the implementation of agroforestry schemes in degraded watersheds ), 
the programme see ks to regain and enhance ecosystem services, which include protection from 
storm surges and flooding ; enhanced water quality and availability ; and provision of food and 
timber. Subprojects that invest in resilient livelihood assets would be complementary, 
generating additional income from improved agriculture, fishing and ecotourism activities.  
1.4.2.  Economic and social development  
30. Economic and social development of the four countries is summarized in the table above 
(section 1.4.1) , which show s a clear distinction between Mauritius  and Seychelles , and the 
Comoros and Madagascar. In addition to the differences in GDP per capita there are differences 
in development , represented by the h uman development index and the shares of GDP by sector  
(see ta ble 1 above) . The GDPs of the Comoros  and Madagascar  depend on agriculture (shares of  
48 and 24 per cent , respectively ), while for Mauritius and Seychelles , agriculture accounts for 
only 4 and 2.5  per cent of GDP , respectively.  
31. Annual h ealth expenditure p er country can serve as an illustration of social 
development: in 2012, health expenditure in Madagascar was approximately  USD 20 per capita, 
while  Mauritius  spent USD 510  per capita .11 
1.4.3.  Absence of alternative sources of financing  
32. The funding proposal indicates that “The p rogramme activities are not expected to 
generate revenues and therefore there are limited opportunities for private sector 
investment” .12 However , the independent TAP  noted that the programme includes some 
potential  subprojects that would generate income:  diversification ; and strengthening and 
protection of livelihood assets and strategies, including through sustainable fisheries 
management, nature- based tourism, value chains for natural products, and so on .13 Moreove r, 
the beneficiaries of grants for subprojects are expected to be CSOs representing vulnerable 
communities with scarce resources, which generally have very limited access to financial 
services.  
33. Considering the GDP per capita of the four countries and the fact that Mauritius and 
Seychelles are what is generally considered as tax haven s, these two countries are considerably 
more likely to be able to obtain funds from other sources of financing for the implementation of 
EbA than the Comoros  and Madagascar . 
 
9 Funding proposal, page 16.  
10 Annex 2 – Feasibility study, s ection 3.2.  
11 Annex 2 –  Feasibility study, page 40. 
12 Funding proposal, page 42.  
13 Funding proposal, page 17.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 91 
 
 
34. To increase the p rogramme’s focus on the most vulnerable groups, the independent TAP  
recommends that distribution  of funds  for EbA between participating countries is review ed, 
taking into account th eir economic development and financial capacit y. 
1.4.4.  Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
35. Limited institutional capacity is identified as a barrier in the proposal, specifically at the 
level of CSOs. The p rogramme would address this barrier by providing capacity -building 
support  to CSOs and promoting their work  alongside government agencies  in mainstreaming 
EbA.  
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  High  
1.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy and policies  
36. The implementation of EbA activities is clearly aligned with the climate change 
strategies  and other adaptation, sustainable development, risk reduction, coastal management 
and biodiversity plans  of the four countries.  The funding proposal emphasi zes that the strategic 
plans developed under component 1 would need to be well aligned with national climate change 
strategies . 
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
37. The accredited entity is the French agency, Agenc e Française de Développement (AFD ), 
which is a long -standing member of the CEPF Donor Co uncil. AFD is actively involved in the 
Indian Ocean r egion  and has  already granted CEPF  a total of  USD  58 million for activities related 
to restoration, preservation  and sustainabl e management of biodiversity, improve ment of  living 
conditions for vulnerabl e people and strengthen ing the capacity of the population to mitigate 
and adapt to the effects of climate change.14 
38. The executing entity of the p rogramme is CEPF , which  was established in 2000  with the 
objective of supporting  CSOs  in the  conservation of critical ecosystems.  CEPF is a joint initiative 
of the AFD , Conservation International, the European Union, the Global Environment Facility, 
the Government of Japan and the World Bank.  
39. Since 201 5 CEPF  has managed grants to CSOs for a total of USD 10.3 million  for activities 
related to  biodiversity conservation, and has developed policies, procedures and operating 
systems to allow even small community -based CSOs to benefit from funding . Given its regional 
presence and experience, CEPF is well positioned to act as the executing entity of the 
programme.  
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
40. The design phase  for the programme  included  meetings and  consultati on wor kshops  
with civil society stakeholders  and relevant government institutions  in each participating 
country. More than 150 individuals from 87 organizations and institutions were directly 
consulted and provided  input . Potential stakeholders , consulted ins titutions and individuals,  
and lessons learned are clearly described  in the proposal.15  
 
14 Funding proposal, page 20.  
15 Annex 7 –  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 92 
 
 
41. Ecosystem profiles and long -term  visions, which would define EbA i nvestment priorities 
in the short and long  term, would  need to be endorsed by  the nationally designated authorities 
of each country to ensure alignment with  national priorities.16 
1.6 Efficienc y and effectiveness     Scale:  Medium  
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
42. Seventy- eight per cent  of the total project cost, which is USD 38.4 million, consists in 
subgrants for CSOs to implement EbA activities, including applied research and monitoring and 
evaluation activities.  
43. The proposal does not include a financial or economic analysis for the p rogramme as a 
whole. The cost –benefit analysis was developed for two examples of EbA projects: mangrove 
restoration , and water shed  forest restoration.  For the former , the cost  per direct beneficiary, 
including implementation  and 5-year maintenance,  is USD 14. For the latter, the cost per 
beneficiary is USD 4 .50. Costs per hectare are USD 5,700 and USD 6 ,900, respectively. Data for 
these estimations are taken from literature and CEPF’s experience in ecosystem conservation projects.
17  
44. The independent TAP  considers that the expect ed results, as presented in the 
programme performance indicators  table ,18 seem overestimated when compared with the  per 
hectare  cost rates taken from  the cost –benefit analysis. For example , the p rogramme expects to 
restore 2,000 ha of w atershed forests, which  would cost approximately USD 14  million. 
Restored coastal ecosystems are expected to reach 4,000 ha. Assuming that  the cost per hectare 
of mangrove restoration is valid for all coastal ecosystem restoration  activities, the cost of 
achieving the target would be USD 2 3 million. Those two activities alone would exceed  the total 
budget allocated to grants for the implementation of EbA activities.  Questioned by the 
independent TAP  on this matter, the p roponent responded that “ To be conservative in our 
assumptions for the CBA models, we purposely chose examples with relatively high costs and 
assumed only modest benefits (both in terms of the value of benefits and the number of benefits 
that the example a ctivities would provide). ” Further, t o demonstrate that are the costs assumed 
on the cost –benefit analysis are overestimated, the proponent provided  data from literature 
which set average costs for mangrove restoration at USD 2, 500 per hectare. Applying th is cost to 
the programme target of 4,000 hectares gives an  estimate of USD 10  million for coastal 
restoration.  Regarding watershed forest restoration, data from literature suggests a cost of USD 
2,000  per hectare based on 13 restoration projects in Madagas car. Considering these cost 
estimation s, the proposed budget allocation seems reasonable in relation to the targets on the 
programme performance indicators.  
1.6.2.  Amount of co-financing  
45. The proposal requests USD 38 million from  the GCF , to be allocated  to the four 
programme countries over 10 years, and this will be complemented by co -financing amounting 
to USD 11.2 million. The sources of co -financing are funds channelled  through C onservation 
International  for the CEPF p rogramme and funds leveraged by t he CSO recipients of individual 
EbA grants. The current donors to CEPF include AFD, C onservation International , the European 
 
16 Funding proposal, page 41.  
17 These cost  per beneficiary values where calculated using  the data presen ted for the two examples in the  applicant’s 
cost –benefit analysis. Cost/beneficiary = cost per ha x area / beneficiaries. For mangrove restoration , proje ct cost 
for the first 5 years (e xcluding “Home damages after storm events ”): USD 5,738/ha; restored area: 22 ha; number 
of beneficiaries: 9,084. For watershed restoration , under the same terms, p roject cost for the first 5 years: USD 
6,868/ha; restored area: 50 ha; number of beneficiaries: 75,000.  
18 Funding proposal, section E.5.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 26/02/Add. 07 
Page 93 
 
 
Union, the G lobal Environment Facility, the Government of Japan, the World Bank, and several 
private philanthropi c organization s.19 
1.6.3.  Financial viability  
46. As described in section 1.2, the p rogramme aims develop a resource mobilization 
strategy to finance the operation of the long -term implementation structure and provide funds 
to continue the implementation of EbA activities after project  lifespan.  
47. Given that most expected EbA activities do not generate revenues directly, and that 
grantees would be  CSOs representing vulnerable communities with very limited access to 
financial services, the  programme is not expected to crowd out private inv estment.  
48. The economic analysis for the mangrove restoration and the watershed forest examples 
show that the subprojects are cost -effective and that benefits outweigh costs. The mangrove 
restoration project , which would need an investment of approximately U SD 135,000 to restore 
22 ha, including 10 -year maintenance, gives  an internal rate of return of 34  per cent  over a 25 -
year period, and the n et present value (with a 12  per cent  discount rate) is USD 550,000. For the 
watershed example, which would need an investment of USD 565,000 to restore 50 ha of forest, 
the internal rate of return  is 28  per cent  over a 25 -year period, and the net present value over a 
25-year time period (with 12  per cent  discount rate) is USD 1,990,000. The sensitivity analysis 
shows that the subprojects remain cost -effective even in scenarios where costs are 30  per cent  
higher than assumed and benefits are 30  per cent  lower.20 
1.6.4.  Best practices  
49. The only references in the funding proposal on be st practices are about the lessons  that 
would be learned and registered in the form of knowledge products to support  future  regional 
replication.  
50. Best practices from the knowledge of the existing network of CSOs that already work 
with CEPF on biodiversity conservation projects would be modified and adapted to consider 
EbA as the focal point.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
51. The independent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval.  
52. To increase the p rogramme’s focus on the most vulnerable groups, the independent TAP 
recommends that the  distribution  of funds  for EbA between participating countries is reviewed , 
taking into account the economic development and financial capacity  of each country . 
 
19 Funding proposal, page 32.  
20 Annex 3 –  Cost –benefit analysis.


---
*Page 94*
---

G
CF/B.26/02/Add.07  
Page 94 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment  (FP135) 
Proposal name:  Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean – EBA IO  
Accredited entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies):  Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles  
Project/programme size: Small 
Impact potential  
AFD would like to sincerely thanks the Inde pendent TAP for its assessment.  
Rega rding the Impact Potential specifically, as noted into iTAP report, we have had a 
conservative approach when it comes to measuring beneficiaries, and expect to have more 
impact when implementing the Programme. We note the iTAP’s conclusion that the 
Programm e will have high impact potential.  
We are also very thankful for the iTAP for the constructive dialogue and smart comments 
regarding activity 3.1.4, and the related table E.6 in the version of the Funding Proposal that 
was submitted to iTAP. We have modifi ed the final version accordingly.  
Paradigm shift potential  
AFD notes the iTAP’s conclusion that the Programme will have medium paradigm shift potential since there are already some examples of Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) in the 
participating countries. AFD agrees EbA is still relatively innovative in the region and believes that the Programme would be an important catalyst for scaling up its use, particularly by 
CSOs.  
AFD is also willing to add that the paradigm shift will also  be within CEPF itself . With the GCF  
support, the aim is to transform CEPF modus operandi  by mainstreaming climate change into 
its future actions, which, has a strong paradigm shift potential.  
Sustainable development potential  
AFD concurs with the iTAP’s conclusion that the Programme has high potential for 
sustainable development.  
One small addition to iTAP constructive comments is that CPEF has already a dedicated 
gender policy  since 2016;  this program will make sure every sub gran t has a gender-
responsive approach.  
Needs of the recipient  
The description of the Programme’s potential to address the needs of the recipients reflects the information provided in the Funding Proposal package. We thank the iTAP to have 
proposed a high po tential for this investment criteria. We note the iTAP’s recommendation to 
review the distribution of funding between the participating countries so as to increase the Programme’s focus on vulnerable groups. We respond to this further in our response to th e 
“overall remarks” below.  We highlight that the distribution of funding noted in the iTAP


---
*Page 95*
---

  
GCF/B.26/02/Add.07  
Page 95 
 
 
 assessment for each country is an indicative target  (see also Annex 22) . The total amount per 
country will ultimately depend on the number and quality of grant propo sals that are 
submitted, including how CSO applicants a ddress the eligibility criteria (see B3 of the F P). 
How EbA activities address vulnerability to climate change  will have to be demonstrated .  
Country ownership  
The description of the Programme’s country ownership reflects the information provided in 
the Funding Proposal package. We note  with thanks  the iTAP’s conclusion that the 
Programme has “high” country ownership.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The description of the Programme’s efficiency and effectiveness reflects the information 
provided in the Funding Proposal package. AFD notes the iTAP’s conclusion that the 
Programme will have medium efficiency and effectiveness  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
AFD  thanks the iTAP for their thorough review of the funding proposal documents. The 
assessment document provides an excellent  summary of the Programme as it relates to the 
GCF’s six assessment criteria. We welcome the recommendatio n th at the Programme be 
funded without  conditions.  
With regards to the recommendation we highlight that  some  flexibility has already been built 
into t he design of the Programme. Despite the important differences in the economic and 
social develo pment , all countries are vulnerable to climate change and their specific 
situations and needs are identified in their respective climate change strategies. All t he 
countries have identified Ecosystem based Adaptation as a priority and have important areas 
for ecosystem services that vulnerable people rely on . 
Despite the more favourable economic situation in some countries than others , there are 
relatively few fun ding opportunities for CSOs that would allow them to address EbA at the 
scale needed.  In addition, the short to medium term funding prospects for CSOs are currently 
unclear due to the economic impacts of the current Covid19 pandemic, which could impact 
their ability to  fundraise for EbA activities. Furthermore, with those 4 countries, the 
Programme would benefit of several CSOs which have high capacity and potential (in 
particular to leverage private sector)  to contribute to regional opportunities for excha nge and 
peer -to-peer capacity building. While we understand the iTAP’s recommendation about 
funding distribution, we believe that it is important to maintain the funding distribution that 
has been agreed with the NDAs of the four participating countries.


---
*Page 96*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme -level Action Plan  
Programme  title:  Ecosystem -based Adaptation in the Indian Ocean  (‘the Programme ´) 
Programme  Duration:  10 years  
Accredited Entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Executing Entity:  Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF)  
Document Date:  1 April 2020 (Gender Action Plan budget file, which had previously been a 
separate document, was added as Appendix 4 on 28 May 2020)  Gender documentation for FP135


---
*Page 97*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Contents  
1. Introduction  .................................................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 The Proposed Programme  ............................................................................................................ 3 
1.2 AFD’ s Approach to Gender Equality  .............................................................................................. 4 
1.3 Organization of the document  ...................................................................................................... 5 
2. Gender Assessment  ........................................................................................................................ 6 
2.1 Gender Equality Situation analysis in the Programme countries  ................................................. 6 
2.2 Overview of gender issues in each Programme country  ............................................................ 16 
2.2.1 Comoros  ............................................................................................................................... 16 
2.2.2 Madagascar  .......................................................................................................................... 18 
2.2.3 Mauritius  .............................................................................................................................. 19 
2.2.4 Seychelles  ............................................................................................................................. 20 
2.2.5 Gender Cha llenges related to the Potential Impacts of Climate Change  ............................ 21 
2.2.6 Civil Society Capacity in the Programme countries  ............................................................. 25 
3. Programme -level Gender Action Plan  .......................................................................................... 26 
Part 1: Preparation of the organizational structure and necessary tools  ......................................... 27 
Part 2: Implementation throu ghout the Programme  ....................................................................... 27 
Part 3: Monitoring & Evaluation and dissemination ......................................................................... 28 
Gender Action Plan showing gender -related activities for each output  .......................................... 30 
References and Data Sources  ............................................................................................................... 34 
Appendix 1. CEPF’s Gender Policy  ........................................................................................................ 39 
Appendix 2. CEPF Gender Toolkit  ......................................................................................................... 41 
Appendix 3 . CEPF Gender Factsheet for CSO applicants  ...................................................................... 59 
Appendix 4. Gender Action Plan Budget  ............................................................................................... 63


---
*Page 98*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
1. Introduction  
1.1 The Proposed Programme  
Like all island developing states, the four  Programme  countries ( Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and 
Seychelles ) are extremely vulnerable to climate change. Their populations, agricultural lands and 
infrastructure are highly exposed to climate change because they tend to be concentrated in coastal 
zones where sea -level rise and increased frequency and severity of extreme weather is most 
damaging. All the Programme  countries report recent climate change such as increased temperatures, 
rainfall changes, sea- level rise and increasing ocean acidification. Climate models, eve n under the 
most optimistic scenarios, project that existing changes are going to become more pronounced in the 
future , putting people, infrastructure, agriculture, natural ecosystems and people’s livelihoods at risk. 
Increased air and sea surface temperat ures, changes to seasonal rainfall and increased numbers of 
extreme weather events including both droughts and flooding are expected. Cyclones are already a significant threat to life and assets and are expected to intensify.  
While the combined effects of  projected climate change mean that many people are at risk, the 
populations and economies of the Programme  countries are highly dependent on natural resources 
and therefore ecosystem services. However, the natural ecosystems that provide these services ar e 
already under severe threat from human activities in all the Programme  countries, which are within a 
biodiversity hotspot  – a region of high biodiversity importance but with extremely threatened natural 
ecosystems. As a consequence, the resilience and ab ility of ecosystems to provide essential ecosystem 
services necessary for people to adapt to climate change is diminished, further exacerbating climate 
change vulnerability. The most significant impacts are expected to include: decreased provision of 
fresh water due to degraded watersheds; increased flooding due to conversion of ecosystems that 
provide natural flood regulation; loss of coastal protection due to damage to coastal ecosystems such as mangroves and coral reefs; declines in the productivity of fisheries due to loss of nursery habitats; and decreased agricultural production due to heat stress and drought.  
Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) measures have been identified as high priorities in the climate 
change strategies of all the Programme  countrie s. EbA encourages conservation, improved 
management and restoration of ecosystems to provide the essential services that people need to 
adapt to climate variability . However, beyond a few pilot projects, financing for EbA is currently 
insufficient in the P rogramme  countries despite the urgent need and opportunity to scale up EbA 
action. While there has been a focus on strengthening government programmes to address climate 
change impacts, there has been less attention on harnessing the capacity of civil soci ety to address 
these challenges. Despite their potential to play an effective role in addressing EbA, CSOs are typically 
under -utilized, under -valued and under -financed by development actors.  
In this context, the Programme  will provide specific funding fo r EbA through the Critical Ecosystem 
Partnership Fund (CEPF) to mobilize Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). CEPF was established in 2000 as a mechanism to enable CSOs to support conservation of critical ecosystems within biodiversity 
hotspots. CEPF is a j oint initiative of AFD, Conservation International, the European Union, the Global 
Environment Facility, the Government of Japan and the World Bank. Since inception, CEPF has granted 
more than USD 232  million for biodiversity conservation to over 2,300 CSO  grantees in 24 biodiversity


---
*Page 99*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
hotspots. CEPF currently funds biodiversity conservation actions in the four countries of the 
biodiversity hotspot and so there is an immediate opportunity to use its existing CSO networks to 
address climate change issues at sc ale.  
The goal of the Programme  is to reduce the vulnerability of island populations by securing the critical 
ecosystem services they need to be resilient to climate change. The Programme  will use tried -and-
tested tools and methodologies that CEPF has deve loped over the last 20 years , including tools to 
mainstream gender into CEPF’s grant -making,  for strengthening and engaging civil society actors in 
ecosystem conservation. CEPF’s current model , which prioritises biodiversity conservation,  will be 
modified to direct investments to geographic and thematic areas of highest priority for EbA. The 
Programme  will work through CSOs, help to build their capacity and help them develop partnerships 
with the private and public sector. The Programme  includes a component  to achieve long -term 
sustainability and encourage replication of best EbA practice . The Programme  has three components:  
Component 1: Developing strategic plans for EbA in the small island biodiversity hotspot that are well 
aligned with national climate change strategies ; 
Component 2: Supporting EbA activities through grants to CSOs;  
Component 3: Ensuring long- term sustainability and replicating success through knowledge products 
and tools for EbA.  
The Programme  is expected to make a significant c ontribution to the climate change and sustainable 
development strategies of the Programme  countries by increasing resilience and reducing the 
vulnerability of ecosystems and people. High level impacts of the Programme  that are expected 
include: decreased v ulnerability for at least 698,000 people  (50% female and 50% male)  through 
access to more resilient ecosystem services and livelihood options ; restoration or improved 
management of at least 1.89 million hectares  of coastal and terrestrial ecosystems that p lay critical 
roles in ecosystem service provision; and increased capacity of at least 25 CSOs, thereby  enabling them 
to make further contributions to EbA.   
1.2 AFD’s Approach to Gender Equality  
AFD has built experience and expertise on integrating gender o bjectives to financed projects, through 
a specific approach tailored to the stakes of each project and to the needs of beneficiaries and project 
partners. Such approach is developed below. In 2013, AFD launched its own strategy process through 
its 2014 –2017 Transversal Integration Framework on gender and the reduction of gender inequalities. 
This gender policy aims to promote equal opportunities for men and women and to improve the 
efficiency and sustainability of operations financed by AFD, through three m ain operational priorities: 
- Preventing gender inequalities in AFD operations; - Promoting gender equality as one of the 
objectives of the interventions; - Supporting the evolution of society on gender issues. To promote 
AFD gender approach and to encoura ge better integration of gender in the project cycle, AFD gender 
strategy focuses on: 1) Developing a gender equality approach specific to AFD’s intervention sectors 
and countries  1; 2) Systematically integrating gender issues throughout the project cycle;  3) Assessing 
and building knowledge on experiences; 4) Strengthening AFD’s capacities on gender issues; 5) 
 
1 See for an example : www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/boite -outils -genre -agriculture -developpement -rural- et-biodiversite


---
*Page 100*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Building capacities of AFD’s partners on gender issues; 6) Participating in debates and discussions on 
gender and development issues2. The implementation of this strategy is based on a decentralized 
approach implemented within AFD teams, with a network of trained gender focal points in all AFD 
teams and particularly in local offices, supported by the Environmental, Social, and Sustainable 
Development Unit, which bears the technical expertise on gender. Such organization allows the 
promotion of equality in access to and control of resources and income, in participation of men and 
women to all project components, and in capacity building and empowerment of project beneficiaries. 
This approach applies to all projects financed by AFD without discrimination.  
1.3 Organization of the document  
This document is in two parts. The first provides a high -level assessment of relevant gender issues in 
the Programme  countries. The second part is a Gender Action Plan for the Programme .  
The gender assessment and Gender A ction Plan have been informed by high -level information 
collected from published literature and from inputs during the stakeholder consultation for the 
Programme. However,  it is important to note that Component 1 of the Programme includes a more 
detailed consultation process to develop th e Programme’s investment strategy that will be captured 
in an  updated  Ecosystem Profile document. As noted in the Gender Action Plan section of this 
document, the process of updating the Ecosystem Profile will include a more detailed gender analysis  
and st akeholder consultation. Ultimately the Ecosystem Profile will determine the priority EbA themes 
and geographical areas where the Programme will invest. Once published, CSOs will then be invited 
to apply for subprojects which address the eligible priorities  identified in the Ecosystem Profile. The 
CSO applicants must then also address gender issues for their specific subproject as part of the grant 
application process.  CEPF has developed guidance for them to do this (see CEPF Gender toolkit 
provided as Appen dix 2 of this document ). CEPF strives to integrate gender into all aspects of its 
programmes and, therefore, it is recommended that applicants and grantees use this toolkit when preparing an application and/or implementing a subproject.  
The gender action p lan references and links to existing CEPF policies and tools for gender 
mainstreaming including CEPF’s gender policy, CEPF’s Environmental and Social Management 
Framework , CEPF’s monitoring and evaluation tools and CEPF’s gender capacity tracking tool that  is 
used to assess the capacity of Civil Society Organization (CSO)  grantees with respect to gender issues.  
The ESMF is provided as Annex 6 and the other documents are included in CEPF’s Operations Manual, which is provided as Annex 21.  
  
 
2 These issues are comprehensively covered in AFD’s guide to integrating gender into Agriculture, Development and 
Biodiversity Projects/Programmes. https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/boite -outils -genre- agriculture- developpement -rural-
et-biodiversite


---
*Page 101*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
2. Gender Assessmen t  
With its focus on S mall Island Developing States and L east Developed Countries, the Programme  
includes some of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change as well as some of the 
poorest.  All the countries in the biodiversity hotspot targeted by the Programme  (Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles)  have already reported significant impacts of climate change 
with increased temperatures, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, coastal erosion, flooding and 
droughts all being attrib uted to climate change. Climate change projections for the Programme  
coun tries indicate that climate change impacts will continue to get worse over the next century even 
under the most optimistic scenarios for cutting greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, other anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems are reducing the availability and quality of important 
ecosystem services, further reducing the resilience of people, often the poorest and most vulnerable 
in society, that depend on them.  
Gender inequa lity remains a significant problem in the Programme countries, increasing the risks and 
burdens of climate change for women. I n Mauritius and Seychelles, per capita national incomes are 
higher than the other countries and women enjoy greater equality in ma ny aspects of society , but 
gender disparities remain .  In Comoros and Madagascar, women are often unequal participants in 
decision -making, labor markets, legal processes and they face gender stereotypes due to socio -
cultural norms. Women are also often poo rer than men and therefore have less access to adaptation 
options when faced with risk events (e.g. poor crop yields, floods, droughts etc.).  
Not only are women often disadvantaged in terms of human development indicators, many are also 
highly dependent o n natural resource s for their livelihoods. Women are often responsible within their 
households for securing water, food and fuel for cooking. Their livelihoods are therefore those that 
are often first and most effected by climate change. In rural areas of all the Programme  countries, the 
different roles and responsibilities of men and women in society, and different gender norms , mean 
that they can be impacted by climate change in different ways.  For example, in the agricultural context, women tend to care for household gardens and subsistence agriculture, while men are more 
likely to engage in cash generating activities. Women often therefore play an important role in 
sustainable resource management , which is particularly relevant for programmes/ projects  such as this 
one promoting improved environmental stewardship through Ecosystem -based Adaptation  (EbA) .  
2.1 Gender Equality Situation analysis in the Programme  countries  
Delivering gender -responsive adaptation to climate change requires understanding the gender 
situation in each country. A first step is to explore publicly available scores and rankings from 
composite indices. These indices have differing methodologies, and are useful to give indicative , but 
not conclusive , measures of current levels of development, gender equality, poverty, and labour force 
participation.  To this end, tables 1 and 2 below include high level statistics for the Programme  
countries allowing comparison of gender inequality indicators and broader human developm ent 
indices (UNDP, 2018).


---
*Page 102*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Two of the four Programme  countries have very low scores for the Human Development Index (HDI)3. 
The HDI for Comoros and Madagascar rank among the lowest for any countries assessed  globally . 
Similarly, Gross National Income (GNI) levels are low for the se two  countries, with some of the lowest 
per capita GNI in the World -  as low as $ 1,400. Globally, indicators such as the Gender Development 
Index (GDI)4 and Gender Inequality Index (GII)5 are not available for all the Programme  countries. Also, 
these indicators should be interpreted with care given the challenges of collecting the necessary high -
quality underlying data for calculating them in a uniform way in each country.  However, the data that 
is available points to some differences between the Programme  countries in terms of gender 
inequality. Further understanding of these differences can be gleaned from examining the more 
specific indicators on health, education, workforce participation, political representation an d other 
measures presented in table 2.  
The Madagascar and Indian Ocean Hotspot countries show a mixed picture for HDI, including two of the lowest ranked countries in the World a s well as two of the highest in the Africa region (and above 
average globally ). Similarly, GDI scores range from slightly below average (in the Comoros) to above 
the global average (Madagascar and Mauritius). GDI data for Seychelles is not available. Although Madagascar’s HDI is very low, it also scores above the global average for  GDI suggesting that gender 
inequality is relatively low –  poverty and extremely poor human development outcomes are 
widespread among both women and men.  In the Comoros, HDI is very low and GDI is close to the 
global average which is consistent with the o bservation that there is widespread poverty and 
inequality for women. By contrast, the global data for Mauritius shows relatively high HDI (ranked 65
th 
in the World) and a high GDI reflecting that women and men have similar scores for many measures of soci al development. GDI data is not available for Seychelles but for the available statistics that make 
up HDI/GDI its scores are similar to Mauritius (see table 2).  
 
 
  
 
3 HDI is a summary measure for assessing long -term prog ress in three basic dimensions of human 
development: health (measured by life expectancy), education (measured by expected years of schooling) 
and standard of living (measured by Gross National Income –  expressed in constant 2011 international 
dollars conv erted using purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion rates). Further details available at 
http://hdr.undp.org/en  
4 GDI was develop by UNDP to add a gender dimension to the Human Development Index. It is expressed as a  
ratio of female HDI to male HDI. Further details available at http://hdr.undp.org/en  
5 GII reflects gender -based inequalities in three dimensions –  reproductive health (measured by maternal 
mortality and adolescent b irth rates), empowerment (measured by share of parliamentary seats held by 
women and secondary and higher educational attainment) and economic activity (measured by labor 
market participation).


---
*Page 103*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
 
Table 1. Key Human Development Statistics and global measures of gender inequality in the Programme countries  
Country  Population  CO 2 emissions  HDI GNI per capita  IHDI6 GDI GII 
 millions  Per capita ( tons ) Score  Rank 
(Trend)  2011 PPP$  Score  Inequality 
loss (%)  Score  Rank  Score 
(Rank)  
Comoros  0.8 0.2 0.503  165 (↗)  1,399  0.275  45.3  0.876  133 n.a. 
Madagascar  25.6  0.1 0.519  161 (↗)  1,358  0.385  25.9  0.962  82 n.a. 
Mauritius  1.3 3.4 0.79  65 (↑)  20,189  0.683  13.5  0.968  72 0.373 
(84) 
Seychelles  0.1 5.4 0.797  62 (↗)  26,077  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
Source: UNDP 2018 Human Development Indices and Indicators (www. http://hdr.undp.org/ ). HDI: Human Development Index  (rank out of 189 countries assessed) ; HDI 
trends are indicated for the period since 1999 as ↑for rapid improvement and ↗ for slow improvement.  GNI: Gross National Inc ome per capita (expressed in 2011 
Purchase Power Parity US$);  IHDI: Inequality -adjusted Human Development Index;  Inequality loss: the difference between HDI and IHDI expressed as a percentage;  GDI: 
Gender Development Index; GII: Gender Inequality Index  (rank is based on 160 assessed countries ) 
  
 
6 : Inequality- adjusted Human Development Index  (IHDI) discounts HDI for inequalities in the average values of the three dimensions that make up HDI. The difference 
between HDI and IHDI can therefore be thought of as a measure of loss in human development due to inequalities in society. In the second c olumn this loss has been 
expressed as a percentage with higher percentages indicating that there are higher levels of inequality (gender and other) in the country.


---
*Page 104*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
 
 
Table 2. Selected high -level statistics related to gender in the Programme countries  
Country  Maternal 
mortality  Infant 
mortality  Life Expectancy 
at birth  Mean years of 
schooling  Expected years 
of schooling  Female share of employment  Labor force 
participation 
rate (%)  Share of 
parliament 
seats (%) Total 
unemployment 
rate Violence 
against 
women  Women 
banking  
   female  male  female  male  female  male  Management  Non -
agriculture  female  male      
Comoros  335 55.0  65.7  62.2  3.7 5.6 11.1  11.4  n.a 35.2  36.0  50.2  6 1.15  6.4 17.9  
Madagascar  353 34 67.9  64.7  6.7 6.1 10.5  10.6  24.5  53.4  83.6  89.4  20 1.12  n.a. n.a. 
Mauritius  53 12.2  78.4  71.4  9.1 9.5 15.5  14.6  29.7  37.9  45.1  72.7  12 2.34  n.a. 87.1  
Seychelles  n.a. 12.3  78.6  69.5  n.a. n.a. 15.3  14.3  39.9  n.a. n.a. n.a. 21 n.a. n.a. n.a. 
Source: UNDP 2018 Human Development Indices and Indicators (www. http://hdr.undp.org/ ). Maternal mortality ratio: deaths per 100,000 live births; Infant mortality 
rate: mortality per 1,000 live births ; Expected years of schooling ratio: Expected years female divided by expected years male (derived from the data by document author) ; 
Female share of employment (management): in senior and middle management (%); Total unemployment rate: female to male ratio; Violence against women : intimate 
partner (% of female population age 15 and older); Women banking : account at financial institution  or wi th mobile money -service provider (% of female population ages 15 
and older).  n.a.: not available


---
*Page 105*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
National -level data  
National level data points provide further understanding of gender inequality in the Programme countries.  
The nationa l-level data points (divided into three categories: poverty and hardship; labour and education; 
and health and social indicators) presented below are not comparable across countries, given the different 
methodologies of each statistical bureau or equivalen t national counterpart. These indicators broadly 
speak to issues identified by the GCF as crucial in the project design stage (such as: poverty levels; 
participation of men/women in formal/informal labour markets; gender- disaggregated education and 
literac y indicators; gender -disaggregated health, morbidity and mortality statistics; etc.).  
• Poverty and Hardship  
The national level statistics on poverty underline the stark contract between the two LDCs, Comoros and 
Madagascar, and the two other countries in the Programme - Mauritius and Seychelles. However, a World 
Bank Poverty Assessment Report (World Bank and Unio n of the Comoros, 2017) notes that the national 
level statistics do not capture the complexity of Comoros’ situation, where the informal sector is 
particularly important, as are remittances from abroad, which are also informal and so not captured. The 
Pove rty Assessment Report also highlights that the access individuals have to remittances is important 
determinant of the income levels available to a household and there are big differences in the 
consumption patterns in households that have access to remitta nces from those do not. The figures for 
Comoros also highlight the relatively large number of female -headed households (27.9% in 2014) and this 
has increased from 18.6% in 2004 (World Bank and Union of the Comoros, 2017).  
 
Table 3. National -level Poverty and Hardship Indicators  
POVERTY & HARDSHIP INDICATORS  Comoros  Madagascar  Mauritius  Seychelles  
% of Population Below International Poverty Line  17.9a   77.6b 7.90c   1.10d 
% of Population Below National Poverty Line  42.4a   70.7b 0.50c   39.3d 
% of Population in Severe Multidimensional 
Poverty  16.1e   57.1e        -         -  
% of Population Vulnerable to Multidimensional 
Poverty  22.3e   11.8e        -         -  
% of Female -Headed Households (FHHs)  27.7f   19.3f 17.0g   51.0h 
% of Male -Headed Households (MHHs)  72.3f   80.7f 83.0g   49.0h 
Sources of data/information for this table:  a The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: 
Comoros’ ; b The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Madagascar’. Technical Note ; c The 
World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Mauritius’. Technical Note ; d The World Bank, 
Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Seychelles’. Technical Note; e UNDP & University of Oxford 
(2019). Table I: Multidimensional Poverty Index. Composite Index  Data ; f The World Bank & Union des Comores (2017). Comoros 
Poverty Assessment . Repor t; g United Nations Population Fund (2012). Population Dynamics and Household Structure. Country 
Implementation Profile; h World Health Organization –  WHO ( 2016). Country Cooperation Strategy 2016 –  2021. Policy Document.


---
*Page 106*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
The figures in  
Table  3 highlight the precarious situation for vulnerable people in Madagascar. A recent World Bank 
report (World Bank, 2016) highlights that Madagascar faces an array of key challenges in reducing poverty, 
including major infrastructure deficits, especially in transport, severe climatic events, and t enuous access 
to markets. While inequality levels have remained moderate, Madagascar’s poorest people experienced 
a substantial welfare loss between 2005 and 2012. Declines in agricultural profitability and persistently 
low productivity in small enterprise s have meant that the poverty rate has remained very high, at over 
70%. Other studies have highlighted the precarious nature of food security among smallholder farmers 
and the extreme vulnerability of people to severe climatic events such as cyclones, floo ding and drought 
(Harvey et al. , 2014 ). The high level of multidimensional poverty noted in  
Table  3 reveals the pervasiveness of deprivation and variety  of different types of poverty faced by the 
majority of the Malagasy population.  
In contrast to the two LDCs, the World Bank classifies Mauritius as an upper- middle income country with 
low levels of poverty and inequality. It’s economy is diversified and h as transformed enormously over the 
past three decades. However, in 2010, after sugar and textile (the main Mauritian exports) lost 
preferential status from western markets  (World Bank, 2015) , the economy has witnessed initial setbacks. 
Concurrently, inequa lity has risen, lowering the living standards of the poorer sections of the populace.  
The main contributor to rising inequality is the variance among earnings (males) situated in different social classes – showing the imperatives of redistribution and pro -poor investment in the country. Mauritius, 
additionally, has low female labour participation (compared to peer economies –  see Table 4), and women 
continue to be disad vantaged in access  to the labour market, which can be attributed to traditional 
models of domestic and care work persistent in most Mauritian households. The World Bank  (2017 a) 
found  that the disproportionate expansion of the female labour force is through  the entry of women 
primarily from affluent households – contributing to greater inequality between households. To elucidate, 
since affluent households possess certain advantages over their poorer counterparts, women are 
increasing the income of these hous eholds while women in poorer households lack access to productive 
and economic resources ( ipso facto , widening the inequality gap in the country).  
Similar to Mauritius, the archipelago nation of Seychelles is different from its Indian Ocean counterparts: 
Seychelles has the highest GDP per capita in Africa ($ 29,300  in 2019 ). However, income inequality remains 
significant in the country, for example with a GINI Index score of 46.8  in 2013, placing it among the  top-
25 most unequal countries  (World Bank, 2013) .7 
The persistently unequal distribution of income, despite Seychelles’ long -standing policy focus and  high 
spending on public services,  social protection and housing incentives, point to constraints in acce ssing 
economic opportunities and reduction of productivity in the economy, according to the World Bank  
(2017b) . These constraints could well intensify as the economy develops further with current trends, 
causing income gaps and capacity barriers, especiall y with increasing climate risks in the region. An 
additional poverty issue related to gender that was noted by participants during the Programme 
 
7


---
*Page 107*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
consultation meetings is that high Seychelles has one of the World’s highest rates of injected drug use, 
partic ularly among unemployed young men.  
Seychelles is particularly dependent on imports  and therefore rising commodity prices ( especially food 
and fuel ) and impacts to global supply chains, such as being observed in the early part of 2020 due to the 
Coronavirus/COVI -19 pandemic, are high risk factors for households struggling with lower income s and 
the backdrop of climate -related risks.  
• Labour and Educati on 
 
Table 4. Labour and Education Indicators  
LABOUR AND EDUCATION INDICATORS  Comoros  Madagascar  Mauritius  Seychelles  
% of Labour Force Participation – Female  37.4a 83.6b 45.4c 66.9d 
% of Labour Force Participation – Male  44.1a 89.2b 74.2c 73.9d 
% Agricultural Labour – F 63.3e 65.0f 6.0g - 
% Agricultural Labour – M 52.6e 71.0f 8.0g - 
% Non -Agricultural Informal Labour – F 19.5h 38.0i - - 
% of Formal Labour – F 17.0a - - - 
% of Formal Labour – M 39.7a - - - 
% Adult Literacy Rate – F 77.6e 68.0j 91.0j 94.0j 
% Adult Literacy Rate – M 84.0e 75.0k 95.0k 93.0k 
Data sources: a Quoted in Arab Development Portal (2019). Comoros Statistical Snapshot 2019. Figures from  the 
International Labour Organisation – ILO & Institute National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques et 
Demographiques – INSEED (2013). Data Report ; b ILOSTAT (2015). ‘Country Profile: Madagascar’ ; c ILOSTAT 
(2017). ‘Country Profile: Mauritius’. O nline Databank ; d ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’. Online 
Databank. e The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Comoros’. Online Databank ; f The World Bank, Gender 
Data Portal (2019). ‘Madagascar’. Online Databank ; g The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Mauritius’. Online 
Databank ; h African Development Bank –  AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile. Report  ; i The World Bank, 
Human Development Department –  Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in Madagascar . Report ; j The World 
Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, adult female 15+’ (collated from UNESCO UIS). Online Databank ; k The 
World Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, adult male 15+’ (collated from UNESCO UIS). Online Databank   
 
Indicators compiled for the labour and education sectors show the interrelated nature of the two sectors, 
and how these help determine both individual and national well -being. Comoros, among the four 
countries targeted by this project, displays the lowest labour force participation (b oth male and female) 
– testifying to its status as an undiversified economy, dependence on remittances and high levels of non -


---
*Page 108*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
wage activities. In the context of climate change and increasing disasters, the lack of diversification in the 
economy and natural resource -based livelihoods for a majority of the population can create impediments 
to adaptation opportunities . 
An AfDB Country Gender Assessment  (AfDB, 2010) notes that the labour market in Comoros is 
characterised by the feminisation of precarious emplo yment, informal activities, and unemployment – 
the agricultural sector employs the largest number of women (about 67%) while the civil service employs 
only 30% of women, particularly in low -level jobs. There are more self -employed women (56.1%) than 
men (4 7.5%), in tandem with 47% of the unemployed in Comoros being women . In the non -agricultural 
informal sector (traders, small entrepreneurs and the self- employed), women occupy a further 19.5% of 
jobs. Female employment in Comoros remains low with only 13.7%  of women in the wage -earning group, 
69.2% of which are in ‘unsheltered employment’  
Although labour force participation in Madagascar is high, the country has uniquely high poverty rates in 
the region, as large sections of the population are dependent on a griculture. In fact, literacy rates collated 
for the country are misleading: over half of the population (and consequently, the workforce) lack 
qualified training and knowledge to enter the formal sector,  which  also accounts for less than 3% of the 
total economy  (World Bank, 2010 ). The agricultural livelihoods -dependent economy and households are 
vulnerable to external shocks and climate risks, reiterating the importance of EbA measures in the country.   
Further, the World Bank  (2010)  identifie d a three -tiered gender gap in Madagascar. For example, median 
earnings for women in non -agricultural employment reach only two -thirds of earnings tabulated for men. 
The differences are partly explained by differences in levels of education, yet women with similar 
char acteristics as men are paid comparatively less. Additionally, the gender wage gap is highest in the 
informal private non -agricultural sector, and this appears to be largely linked to firm size and other 
characteristics. Women, thus, appear to face difficul ties and possibly discrimination in at least three areas: 
access to education, access to higher paying jobs and same pay in those jobs, and access to financial capital and other institutions that favour firm growth.  
In Mauritius, the gendered dynamic of the labour market is evident: female labour force participation is 
quite low compared to peer economies. This can be primarily attributed to tradition - and faith -based 
norms that inform domestic and household labour (care, reproductive and relat ed work) in Mauritian 
society.  
Gokulsin and Tandrayen -Ragoobur (2014) studied gender, education and the labour market and found 
that alt hough girls outperform boys at all education levels (primary, secondary and tertiary), their access 
to job opportunities  is reduced. The f emale unemployment rate is higher than that of male s, while women 
who manage to enter the labour market are segmented to remain in low -occupation jobs. As mentioned 
in an earlier section, women entrants from affluent households primarily fuel led the  recent expansion of 
female labour –  showing how women’s access to the market and remunerative prospects are stymied by 
existing household income levels  (World Bank, 2015) .


---
*Page 109*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
In Seychelles, g irls and young women have higher enrolment rates in seco ndary and tertiary education 
than boys/young men. According to the UNESCO Institute of Statistics, gross enrolment in tertiary 
education for females was 20 per cent, compared with 9 per cent for males ( UN ECA, 2017).   
Despite higher levels of education, however, female labour force participation still lags behind male labour 
force participation by almost 10 % (Ilostat, 2017) , with the  Gender Secretariat reporting considerable 
dropout rates for women from the labour market.  Seychelles presents a unique case for labour and 
education performance, underscoring the complex social phenomena that inform socioeconomic 
indicators, which provide the baseline upon which climate adaptation and resilience can be built.  
These existing gaps translate into inequ alities, such as in: decision -making authority and power within the 
household; control over economic and productive resources; and access to capital, savings and 
investment opportunities; which are crucial in determining resilience capacities, disaster res ponse and 
the ability to capitalise on adaptation opportunities.  
• Health and Social Indicators  
Table 5. Health and Social Indicators  
HEALTH & SOCIAL INDICATORS  Comoros  Madagascar  Mauritius  Seychelles  
# # Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) Per 
100,00 Live Birthsa 335 353 53 - 
# Under -Five Mortality Rate, Per 1000 Live 
Birthsb 69 44 13 14 
% Exposure to Gender -Based Violence 
(GBV)  5c - 24d 58e 
Data sources: a The World Bank, Open Data (2015). ‘MMR, modelled estimate (collated from WHO/ UNICEF/ 
UNFPA/ UNDESA). Online Databank  ; b The World Bank, Open Data (2017). ‘Mortality Rate, under 5 (collated by 
the UN Inter Agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation). On line Databank  ; c The World Bank, Open Data (2017). 
‘Comoros: Proportion of women subjected to sexual/ physical violence in last 12 months (collated by the UNDS). 
Online Databank  ; d Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’. Online. Consulté  le 24 août 2019 ;  e 
Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Seychelles: GBV National Baseline Research’. Report. Online. Consulté le 24 août 2019.  
 
Selected health and social indicators presented above, particularly the extremely high maternal mortality 
ratio (MMR) and under -five mortality rate, display how the health system in Comoros is plagued by limited 
access to medical centres, insufficient reso urces with frequent drug shortages, skilled staff shortages, 
inadequate staff training opportunities, and weaknesses in health data collection, analysis, and processing  
(AfDB, 2010).  In 2003, the MMR was 381 deaths per 100,000 live births, and has seen a d ownward trend 
marked at 335 deaths in the latest survey (2015). Although GBV rates are lower and atypical in the region,


---
*Page 110*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Comoros has a high rate of child marriage (32%, according to the UN Women Global Database on Violence 
Against Women).  
The data gathered  on Madagascar for health and social indicators reveal a similar predicament to that of 
Comoros. High MMR and under -five mortality rates, along with the country’s struggles with pneumonic 
plague in 2017 and 2018, indicate a lack of investment in the public  health system, limited access to 
healthcare, and gaps in preparedness, surveillance and response capabilities. Although national GBV rates are not available yet for the country, a UNFPA pilot study (in Antananarivo, Diego and Tulear) found about 
30% of wo men reported having experienced GBV  (The New Humanitarian, 2013) . Further, Madagascar 
has a high rate of child marriage (41%, according to the UN Women Global Database on Violence Against Women).  
Given this baseline, climate -sensitive health impacts/diseas e outbreaks (such as malaria, typhoid, and 
cholera in the aftermath of disasters) as well as pandemics such as Coronavirus/COVID 19 can be expected 
to further destabilise households, create income shocks, and lead to preventable loss of life.  
In contrast to Comoros and Madagascar, Mauritius’ performance on health and social indicators is better, 
proving the importance of consistent and relevant government investment in the public health sector and 
social institutions. According to time -series data reported by the Government of Mauritius, however, 
there are recent spikes in MM R and under -five mortality (especially in 2017 ; Govt. of Mauritius, 2017 ). 
Gender Links finds that about a quarter of women in Mauritius have experienced some form of GBV in 
their lifetime , including partner and non -partner violence , while a similar proportion of men admit to 
perpetuating violence against women in their lifetime. Violence occurs primarily in intimate partner 
relationships, showing how IPV is the predominant type  of GBV in the island country, in addition to 
minimal rates of reporting: only 0.3% of women in Mauritius have reported domestic violence. It can be 
speculated from the Gender Links baseline study that actual levels of GBV are higher and go underreported i n the country.  
In a similar vein to Mauritius, Seychelles has better indicators of health outcomes (such as life expectancy 
and child mortality rates) than many other small island states, primarily because of free access to 
healthcare provided by the state. Since the 2000s, the country has recorded zero maternal mortality; 
births attended by skilled health s taff hovers between 99 and 100%,  and the proportion of women 
receiving prenatal care has consistently been over 99%  (World Bank, 2012)   The island natio n achieved 
most of the health -related MDGs, and is on track to operationalis e policy and budgetary allocations 
towards SDG 3 (Good Health and Well- Being).  
GBV studies in Seychelles have uniquely featured both women and men: in partnership with Gender Links , 
the Government has determined that the most common form of violence against men is emotional 
violence (29%), followed by physical violence (12%), economic violence (9%), and sexual violence (3.3%). 
Violence against women stands at a staggering 58%, showing the prevalence of di fferent types and 
complex incidence of GBV  in the islands.


---
*Page 111*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
2.2 Overview of gender issues in each Programme  country  
2.2.1 Comoros  
The Human Development Report (UNDP, 2018) ranks the Union of Comoros  133rd  of 189 countries 
assessed  for gender equality according to its GDI score. The Comorian Government recognizes the 
importance of gender mainstreaming and full participation of women in the development process as a 
means of reducing poverty and boosting the country’s economic development. In the Growth and Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRGSP) as updated in 2009, the Comorian Government affirmed its 
determination to give women their rightful place in the decision -making and development process.   
Gender iss ues in the Comoros are closely linked to traditions, customs and religion, which govern most 
aspects of the day -to-day life, and which strongly influence behavior and gender relations.  
Comorian society is often described as matriarchal. This system is thou ght to have been inherited from 
ancient times before the introduction of Islam and colonization. However, current realities do not seem 
to truly reflect the authority that the Comorian woman would be expected to wield in the household, 
community, or political domain  under a matriarchal system . According to custom, women generally 
inherit land and houses, but usufruct8 rights tend to go to their husbands, maternal uncles or their 
brothers. Even after a formal wedding, the Comorian woman is seldom consulted for community or village projects. She does not have access to village or community decision -making roles. Decisions relating to 
community life are taken by male notables at the village square or in mosques  (ADB, 2010).  
The economy of the Union of Comoros i s characterized by a high dependence on remittances from family 
members abroad , many based in France. Linked to this there is a  low overall labor force participation rate, 
especially for women (men: 50%; women: 36 %). As a consequence,  there is a high degree of dependency, 
particularly among women. ADB (2010) reports that women receive more of the remittances living abroad because there are more women -headed household s and that these households enjoy better living 
conditions. In women -headed households, a greater proportion of resources is allocated to household 
consumption and the wellbeing of the household members  (ADB, 2010) . This situation  is seemingly 
favorable to women  but also highlights their vulnerability in the event that remit tances stop for some 
reason.  
Overall, gender policy in the Union of Comoros is mainly defined by the Growth and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRGSP ; Stratégie de croissance et de réduction de la pauvreté –  SCRP , 2009 ) which calls 
for gender dimensions and human rights to be integrated into all programs as a priority to ensure peace 
and security. The gender strategy framework is specified in more detail in the National Gender Equity and 
Equality Policy ( Politique nationale d’Equité et d’Egalité de Genre  - PNEEG , 2008 ), which includes 5 
strategic orientations:  
• better integration of women in the economy;  
• improved education attainment for girls;  
 
8 referring to the right of one individual to use and enjoy the property of another


---
*Page 112*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
• promotion of health and reproductive health rights;  
• adoption of egalitarian deci sion-making in politics, religion and customs; and  
• harmonization  and coordination of institutional mechanisms.  
In Comorian society , customary rules, Islamic law and modern law are applied in parallel, resulting in a 
complex situation. The fundamental gender equality provisions enshrined in modern law are not 
therefore adequate to successfully reduce the gender disparity embodied in customary practices and 
Islamic law.  
The participation of women in the  labor market is approximately 36% (UNDP, 2018). More w omen  than 
men  work in precarious employment and informal activities . The agricultural sector employs the largest 
number of women (66.9%) while  only 30% of  the civil service are female employees,  most of whom occupy 
low-level jobs  (ADB, 2010) . In the Comoros, there are more unemployed women than men  with 1.15 
women unemployed for every man (UNDP, 2018) . This high female unemployment rate helps explain the 
limited resources of Comorian women in gen eral.  According to ADB (2010) , the low level of employment 
of Comorian women conceals a high female participation rate  in non market activities that are not included 
in national income accounting.  Access to conventional bank credit is very limited for women  
entrepreneurs because they are unable to comply with loan requirements. However, Microfinance 
Institutions ( MFIs ) have more flexible lending conditions and provide an alternative. As a result , 50% of 
MFI customers are women  (AFD, 201 6). However, the overa ll proportion of women with accounts at 
financial institutions remains low at just 17.9% (UNDP, 2018).  
Women are mainly involved in agriculture through market garden production and poultry husbandry . 
They also undertake cash crop production with less involvement in the marketing aspects, unlike in fishing 
where they are often  responsible for the sale of fish  (ADB, 2010) .  
According to custom, inheritance of land follows the maternal line.  Land and buildings therefore pass to 
the eldest daughter. Howev er, men (usually husbands or brothers) usually manage the land. Also,  there 
are differences between the islands and in Anjouan and Mohéli sons may inherit up to 2/3 of the family 
inheritance in keeping with Islamic law (AFD, 2016). Absence and/or poor land  registry is a common 
situation in the Comoros.  
Climate change, combined with ongoing pressures on the country’s natural resources , is likely to have 
negative impacts on food security, forest cover and water availability. Given that women and girls are 
generally responsible for household tasks such as collection of fuel wood,  collection of water and the 
harvesting and preparation of food, c limate change is likely to further increase the workload of women 
and girls .  This will reduce the time available for food production as well as income -generating activities, 
and could affect household food security and the nutritional well- being. Moreover, more women than 
men work in the informal sector and in small enterprises wh ich are less easily able to recover from the 
effects of disasters, given their lack of capital and limited access to credit.


---
*Page 113*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
2.2.2 Madagascar  
In 2018, the World Economic Forum ranked Madagascar 84 out of 149 countries globally and 15 among 
Sub-Saharan cou ntries for gender equality. In a separate ranking, the Africa Development Bank ranked it 
within the top ten countries for gender equality in Africa (A DB, 2015).  Although Madagascar performs 
relatively well within Africa for some measures of gender equalit y, significant gender gaps remain and in 
recognition of this the Government has developed a National Plan for Gender Promotion that aims to 
mainstream gender integration into all development interventions.  The situation that many Malagasy girls 
and women f ace seems stagnant, especially in areas where no public administration is available. In some 
areas, traditional customs and stereotypes still prevail and regulate women’s everyday lives  
Extreme poverty and food insecurity are extreme in many parts of rural Madagascar.  Household structure 
plays an important role in the poverty in Madagascar. Extreme poverty incidence, though not absolute 
poverty, is higher among female -headed households (Sulla, 2014). Although there are no major 
differences between male s and females in terms of absolute poverty rates at the national level, this does 
not imply there are no gender -related discrepancies. Analysis of the labor market suggests that women’s 
earnings are not as high as those of men when controlling for various other factors (Sulla, 2014).  
In Madagascar, both government and civil society are confronting women’s rights issues more than ever 
before. Yet much remains to be done, especially to overcome deeply ingrained practices and customs that 
hinder women’s empowe rment.  Women’s rights are enshrined in the Constitution of Madagascar and the 
government has a National Plan for Gender Promotion. However, gender disparities persist and were well 
characterized by the Africa Development Bank (ADB, 201 6):  
• Social norms rem ain centered around men: these are reflected in households, where traditional 
division of labor leaves execution roles  to women and decision -making roles to men. This division 
tends to also be reflected in workplaces;  
• Important gaps in gender positive legi slation and their application: throughout much of rural 
Madagascar the country’s laws coexist with traditional bylaws and customs.  The legal system is 
hard for people, including women, to access in rural areas , which means that the many gender 
positive legal texts are effectively not applied;  
• High prevalence of underage marriages and adolescent childbirth: r elated to the two points 
above, social norms in many areas encourage early marriages and childbirth. In so me regions , 60% 
of girls already have children by the age of 18;  
• Disproportionate burden placed on women for childcare and household tasks : Related to the 
points above, and exacerbated by widespread food and health insecurity, women tend to be 
responsible within households for multiple roles in households that are time consuming, not paid 
and limit their ability to engage in the labor market, politics, community associations and broader 
civil society;  
• Violence against children and women: Despite multiple in itiatives over successive governments 
and by donors, violence against women and sexual exploitation of minors remains a problem that 
is amplified by poverty in some regions of the country;


---
*Page 114*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
• Lack of economic opportunities for women : due to multiple factors , women have less 
opportunities to engage in revenue generating activities.  
While climate change impact s both men and women, it is particularly problematic for women due to 
traditional roles and division of labor.  Problems such as decreasing productivity o f land, sedimentation of 
water courses and health issues are already widespread concerns for many of Madagascar’s rural poor 
and will be amplified by climate change and further environmental degradation. Women, particularly 
women -led households, tend to ha ve less land,  practice agriculture that is less diverse, have  less 
opportunities to engage in alternative cash paying work and therefore less resilience and ability to adapt 
in the face of unexpected events.     
In general, the national policies, strategie s and programs for development and for sustainable 
management of natural resources (forests, water catchment and irrigation, preparation of the REDD 
strategy, climate change, land use, food security, risk and disaster management...) take into account 
gende r. In spite of difficulties, women are taking an increasing leadership in the environment sector.  
2.2.3 Mauritius  
As noted earlier, Mauritius is ranked relatively highly (65th of 189 countries assessed) for gender equality 
according to its GDI score  (UNDP, 2018) .  The Constitution of Mauritius, approved in 1948, granted  women 
the right to vote and equal access to, and full participation in, power struc tures  and decision -making 
forums. After years of lobbying by women ’s organizations , two important de velopments occurred in the 
1980s. First, key laws were amended to give women greater equality in matters related to marriage, 
property rights, income and business ownership. Second, a new ministry was established with 
responsibility for women’s rights, children and family issues. The current Ministry of Gender Equality , 
Child Development  and Family Welfare has as its mission to design and implement policies and 
programmes geared towards promoting gender equality and equity, protecting the rights of children  and 
enhancing their overall development and promoting the welfare of families. In 2008, the National Gender 
Policy Framework  was established that calls upon all Ministries to include gender dimensions in all their 
respective policies.  
In Mauritius, gender  equality is observed in many spheres of society  (UN ECA, 2016; UNDP, 2018) . In 
education, the proportion of women is higher than for men in terms of tertiary and secondary school 
enrolment and literacy rates for those aged 15 to 24. Regarding health, child health (the under -5 survival 
rate) and the share of population without HI V is similar for males and females . The life expectancy of 
women also exceeds that of men . 
Women lag men in terms of employment. Women have lower labor force participation, a smaller share 
of jobs than men and lower rates of employment (see table 2). Women  have low ownership of businesses 
and fewer of them have accessed financial credit. However, the proportion of women in senior 
management roles is increasing.  A large proportion (87%) of women have bank accounts  (UNDP, 2018) .  
One of the remaining areas of greatest inequality is in politics. At only 11.6%, t he representation of women 
in parliament is significantly lower than that of men  (UNDP, 2018) .


---
*Page 115*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
The Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare is entru sted with the 
responsibility to design and implement social policies and programs , which promote empowerment  of 
women , child development, family welfare as well as welfare of the community. Accordingly, actions 
of the Ministry are geared towards having the  right conditions and environment for the harmonious 
development of the Mauritian children, women and their families9. 
 The main objectives of the Ministry are:  
• To promote and defend women's rights as human rights, work for the elimination of all forms of 
discrimination against women and ensure that legal measures are taken to promote equality 
between men and women ; 
• To implement gender -sensitive macroeconomic policies and strategies, including those related to 
poverty alleviation ; 
• To promote and de fend children’s rights, work for the elimination of all forms of violence and 
discrimination against children ( defined as being the age bracket of 0 -18 years ) and ensure that 
legal measures are taken & mechanisms are put in place to promote safety and secu rity of 
children ; 
• To promote the development and welfare of children from birth  in accordance with the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), to promote family welfare and to combat gender -
based  violence ; 
• To promote the welfare and empowerment of citizens through community -based programmes 
for an inclusive society.  
2.2.4 Seychelles  
Lack of some data means that Seychelles does not appear in global comparisons of gender development 
indices (e.g. GDI, GII or t he Women’s Economic Opportunity Index). However, where data is published, 
development indicators for women and girls are mostly above global averages. Where sex disaggregated data is available, women and men have similar scores in most cases. Seychelles re gistered only 4 cases of 
maternal death in the period 2006 -2015 ( UN ECA, 2017). Health indicators for children under age of 5 are 
similar for girls and boys ( UN ECA, 2017) and life expectancy is relatively high by global standards for 
women (78.6) and men (69.5). Girls and young women have higher enrolment rates in secondary and 
tertiary education than boys/young men. According to the UNESCO Institute of Statistics, gross enrolment 
in tertiary education for females was 20 per cent, compared with 9 per cent for males ( UN ECA, 2017).  
In common with most countries, women are less represented in politics than men. According to data from 
the Inter -Parliamentary Union, seven women were elected to parliament in the 2016 elections, compared 
with 26 men. In a cabinet  of 12 ministers, excluding the Vice -President, five are women ( UN ECA, 2017). 
However,  women are well represented in some senior management posts and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs noted in 2013 that “for positions, such as director- general and district administrators, women are 
almost on par with men or are more represented. In positions with more decision -making power and 
authority (government ministers and chief executive officers), there are fewer women”  (COL, 2015)  
 
9 http://gender.govmu.org/English/Pages/default.aspx


---
*Page 116*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
There is a dearth of sex -disaggreg ated data about the various levels of poverty in Seychelles. However, 
the 2004 Millennium Development Goals report indicated that “although there is no absolute poverty in 
Seychelles ‘pockets’ of poverty do exist and the report identifies single teenage mo thers with few 
marketable skills as constituting one of the ‘pockets’” (COL, 2015).  
2.2.5 Gender Challenges related to the Potential Impacts of Climate Change  
Many information exist on Gender Challenges related to the potential impacts of Climate Change.  Annex 
2, the Feasibility Study identifies a number of potential impacts of climate change that the Programme 
has the potential to address. Table 6 below outlines these risks and impacts and notes gender risks and 
challenges that are associated with them.   
 
Table 6. Summary of Gender challenges for the p otential Impacts from Climate Change in the Programme Countries  that are o f 
high relevance to the Programme  
Climate Risk  Potential Impacts  Gender challenges  
Water Resources  
Increased 
temperatures  Reduction of key water points; 
draining of standing freshwater 
sources and watercourses during the 
dry season  Women and girls often take on 
the role within households of collecting water and maintenance 
of irrigation for rice/other crops.  
Reduced rainfall and 
increased drought conditions  Reduced river flows, resulting in 
reduced access to water supplies for drinking, sanitation and energy 
generation, and reduced water quality   
Increased intensity of 
cyclones  Cyclone -induced destruction o f water 
infrastructure and flood -induced water 
quality reductions due to increased 
sedimentation   
Agricultural Production  
Increased 
temperatures  Crop damage and reduced yields  Different roles in agricultural 
production and natural resources 
management.  
 
Increased precipitation during the rainy season  Higher rates of evapotranspiration, 
reducing soil moisture and increasing soil degradation  
Increased need for irrigation  
Increased livestock mortality  Women and men have different 
access to and control over land and water resources in coastal zones. There may be conflicts between usufruct rights and legal 
rights or traditional tenure and 
formal tenure. Women tend to 
have access to land through male 
famil y members (husband, father, Reduced rainfall in the 
dry season and 
increased drought 
conditions  Increase in pests and diseases  
Increased sedimentation, soil erosion and siltation, c ompromising flat 
lowland areas


---
*Page 117*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Increased cyclone 
intensity  Damage to crops, supply chains and 
infrastructure from cyclones  or brother), rather than hold titles 
in their own names  (though note 
the exception of parts of 
Comoros) . Tenure has proved to 
be important as it influences who 
can make formal decisions about 
land use, who is consulted on 
develo pment plans, and who has 
access to other supportive services such as credit and 
extension services.  
Coastal Ecosystems  
Increased 
temperatures  Increased sea surface temperatures 
and ocean acidification, impacting coral reefs and other coastal 
ecosystems  Often coastal zone management 
decisions are made without the perspective and leadership of female stakeholders and professionals. Women are still the 
minority decision -makers in 
political processes, because 
women tend to have less access 
than men to formal decision  
making authorities and to local 
decision -making structures, 
including those related to coastal 
management.  Increased cyclone 
intensity  Destruction of marine habitats and 
biodiversity loss  
Sea level rise  Increased coastal erosion, inland soil 
erosion and saltwater intrusion  
Reduced water quality and increased flooding in densely populated coastal urban areas  
Fisheries  
Sea level rise   Reduced productivity due to increased 
sedimentation and runoff, and reduced water quality  The s egregated nature of the 
fishing industry  is a challenge . 
Studies show that men tend to fish offshore or in major inland water bodies, while women fish 
close to shore. Women tend to be 
more involved than men in post -
harvest activities, particularly in 
small- scale fisheries. Women tend 
to juggle multiple activities (such 
as combining aquaculture with 
vegetable gardens or fish - 
smoking), whereas men’s work is 
often clearly focused on one set 
of inter- related activities.
 
 
Rise in sea surface 
temperature  Temperature -induced shifts in the 
ranges and populations of fish; 
changes in reproduction cycles  The Indian Ocean tsunami of 
December 2004 had differential 
impacts on women and on men,


---
*Page 118*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Increased cyclone 
intensity  Destruction of fish habitat and 
ecosystem (e.g., coral reefs and 
mangroves); migration of fish away 
from historical fishing areas  due to the strong gender -based 
division of labour of productive and re productive activities in the 
areas it struck. Men have traditionally taken care of fishing 
and marketing, while women are 
responsible for fish processing. 
Therefore more men were away in the sea, while women were along the shores, resulting in a very high death toll for women 
and children. However, many 
relief and rehabilitation efforts continue to focus more on men 
than women.  Increased frequency of 
extreme events  Increased production costs due to 
destruction of infrastructure and interruption of s upply chains  
Note: Table based on information provided in the national adaptation plans for the four Programme 
countries  
 
As everyday users of resources, women can also easily identify changes to habitats, species abundance 
and distribution and can single out factors relating to these changes. Women can also be instrumental in 
all forms of habitat restoration  which is likely to be an important EbA activity proposed as subprojects . An 
initial point in most management initiatives has been the introduct ion of practical activities, in which the 
communities become involved. This is then expanded to other management initiatives. Habitat 
restoration can include mangrove re -planting, coral re -planting, shore vegetation re -planting, and other 
such activities. Regeneration at that level can then motivate involvement in wider management issues 
Involvement of women in mangrove swamp restoration and maintenance, using their knowledge about 
biodiversity in these coastal ecosystems, will also benefit coastal households and enable sustainable 
coastal zone management.  
 
Table 7. Other Gender Risks and Challenges for the Programme  
Risks and Challenges  Context  
Gender differentiated 
impacts of climate effects 
and natural disasters  The first and foremost hurdle for the project is the gender -specific 
differences (in consumption patterns and incidence of poverty, access to and control of resources and power, time use patterns and economic 
activities, etc.) that uniquely compound and ov erlap to create gendered 
vulnerability to climate change in each Programme country.  
Gendered access to EbA 
solutions proposed by the 
Programme  Women are often not allowed to access public spaces (where public 
information  may be announced), for example mo sques in Comoros . 
Women may have less access to information, such as radio access in


---
*Page 119*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Madagascar, and dissemination of information may be limited to channels 
primarily accessed by men. Additionally, time poverty (explored below) 
experienced by women and men  (in some contexts) can also constrain the 
adoption of adaptation solutions, particularly in post -disaster and other 
vulnerable contexts.  For example, in Madagascar, time poverty is 
recognized as a major constraint for introducing more sustainable 
agricult ural practices as people can’t afford to experiment and for them 
not to work.  
Sidelining local adaptation 
measures  Communities have long histories and pra ctice of management of natural 
resources. Consequently, local adaptation methods  and information 
chan nels (albeit discrete and reactive) have also existed. Resilience of 
communities, as well as ecosystems, can be ensured through the 
incorporation of these primarily reactive techniques into broader  
projects/programmes.  
Gender -based violence  Despite mounti ng evidence for interlinkages between GBV and 
environmental factors, academic enquiry and practical integration of this perspective remains limited in adaptation practice. Physical, sexual and 
psychological harm are usually exacerbated during ex -post  situa tions of 
climate impacts and losses, disasters and extreme weather events.  
In the Indian Ocean island nations, GBV rates are high ( and probably 
underreported - Madagascar lack s a recent nation -wide survey). In the 
Seychelles archipelago, men also experience high levels of violence 
(uncharacteristic to the region, where women are usually targeted) 
alongside a persistent drug -addiction epidemic, creating further barriers 
in the fa ce of frequent and severe climate impacts.  
Gendered limitations in 
decision -making 
institutions  Decision -making institutions, power -sharing mechanisms and overall 
representation tend to be skewed towards men in all four Programme 
countries. Yet, at the sa me time, women make important household 
decisions daily, in these countries, that pertain to domestic food security, 
water provision, and other essentials. Without the adequate integration 
of these complex and gendered phenomena, it will be difficult to re spond 
to particular needs and interests of vulnerable groups at the local level. In 
such a context, interventions become restricted to implementing scenario -
based adaptation solutions, which are essentially top -down, that lead to 
limited successes and lack  of ownership at the community level.  
 
It is because the CEPF seeks to local and very contextualized information regarding gender issues that it 
is managing to get good result on these issues as related to its annual impacts reports. The strength of the


---
*Page 120*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Programme regarding gender results will b e allowed thanks to the detailed gender analysis that will be 
undertaken as part of Component 1 of the Programme alongside the priority setting to determine the 
priority EbA themes and geographic sites where the Programme will invest through CSO subproject s. The 
analysis of climate risks, potential impacts and specific gender considerations for the Programme will be 
undertaken at that time and enlightened with the global knowledge available on these issues10.  
2.2.6 Civil Society Capacity in the Programme countries  
An overview of the Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) working on environmental issues in each of the four 
Programme countries is provided in Annex 2, the Feasibility Study. Overall the organizations vary 
enormously from international NGOs, national NGOs that can have large, complex programs down to 
community -based groups with very little capacity and few opportunities to access funding. Very few of 
the organizations have a regional/multi- country emphasis, which has hampered regional cooperation. 
Even the very largest of the environmental international NGOs such as WWF, WCS and CI tend to be 
focused almost exclusively on Madagascar alone. Madagascar also has several large national NGOs with significant capacity and the ability to attract funding from international donors. CEPF’s past investments 
have been important for contributing to the emergence of many of these national NGOs. In the other 
countries, national NGOs tend to dominate, sometimes in partnership with international organizations.  
The capac ity of these various CSOs varies also varies enormously. Specifically,  with respect to integrating 
gender into their activities, the International NGOs all have dedicated gender teams at their international headquarters who provide support to their country  offices on gender issues. Typically, the country office 
will either have one person dedicated to gender, or more usually, someone who is the gender focal point 
but also has other responsibilities. All of these NGOs provide their staff with periodic intern al trainings on 
gender and are also likely to invite close partner national NGOs to such trainings when possible. National 
NGOs will also tend to have gender focal points who have benefitted from gender trainings that have 
either been organized in the spec ific context of environmental programs, or by development partner 
organizations (including international development NGOs) on more general concepts of integrating 
gender into projects. Staff at larger NGOs (whether national or international) will therefore  tend to be 
familiar with the advantages, and indeed the need, of integrating gender dimensions into their work. They 
will also likely have access to significant technical resources to help them do that (though probably not 
financial resources).  
By contra st, the concept of integrating gender considerations into their activities, will be more novel for 
smaller NGOs, they not be familiar with it, they may not have received training and they may have limited technical resources to help them. Resources such as  CEPF’s gender toolkit (Appendix 2) have been 
developed with these organizations in mind and will be modified and improved upon as part of 
Component 3 (knowledge products development) of the Programme.    
  
 
10 See for an example : https://www.undp.org/content/dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/environment -
energy/www- ee-library/wat er-governance/resource -guide -mainstreaming -gender -in-water -
management/IWRMGenderResourceGuide -English -200610.pdf


---
*Page 121*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
 
3. Programme -level Gender Action Plan  
Ensuring that both men and women have equal opportunities to participate in , and benefit from , the 
Programme  can be achieved through progressive and efficient mainstreaming of gender dimensions 
throughout the grant -making processes in the hotspot. One of the goals of this Gender Action Plan is to 
ensure that any gender -related adverse impact  of subprojects  is avoided, minimized and/or mitigated.  
Further, CEPF seeks to achieve positive gender equality impacts through application of the Plan.  The 
objective of  this Plan is to outline actions that will be specifically taken within the duration of the 
Programme .  
Given the three components of the Programme (1. Development of strategic plans for EbA; 2. Supporting 
EbA activities through grants to CSOs; and 3. Ensu ring long term sustainability, including through capacity 
building), the Programme can contribute towards greater gender equality in the four Programme 
countries by:  
• Establishing gender -aware strategic plans for EbA;  
• Promoting gender balance in the EbA act ivities that are financed through the grants that CEPF 
makes;  
• Building capacity of CSOs, including community groups, on gender so that they integrate gender 
activities into their own projects/programmes, whether funded by CEPF or other sources . 
To ensure that all Programme  activities (e.g., definition of investment strategies, training of the Regional 
Implementation Team, sub project design, implementation and reporting, monitoring and evaluation, 
learning and communication) are consistent with CEPF’s Gender  Policy, the Plan is divided into three parts:  
1) Preparation of the organizational structure and necessary tools.  
2) Implementation throughout the Programme . 
3) Monitoring & Evaluation and dissemination of lessons learned (especially relevant to Component  
3, whic h concerns replicating successful approaches to other hotspots).  
CEPF recognizes that Civil Society Organization (CSO) grantees have different capacities, needs and 
experiences in integrating gender into their sub projects and operational structures. The Gender Action 
Plan seeks to be practical in terms of feasibility given the broad geographical targets of the Programme , 
the wide variation in capacities of the CSOs  that are expected to be engaged and supported by the 
Programme , and the gender disparities among the countries involved . The Plan will be applied 
accordingly , recognizing that site -specific approach es to addressi ng gender issues will be needed. The Plan 
is well aligned with the way that CEPF already integrates gender issues into its grant -making and will 
benefit from the internal capacity that CEPF already has on gender issues as well as tools and training 
resources already developed (see Appendix 2 and 3 for the CEPF toolkit and CEPF factsheet on gender for 
CSO grantees; CEPF’s gender tracking tool for CSOs is also included in Annex 21 provided as part of the funding proposal package).


---
*Page 122*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
 
Part 1: Preparation of the organizational structure and necessary tools  
Within the first year of the Programme , the following actions will be taken in order to build staff skills and 
develop tools and training materials:  
1. CEPF’s existing Gender Focal Point11  will take responsi bility for the implementation of the Gender 
Action Plan. The staff member will continue to benefit from ongoing training opportunities and 
institutional support from Conservation International, who have a dedicated gender team  and 
capacity building opportu nities with AFD’s gender team as they arise.  
2. Progressive updates will be made to existing templates, documents, protocols, scopes of work, 
tools and training materials/contents (and potentially the development of new ones) to integrate 
gender consideratio n in the day -to-day management of grant -making. This will flow down from 
the Ecosystem Profiling stage , where the cultural aspects of the region are described,  and which 
will include a gender analysis,  to the training of the Regional Implementation Team, the selection 
of subprojects, the monitoring of their implementation and the refinement of CEPF’s Monitoring 
Framework (see Part 3 below).  
3. A focal point for gender will be nominated within the Regional Implementation Team, who will 
receive specific trainin g on gender, subsequently assess capacity -needs, provide guidance and 
training  to members of their RIT   in order for their whole  team to train and support subproject 
applicants and grantees, and report back on gender mainstreaming at the hotspot level.  The 
gender focal point will also benefit of experiential learning from other CEPF RITs. Those 
experiences have produced the CEPF Toolkit and Factsheet (attached below) and are contributing to the development of Gender Mainstreaming Guidelines.  The Scope o f Work for the Regional 
Implementation Team will be revised accordingly.  
 
The Programme  will provide a strong foundation for further strengthening of gender integration at the 
scale of CEPF’s global operations. Experience with implementation of the Gender Action P lan in the 
hotspot will be documented, and inform the implementation of CEPF’s gender strategy in the other 
hotspots where CEPF invests.  
Part 2: Implementation throughout the Programme  
Following the completion of Part 1 of the Gender Action Plan, additional activities will be implemented 
throughout the Programme : 
 
11 This role is fulfilled by the CEPF Executive Manager who serves as Learning and Outreach Manager for CEPF and 
therefore has other roles. 15 % of her time is dedicated to supporting CEPF’s gender work. However, the 
principal responsibility for day to day advancement of the Gender Action Plan will be the RIT team, who, as 
noted will have a gender focal point, and will also benefit of t he support of the CEPF Grant Director for the 
Hotspot.


---
*Page 123*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
1. The Regional Implementation Team for the hotspot, and in particular the gender focal point, will 
be trained on gender definition,  use of the CEPF Gender toolkit,  on the Action Plan and on its 
implication s for the grant -making process and on subsequent monitoring.  
2. The log frame for the hotspot  (included within the Ecosystem Profile developed under Component 
1) will be reviewed, and gender -responsive approaches, with potential indicators, will be 
incorporated wherever appropriate.  
3. Gender analyses and recommendations will be incorporated into relevant grants during the 
design  and the pro posal writing phase s (CEPF and Regional Implementation Team are consulted 
for additional expertise).  
4. Trainin gs for grantees will be organized on gender definition, gender implication s for EbA 
subprojects , strategies for gender mainstreaming and gender monitoring.  
5. Grantees will be supported to integrate gender -specific deliverables and indicators into their 
propo sals as appropriate.  
Given that the grant portfolio to be developed in the hotspot will be developed reactively, based upon 
the updated Ecosystem Profile and the type and quality of proposals received  from CSOs , it is not possible 
at this stage to provide a detailed plan for gender integration in each of the grants . However, while 
implementation will provide a fuller picture of challenges and opportunities, general suggestions at this point to mainstream gender into the Programme , are given in the Action Plan table below.  
Programme Grievance Mechanism  
CEPF requires all subprojects to have in place a grievance mechanism that must make available the contact 
details of the RIT and CEPF Secretariat, in case people affected by the project have concerns that they do 
not wish to raise directly with the grantee. Any grievances raised with the grantee should be 
communicated to the RIT and the CEPF Grant Director within 15 days, together with a proposed response. 
If the claimant is still  not satisfied following the response, the grievance may be submitted directly to the 
CEPF Executive Director via the dedicated email account ( cepfexecutive@conservation.org
) or by mail. If 
the claimant  is still not satisfied, the grievance may be submitted to AFD at their local office . 
Part 3: Monitoring & Evaluation and dissemination  
CEPF ’s global Monitoring Framework includes gender -specific indicators to assess concrete progress on 
gender mainstreaming across its grant portfolio .  
The gender indicators are applied to all relevant grants and are captured at the level of individual grants, 
and then aggregated at hotspot and global levels. Necessary adjustments may be made to the new 
indicators relevant to EbA based on initial implementation experiences during the Programme  and 
consultation with the Regional Implementation Team in the hotspot.   
Along with other indicators, the gender monitoring data shall inform programming through adaptive 
management. In addition to these indicators, efforts will be made to capture appropriate good practices 
from civil society organizations in particular, in ord er to share lessons learned via the production and 
dissemination of analytical documents on the gender theme  (as part of Component 3) . The exact nature


---
*Page 124*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
of the knowledge products to be developed in Component 3 is to be defined along with the updating of 
the Ecosystem Profile in Component 1.


---
*Page 125*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
Gender Action Plan showing gender -related activities for each output  
(note these activities also appear in section E .6. of the Funding Proposal  document ) 
Activities   Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  
Impact Statement:  
To reduce the vulnerability of island populations, including women and girls, by securing the critical ecosystem services they need to be resilient to climate change.  
 
Outcome Statement:  
Improved protection and/or restoration of 1.89 million hectares of important ecosystems for adaptation lead to secured critical ecosystem services for at least 698,000 
people.  
 Note: As part of Component 1, important ecosystems for  climate change adaptatio n will be defined though studies and a consultative process to agree a common vision 
between governments, donors, CSOs and the private sector for national EbA priorities.  Of the 698,000 people, 50% are expected to be women and girls. The expected 
distribution of number of direct and indirect beneficiaries of the Programme is provided in Annex 17 of the Funding Proposal.  
 
Output 1.1 Ecosystem Profile  updated  in the hotspot to identify and prioritise EbA actions by CSOs  
Activities  
 
• Include gender analysis  as a 
chapter in the Ecosystem Profile  
• Identify priority EbA activities that address climate change adaptation 
gender challenges  
• Include gender disaggregated 
indicators in Ecosystem Profile 
logframe and monitoring 
framework  
 Indicators  
  
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile include s gender 
analysis/assessment  
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile include s EbA 
priorities that address climate change gender 
issues  
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile include s gender 
disaggregated indicators   Indicative 
Time line 
 
 
  
By end of year 1  
(and further 
update after 5 
years)  Responsible  Organization  
 
 
 
 
 
CEPF  
 
Output 1.2 Long -term Vision for civil society enagagement in Ecosystem -based Adaptation developed for the hotspot with participation of government, civil society, 
donor and private sector actors.  
 
Activities  
 Indicators  
 Timeline  
 Responsible


---
*Page 126*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
• Include gender analysis as a 
chapter in Long -term Vision  
• Identify priority EbA activities that 
address climate change adaptation 
gender challenges  
• Develop a Gender Action Plan as 
part of the Long -term Vision  
• Identify opportunities for 
mainstreaming gender actions in 
EbA into national policies  
• Identify opportunities for private 
sector partnerships that address 
gender issues as part of EbA  
• Include gender disaggregated 
indicators in Long -term Vision 
logframe an d monitoring 
framework  
  
 
• 1 Long -term Vision include s gender 
analysis/assessment  
• 1 Long -term Vision include s EbA priorities that 
address climate change gender issues  
• 1 Gender Action Plan included in the Long -term 
Vision  
• 1 Long -term Vision include s gender 
mainstreaming opportunities  
• Long -term Vision include s gender EbA 
partnership opportunities  
• 1 Long -term Vision include s gender 
disaggregated indicators   
 
 
 
By end of year 6   
 
 
 
CEPF  lead for the Programme  but 
with broad input from government, 
CSOs, donors, private sector to 
ensure common ownership of the 
Vision.  
 
Output 1.3 Financing Plan developed for each of the Long-term Vision document  
Activities  
 
• Financing Plan include s funding for 
gender related activities identified 
in the Long - term Vision / Gender 
Action Plan  Indicators  
 
• 1 Financing Plan include s costed needs and 
identified funding opportunities for gender actions as identified in the Long -term Vision / Gender 
Action  Plan  Timeline  
 
 
By end of year 6  Responsible  
 
CEPF  lead for the Programme  but 
with broad input from government 
and donors operating in the 
Programme  countries  
 
Output 2.1. Prioirty EbA activities by CSOs supported in priority areas as defined in the Ecosystem profile  
Activities  
 
 
• Development of gender training 
materials for the Regional 
Implementation Team ( RIT) Indicators  
 
 
• 1 set of training materials for RIT are developed  
 
• 1 RIT trained and capable of ensuring that gender is 
mainstreamed into the grant portfolio management  Timeline  
  
By end of year 1  
 By end of 18 
months  Responsible


---
*Page 127*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
• The R IT is trained on gender 
mainstreaming, the Action Plan 
and their role in delivering it and 
subsequent monitoring  
• Development of gender training 
materials on EbA for the CSOs  
• Provide trainings on gender 
mainstreaming to CSOs  
• Initiate Calls for Proposals that specifically encourage subprojects 
that address detrimental gender -
specific practices and encourage 
positive ones that can be 
promoted as part of EbA grants  
• Support CSOs for EbA  grants that 
address gender issues or promote 
best gender practice   
• 1 set of training materials for CSOs developed  
 
• Training on gender mainstreaming in EbA provided to average of 1 0 CSOs in each country ( 4 trainings in 
total; 40 CSOs)  
 
• Minimum 20 subprojects specifically address gender 
issues to achieve gender positive results  
 
  
By end year 2  
 
By end year 3  
  
 
 
10 b y end year  5; 
20 by end year 10  CEPF , RITs  
 
Output 2.2 EbA action impacts quantified through cutting -edge science  
Activities  
 
• Support applied research to improve understanding of gender 
issues in EbA  Indicators  
 
• At least 2 research subprojects in the hotspot 
focused on improving gender dimensions of EbA  Timeline  
 
By end year 5  Responsible  
 CEPF , RITs  
 
Output 3.1 Models, tools and best practices developed under the Programme  are widely available and inform other actors developing and implementing EbA actions 
globally  
 
Activities  
 
• Develop innovative knowledge 
product documenting , and for 
sharing , models, tools and best 
practice on gender mainstreaming 
in EbA  
 Indicators  
 
 
• At least 1 knowledge product developed and 
disseminated  Timeline  
  
By end year 5  Responsible  
 
 
CEPF


---
*Page 128*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
 
  Output 3.2 Ensuring the financial and institutional sustainability of multi -sector programs for EbA, including through enhanced public and private partnerships  
 
Activities  
 
 
• Development of gender training 
materials for the Long -term 
implementation structure  
• The Long -term implementation 
structure  is trained on gender 
mainstreaming, the Action Plan 
and its role in delivering it and 
subsequent monitoring  
• Update gender training materials 
on EbA for the CSOs  
• Provide trainings on gender 
mainstreaming to CSOs through Long -term implementation 
structures  
 Indicators  
 
 
• 1 set of training materials for Long -term 
implementation structures  are developed  
 
• 1 Long -term implementation structure trained and 
capable of ensuring that gender is mainstreamed into the grant portfolio management  
 
• 1 set of training materials for CSOs updated 
 
• Training on gender mainstreaming in EbA provided to average of 1 0 CSOs in each country ( 4 trainings in 
total; 40 CSOs)  
 Timeline  
  
 
By end year 6  
 
 
By end year 6  
  
By end year 7  
 
 
By end year 7  Responsible  
  
 
  
 
 
CEPF


---
*Page 129*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
References  and Data Sources  
• References  
African Development Bank, 2010. Country Gender Profile  : Comoros  
African Development Bank, 2015. African Gender Equality Index 2015, ADB  
African Development Bank, 2016. Profil Genre Pays: République de Madagascar. 52pp.  
AFD, 2016. Profil Genre Comores. 5pp.  
Commonwealth of Learning, 2015. Gender Profile: Seychelles  
Economist In telligence Unit , 2012. Women’s Economic Opportunity Index  
Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’  
Government of Mauritius (2017). Health Statistics Report 2017.  Government Report. Accessed 03 
September 2019. Available at: 
http://health.govmu.org/English/Documents/2018/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202017%20FOR%20PRINT
ING.pdf  
Harvey C.A., Rakotobe Z.L., Rao N.S., Dave R., Razafimahatratra H., Rabarijohn R.H., Rajaofara H., and 
MacKinnon J.  2014. Extreme vulnerability of smallholder farmers to agricultural risks and climate 
change in Madagascar. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society . 369: 20130089  
 
ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’  
Republic of Seychelles , 2010. National Action Plan for Gender based Violence for the Republic of 
Seychelles. 30pp.  
Sulla V. , 2014. The Face of Poverty in Madagascar. Poverty, Gender and Inequality Assessment. 
World Bank.  
United Nations, Economic Commission for Africa, 2016. Country Profile: Mauritius. 40pp.  
United Nations, Economic Commission for Africa, 2017. Country Profile: Seychelles. 33pp.  
UNDP , 2018.  Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update  
The New Humanitarian (2013). ‘Small steps in Madagascar’s fight against GBV’. Online News Report. 
Accessed 03 September 2019. Available at: 
http://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/feature/2013/12/10/small- steps -madagascar- s-fight -against -
gender -based -violence  
The World Bank, Human Developmen t Department –  Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in 
Madagascar.  
The World Bank, 2012. Country Partnership Strategy: Seychelles


---
*Page 130*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
The World Bank, Development Research Group, 2013. ‘Gini Index’. Online Databank. Accessed 20 
August 2019. Available at: 
‘https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?end=2017&most_recent_value_desc=true&start
=1979&view=chart  
The World  Bank , 2015. Mauritius: Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity. Report. Accessed 
17 August 2019. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23804  
The World Ba nk, 2017 a. Mauritius: Addressing Inequality through More Equitable Labour Markets.  
The World Bank 2017b. Seychelles: Systematic Country Diagnostic. Report. Accessed 20 August 2019. 
Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27559  
World Bank and Union of the Comoros, 2017. Comoros Poverty Assessment. World Bank Group. 
223pp.  
World Economic Forum , 2018. The Glob al Gender Gap Report 2018


---
*Page 131*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
• Data Sources for tables  
 Sources of data/information for  
 Table  3: 
a The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Comoros’. 
Technical Note (online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB -9722 -4AE2 -ABC7 -
AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_COM.pdf  
b The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Madagascar’. 
Technical Note (online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB -9722 -4AE2 -ABC7 -
AA2972D6 8AFE/Global_POVEQ_MDG.pdf  
c The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Mauritius’. 
Technical Note (online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB -9722 -4AE2 -ABC7 -
AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_MUS.pdf  
d The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Seyc helles’. 
Technical Note (online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB -9722 -4AE2 -ABC7 
AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_SYC.pdf  
e UNDP & University of Oxford (2019). Table I: Multidimensional Poverty Index. Composite Index  
Data. Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_table_1.pdf  
f The World Bank & Union des Comores (2017). Comoros Poverty Assessment. Report. Accessed 15 
August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/342321528113131924/pdf/125069 -WP-P156542-
OUO -9-Comoros -Poverty -Assessment -revised.pdf  
g United Nations Population Fund (2012). Population Dynamics and Household Structure. Country 
Implementation Profile. Accessed 28 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource -pdf/FINAL_Mauritius.pdf  
h World Health Organization –  WHO (2016). Country Cooperation Strategy 2016 –  2021. Policy 
Document. Accessed 28 August 2019. Available at: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/254891/ccs -syc-2016- 2021-
en.pdf;jsessionid=E8B0B324965D261078C3BA1B2C44A0BC?sequence=1  
 Sour ces of data/information for Table 4: 
a Quoted in Arab Development Portal (2019). Comoros Statistical Snapshot 2019. Figures from the 
International Labour Organisation –  ILO & Institute National de la Statistique et des Etudes 
Economiques et Demographiques –  INSEED (2013). Data Report. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available 
at: 
http://data.arabdevelopmentportal.com/StatisticalSnapshot/?ln=en&type=country&query=COM/


---
*Page 132*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
b ILOSTAT (2015). ‘Country Profile: Madagascar’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. 
Available at: https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR  
c ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Mauritius’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available 
at: https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR  
d ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available 
at: https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR  
e The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Comoros’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 
2019. Available at: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/comoros  
f The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Madagascar’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 
2019. Available at:  http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/madagascar  
g The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Mauritius’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 
2019. Available at:  http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/mauritius   
h African De velopment Bank –  AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile . Report. Accessed 26 
August 2019. Available at: https:// www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project -and-
Operations/Comoros%20 -%20Country%20Gender%20Profile.pdf  
i The World Bank, Human Development Department – Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in 
Madagascar . Report. Accessed 24 August 2019. Avai lable at: 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMADAGASCAR/Resources/LaborMarkets.pdf  
j The World Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, adult female 15+’ (collate d from UNESCO UIS). 
Online Databank. Accessed 30 August 2019. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.FE.ZS  
k The World Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, ad ult male 15+’ (collated from UNESCO UIS). 
Online Databank. Accessed 30 August 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.MA.ZS
 
 Sources of data/information for Table 5 
a The World Bank, Open Data (2015). ‘MMR, modelled estimate (collated from WHO/ UNICEF/ 
UNFPA/ UNDESA). Online Databank. Accessed 22 August 2019 . Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT  
b The World Bank, Open Data (2017). ‘Mortality Rate, under 5 (collated by the UN Inter Agency 
Group for Child Mortality Estimation). Online Databank. Accessed 23 August 2019. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.DYN.MORT  
c The World Bank, Open Data (2017). ‘Comoros: Proportion of women subjected to sexual/ physical 
violence in last 12 months (collated by the UNDS). Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. 
Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.1549.ZS?locations=KM  
d Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’. Online. Accessed 24 August 2019. 
Available at: https://genderlinks.org.za/what -we-do/justice/research/violence- against -women -
baseline -research/mauritius -vaw-baseline -research/


---
*Page 133*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
e Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Seychelles: GBV National Baseline Research’. Report. Online. Accessed 24 
August 2019. Available at: https://genderlinks.org.za/what -we-do/justice/research/violence -against -
women -baseline -research/seychelles -vaw-baseline -research/


---
*Page 134*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
 
Appendix 1. CEPF’s Gender Policy  
 
 
CEPF’s mission is to engage civil society to protect biodiversity hotspots, the world’s most biologically 
diverse yet threatened ecosystems. The purpose of this policy is to ensure CEPF carries out its mission 
through a gender awareness lens. This means that staff of the CEPF Secretariat, Regional 
Implementa tion Teams and grantees  will understand and take into account the different roles of men 
and women in CEPF -related activities at all scales (e.g., Regional Implementation Team training, 
proposal design, project implementation and reporting). Gender issues and considerations will be 
actively incorporated throughout the grant -making process and progress on gender -related outcomes 
will be monitored.  
 
CEPF recognizes that:  
• In all of our conservation work, gender plays an important role in achieving long -term 
goals and objectives.  
• Gender equity is a critical component of our overall strategy to ensure empowered civil 
society, equitable participation and decision -making by stakeholders at all scales, and the 
sustainability of conservation impacts.  
• Both men and w omen encounter constraints based on gender. If not addressed, these 
constraints can cause delays or impediments to achieving CEPF’s conservation objectives.  
 CEPF staff will strive to:  
• Provide and encourage training and professional development on gender among staff of 
the CEPF Secretariat, Regional Implementation Teams and grantees as part of CEPF’s 
learning efforts.  
• Work with grantees to ensure gender analysis and recommendations are included in the 
project design, implementation and monitoring pr ocesses.  
• Develop indicators and report on gender equity as part of CEPF’s Monitoring Framework.  
• Promote best practices for incorporating gender in conservation strategies throughout the CEPF network.


---
*Page 135*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Definitions  
 
Gender refers to the economic, social, po litical, and cultural attributes and opportunities associated 
with being women and men. The social definitions of what it means to be a woman or a man vary 
among cultures and change over time. Gender is a sociocultural expression of particular characterist ics 
and roles that are associated with certain groups of people with reference to their sex and sexuality.  
 
Gender analysis is the process of collecting and interpreting information on the respective roles and 
responsibilities among men and women in six do mains of activity, including: practices and 
participation; access to resources; knowledge and beliefs; laws, policies and regulatory institutions.  
 
Gender aware refers to explicit recognition of local gender differences, norms, and relations and their 
impo rtance to outcomes in program/policy design, implementation and evaluation. This recognition 
derives from analysis or assessment of gender differences, norms, and relations in order to address 
gender equity in outcomes.  
 
Gender equity is the process of bei ng fair to women and men. To ensure fairness, measures must be 
taken to compensate for historical and social disadvantages that prevent women and men from 
operating on a level playing field.  
 
Gender equality is the state or condition that affords women and  men equal enjoyment of human 
rights, socially valued goods, opportunities, and resources.  
 Gender integration refers to strategies applied in program assessment, design, implementation, and 
evaluation to take gender norms into account and to compensate fo r gender -based inequalities.  
 
Gender mainstreaming is the process of incorporating a gender perspective into policies, strategies, 
programs, project activities, and administrative functions, as well as into the institutional culture of 
an organization.  
 
Sex refers to the biological differences between males and females. Sex differences are concerned 
with males’ and females’ physiology.


---
*Page 136*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Appendix 2. CEP F Gender Toolkit  
Table of Contents  
 
HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKIT  42 
INTRODUCTION  42 
CEPF AND GENDER  42 
What is Gender?  42 
Why is CEPF interested in gender issues?  43 
CEPF Gender Policy  43 
WHAT IS CEPF LOOKING FOR IN A PROPOSAL?  44 
DEFINITIONS  44 
INTEGRATING GENDER INTO CONSERVATION  47 
Part 1: Integrating Gender Into Your Proposal  47 
Part 2: Integrating Gender During Project Design  48 
Part 3: Integrating Gender Into Monitoring Indicators  49 
Part 4: Integrating Gender Into Your Organization  50 
ANNEX A: INTEGRATING GENDER INTO PROPOSAL WRITING  53 
ANNEX B: IDEAS TO CIRCUMVENT GENDER BARRIERS  56 
ANNEX C: WHAT ARE CEPF’S GLOBAL DONOR PARTNERS DOING ON GENDER?  58 
USEFUL REFERENCES FROM CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL  62


---
*Page 137*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKIT  
 
This gender toolkit is intended to provide guidance for CEPF applicants and grantees in 
understanding and integrating gender into their conservation projects. CEPF strives to integrate 
gender into all aspects of its programs and, therefore, it is recommended that applicants and 
grantees use this toolkit when preparing an application and/or implementing a project. With that said, use of this toolkit is not mandatory and none of the worksheets need to be submitted to the 
CEPF Secretariat or regional implementation team.  
This toolkit is designed to be easy to use, and applicable to the stage you are in with your 
project. Check the Table of Contents to see which section would help you most. Y ou may want to 
start with the chapters on “CEPF Gender Policy” and “Definitions” to gain a general understanding 
of gender and CEPF’s position on gender issues.  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Gender is a social construct that refers to relations between and among the sex es, based on their 
relative roles. It encompasses the economic, political and socio -cultural attributes, limitations, 
and opportunities associated with being male or female. Gender varies across cultures, is dynamic 
and open to change over time, and becaus e of this, gender roles should not be assumed, but 
analyzed.  
Gender, however, is a significant characteristic that influences a person’s interactions with the 
environment and ability to participate in, and benefit from, conservation initiatives.  
As such, gender can influence who uses, has access to and owns natural resources. Therefore, 
considering gender can help determine who participates in and benefits from a conservation 
project. These considerations can ultimately affect a project's long- term success . 
For these reasons, CEPF developed this gender toolkit to ensure that CEPF’s investments are 
implemented with gender -awareness in mind. This means that CEPF’s Secretariat staff, regional 
implementation teams and grantees aim to understand and consider the  different roles of 
women and men in CEPF -related activities at all scales, and that gender issues and considerations 
are actively incorporated throughout the grant- making process.  
 
CEPF AND GENDER 
 
What is Gender?


---
*Page 138*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Gender refers to the social and cultural  attributes of being a man or a woman. It is not the same 
as sex, which refers to the biological attributes of being a man or a woman. Gender differs across 
cultures, it is learned, and it changes over time. When we talk about gender, we are talking about 
both women and men, and not just about women.  
Why is CEPF interested in gender issues?  
CEPF is interested in gender because it can influence natural resources use, needs, knowledge 
and priorities. It can also influence power, access, control and ownership over natural resources. 
Consideration of gender can affect the quality of stakeholder engagement and participation, the 
quality of social outcomes, and the delivery of benefits to project participants. Additionally, it can affect the sustainability of conservation outcomes. Gender can play an important role in achieving long- term conservation goals and objectives.  
 
CEPF Gender Policy  
CEPF’s mission is to engage civil society to protect biodiversity hotspots, the world’s most 
biologically diverse yet threatened ecosystems. The purpose of this policy is to ensure CEPF 
carries out its mission through a gender awareness lens. This means that staff of the CEPF 
Secretariat, Regional Implementation Teams and grantees will understand and take into account the different roles of women and men in CEPF -related activities at all scales (e.g., Regional 
Implementation Team training, proposal design, project implementation and reporting). Gender issues and considerations will be actively incorporated throughout the g rant-making process and 
progress on gender -related outcomes will be monitored.  
 
 CEPF recognizes that:  
• In all of our conservation work, gender plays an important role in achieving long- term 
goals and objectives.  
  
• Gender equity is a critical component of o ur overall strategy to ensure empowered civil 
society, equitable participation and decision- making by stakeholders at all scales, and the 
sustainability of conservation impacts.  
 
• Both women and men encounter constraints based on gender. If not addressed, these 
constraints can cause delays or impediments to achieve CEPF’s conservation objectives.  
CEPF staff strives to:  
• Provide and encourage training and professional development on gender among CEPF 
Secretariat staff, regional implementation team s and grantees as part of the 
organization’s learning efforts.  
 
• Work with grantees to ensure gender analysis and recommendations are included in the project design, implementation and monitoring processes.


---
*Page 139*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
• Develop indicators and report on gender equity as  part of CEPF’s Monitoring Framework.  
 
• Promote best practices for incorporating gender into conservation strategies throughout 
the CEPF network.  
 
 
 
 
WHAT IS CEPF LOOKING FOR IN A PROPOSAL?  
 
When CEPF reviews your proposal, we will pose these questions to determine whether you have 
thought about gender issues:  
 
1.  Have you considered the respective roles of women and men and how they 
relate to the project?  
2.  Have both women’s and men’s opinions been sought in project 
development?  
3.  Are women’s and men’s unique roles reflected in the project’s objectives?  
 
4.  In what ways will the activities benefit women and men differently?  
 
5.  Is the project likely to have negative effects for women or for men?  
 
6.  Are there any social, legal and/or cultural obstacles that could prevent women 
or men from participating in the project?  
7.  Does the project have programs, activities and/or services in place to ensure 
that gender -based issues and concerns will be addressed?  
8.  Does the project design include relevant sex -disaggregated indicators that 
measure participation and benefits for women and men?  
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Here are a few explanations of some terms used in this toolkit.  
Gender  Refers to the economic, social, political, and cultural attributes and 
opportunities associated with being women and men. The social definitions 
of what it means to be a woman, or a man vary among cultures and change


---
*Page 140*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
over time. Gender is a socio -cultural e xpression of characteristics and roles 
that are associated with certain groups of people with reference to their sex.  
Gender Analysis  The process of collecting and interpreting information on the respective roles 
and responsibilities among women and men in six domains of activity: 
practices and participation; access to resources; knowledge and beliefs; laws; 
policies; and regulatory institutions.  
Gender 
Awareness  Refers to explicit recognition of local gender differences, norms, and relations 
and the ir importance to outcomes in program/policy design, implementation 
and evaluation. This recognition derives from analysis or assessment of 
gender differences, norms and relations in order to address gender equity in 
outcomes.  
Gender Balance  Commonly used in reference to human resources and equal participation of 
women and men in all areas of work, projects or programs.  
Gender Bias  The often unintentional and implicit differentiation between women and men 
by placing one gender in a hierarchic al position relative to the other in a 
certain context as a result of stereotypical images of masculinity and 
femininity. An example of gender bias is focusing on the experience and point 
of view of either men or women while presenting the results as unive rsally 
valid.  
Gender Blind  Does not take gender into account. Based on the often -incorrect assumption 
that possible differences between women and men are not relevant.  
Gender Division 
of Labor  Allocation of different jobs or types of work to women and men. For example, 
among human foragers, males and females target different types of foods 
and share them with each other for a mutual or familial benefit.  
Gender Equality  The knowledge that differences between women and men are socially 
constructed and im pact our behaviors, attitudes, beliefs and values, which 
affords women and men equal enjoyment of human rights, socially valued 
goods, opportunities and resources.  
Gender Equity  The process of being fair to women and men. To ensure fairness, measures 
must be taken to compensate for historical and social disadvantages that 
prevent women and men from operating on a level playing field. An example 
of gender equity: providing child care at a stakeholder meeting, thereby 
allowing women the ability to focus on the discussion, rather than taking care 
of their children.  
Gender Gap  The differences between women and men, especially as reflected in social, 
political, intellectual, cultural, or economic attainments or attitudes.  
Gender 
Integration  Refers to strategies applied in program assessment, design, implementation 
and evaluation to take gender norms into account and to compensate for 
gender -based inequalities.  
Gender 
Mainstreaming  The process of incorporating a gender perspective into policies, strategies, 
programs, project activities, monitoring and evaluation, budgeting, and 
administrative functions, as well as into the institutional culture of an 
organization to promote equality between women and men, and to combat 
discrimination.


---
*Page 141*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Gender Norms  Behaviors or attributes that society attributes to a particular sex. Gender 
norms change from culture to culture and over time since they are based on 
the expectations of societies, which a re constantly evolving.  
Gender 
Perspective  Taking into account gender -based differences when looking at any social 
phenomenon, policy or process.   
Gender Role  The role or behavior learned by a person as appropriate to their gender, 
determined by the prevailing cultural norms.  
Sex Refers to the biological differences between males and females. Sex 
differences are concerned with male and female physiology.  
Sex-
disaggregated  Refers to any data collected and organized separately for women and men.


---
*Page 142*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
INTEGRATING GENDER INTO CONSERVATION  
 
Integrating gender into conservation programs is a four -fold process. All four parts are essential 
for effective and sustainable conservation results.  
 
Gender integration must be considered for all grants (large and small) awarded by CEPF:  
• 1: At the proposal -writing level  
• 2: At the project -design level  
• 3: At the monitoring level  
• 4: As an integrated part of the grantee’s organization 
 
Part 1: Integrating Gender Into Your Proposal  
 
Addressing gender issues is an integral part of preparing fundraising proposals. These general 
questions will help you consider gender when completing your application for a CEPF call for 
proposals.  
 
Question  Meaning  
Have you thought about the 
respective roles of women and  
men and how they relate to your 
project?  Do you understand what women do every day? Do you 
understand what men do every day? Do you understand 
the place of women and men in their household and 
community? Have you thought about how their activities/ 
work w ill come into play during your project?  
Have both women’s and men’s 
opinions been sought in project 
development?  Have you been able to interview the same number of 
women and men to understand their thoughts and views 
on your project?  
Are women’s and men’s unique 
roles reflected in the project’s 
objectives?  Think about women’s and men’s roles in their households 
and communities and consider/include that role rather 
than dismissing it.  
In what ways will the activities 
benefit women and men 
differently?  In most cases, a project should benefit women and men 
equally, but it may not. Can you identify those differences 
and reduce them?  
Is the project likely to have 
negative effects for women or 
for men?  Will the project have a negative impact? I s the impact 
perceived or real? If there is an expected negative impact, 
your project may trigger one of CEPF’s environmental or 
social safeguards. More information about safeguards is 
available on CEPF’s website   or from your regional 
implementation team.


---
*Page 143*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Are there any social, legal and/or 
cultural obstacles that could 
prevent women or men from 
participating in the project?  Understanding gender roles helps prevent the non -
participation of women.  
Does the project have programs, 
activities and/or services in place 
to ensure that gender -based 
issues and concerns will be 
addressed?  When designing and implementing your project, consider 
gender barriers that may be raised. (Check Annex B -  Ideas 
to Circumvent Gender Barriers.)  
 
In Annex A, we have included a more detailed questionnaire for further guidance.  
 
 
Part 2: Integrating Gender During Project Design  
 
It is best to analyze gender and social issues in the concept phase of a project (but it is also never 
too late to examine an ongoing project that can be adaptively managed!). Gender and social 
equity challenges and opportunities should be revisited periodically through out a project as a 
way to measure progress and ensure issues are being adequately addressed.  
It is important to do a social analysis to examine how different individuals and groups may affect 
a project and how a project will affect them. During this exerci se, you will collect, identify and 
analyze information on the different roles, responsibilities, needs and interests of women and 
men of different social groups. To capture the nuances of various social characteristics, the data 
and analysis on women and m en should be disaggregated by social categories relevant to the 
project (e.g., socio -economic status, profession, ethnicity/race/indigeneity, age, educational 
status, geographic location and religion).  
 
There is primary and secondary information that can be gathered in the project area. Primary 
information is usually done through field -based data collection and can include focus groups, 
interviews or surveys whereas secondary information can be found in online searches (e.g., World 
Bank Gender Statistics; Demographic Health Survey; USAID’s country -level gender assessments; 
Social Institutions & Gender Index; or World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap).  
 
Sample questions for gathering primary information:  
 
Theme  What actions are needed to improve 
conservati on outcomes and ensure equality?  
Practices and participation:  Peoples’ 
behaviors and actions in life and how 
they vary by gender and social group.  • Build awareness by creating a women’s versus men’s 
daily activities profile with local stakeholders.  
Access to, and control of, resources:  
One’s ability to use resources or 
assets.  • Find ways to share information about the project to 
women and men.


---
*Page 144*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Knowledge, beliefs and 
perceptions:  Social norms of and 
about women, men, girls and boys.  • Ensure that information about the project is provided to 
both women and men.  
• Hold meetings at times of the day that are accessible to 
women.  
Legal rights and status:  How women 
and men are regarded and treated by 
the customary and formal legal codes 
and judicial systems.  • Ensure that both women and men understand their 
rights.  
• If inequalities are contained in the law, ensure that these are considered when identifyin g conservation 
outcomes.  
Power:  The capacity to control 
resources and to make autonomous 
and independent decisions free of 
coercion.  • Explain to women and men the importance of each 
gender to conservation.  
• Organize gender role -play exercise to understa nd what 
women’s participation would have added to decision 
making  
Impact:  How might the project 
impact women and men both 
positively and negatively?  • Discuss the perceived benefits and costs of the project.  
 
 
Part 3: Integrating Gender Into Monitoring Indicators  
 
After considering gender during proposal writing and project design, it is essential to maintain 
this focus by monitoring gender issues throughout the project. Inclusion of specific and relevant 
indicators will help project staff keep track of project activities and impacts as they relate to 
gender. The data produced from gender -related indicators will help the grantee and CEPF to 
understand how gender was integrated into the project, and to measure the benefits and 
changes accruing to both women and men.  
 
Theme  Possible Indicators  
Practices and participation:  Peoples’ behaviors 
and actions in life and how they vary by gender 
and social group.  • Number of consultation meetings held 
specifically to hear the view of women  
• Number of gender awareness sessions held 
during the project  
Access to, and control of, resources:  One’s 
ability to use resources or assets.  • Sex -disaggregated number of persons with 
improved access to resources  
Knowledge, beliefs and perceptions:  Social 
norms of and about, women, men, girls and 
boys.  • Sex -disaggregated number of attendant s at 
community meetings discussing the project  
• Number of consultation meetings held 
specifically to hear the view of women  
Legal rights and status:  How women and men 
are regarded and treated by the customary and 
formal legal codes and judicial systems.  • Number of women that are decision -makers 
in their household/community  
• Number of women that have increased 
involvement in decision -making


---
*Page 145*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Power:  The capacity to control resources and to 
make autonomous and independent decisions 
free of coercion.  • Sex -disaggregated number of people with 
improved understanding of and commitment 
to gender issues  
Impact:  How might the project impact women 
and men?  • Sex -disaggregated number of people in 
project decisions and benefits  
• Sex -disaggregated number of people 
receiving non -cash benefits  
• Sex -disaggregated number of people 
receiving cash benefits  
 
 
Part 4: Integrating Gender Into Your Organization  
 
CEPF’s gender policy states that “staff of the CEPF Secretariat, regional implementation teams 
and grantees will understand and take into account the different roles of women and men in 
CEPF -related activities at all scales (e.g., regional implementation team training, proposal design, 
project implementation and reporting). Gender issues and considerations will be actively incorporated throughout the grant- making process and progress on gender -related outcomes 
will be monitored.”  
 
CEPF has developed the Gender Tracking Tool to help grantees assess their understanding of and 
commitment to gender issues. This tracking tool is a self -assessment tool. Ideally, it should be 
completed by a small group of people from your organization which, to the extent 
possible, consists of both women and men and represents the variation in roles and 
responsibilities.  
All grantees (large and small grants) are required to complete the Gender Tracking Tool . 
The tracking tool is available i n multiple languages on the CEPF website
. 
 
The Gender Tracking Tool should be completed within three months of the start of your 
project and again at the end of the project. All inf ormation provided in the tracking tool is 
confidential and will not be shared. It contains scores so that an organization can more easily 
determine if there is a change in its understanding and integration of gender over the course of 
the project. CEPF wil l use the information to determine overall understanding of gender by 
grantees in the biodiversity hotspot, interest in learning about gender and the topics that would 
be most useful to include in training sessions.  
 
The Gender Tracking Tool includes eight  multiple -choice questions. These questions are listed 
below with explanations.  
 
Gender Tracking Tool 
Questions  Explanation


---
*Page 146*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
1. Does your organization have a 
written policy that affirms a 
commitment to gender equality?  
 A gender policy does not have to be long or 
complicated, but it should explain how the 
organization integrates gender into its operations. 
CEPF’s gender policy is 1 page and states why we think 
gender issues are important and how we will integrate 
gender i nto all aspects of our work. You can find the 
CEPF gender policy on the CEPF websit e. 
2. Are there people in your 
organization responsible for gender 
issues?  
 Have any staff been assigned to train others in gender 
issues or to conduct gender analyses, monitoring or other activities related to gender? Does your 
organization have anyone responsible for ensuring that 
concerns and issues related to gender are considered?  
3. Have any staff in your 
organization ever received training 
on gender issues?  Does your organization understand what is meant by 
gender and how a gender lens provides a holistic view?  
4. Is gender analysis built into your 
program planning procedures?  
 Before you undertake a project or activity, does your 
organization undertake research to determine the roles 
and responsibilities of women and men and how these 
might affect the project, its participants and its 
expected results?  
5. Do you collect sex -disagg regated 
data about the people impacted by 
your projects?  
 Does your organization collect data about how women 
and men are impacted by the projects it implements? 
For example, is your organization able to report on 
how many women benefit from a project and how 
many men benefit?  
6. Does your organization monitor 
and evaluate how your projects and 
programs impact women and men 
differently?  Does your organization have a means to measure how 
projects impact women and men differently, and if so, does  your organization use the information to better 
understand what is happening during a project?  
7. Does your organization allocate 
financial resources to incorporate 
gender into its work?  
 Does your organization consider including any funds 
into project budgets to ensure better gender 
integration? Ensuring that gender is considered does 
add some costs to a project. It could entail extra 
meetings, or specific staff or activities.  
8. Would your organization be 
interested in being contacted by the 
regional implementation team to 
learn more or receive training about 
gender issues?  
 This toolkit is available on the CEPF website. However, 
feel free to contact the regional implementation team 
of your biodiversity hotspot for more information on 
gender. Y ou can also check the CEPF website  and 
Annex C: What CEPF Donors are doing on Gender.  
 
Both small - and large -grant recipients will answer the same questions on assessing their 
understanding of, and commitment to, gender issues. However, the Gender Tracking Tool has a 
different format for each set of grantees :


---
*Page 147*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
• Large -grant recipients will re ceive the Gender Tracking Tool from their grant manager as 
this tool will be generated through ConservationGrants, CEPF’s grants management 
system.  
 
• Small -grant recipients will receive the Gender Tracking Tool in an Excel document from 
their regional imple mentation team.


---
*Page 148*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
ANNEX A: INTEGRATING GENDER INTO PROPOSAL WRITING  
 
The worksheet below will help you keep gender in mind while developing and writing your 
proposal. You may need to consult with local partner organizations or government institutions 
for in-depth, socio -cultural information. In some cases, it may be advisable to conduct focus 
group sessions with project beneficiaries to better understand the local context.  
Remember that the most effective way to ensure that gender inequalities are address ed is to 
emphasize community participation combined with transparent and participatory stakeholder analysis. Truly integrating gender into a project goes beyond just engaging women’s 
groups and counting women involved in activities.  
 
Gender Situation Analysis and Background  Yes/No (If no, how 
can it be improved?)  
Is there an analysis of gender dynamics in the target area?   
Is there information on whether existing stakeholders, NGOs, 
government ministries and other actors are currently involved in 
gender -based activities, both in implementation and policy 
advocacy?   
Is it clear whether women have access to, use of and control of 
resources, goods and services?   
Is it clear whether men have access to, use of and control of 
resources, goods and services?   
Is there clarity on how decisions are made in the target area (e.g., 
community, household, families, etc.)?   
Are there gender -based constraints or barriers to gaining equal 
access to resources and benefits from proposed project activities? 
Have these been addressed?   
Have the gender -specific context variables that may prevent reaching 
proposed objectives and ex pected results been addressed?   
Overall Project Strategy Design  Yes/No (If No, how 
can it be improved?)  
Are all ways into which one’s gender differentiates their connection 
with natural resources and ecological systems accounted for 
(including knowledge, use, access, control, impact on natural 
resources and attitudes toward conservation)?   
Do existing gender roles affect the achievement of conservation 
outcomes (including decision -making)?   
Will the project impact these roles and program effectiveness?   
Are there some gender -based constraints to achieving conservation 
outcomes? Will the project address them?


---
*Page 149*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Are there opportunities? Will the project address them?   
Activity Design  Yes/No (If no, how 
can it be improved?)  
Will the program have some effects (positive and negative) on 
women?   
Will the program have some effects (positive and negative) on men?   
Will there be possible unintended consequences of these activities? 
Will they affect women and men differently?   
Are forms or methods of communication specifically targeted to 
women included?   
Are forms or methods of communication specifically targeted to men 
included?   
If these are different, is the project addressing targeting different 
gender -based messages for conservation?   
Are meeting time and meeting locations appropriate for women?   
Are meeting time and meeting locations appropriate for men?   
Community and Household Impact  Yes/No (If no, how 
can it be improved?)  
Could the project activities have an impact on household and social 
gender structures?   
Could the project activities have an impact on division of labor at the 
household and community levels?   
Could the project activities have an impact on time constraints of a 
particular gender?   
Could the project activities have an impact on subsistence activities?   
Could the project activities have an impact on traditional rights?   
Could there be an impact on policy and regulatory changes affecting 
gender participation?   
Monitoring and Evaluation  Yes/No (If no, how 
can it be improved?)  
Are indicators sex -disaggregated and gender sensitive?   
Will there be a number and/or percentage of women and men 
participating in an activity?   
Will there be a number and/or percentage of women and men 
benefiting from the project?   
Will there be a number and/or percentage of women and men 
demonstrating leadership in project implementation?   
Are there other indicators on community knowledge, attitudes and 
practices about female participation and leadership (e.g., change in


---
*Page 150*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
beliefs regarding women in natural resource management decision -
making) that should be included?  
Staffing and Budgeting  Yes/No (If no, how 
can it be improved?)  
Is the budget adequate to integrate gender?   
Have you allocated enough staff time to monitor sex -disaggregated 
data?   
Have you allocated enough staff time to monitor the impact and 
benefits gender may have on women and men?   
If you think your organization will benefit from additional gender 
training, have you allocated budget for this?   
If a baseline and end of projects assessments are relevant to your 
project, have you budgeted for them?   
If relevant, have you allocated enough funds for ensuring 
participation of women and men to specific project activities?


---
*Page 151*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
ANNEX B: IDEAS TO CIRCUMVENT GENDER BARRIERS  
 
Barrier/Challenge/Risk  Possible Solution  
Lack of time/competing 
priorities  • Find out what time of day/season women and men tend to 
be available and schedule activities then.  
• Provide childcare during activities.  
Inaccessibility/travel to 
activities is onerous  
 • Move activities closer to communities where you want to 
engage people.  
• Provide transportation to activities.  
• Understand cultural norms around overnight activities and 
work with households to identify appropriate ways to allow 
for both women’s and men’s participation.  
Feeling uncomfortable about 
participating publicly in 
activities  • Conduct separate activities with women and men (with same -
sex facilitators) so that participants feel comfortable.  
• Provide a foundational workshop for individuals who have 
less background/experience on the subject so th at everyone 
can be prepared and knowledgeable.  
• Encourage the facilitator to seek out opinions and 
contributions from quieter groups/individuals.  
• Be explicit in invitations to participate that you value the 
contributions of all voices and hope to see a dive rsity of 
community members.  
• Ensure that activity discourse is conducted in the local 
language.  
• Work with local leaders and male project participants to 
explain the importance of women’s participation and identify 
culturally appropriate ways to allow for th eir participation.  
Limited access to information  • Create communication materials in languages (or with 
images) that everyone can understand.  
• Tailor messages for different groups through the most appropriate communication channels (e.g., radio, written, 
informal, community meeting, etc.) depending on how each 
gets their information.  
Project design does not 
address gender/social equity  • Provide basic gender training and follow -up trainings, 
particularly for staff members who interact with the 
community.  
• Allocate an amount in the project budget for gender 
activities and/or training.  
• Consult with local women’s organizations, indigenous and 
youth groups, governmental entities, or 
conservation/development NGOs.  
Project may increase work 
load (paid  or unpaid) of a 
certain group  • Examine whether those with the increased workload are 
benefitting from the project:


---
*Page 152*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
o If yes, be sure that participants perceive the 
benefits to outweigh the cost of extra work.  
o If no, you’ll need to re -think your project to make 
sure that nobody is adversely affected.  
Project may increase 
possibility of domestic 
violence or physical unsafety 
of some people  • Have an honest conversation with project participants to 
determine whether there are methods of project 
implementation that can eliminate this risk. Otherwise, the 
project should not continue.


---
*Page 153*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
ANNEX C: WHAT ARE CEPF’S GLOBAL DONOR PARTNERS DOING ON 
GENDER?  
 
L’Agence Française de Développement  adopted its own gender strategy  in March 2014 after 
several years of gender integration. The Crosscutting Interventi on Framework on Gender and the 
Reduction of Inequalities Between Women and Men  aims to contribute to sustainable, inclusive 
and equitable development between women and men.  
The gender policy for Conservation International  (CI) states that gender will be ad dressed at all 
stages of the program design cycle, including planning, implementation, and monitoring and 
evaluation. (Useful references by CI are available on the next page of this document.)  
The strategy for equality between women and men  represents the European Commission's  work 
program on gender equality for the period 2010 -2015. It is a comprehensive framework 
committing the Commission to  promote gender equality  into all its policies.  
The Global Environment Facility’s (GEF) gender equality policy  calls on the GEF and its partner 
agencies to mainstream gender into GEF operations, including efforts to analyze and address the 
specific needs and role of both women and men into GEF projects, as appropriate for each 
intervention.   
In 2001, the Japanese Government  established a Gender Equality Bureau tasked with planning 
and coordinating the policies pertaining to gender equality. It has a framework for the promotion of gender equality.  
The Worl d Bank’s gender strategy
 (PDF – 29 MB)  aims to reduce poverty and enhance economic 
growth, human well -being, and development effe ctiveness by addressing gender disparities and 
inequalities that are barriers to development.


---
*Page 154*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
Appendix 3. CEPF Gender Factsheet for CSO applicants  
 
WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS GENDER IMPORTANT TO CEPF?  
Gender refers to the social and cultural attributes of being a man or a woman. Gender differs across 
cultures, it is learned and it changes over time . When we talk about gender, we are talking about 
both women and men, and not just about women.  
CEPF is interested in gender beca use it can influence 
natural resource use, needs, knowledge and priorities. 
Gender can also influence power, access, control and 
ownership over natural resources. Consideration of 
gender can affect the quality of stakeholder 
engagement and participation, t he quality of social 
outcomes, and the delivery of benefits to project 
participants. Additionally, it can affect the sustainability 
of conservation outcomes. Gender can play an important role in achieving long -term conservation 
goals and objectives.  
 
 
 
 
INTEGRATING GENDER INTO YOUR PROJECT  
 
• Consult  with local partner organizations or government institutions for 
in-depth socio -cultural information, if needed. In some cases, it may be 
advisable to conduct focus group sessions with project beneficiaries to 
better understand the local context.  
 
• Remember  that the most effective way to ensure that gender 
inequalities are addressed is to emphasize community participation 
combined with transparent and participatory stakeholder analysis.  
 
• There are barriers to gender mainstreaming but there are ways to 
circu mvent those barriers. Check the Gender Toolkit to learn about what could be done in specific 
situations.  
 
• Gender must be mainstreamed into ALL grants (large and small) awarded by CEPF on these four 
levels:  
  
Sustainable conservation cannot be 
achieved without gender balance; so 
ultimately it affects a project's long -
term success. 
 
Truly integrating gender into a 
project goes beyond just 
engaging women’s groups and 
counting women involved in 
activities .


---
*Page 155*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consult CEPF’s Gender Toolkit for more information about mainstreaming gender into your 
environmental programs.  
 
 
 
ADVICE FOR APPLICANTS: REGARDING GENDER, WHAT C EPF IS LOOKING FOR 
IN A PROJECT  
Project Design Proposal Writing
Monitoring Grantee OrganizationGender


---
*Page 156*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
 
 
  
Gender in 
Projects: 
What is CEPF 
Looking for?
Have you 
considered the 
respective roles of 
women and men 
and how they 
relate to the 
project?
 Have both 
women’s and 
men’s opinions 
been sought in 
project 
development?
Are women’s and 
men’s unique 
roles reflected in 
the project’s 
objectives?
In what ways will 
the activities 
benefit women 
and men 
differently?
Is the project 
likely to have 
negative effects 
for women or for 
men?
Are there social, 
legal and/or 
cultural obstacles 
that could prevent 
women or men 
from 
participating?
Does the project 
have programs, 
activities and/or 
services in place 
to ensure that 
gender -based 
issues and 
concerns will be 
addressed?
Does the project 
design include 
relevant sex -
disaggregated 
indicators that 
measure 
participation and 
benefits for 
women and men?


---
*Page 157*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the 
Indian Ocean  
USEFUL REFERENCES FROM CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL  
 
• Activity Handbook: interactive methods for collecting gender -related information for 
conservation projects  (PDF – 1.3 MB)  
 
• Oops! Stories of Conservation Fails when gender is not integrated  (PDF – 230 KB)  
 
• Integrating Gender & Social Equity Into Conservation Programming  (PDF – 1.2 MB)  
 
• Integrating gender into funding proposals  (PDF – 648 KB)  
 
• Making the case for gender in conservation  (PDF – 228 KB)   
 
• Video: Introduction to Gender and Conservation


---
*Page 158*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
Appendix 4. Gender Action Plan Budget  
The budget for the gender plan has been fully integrated into the overall Project budget. Some of the activities included in the gender plan include 
integration of gender considerations into  broader pieces of work and therefore the costs have been calculated for the overall deliverable rather than the 
gender elements of it. Where this is the case we have indicated in the “Budget” column an estimate of the total cost that wou ld be related to the gender -
related work. For example, Output 1.1 is the development of an updated Ecosystem Profile document under which the priorities for EbA in the four 
countries will be defined. This will include identification of priorities that address gender - relate d EbA issues. The total budget allocated for developing the 
Ecosystem Profile is USD 345,606 of which we estimate approximately USD 25,000 will be related to work on gender identified u nder this gender plan.  
Impact Statement:  
To reduce the vulnerability of island populations, including women and girls, by securing the critical ecosystem services they need to be r esilient to climate change.  
 
Outcome Statement:  
Improved protection and/or restoration of 1.89 million hectares of important ecosy stems for adaptation lead to secured critical ecosystem services for at least 698,000 
people.  
Output 1.1 Ecosystem Profile updated in the hotspot to identify and prioritise EbA actions by CSOs  
Activities  
 
• Include gender analysis as a chapter in the 
Ecosystem Profile  
• Identify priority EbA 
activities that address 
climate change adaptation 
gender challenges  
• Include gender 
disaggregated indicators in Ecosystem Profile 
logframe and monitoring 
framework  
 Indicators  
 
 
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile includes 
gender analysis/assessment  
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile includes 
EbA priorities that address climate 
change gender issues  
• 1 updated Ecosystem Profile includes 
gender disaggregated indicators   Budget elements   
 
 
Gender analysis/assessment to be 
included within  the contractual 
agreement for developing the 
Ecosystem Profile.  
 
 Budget  
 
 
Included within budget for 
Ecosystem Profile update (total USD 
345,606; estimated USD 25,000 for 
the gender elements)  
Output 1.2 Long -term Vision for civil society enagagement in Ecosystem -based Adaptation developed for the hotspot with participation of government, civil society, 
donor and private sector actors.


---
*Page 159*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
Activities  
 
• Include gender analysis as 
a chapter in Long -term 
Vision  
• Identify priority EbA activities that address 
climate change adaptation gender challenges  
• Develop a Gender Action 
Plan as part of the Long -
term Vision  
• Identify opportunities for 
mainstreaming gender 
actions in EbA into 
national policies  
• Identify opportunities for 
private sector 
partnerships that address 
gender issues as part of 
EbA  
• Include gender 
disaggregated indicators 
in Long -term Vision 
logframe and monitoring framework  
 Indicators  
 
 
 
• 1 Long -term Vision includes gender 
analysis/assessment  
• 1 Long -term Vision includes EbA 
priorities that address climate change 
gender issues  
• 1 Gender Action Plan included in the 
Long -term Vision  
• 1 Long- term Vision includes gender 
mainstreaming opportunities  
• Long -term Vision includes gender EbA 
partnership opportunities  
• 1 Long -term Vision includes gender 
disaggregated indicators  Budget elements   
  
 
Development of gender assessment 
and plan included in the overall 
budget for the development of the 
Long -term Vision  
 
 
 Budget  
 
 
 
Included within budget for Long -
term Vision development update 
(total USD 345,606; estimate for 
gender elements USD 25,000)  
Output 1.3 Financing Plan developed for each of the Long -term Vision document  
Activities  
 
• Financing Plan includes funding for gender related 
activities identified in the 
Long - term Vision / 
Gender Action Plan  Indicators  
 
• 1 Financing Plan includes costed needs and identified funding opportunities for 
gender actions as identified in the Long -
term Vision / Gende r Action Plan  Budget elements   
 
Budget elements specifically related to 
gender should be minimal because 
budget needed will have been 
identified in the Long -term Vision 
under Output 1.2. However, there is a Budget  
 
Gender elements included within 
budget for Long -term Vision 
development update. B udget for 
producing Financing Plan is USD 
67,402


---
*Page 160*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
budget for developing the Financing 
Plan that inc ludes establishing 
financial targets for identified EbA 
actions and financing plans for each 
hotspot. This could include gender 
elements if additional work is needed.   
 
Output 2.1. Prioirty EbA activities by CSOs supported in priority areas as defined in the Ecosystem profile  
Activities  
 
• Development of gender training materials for the  
Regional Implementation Team ( RIT) 
• The RIT is trained on 
gender mainstreaming, 
the Action Plan and their 
role in delivering it and 
subsequent monitoring  
• Development of gender 
training materials on EbA 
for the CSOs  
• Provide trainings on gender mainstreami ng to 
CSOs  
• Initiate Calls for Proposals 
that specifically 
encourage subprojects 
that address detrimental 
gender -specific practices 
and encourage positive 
ones that can be 
promoted as part of EbA 
grants  
• Support CSOs for EbA 
grants that address Indicators  
 
• 1 set of training materials for RIT are developed  
 
• 1 RIT trained and capable of ensuring that gender is mainstreamed into the 
grant portfolio management  
 
 
 
• 1 set of training materials for CSOs 
developed  
 
• Traini ng on gender mainstreaming in 
EbA provided to average of 10 CSOs in 
each country (4 trainings in total; 40 
CSOs)  
 
• Minimum 20 subprojects specifically 
address gender issues to achieve gender positive results  
  Budget elements   
 
Staff time to update of RIT training 
materials, including specific focus on 
gender elements of EbA  
 
Travel of Gender lead to train the RIT. 
Meeting facilities.  
 
 
 
Staff time to update CSO training 
materials, including specific focus on 
gender elements of E bA;  
 
4 training workshops (estimate USD 
10,000 per workshop in the smaller 
countries and USD 20,000 for 
Madagascar).  
 
Grants for gender focused subprojects  Budget  
  
Included in staff time  
 
 
Included in Output 2.1 Travel 
budget – estimated USD 7,000 
 
 
 
Included in staff time  
 
 
 
Included within RIT subgrant 
(estimated at USD 50,000).  
 
 
 
Included within subproject grants 
budget (total for all grants, 
including gender focused ones: USD 
30.4 million)


---
*Page 161*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan –  Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
gender issues  or promote 
best gender practice  
Output 2.2 EbA action impacts quantified through cutting -edge science  
Activities  
 
• Support applied research 
to improve understanding 
of gender issues in EbA  Indicators  
 
• At least 2 research subprojects in the 
hotspot focused on improving gender 
dimensions of EbA  Budget elements   
 Grants for gender focused research 
subprojects  
 Budget  
 
Included within subgrants budget (total for all research grants, 
including gender focused ones: USD 
3.5 million)  
Output 3.1 Models, tools and best practices developed under the Programme are widely available and inform other actors develo ping and implementing EbA actions 
globally  
Activities  
 
• Develop innovative knowledge product 
documenting, and for 
sharing, models, tools and 
best practice on gender mainstreaming in EbA  
 Indicators  
 
 
• At least 1 knowledge product developed 
and disseminated Budget elements   
 
 
Staff time; professional services fo r 
knowledge product development and 
dissemination  
 Budget  
  
Included within knowledge product 
budget (total for professional 
services for developing knowledge 
products: USD 600,000 ; estimate 
for gender product/s USD 100,000)  
Output 3.2 Ensuring the financial and institutional sustainability of multi -sector programs for EbA, including through enhanced public and private partnerships  
Activities  
 
• Development of gender 
training materials for the  
Long -term 
implementation structure  
• The Long -term 
implementation structure 
is trained on gender 
mainstreaming, the Action 
Plan and its role in Indicators  
 
• 1 set of training materials for Long -term 
implementation structures  are 
developed  
 
• 1 Long -term implementation structure 
trained and capable of ensuring that 
gender is mainstreamed into the grant 
portfolio management  
 Budget elements   
 Staff time  
 
 
 
Staff time, travel and meeting costs  
 
 
 
 
  
 Included in staff time  
 
 
 
Included in training and workshop costs. Estimated at USD 7,000


---
*Page 162*
---

Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Programme level Action Plan – Ecosystem -based Adaptation i n the Indian Ocean  
delivering it and 
subsequent monitoring 
• Update gender training
materials on EbA for the
CSOs
• Provide trainings on
gender mainstreaming toCSOs through 
Long -term
implementation
structure/s• 1 set of training materials for CSOs
updated
• Tr
aining on gender mainstreaming in
EbA provided to average of 10 CSOs in
each country (4 trainings in total;
minimum of 40 CSOs)Subgrant  
Sub
grant costs (estimate USD 10,000 
per workshop in the smaller countries 
and USD 20,000 for Madagascar) for 
gender trainings to be delivered through local partner organizations.  Training materials to be developed 
by subgrantee (included in figure 
below).  
Inc
luded in subgrants; estimated 
USD 50,000 for gender trainings in 4 countries.  
 __________