=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20200723142310+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/ModDate: D:20200724120042+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
18 – 21 August 2020  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B. 26/02/Add.0 2 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum I I 
Funding proposal package f or FP 130 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Indonesia REDD- plus  RBP for results period 2014 -2016 "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.26/02 /Add.02 
Page b 
3 
83 
88 
92 
123  
159  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  162


---
*Page 3*
---

Please submit the completed form to fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following naming convention in the subject line and file name: 
“[Country] REDD+ RBP FP- [Accredited entity]- yyyymmdd”    . 
Version 1.0  
Accredited entities are expected to develop a funding proposal  in close consultation with the relevant national 
designated authority and REDD -plus entity/focal point, in  response to the request for proposals for the Pilot 
Programme for REDD -plus results -based payments (Decision B.18/07). The funding proposal  should follow 
the terms of reference of th at Board decision and will be assessed per Stage 2 (sections 2 – 5) of the 
scorecard annexed to  the same Board decision.  
Programme Title:  Indonesia  REDD- plus RBP for results period 2014- 2016 
Country:  Indonesia  
Results period  in this 
proposal : 2014 – 2016 
National Designated 
Authority:  Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance  
REDD -plus entity/f ocal point Directorate General for Climate Change , Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry  
Accredited Entity:  UNDP  
Date of first submission/ 
version number:  [2019- 11-08] [V.1]  
Date of current submission/ 
version number  [2020 -05-27 ] [V.7]


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 1 OF 80 
 
 
 
A.  Proposed and projected REDD -plus results   
 
Please provide the following information:  
 
Total volume of REDD -plus results achieved 
in the results period as reported in the 
country’s BUR technical annex (tCO 2eq): Indonesia reported  in the BUR technical annex  the results 
of the implementation of the activities reducing emissions 
from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest 
degradation for 2013– 2017, calculated against the FREL, 
which amount to emission reductions of 48,978,427 
tCO 2 eq annually  (average of annual emissions) and 
244,892,137 tCO 2 eq as the total for 2013 –2017.  The 
reference period applied for the construction of the 
UNFCCC technically assessed FREL was 1990- 2012.   
 
Indonesia has taken note that t he UNFCCC reference 
period exceeds the maximum of 20 years, as indicated in 
the GCF RE DD+ RBP scorecard, in 2a(xiii).  Following the 
guidance contained in footnote 22 of row 2a(xiii) of the 
scorecard, Indonesia has recalculated its reference level 
based on a period of 20 years. T he results corresponding 
to the recalculated FREL for the purpo se of this funding 
proposal amount to 144,989,856 tCO 2 eq, or  48,329, 952 
tCO 2 eq annually for the 2014 – 2016 period . More details 
can be found in Annex XVII of this funding proposal.   
 
Years 2013 and 2017 have been excluded from this funding 
proposal. The 2013 results are not eligible for the GCF RBP 
programme. The  2017 results have been negotiated as part 
of the Indonesia/Norway Partnership. Only the period 2014-
2016  was considered for deter mining  the volume to be 
offered  to the GCF for REDD+  RBP. 
 
A= Achieved v olume of REDD -plus results 
offered to the pilot programme in this proposal  
(tCO 2eq): 9 million t ons CO 2 eq/ year for the period of 201 4 – 2016. 
The total volume offered for these three years is equivalent 
to approximately 19% of the total volume available for these 
years , based on the recalculations described above and 
further elaborated in Annex XVIII.   
 
Year  tCO 2eq 
2014  9 Mt 
2015  9 Mt 
2016  9 Mt 
Total  27 Mt 
 
 
B= Expected volume of REDD -plus results to 
be achieved in the following years of the 
eligibility period (tCO 2eq): 97,415,658.03  tons CO 2 eq in year 2018  according to 
preliminary estimates  
A+B = Total volume expected to be submitted 
to the pilot programme (tCO 2eq): 36 million tons CO 2 eq in total (average of 9 million tons 
CO 2 eq/ year)  
 
Year  t CO 2 eq 
2014  9 Mt 
2015  9 Mt 
2016  9 Mt 
2017  0 Mt to offer (2017 results 
negotiated as part of 
Norway /Indonesia 
Partnership)  
2018  9 Mt 
Total  36 Mt


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 2 OF 80 
 
 
 
B.  Carbon elements  
B.1. Forest Reference Emission Level / Forest Reference Level (FREL/FRL)  
 
Please provide link  to the FREL/FRL submission: 
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/frel_submission_by__indonesia_final.pdf  
 
Please provide link to the UNFCCC Technical Assessment Report: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2016/tar/idn.pdf  
 
Indonesia’s FREL reference period exceeds the maximum of 20 years, as indicated in the GCF REDD+ RBP 
scorecard (2a(xiii) ). Following the guid ance contained in footnote 22 of row 2a(xiii) of the scorecard, Indonesia 
recalculated its reference level based on a period of 20 years  (1993- 2012) . This is exclusively for the purpose 
of this funding proposal and does not impact the UNFCCC FREL or result s having already been submitted or 
reported in the BUR technical annex, and technically assessed or analysed, respectively. It does not pre- empt 
future submissions  to the UNFCCC by Indonesia. The 20- year reference period of 1993 – 2012  was selected 
by Indonesia as the 20- year FREL baseline because it is as consistent as possible with the UNFCCC FREL  
period.  
 
To meet  the requirements of the GCF RBP pilot programme,  which  does not allow for projected emissions from 
non-HFLD countries , an annual average was generated and applied to the shorter period  for all activities and  
carbon pools . The exclusive purpose for this application of an annual average is the GCF pilot and to ensure 
alignment with its TORs . It is Indonesia’s view that this approach does not well represent the very nature of 
emissions from soil organic carbon in peatlands , which tend to increase overtime due to  accumulating , or 
inherited,  emissions . Indonesia has included soil organic carbon e missions from peat  decomposition  in the 
UNFCCC FREL in the  spirit of completeness , despite the fact that its  omission from the FREL would have be en 
justified by the high level of uncertainty  associated with these emissions . Indonesia would like to highlight that 
the scorecard does not consider this very important element of its own national circumstances.  
 
More details can be found in section B.1.2 of this funding proposal.  
 
B.1.1. UNFCCC Technical Assessment and Analysis process  
(i) Consistency of the FREL/FRL: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the  consis tency of the FREL/FRL with the GHG 
Inventory, including the definition of forest used . If the report identi fies inconsistencies, explain these 
inconsistencies between the GHG inventory and FREL /FRL , and describe how  they will be resolved  in the 
next GHG inventory or  FREL /FRL .  
 
In 2015, Indonesia, on a voluntary basis, proposed a national FREL  based on  average historical  emissions 
from 1990 to 2012  and covering the activities reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions 
from forest degradation.  The national FREL was submitted to the United  Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) Secretariat, and successfully went  through a technical assessment by UNFCCC 
experts in 2016. The FREL includes only  natural forests in Indonesia’s national territory, which covered an area 
of 113.2 million he ctares in 1990, comprising up to 60 per cent of the national territory and 78.6 per cent of the 
country’s total forest land in 1990 (plantation forests are excluded). The UNFCCC assessed FREL of Indonesia 
is 568,859,881 t CO 2 eq for 2013 but increases annually because of accumulating emissions from peat 
decomposition, reaching 593,329,235 t CO 2 eq for 2020.  Following the ITAP assessment, this has been 
modified to a single annual average value as the recalculated FREL ( 568,988,033  t CO2 eq) , for the purpose 
of this funding proposal. More information  can be found in section B.1.2 of this funding proposal . 
 
In the Report on the technical assessment of the proposed forest reference emission level of Indonesia  
submitted in 2016, issued 25 November  2016, the Assessment Team, or AT , commended  Indonesia for 
establishing overal l consistency of data sources between the FREL and the national greenhouse gas (GHG) 
inventory , given that the first biennial update report (BUR 1) of Indonesia and the FREL use the same principal 
data sources . The emission factors are derived from the national forest  inventory (1990 –2013) . Key activity 
data are a time  series of land- cover maps for 1990– 2014. Both the FREL and the GHG inventory rely on the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines  and the Wetlands  Supplement . 
 
The AT did note that Indonesia’s FREL applied a different forest definition than that used in the national GHG 
inventory contained in Indonesia’s first BUR, pointing out that in addition to the six natural forest classes 
contained in the FREL, the GHG inve ntory includes information about plantation forests. In the modified FREL 
submission, however, Indonesia addressed consistency concerns. As explained in the exchanges with the AT, 
during the TA, the definition of forest is not being changed in the FREL, bu t rather excluding the plantations


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 3 OF 80 
 
 
 
given the objectives of REDD+ and the focus on natural forests. Indonesia explained that what is applied can 
be considered a “working definition” that also considers the concept of practicality and cost -effectiveness 
asso ciated with measuring REDD+ performance in the future. The AT commended Indonesia in the TAR for 
including this additional explanation of the forest definition in the modified FREL submission.  
 
 
(ii.a) Data source of the FREL/FRL: Please provide any additional information that supplements the 
information contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to  the data used for  to the construction 
of the FREL/FRL, specifying whether  the FREL /FRL  is based on historical data and is  equal to or below the 
average annual historical emissions during the reference period.  
 
The activity data used for the construction of the FREL are land- cover data from the National Forest Monitoring 
System (NFMS), which are publicly available on the NFMS website 
(http://webgis.m enlhk.go.id:8080/nfms_simontana/ ). These official data describe land- cover classes and forest -
cover change over the years, which have been developed and updated regularly since 2000. In addition, data 
from the 1990s were added to the NFMS (from freely avai lable Landsat satellite data archives). The ongoing 
efforts of improvement on land cover mapping program since 1990s using satellite imagery and established as 
a system in 2000, has become a success story that credibly monitored deforestation over years and become 
one of the important datasets to establish the national FREL. A national MRV system on climate change 
mitigation which is specific for the land- based sector and is supported by the NFMS has also been developed 
since 2015. The national MRV system now has a legal basis through the enactment of the Ministerial Regulation 
No. 70/2017 on REDD+ procedure and No. 72/2017 on MRV system. In addition, the Ministerial Regulation 
No. 71/2017 on National Registry System has been authorized to complete the requi rement of MRV system.  
 
For its FREL submission, Indonesia used data sets for years 1990, 1996, 2000, 2003, 2006, 2009, 2011 and 
2012 to capture historical land- cover data. The wall -to-wall land -cover maps that serve as activity data were 
produced by the Mi nistry of Environment and Forestry, using Landsat satellite images. The images were 
digitized manually by visual interpretation. The peatland spatial data used in the construction of the FREL were 
provided by the Ministry of Agriculture, and were based on several related maps, field surveys and ground 
checks.  
 
Deforestation and forest degradation activity data were quantified by overlaying maps from different time points. 
In a first step, for each of the time points, a set of satellite images was used to ge nerate land cover maps. In a 
second step,  areas of change were determined from overlaying these maps with others. During the technical 
assessment, the AT pointed out that direct comparison of satellite images would  reduce the sources of errors 
and is seen as best practice in remote sensing analysis.  Indonesia acknowledged that such an approach is 
often considered to generate better  results but explained that processing data for the complex land- cover 
information of the whole country and for the long ti meframe in question would be highly  challenging and would 
require extensive ground truthing. Indonesia highlighted, however, its plans to improve land- use and land- cover 
mapping. The AT acknowledged this explanation and commended Indonesia for these effort s, agreeing that 
moving from single- date interpretation to interpretation techniques for time series of satellite images is an area 
for improvement. The AT also commended Indonesia for its efforts to compile land- cover databases using 
automated interpretat ion approaches across  a long time series of satellite images and to improve the existing 
NFMS.  
 
The primary source of data used to derive emission factors for deforestation and forest degradation was the 
national forest inventory (NFI), complemented by additional research plots to fill information gaps for certain 
forest types (e.g. mangrove forest) for which there were not a sufficient number of  NFI plots. As part of the 
Indonesia NFMS,  the National Forest Inventory (NFI) program is implemented since 1986. The terrestrial NFI 
plots were utilized to generate a national database on aboveground biomass and thus  emission factors, which 
were used to construct the national  FREL. The NFI uses more than 3,900 clusters of sample plots, with each 
cluster consisting of a permanent sample plot of 1 ha surrounded by eight temporary sample plots. Emission 
factors f or peat decomposition were taken from the IPCC Wetlands Supplement, which, as Indonesia explained 
to the AT, were mostly derived from data from Indonesia and can therefore be considered suitable for estimating 
emissions from peat decomposition in the FREL.  In the submission, Indonesia reports that 4,450 measurements 
of permanent sample plots were available for calculations, complemented by additional forest research data. 
Despite the large number of plots, the AT noted that there are still gaps for individual strata.  
 
Indonesia is constantly working to improve its data and information on forests. Indonesia’s submission highlights 
ongoing work to improve the NFI and to refine the set of emission factors. The AT acknowledges these plans 
and agrees that improving the set of emission factors is an area for improvement.  In addition, s pecific areas, 
namely PAA (Performance Assessment Area, or WPK in Indonesian) where REDD+ activities will be measured, 
reported and verified, have been identified. The PAA was generated based on the natural forest extent in the


---
*Page 7*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 4 OF 80 
 
 
 
end of 2012 and distribution of forested peat land in 1990. An adjusted version of the linear regression equation 
to estimate emissions from peat decomposition was deemed necessary. A new equation using a non-linear 
model has also been developed and introduced to properly update the previous emission projection for peat 
decomposition, which Indonesia recognized as needing improvement and which  the LULUCF experts had 
agreed with and acknowledged . Demonstrat ing responsiveness to t his finding, th e new equation is being  
considered in the context of the 2nd FREL process. Indonesia intends to submit a national FREL to the 
UNFCCC in 2020  (see B .1(iii) below  for more details ).  
 
To meet the requirements of the GCF RBP pilot programme, which does not allow for projected emissions from 
non-HFLD countries, an annual average was generated and applied to the recalculated FREL for all activities 
and carbon pools. The exclusive purpose f or this application of an annual average is the GCF pilot and to 
ensure alignment with its TORs. It is Indonesia’s view that this approach does not rightly represent the very 
nature of emissions from soil organic carbon in peatlands, which tend to increase overtime due to accumulating 
emissions. Indonesia has included emissions from soil organic carbon in peatlands in the UNFCCC FREL in 
the spirit of completeness. Its omission from the FREL would have been justified by the high level of uncertainty 
associat ed with these emissions. Indonesia would like to highlight that the scorecard does not consider 
this very important element of its own national circumstances.  
 
 
(ii.b) If a country is considered HFLD: Please provide the basis/justification for this classification . 
 
Indonesia is not considered an HFLD, so this criterion is not applicable.  
 
 
(ii.c) FREL/FRL adjustments  for a HFLD country : If adjustments made , please provide information that the 
adjustment does not exceed 0.1% of the carbon stock over the eligibility period in the relevant area and/or 
exceed 10% of the FREL/FRL to reflect quantified, documented changes in circumstances during the 
reference period that likely underestimate future rates of deforestatio n or forest degradation during the 
eligibility period  
 
The ToR for the pilot program does not allow for projections from non- HFLD countries. Indonesia would like to 
highlight that the scorecard does not consider the nature of soil organic carbon emissions f rom peat 
decomposition , which is considered a very important element of its own national circumstances.  
 
(iii) FREL/FRL in accordance with 12/CP.17 : Please provide any additional information that supplements the 
information contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the quantified estimate of the 
FREL/FRL.  Include whether  the FREL/FRL was constructed in accordance with the guidelines i n Decision 
12/CP.17 ; specifically on the modalities for  FREL/FRL  and whether the raised issues were material or not 
material to the quantified estimate of the FEEL/FRL . 
 
In the TAR, the AT note d that the data and information used by Indonesia in constructing its FREL are 
transparent , complete, and in overall accordance with the guidelines contained in the annex to decision 
12/CP.17.  The methods used by Indonesia are consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land- Use Change and Forestry (hereinafter referred to as the 
IPCC good practice guidance for LULUCF) and the  2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories (hereinafter referred to as  the 2006 IPCC Guidelines), as appl ied to the construction of the FREL. 
For the estimation of emissions from peat decomposition the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines for  
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (hereinafter referred to as the Wetlands  Supplement) was 
used.  
 
In its  submission, Indonesia stated that it has applied  a stepwise approach to the development of the FREL, in 
accordance with decision 12/CP.17, paragraph 10, with the aim of improving the FREL by incorporating better 
data, improved methodologies and, where appropriate,  additional pools. The submission lists a few areas for 
technical improvement, such as  refining activity data and emission factors, estimating peatland fire emissions 
and including  additional REDD+  activities.  Current efforts are underway to implement these improvements, 
starting with the re- submission of a national FREL at the end of 2020. This new FREL is expected to include 
the following improvements: inclusion of post -conver sion removals  following deforestation; improvement s to 
forest emission factor s (carbon stock) by adding data from  recent research and plot measur ements (especially 
for mangrove forest); inclusion of other significant carbon pools: b elowground biomass, soil organic carbon 
(Mangrove Forest and peat fire s); inclusion of an additional  REDD+ activity (enha ncement of forest carbon 
stock s).


---
*Page 8*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 5 OF 80 
 
 
 
Quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) procedures for the FREL data and calculation s were carried out . 
In the case of quality control, this was conducted by the relevant data custodian . For land cover data,  this was 
the responsibility of the Directorate of Forest Resources Inventory and Monitoring, Directorate General of 
Forestry and Environmental Planning , while for peat decomposition, this is handled by the Indonesian Center 
for Agricultural Land Resources Research and Development of the Ministry of Agriculture .  In the case of quality 
assurance, expert  assessments  were carried out  for both for the activity data as well as the emission factors  
consultation. Experts included scientists  from other government agencies like Forestry Research and 
Development Agency (FORDA ) as well as from academic  institutions  such as Bogor A griculture University . 
 
These calculations  were carried out with the aim to align the data and information presented by Indonesia with 
the guidance contained within the  relevant COP  decision s including transparency, accuracy, completeness and 
consistency of data.  
 
 
(iv) FREL/FRL transparency: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the transparency of the FREL/FRL and whether 
significant issues were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address  and overcome 
issues that were not material to the transparency of the FREL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be 
resolved due to time and data restrictions .  
 
Regarding transparency, t he AT noted  that the data and information used by Indonesia in constructing its FREL 
are transparent , complete,  and in overall accordance with the guidelines contained in the annex to dec ision 
12/CP.17.  The AT noted  that the transparency and completeness of information improved significantly in the 
modified FREL submission, without the need to alter the approach or  values used to construct the FREL. The 
AT commended Indonesia for the effor ts made  in this regard.  
 
The AT acknowledged that during the TA, Indonesia provided a large amount of background information and 
material , including land- cover matrices for peatlands . The AT noted the immense effort that Indonesia 
undertook in building the time series of land- cover maps .  
 
To enhance transparency, Indonesia has developed and made available online the following reports with more 
details about the REDD+ submissions process, including roadmaps for improvement  of the data and policies 
related to REDD+:  
1. Indonesia Report on REDD+ Performance, Directorate General of Climate Change, Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry, Republic of Indonesia, 2018, available at: 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/Book_IRPR_KLHK_B5_revisi_4_opt.pdf   
2. Pro ses Technical Assessment: Forest Reference Emission Level, Indonesia Pada Tahun 2016, 
Direktorat Inventarisasi GRK Dan MPV and Direktorat Jenderal Pengendalian Perubahan Iklim,  
Kementerian Lingkungan Hidup Dan Kehutanan, 2018, available at: 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/igrk/13-buku_proses_TA_B5.pdf  
 
These as well as related documentation may be accessed here: http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/peraturan-
perundangan.html . 
 
 
(v) FREL/FRL complete ness: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the understanding of the FREL/FRL and whether 
significant issues were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome 
issues that were not material to the completeness of the FEL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be 
resolved due to time and data restrictions . Include information that allows for the reconstruction of the 
FREL/FRL . 
 
Regarding completeness, it is important to reiterate that the AT noted that the data and information used by 
Indonesia in constructing its FREL are transparent , complete  and in overall accordance with the guidelines 
contained in the annex to decision 12/CP .17. The AT acknowledged  that Indonesia included emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation  in the FREL , which are the two most significant REDD+  activities in 
Indonesia.  The TA report also states that t he FREL limits its scope to aboveground  biomass and soil organic 
carbon on organic soils, and to CO 2, which are the most  significant pools and gas in terms of emissions from 
forests.  The AT commended  Indonesia for the information provided on its ongoing work  in the development of 
the FREL and improving the coverage of the estimates . 
 
Indonesia has included emissions from soil organic carbon in peatlands in the UNFCCC FREL in the spirit of 
completeness , despite the fact that its  omission from the FREL could have been justified by the h igh level of


---
*Page 9*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 6 OF 80 
 
 
 
uncertainty associated with these emissions. Indonesia would like to highlight that the GCF pilot programme 
scorecard does not consider the fact that the emissions from soil carbon in peatland accumulate over the years 
and by nature tend to  increase over time, due to the inherited emissions , which is a  very important element of 
Indonesia’s  national circumstances .  
 
One area of further improvement identified by the AT was t he assessment of  whether post -conversion removals 
are significant and could be considered when estimating emissions from deforestation . As part of the process 
to improve its data in a  stepwise manner, Indonesia is now compiling emission factors of non- forest land cover 
classes to be elaborated in estimating net emission from deforestation.  This is being carried out in the context 
of the c urrent efforts to implement improvements , as part of  the re- submission of a national FREL at the end of 
2020 . 
 
In its FREL submission Ind onesia stated that f urther improvement may be carried out to the current estimates 
(i.e. more detail ed estimates on deforestation and forest  degradation) as well as the inclusion of other REDD+ 
activities (i.e. conservation of  forest carbon stock, sustainable management of forest and enhancement of forest  
carbon stock), when more and better data and better methodologies  become available,  noting the importance 
of adequate and predictable support as referenced by decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 71.  
 
 
(vi) FREL/FRL consisten cy: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to t he consistency of the methodology used over 
the time series used for the construction of the FREL/FRL , and whether significant issues were raised in the 
report and resolved. If applicable, provide a  plan to address and overcome issues that were not material to 
the consistency of the FREL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be resolved due to time and data 
restrictions .  
  
The activity  data for deforestation and forest degradation used for the construction of Indonesia’s  FREL,  
generated from the available national forest monitoring system, are methodologically  consistent  over time: the 
FREL employs the nation- wide land cover data set which was  generated using the same methods/approaches 
since the establishment of the system in 2000, and then also applied backwards in time to the 1990s .  
 
The AT acknowledged the immense effort that went into building the time series of land- cover maps but noted 
that maintaining a consistent interpretation approach across diverse interpreters is very difficult  and that this is 
a potential source of the observed discontinuity. In response, Indonesia explained that it is exploring ways to 
develop the existing NFMS, for example by  combining automated methods and visual interpretation, in order 
to improve the land- cover  data. In line with this, in the view of the AT, improving quality management is an area 
for improvement. The AT commended Indonesia for its efforts to compile land- cover databases  using 
automated interpretation approaches across long time series of satellite images and to improve the existing 
NFMS. Introducing automated processing may help to ensure a coherent interpretation.  As part of its efforts to 
continuously improve its technical information,  Indonesia is already applying  an integrated system, combining 
automated d etection for the changes and visual approaches for the land cover types,  though  due to the needs 
of detailed information for national purposes, Indonesia would not completely migrate the system from visual 
into automated interpretation.  
  
A set of satelli te images was used to generate land cover maps. In a second step, changed areas were 
determined by overlaying these maps with others. As noted above in Section ii(a), the AT pointed out that direct 
comparison of satellite images would improve consistency and accuracy, reduc ing the sources of errors. 
Indonesia acknowledged  that such an approach is often considered to generate better results , but explained 
the challenges,  given that  process ing data for the complex land- cover information of the whole country and for 
the long timeframe in question would be highly challenging and would require extensive ground- truthing. As 
explained above, Indonesia highlighted its plans to i mprove land- use and land- cover mapping, and t he AT 
acknowledge d this explanation and commended Indonesia for these efforts . 
 
Activity data were developed with more consistent and more accurate data on land cover and land cover 
changes, and over a longer time period , compared to earlier FREL initiative s. The Ministry of Forestry data sets  
available at the time of constructing the FREL to be submitted to the UNFCCC  were thoroughly scrutinized by 
checking and  comparing the consistency with  other available data, e.g. forest and non- forest data from  LAPAN 
(Aeronautics and Space Agency of Indonesia) presented in Land Cover Change Analysis (LCCA); as well as 
to other similar products that have been published in peer  reviewed international journals (Margono et al., 2014; 
Hansen et al., 2013).  
 
The updated emission factors better reflect the diversity of forest types and conditions , compared to earlier 
FREL initiatives . Furthermore, the data used in this submission hav e been thoroughly scrutinized in  terms of


---
*Page 10*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 7 OF 80 
 
 
 
clarity, comprehensiveness, consistency, and comparability – a step that was  not done in the previou s FREL  
initiatives . 
 
Additionally, it is important to note that t he activities and carbon pool s used for the FREL calculation is also 
consistent  with national  standards  for calculation and monitoring of emission reductions , avoided emissions  or 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks. Several Indonesian National Standards (Standard Nasional Indonesia -
SNI) for measuring and monitoring forest carbon have been issued by the National Standardization Agency of 
Indonesia  (BSN) in collaboration with MoFor , and these follow the IPCC 2006 Guidelines.  
 
 
(vii) FREL/FRL accura cy: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to  the accuracy of the FREL/FRL and whether 
significant issues were raised and resolved. This should include information on whether the data and 
methodologies used neither over - nor under -estimate emissions and/or removals during the reference period . 
If applicable, provide a plan to address  and overcome issues raised in TA Report that were not material to the 
accuracy of the F REL/FRL and that couldn’t be resolved due to time and data restrictions . 
 
The AT commend ed Indonesia for the information provided on its ongoing work  in the development of the FREL 
and improving the accuracy of the estimates.  
 
Indonesia has included in its FREL submission the most significant activi ties and carbon pools, also considering 
the extent to which the data that was available and was considered accurate. By using current land- cover data 
derived from historical Landsat images (TM, ETM, OLI), it is possible to detect deforestation with good accuracy, 
but it is still problematic to monitor different degrees of forest degradation with the same level of confidence.  
Indonesia recognizes that the accuracy of biomass estimates from degraded forests could be increased and 
the level of forest degradation could be better quantified.  
 
Emissions from deforestation and forest degradation primarily originate from the aboveground biomass ( AGB ) 
pool. AGB is the most studied carbon pool across forest ecosystem types  in Indonesia, which allows more 
accurate calculations  of carbon emissions using Tier 2 or Tier 3. AGB data  are widely available in Indonesia 
and comparable across the national scale.  AGB can  be estimated from forest inventory or sample plot  data 
using allometric equations . Uncertainties from activity data of forest degradation and deforestation were derived 
from the overall accuracy assessment of land cover maps  against 181 ground truth points. The land cover 
assessment was conducted for all 23 classes of the 2011 land cover map and the results found an overall 
accuracy of 88% of the map and 98% for aggregated classes of forest and non- forest (MoFor, 2012, Margono 
et al., 2012).  
 
According to Indonesia’s FREL submission, additional work to assess the accuracy of change analysis data is 
already planned and it will be expedited soon.  Improvements were already made in the REDD+ technical annex 
(See Section B.2). Since the AGB  emissions calculatio ns use Tier 2, the uncertainty level s for forest  degradation 
and deforestation are lower than that of peat emissions.  For peat decomposition, uncertainty of  activity data 
was derived from the overall accuracy of the peat land mapping (80%)  (Ritung et al. 2011), while the IPCC 
guideline 2013 default values ( IPCC  2014) were adopted as uncertainty values of emission factors.  While this 
high level of uncertainty in peat emissions c ould have been a justification for its exclusion from the FREL, 
Indonesia decided to include it to ensure completeness and transparency of information. The average 
uncertainty for all emissions  is 16.1% . 
 
• Activity data: to improve accuracy and consistency in satellite image  interpretation, time series satellite 
images could be directly compared (rather than analysing satellite images for time points individually 
by overlaying maps to detect changes) and autom ated image processing techniques could be 
introduced. E fforts are underway in Indonesia to establish:  
o a new system for accuracy assessment of land- cover mapping from remote sensing data.  
o an annual forest fire map from Landsat starting from 2000 (using visual interpretation of burn 
scars). Advancing remote sensing technology to improve burn scars and depth of burn 
estimation mapping to increase the accuracy of peat fire emission calculations so that these 
estimates can be included in a future FREL.  
• Plans to improve the NFI and to refine the set of emission factors : Indonesia is now working by focusing 
data of carbon stocks and emission factors from NFI plots specifically for mangrove forests. Meanwhile 
Indonesia is also under a process of conducting the NFI re- design, to have more terrestrial data and 
information in accurate and effective ways.  
• Improve the data on peatland: Indonesia has made progress to improve the peatland activity data , by 
developing detailed , higher -resolution  maps of peatland area s, which is being piloted at the district


---
*Page 11*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 8 OF 80 
 
 
 
level.  This work is being  undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture. The Peatland Restoration Agency 
is also  updating maps of peatland canals .  
• Move from overall map accuracy to classification accuracy of individual classes or differentiating 
sampling errors between the individual forest classes . Efforts  are underway in Indonesia to test and 
exercise uncertainty analysis that fits the data, approach and methods used in Indonesia. Sample-
based estimation is one of the approach es that have been tested.  
 
 
(viii) Sources of emissions: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to whether all activities  listed in paragraph 70 of 
UNFCCC decision 1/CP .16 (‘REDD -plus activities’) that are a significant source of emissions were include d. If 
they were not, justify whether activities that are significant sources  of emissions were not included due to lack 
of data and/or whether the omission overestimates  emissions  or underestimate removals . Provide also a plan 
to include all data on all REDD -plus activities that are significant sources of emissions  in future FREL/FRL 
submissions.  
 
The AT acknowledged that Indonesia included in its FREL emissions from both deforestation and forest 
degradation, which are the two most significant REDD -plus activities in Indonesia.  
 
In its FREL submission, Indonesia states that f urther improvement s may be carried out to the current estimates 
(i.e. more detail ed estimates on deforestation and forest  degradation) as well as the inclusion of other REDD+ 
activities (i.e. conservation of  forest carbon stock, sustainable management of forest and enhancement of forest  
carbon stock), when more and better data and methodolog ies become available,  noting the importance of 
adequate and predictable support as referenced by decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 71.  As explained in 
Indonesia’s FREL submission, the other three RE DD+ activities were excluded due to data gaps. Indonesia is 
undertaking efforts to improve understanding  related to enhancement of C stocks , with a view to include 
enhancement as an additional REDD+ activity in the re -submission of a national FREL at the end of 2020.  
 
(ix) Significant  pools:  Please provide any additional information that supplements the information contained in 
the Technical  Assessment Report in relation to the inclusion of the most significant pools . If applicable, justify 
whether significant pools  were not included due to lack of data and/or the omission does not overestimate 
emissions  or underestimate removals . In addition, provide a plan to include all significant pools in future 
FREL/FRL submissions.  
 
The carbon pools included in Indonesia’s  FREL were  aboveground biomass for all strata and  soil organic carbon 
emissions from peatland decomposition associated with deforestation and forest degradation on peatlands . 
Belowground biomass, litter and deadwood were not included in calculations because the necessary data were 
unavailable,  
 
Indonesia included in its FREL submission the most significant carbon pools, considering the extent to which 
available data were considered accurate. AGB is an important carbon pool for LULUCF emission s. AGB and 
soil organic  carbon are dominant pools  compared to the other s (i.e. belowground biomass, deadwood , litter 
and mineral soil  C). Moreover, the existing  records in  Indonesia regarding the other carbon pools were  very 
limited. Review on the proportion of carbon pools showed that the biomass proportion of  understory vegetation 
and seedlings is generally small. Similarly, litter is accounted for only about 2% from the total forest biomass.  
 
Without neglecting the importance of belowground biomass, some underlying reasons presented by Indonesia 
on its FREL submission to focus only on aboveground biomass carbon pools were : 
 
1. Emissions from deforestation and forest degradation are primarily originated from AGB pool.  AGB 
accounts for more than 70% of the total forest biomass, excluding soil.  AGB is the most studied carbon 
pool across forest ecosystem types in Indonesia, which allows more accurate calculation of carbon 
emissions using Tier 2 or  Tier 3 and which is comparable throughout the national scope. AGB data are 
widely available and can be estimated from forest inventory or sample plot data using allometric 
equations. Many studies on allometric equations for estimating aboveground tree biomass in Indonesia 
are available (e.g. Yamakura et al., 1986; Ketterings et al., 2001; Chave et al., 2005; Basuki et al., 
2009; Krisnawati et al., 2012; Manuri et al., 2014).  
2. Indonesia has a nearly  complete estimation of AGB values  at the national  level,  managed by the 
Ministry of Forestry (now Ministry of Environment and Forestry). It is based on forest inventory results 
from the National Forest Inventory (NFI) Field Data System that covers the entire forests across 
Indonesia measured since 1990s.  
3. The Fores t Research and Development Agency (FORDA) within the Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry in collaboration with the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) has established an online


---
*Page 12*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 9 OF 80 
 
 
 
carbon monitoring system in 13 Provinces (http://puspijak.org/karbon/). The system estimates AGB 
based on permanent sample plots established at various vegetation types.  
 
Based on the preliminary data from the Indomalaya ecozone, the AT found that deadwood and belowground 
biomass pools would likely be significant sources of em issions. The AT considered treatment of emissions from 
belowground biomass carbon, deadwood and soil organic carbon to be an area for technical improvement. The 
exclusion of litter is considered justified, however, given the low biomass volume, which is in dicative of low 
significance.  Belowground biomass  is being considered for inclusion in the resubmission of the national FREL 
to the UNFCCC planned for 2020.  
 
The inclusion of soil organic carbon emissions on deforested or degraded peat was a  very important  effort 
made by Indonesia,  as it is a significant carbon pool.  This demonstrates Indonesia’s intention to make its 
information more transparent and complete even though it is recognized that emission factors from peatland 
still require improvement . Due to the complex processes in peatland ecosystems, their mutual  relationship with 
land cover and limited data availability, its  FREL submission is  limited to the i nclusion of emissions from peat 
decomposition.   
 
In its submission, Indonesia applies a stepwise approach to the development of the FREL, in accordance with 
decision 12/CP.17, paragraph 10, with the aim of improving the FREL by incorporating better data, i mproved 
methodologies and, where appropriate, additional pools. The submission lists a number of areas for technical 
improvement, such as refining activity data and emission factors, estimating peatland fire emissions and 
including additional REDD -plus act ivities.  
 
 
(x) Emissions from gases:  Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the inclusion of all gases that are significant 
sources  of emissions . If not all of the gases were included, justify whether gases that are significant sources  
of emissions were not included due to lack of data and/or whether  the omission overestimates  emissions  or 
underestimates  removals . Provide also a plan to include all signif icant pools in future FREL/FRL submissions . 
 
Indonesia’s  FREL include d only CO 2 emissions and did  not cover emissions of other GHGs  as CO 2 contributes 
more than 99.9 per cent of total GHG emissions from LULUCF. The AT agreed, as captured in the TAR, that 
CO 2 is the most s ignificant gas in terms of emissions from forests , and commended  Indonesia for the 
information provided on its ongoing wor k in the development of the FREL and improving the accuracy and 
coverage of the estimates.  The AT considers that  Indonesia generally followed decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 
70, on activities undertaken,  paragraph 71(b) and decision 12/CP.17, paragraph 10, on implementing a 
stepwise approach.  
 
The AT also noted that, according to Indonesia’s first BUR as well as  its second national communication, fires 
occur frequently in the country and these could result in large amounts of non- CO 2 emissions, on peatland 
forests.  The AT considers the inclusion of non- CO 2 GHG emissions an area for technical improvement.  
Indonesia ’s FREL  explained  that peatland fires have not been included in the FREL owing to the complexity 
and high uncertainty of re lated activity data . There is a high level of uncertainty associated with all parameters 
(hotspot detection, size of burned area estimation, fire frequency, burned peat depth, and mass of fuel available 
for combustion). As Indonesia explained in the FREL s ubmission, it has plans to include peatland fires in the 
FREL in the future.  As shared with the LULUCF experts during the TA, Indonesia has already been making 
progress on peat land fire emission estimates by collating new findings from published peer revi ewed literature.  
Advancing remote sensing technology to improve burned scar and peat depth of burn estimation mapping will 
increase the accuracy of peat fire emission calculations so that these estimates may be included as an 
improvement in a future FREL.  Progress has already been made to develop a methodology applying manual 
analysis of MODIS data, for “hot spots” and yearly burned scar areas.   
 
 
(xi)  IPCC guidance for FREL/FRL : Please indicate if the whether  the construction of the FREL/FRL (data, 
methodologies and estimates) was guided by 2003 GPGs or  2006 GLs.  
 
The methods used by Indonesia are consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land- Use Change and Forestry (hereinafter referred to as the IPCC 
good practice guidance for LULUCF) and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
(hereinafter referred to as the 2006 IPCC Guidelines), as applied to the construction of the F REL. For the 
estimation of emissions from peat decomposition the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (hereinafter referred to as the Wetlands Supplement) was used.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 10 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
(xii) Issues related to applying IPCC guidance:  Please mention  any significant issues related to the 
application of IPCC GLs/GPGs as  raised in the TA report . Include any significant issues that are material to 
the alignment with the methodologies of the IPCC GLs/GPGs that were raised in the TA report and whether  
significant issues were raised and resolved.  If applicable, provide a plan to address  and overcome issues 
raised in TA Report that were not material to the application of IPCC guidance and that couldn’t be resolved 
due to time and data restrictions . 
 
There was only a single, specific issue raised regarding the application of IPCC guidance , however , in 
response,  a clear plan for data improvements was already  identified.  
 
Indonesia’s FREL includes soil organic carbon emissions from decomposition associated with deforestation 
and forest degradation on peatlands . These emissions  are calculated for all area s of deforestation or forest 
degradation that occur on peatlands , which means the FREL does not distinguish areas with and without 
drainage . The AT noted that the emission factors from the Wetlands Supplement are intended to be applied 
only to “drained organic soils .” 
 
During the facilitative exchange for the TA, Indonesia explained , however, that given the national context -  that 
deforestation and forest degradation on peatlands are usually accompanied by drainage , that Indonesia, 
therefore, consider s the treatment of all secondary forests as drained forests , a justifiable approach when 
applying the IPCC guidance.  Indonesia also included information in the modified FREL submission explaining 
that it is impossible to trace back the negligibly small areas of undrained secondary peat forest .  
 
Indonesia plans , however, as noted in its FREL submission,  to improve the data on peatlands, chiefly regarding 
emission factors and their  dependenc e on the water table. The AT acknowledged  these plans and agrees that 
collecting more detailed data on the management of peatlands is an area for improvement.  
 
 
B.1.2. Additional criteria related to FREL/FRL  
(xiii) Reference period for the FREL/FRL:  Please indicate the  reference period (number of years) applied for 
the construction of the FREL/FR L. 
 
The reference period applied for the construction of the UNFCCC technically assessed FREL was 1990- 2012.  
 
However, Indonesia has taken note that this reference period exceeds the maximum of 20 years, as indicated 
in the GCF R EDD+ RBP scorecard, in 2a(xiii). The scorecard is a required assessment as part of the terms of 
reference for the pilot programme for REDD+  results -based payments  and is contained within Annex XI and 
XII to GCF/B.18/23 . Following the guidance contained in footnote 22 of row 2a(xiii) of the scorecard, Indonesia 
has recalculated its reference level based on a historical annual average for a period of 20 years. The 20- year 
reference period being applied for this proposal is, therefor e, 1993 – 2012. This is exclusively for the purpose 
of this funding proposal and does not impact the UNFCCC FREL or results having already been submitted or 
reported in the BUR technical annex , and technically assessed or analysed, respectively. It also does not pre-
empt future iterations of FRELs  or results to be submitted to the UNFCCC  by Indonesia in the future . Details 
on the recalculation of the 20- year FREL baseline are presented in Annex XVII.   
 
Indonesia selected the 20- year FREL baseline because it  is as consistent as possible with the UNFCCC period, 
while still meeting the requirements of the GCF REDD+ RBP pilot programme.  
 
It was important for Indonesia to maintain a FREL period for this funding proposal of a length that would be as 
close as possible to the length of the UNFCCC technically assessed FREL period of 1990- 2012.  
 
The UNFCCC technically assessed FREL reference period was selected, based on a thorough analysis which 
considered the following aspects:  
(1) availability of land- cover data that is transparent, accurate, complete and consistent;  
(2) reflection of the general condition of forest transition in Indonesia;  
(3) the length of time that could reflect the national circumstances, policy dynamics and impacts 
(biophysical, social, economic, political and spatial planning), as well as associated carbon emissions.  
 
As described in Indonesia’s FREL submission to the UNFCCC, five different scenarios for the FREL period 
were considered, considering the trends, availability and reliability of historical data. The 1990- 2012 period was 
selected as it best illustrates and captures the national circumstances of the land use sector in Indonesia, 
including the policy dynamics and social aspects.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 11 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
As detailed in the FREL submission, Indonesia established an intensive forest plantation development in 1990s. 
Capturing this decade is important because during this time the country initiated a massive forest -based 
industry, such as wood- fiber industry and forest estates (plantations). This time period also covers the 
economic crisis in 1998 when almost all sectors collapsed, including the forestry sector, resulting in increased 
illegal logging activities and forest encroachments on the ground. Additionally, there was rapid expansion of 
palm oil plantations  during this time. Besides, the period also includes the years  1997 to 1998 when extensive 
fire disasters occurred in Indonesia due to a prolonged El Nino . Following these years, in the period 2000- 2003 , 
the deforestation rate decreased mainly due to implementation of the National Strategic Plan of the Ministry of 
Forestry aimed to reduce Annual Allowable Cut for timber extraction. In addition, during that period, the 
government set policies to encourage efforts for forest rehabilitation.  
 
 
(xiv) If previous reference level submitted:  Please i ndicate whether  a previous reference level applying to the 
same area was submitted. If so, describe the difference between the emissions and removals used for the 
previous one and the current one. Describe any adjustments made to the current FREL/FRL compared to the 
previous one, if applicable.  
 
No previous REDD+ reference level had been submitted by Indonesia to the UNFCCC, as can be seen on the 
REDD+ Web Platform here: https://redd.unfccc.int/submissions.html?country=idn.  
 
 
(xv) Uncertainties:  Please indicate whether the country has provided information on aggregate d uncertainties  
of the emissions or removals estimate, taking into account national capabilities and circumstances , and if so , 
indicate the percentage of aggregate uncertainties and provide information on assumptions and sources . If 
applicable, indicate the process implemented to minimize systematic and random errors.    
 
Indonesia conducted a comprehensive uncertainty analysis of its FREL. Uncertainties associated with the 
activity data for  forest degradation and deforestation were derived from the overall accuracy assessment of  the 
land cover maps  against 181 ground truth points. The land cover assessment was conducted for all 23 classes 
of the 2011 land cover map and the results found an overall accuracy of 88% of the map  and 98% for 
aggregated classes of forest and non- forest (MoFor, 2012, Margono et al.,  2012).  
 
Since the AGB  emissions calculation is using Tier 2 accuracy, the uncertainty level for  AGB emissions from 
forest degradation and deforestation is lower than that of  soil carbon emissions  from deforestation and forest 
degradation on peat lands . For peat decomposition, uncertainty of  activity data was derived from the overall 
accuracy of the peat land mapping (80%)  (Ritung et al. 2011), while the IPCC guideline 2013 default values 
(Hiraishi et al.,  2014) were adopted as uncertainty values of emission factors.  The average uncertainty for all 
emissions  is 16.1% . 
 
The AT commend ed Indonesia for the exemplary effort made in providing the uncertainty analysis. During the 
TA, several aspects of the uncertainty analysis were discussed and areas for future improvement were 
identified; for example, moving from overall map accuracy to classification accuracy of individual clas ses or 
differentiating sampling errors between the individual forest classes. Additional work to assess the accuracy of 
change analysis data is already planned and it will be expedited in the near future. Indonesia is currently working 
on a new approach for accuracy assessment of land -cover mapping from remote sensing data, in order to 
provide accuracy information on each of the land cover data set .  
 
The AT notes that, in line with the stepwise approach, the uncertainty analysis provided in the FREL submission 
cover ed only selected sources of error, and the AT s aw broadening the scope of the uncertainty analysis to 
cover further potential sources of er ror, and differentiating between land- cover classes with regard to emission 
factors and activity data, as areas  for technical improvement.  In response, the uncertainty analysis for the 
reported results was more comprehensive than that for the FREL estimates (see Section B.2), so improvements 
have already been undertaken.  
 
A re-design of the current NFI system is being initiated to ensure the sustainability of NFI data measurement, 
covering all vital land cover classes and reduction of uncertainties of the e mission factors.  
 
 
(xvi) Please indicate whether different FREL/FRLs have been used for different funding sources  or other 
purposes , and if so, list and describe them.  
 
Results -based payments baseline established in a bilateral partnership with the Government of Norway


---
*Page 15*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 12 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
A baseline for results -based payments (RBP) has been established as a benchmark for assessing Indonesia’s 
performance in implementing REDD+ under the framework of the Indonesia- Norway Partnership1. Reductions 
in emissions from perform ance indicators are compared to a results -based payment baseline to report results 
under this Indonesia- Norway bilateral agreement.  
 
This RBP baseline is national in scale, covering all -natural forests in Indonesia, including dryland, mangrove 
and swamp forests in both primary and secondary classes. The baseline is based on the annual historical 
average level of each of the following performance indicators: emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation.  The results -based payment baseline distinguishes  between the activities covered, or performance 
indicators.  Aboveground biomass is the only pool included in the RBP baseline, and carbon dioxide is the GHG 
included.  
 
The RBP baseline for the Indonesia- Norway Partnership was  developed using a reference period from 
2006/2007 -2015/2016 and will be valid up to 2019/2020.  The estimated baseline  value of that results is  278.5 
MtCO 2e/yr. The emission reduction result is the difference between the RBP baseline and the emissions in 
each year , expressed in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent .  
 
From the reported emission reduction results, set -asides will be  made to determine the maximum number of 
emission reductions Indonesia can be rewarded for by Norway and other financiers. These deductions are 
intended to reflect risks related to uncertainty , as well as Indonesia's ambition to reduce national GHG 
emissions. The deducted volumes cannot be rewarded or bought by other financiers.   
 
While p eat decomposition and emissions from peat fire shall be measured and reported, these will not be 
included as  a performance indicator in the first reporting period under the partnership. Plans shall be made t o 
include peat decomposition and peat fire emissions in the results -based payment model over time.  Even though 
peat fire emissions are not part of the RBP model from the start, a proxy approach for measuring reduced 
emissions from peat fires is being  piloted and  will be  reported on. This refers to the same as the methodology 
applying manual analysis of MODIS data, for “hot spots” and yearly burned scar areas , which is mentioned 
above in B.1.1(x).  
 
The RBP baseline will be updated periodically, indicatively every 5 years, but also considering any updated 
FREL and NDC Indonesia might submit to the UNFCCC.  When the Indonesia- Norway agreement is renewed, 
the RBP baseline will be updated for the upcoming period. Updating of the RBP baseline will consider  new 
knowledge, extension of the scope (inclusion of more pools, gases or performance indicators) and 
improvements in methodologies and data.  The updated RBP baseline (for a new period) will reflect an increase 
in ambition.  The reference period will be moved forward in time, by 5 years. If this does not represent an 
increase in ambition, a percentage increase in ambition will be established.  
 
 
B.2. REDD -plus Results reporting     
 
Please provide link  to the BUR technical annex  containing REDD+ results : 
https://unfccc.int/documents/192165  
 
Please provide link to the UNFCCC Technical Analysis Report:  
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/tatr1_2019_IDN.pdf _______________  
 
B.2.1. UNFCCC Technical  Analysis  
(i) Consistency of results with FREL/FRL : Please provide any additional information that supplements the 
information contained in the Technical Analysis  Report in relation to the consistency of the reported results in 
the technical annex to the BUR with the FREL/FRL (including the inclusion of same pools, activities and 
gases) .   
 
Indonesia has ensured  consistency in the methodologies, definitions, comprehensiveness and information 
provided between the assessed FREL and the results achieved reducing emissions from deforestation and 
forest degradation, as described in Indonesia’s  REDD+ Technical A nnex to its second B UR. The LULUCF 
experts noted this was done by:  
• Using consistent methodologies and data to generate AD on the deforestation area (defined as loss of 
natural forest cover below a certain threshold and converted to non -forest land without considering 
 
1 https://www.norway.no/contentassets/313ad6b82f28487e806ed9dad7c8a710/loi -signert -versjon.pdf


---
*Page 16*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 13 OF 80 
 
 
 
subsequent regrowth after forest cover loss; i.e. “gross” deforestation), the forest degradation area (defined 
as a c hange from primary forest to disturbed secondary forest) and the degraded peatland area where 
deforestation or forest degradation have occurred. The areas of deforestation and forest degradation were 
both derived from the same forest monitoring system using the same methods, procedure and stratification, 
by overlaying land- cover maps with 23 land- cover classifications generated from Landsat satellite images 
at different time points, with a minimum mapping unit of 6.25 ha. Deforestation is identified by the change 
from six natural forest land classifications to non- forest land classifications, excluding subsequent regrowth. 
Forest degradation is identified by the change from primary natural forest land classifications to secondary 
natural forest land classifi cations. The same peatland map was used for deriving the degraded peatland 
area;  
• Using consistent methodologies and data to generate emission factors ( EF). The same EF associated with 
specific land -cover changes based on the consistent land- cover stratification are used for both the FREL 
and results;  
• Including the same carbon pools: above- ground biomass and soil organic carbon;  
• Including the same gases: CO2 only;  
• Covering the same area: entire national territory;  
• Using the same assumption that all peatland where deforestation or forest degradation has occurred is 
considered as degraded (drained);  
• Using the same forest definition as that used in constructing its FREL.  
 
The LULUCF experts commend Indonesia for ensuring the full consistency of the dat a and methodologies 
described in the FREL for 1990– 2012 and in the technical annex with the results of the implementation of the 
activities reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation for 2013 –
2017.  
 
In the Technica l Analysis Technical Report ( TATR ) the LULUCF experts state  that Indonesia ensured overall 
consistency between the FREL and the results  reported through the Technical Annex to the BUR , using 
consistent methodologies and data to generate activity data  (AD), as well as the same EFs . 
 
In recalculating the FREL to represent 1993 –  2012, and presenting the corresponding results, for the sake of 
this FP, that full consistency, as described above, has been maintained.  There have been no changes  to 
assumptions, definitions, or comprehensiveness  for either the recalculated FREL or corresponding results . 
Changes  made were the modification of  the time period over which the methodological approach was applied  
as well as the presentation of the average annual emissions for the reference level  period , versus the historical 
average as applied in the UNFCCC technically assessed FREL  and the linear  projection for soil carbon 
emissions from peat decomposition.   
 
   Deforestation   
 
Degradation    
 Peat Decomposition   
 
 Reference 
level   Actual    Reference 
level    Actual    Reference 
Level   Actual   
2014  321,077,036  118,747,501  67,888,879  9,824,101  180,022,119  240,813,389  
2015  321,077,036  239,501,493  67,888,879  85,971,152  180,022,119  248,965,527  
2016  321,077,036  283,794,741  67,888,879  78,649,415  180,022,119  255,706,927  
Total:         
Table 1: Input Data for 1993 -2012 Recalculated FREL and Corresponding Results  
 
 
 Total FREL   Total Actual 
Emissions   Total Emission 
Reductions  
 2014  568,988,033  369,384,991  199,603,043  
 2015  568,988,033  574,438,172  (5,450,138)  
 2016  568,988,033  618,151,083  (49,163,049)  
TOTAL    144,989,855  
Table 2: Recalculated 1993- 2012 FREL and Corresponding Results (tCO2e)


---
*Page 17*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 14 OF 80 
 
 
 
(ii) Transparency  of the data : Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis  Report in relation to the transparency of  the data and information 
provided in the technical annex  (i.e. whether information has been provided to provide an understanding of 
how UNFCCC guidance on results reporting has been addressed) . Include information on significant issues 
raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether these were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a 
plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report, that were not material 
to the transparency of the data on results and that could not  be resolved due to time and data restrictions . 
 
Indonesia’s REDD+ submissions were developed by a group of experts representing cross -ministerial agencies 
and organizations through a “transparent scientific -based participatory process”.  
 
The LULUCF experts noted that the Party’s estimation of the result s of the implementation of the activities 
reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation in the national area of 
Indonesia was undertaken using a transparent and consistent approach. The LULUCF experts commend ed 
Indonesia for its significant long- term efforts to build up a robust NFMS that can provide transparent estimates 
of emissions from deforestation.  
 
The LULUCF experts noted that, as part of the TA process, Indonesia provided additional information, the 
transition matrix of land- cover changes, some technical clarifications of EFs and the relationship between the 
GHG inventory and the reported  result s. The LULUCF experts commended  Indonesia for these efforts to 
provide the additional information, which increased  the transparency .  
 
As conveyed during the technical analysis , and informed by the exchanges with the LULUCF experts , Indonesia 
identified several capacity -building needs which would enable Indonesia to improve its data and methodologies . 
 
The specific needs identified for enhancing transparency are:  
(i) Development of a data publication and online analysis system, to comply with transparency 
requirements  
(ii) Development of an integrated system for strengthening the linkage between the GHG  inventory and 
mitigation actions to support the transparency and accountability of methodologies.  
 
The following documents were provided by Indonesia during the assessment process in response to requests 
for clarification or additional information during the TA , enhancing the transparency of the information:  
 
1.Indonesia Report on REDD+ Performance, Directorate General of Climate Change, Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry, Republic of Indonesia, 2018, available at: 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/Book_IRPR_KLHK_B5_rev isi_4_opt.pdfhttp://ditjenppi.m
enlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/Book_IRPR_KLHK_B5_revisi_4_opt.pdf   
 
2. Proces s Technical Assessment: Forest Emission Level, Indonesia Pada Tahun 2016, Direktorat Jenderal 
Inventarisasi GRK Dan MPV Direktorat Genderal Pengendalian Perubahan Iklim Kementerian Lingkungan 
Hidup Dan Kehutanan, 2018, available at: http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/ad minppi/dokumen/igrk/13-
buku_proses_TA_B5.pdf  
 
3. Land Transition Matrices, 2012- 2017.  
 
 
(iii) Completeness of the data : Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis  Report in relation to the completeness  of the data and information 
provided in the technical annex  (i.e. whether information has been provided that allows for the reconstruction 
of the results) . Include information on significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether 
these were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues raised 
in the Technical Analysis Report, that were not material to the completeness of the data on results and that 
could not  be resolved due to time and data restrictions . 
 
In the TATR, it is reported that t he LULUCF experts consider ed the data and information provided in the 
technical annex to be transparent, consistent, complete and accurate . 
 
The relevant information and data required by COP decisions f or allowing for the reconstruction of results 
were obtained from the documents referred to in the technical annex and through the responses from the 
Party to the questions of the LULUCF experts during the TA.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 15 OF 80 
 
 
 
The LULUCF experts commended Indonesia for its efforts to ensure the completeness of the data , providing 
enough information for the reconstruction of the results.  
 
 
(iv) Consistency of the data : Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis  Report in relation to the consistency of the data and information provided 
in the technical annex  (i.e. data and methodologies were applied consistently over the results time series) . 
Include information on significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether these were 
raised and resolved . If applicable, provide a  plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the 
Technical Analysis Report, that were not material to the consistency of the data on results and that could not  
be resolved due to time and data restrictions . 
 
The LULUCF experts noted that the Party’s estimation of the results was undertaken using a tr ansparent and 
consistent approach.  
 
According to decision 12/CP.17, paragraph 8, the FREL shall be established taking  into account decision 
4/CP.15, paragraph 7, and maintaining consistency with the anthropogenic forest -related GHG emissions by 
sources and  removals by sinks reported in the Party’s GHG inventory. Indonesia clarified during the consultation 
process that there is no difference in the method and principal data it used for deforestation and forest 
degradation- related estimations in its GHG inventories between the first and second BURs. Taking into account 
the conclusion in the technical assessment of the FREL that consistency was achieved between the FREL and 
the GHG inventory in the first BUR , the team assessing Indonesia’s FREL noted that the P arty maintained 
consistency in terms of sources of AD and EFs with the GHG inventory included in its second BUR.  
 
It was noted by the LULUCF experts that Indonesia’s reported emission estimates from peat decomposition in 
its GHG inventory contained within the second BUR are different from the emission estimates reported in the 
technical annex , with differences rang ing from 29 per cent to 31 per cent for 2013 –2017. During the TA, 
Indonesia explained that the methodology used for the estimati on was the same , but the activity areas were 
different. The AD for the second BUR included the entire peat decomposition area in Indonesia, whereas the 
AD for REDD+ activities included only the areas of peat decomposition that were forested in 1990.  In the  TATR,  
there are no suggested technical improv ements in this regard, so it may be inferred that the explanation was 
considered sufficient.   
 
In terms of times series, t he LULUCF experts concluded that (1) improve ments to the accuracy and consistency 
of the  interpretation of satellite images  - by directly comparing time series of satellite images (rather than 
analysing satellite images for time points individually by overlaying maps to detect changes), as well as  (2) 
introduction of automated image processing techniques are areas for technical improvement  already  identified 
in the FREL TAR that also apply to the provision of information on the REDD+ results . Beyond the identification 
of direct comparison and automated image processing being areas of improveme nt, the LULUCF experts rai sed 
no concerns regarding consistent application of data and methodologies over the results time series.  
 
 
(v) Accuracy of the data:  Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis  Report in relation to the accuracy  of the data and information provided in 
the technical annex  (i.e. whether it neither over - nor under -estimates  emissions and/or removals) . Include 
information on significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether these were raised and 
resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the Technical 
Analysis Report, that were not material to the accuracy of the data on results and that could not  be resolved 
due to time and data restrictions . 
 
In the TATR, the LULUCF experts concluded that the results are accurate to the extent possible.  
 
The LULUCF experts noted that the Party’s estimation of the results of the implementation of the activities 
reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation in the national area of 
Indonesia was undertaken using a transparen t and consistent approach. The LULUCF experts commend 
Indonesia for providing transparent information and continuing to improve the accuracy of its estimates.  
 
Both the established FREL and the results obtained for 2013 –2017 from the implementation of the activities to 
reduc e emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, as reported in the BUR,  are based on the 
assumptions that i) the amount of aboveground biomass per area in each forest type does not change over 
time,  ii) all losses of carbon in aboveground biomass are estimated as CO 2 emissions in the year of land- cover 
change (i.e. by applying instantaneous oxidation),  iii) regrowth after land- cover change is not considered, and  
iv) all peatland areas where deforestation  or forest degradation appear are treated as degraded. The LULUCF


---
*Page 19*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 16 OF 80 
 
 
 
experts noted that these assumptions may affect the accuracy of the estimated emissions from the activities; 
however, the effect of the assumptions on the emission reduction results, in term s of accuracy, may be limited 
because such effects are likely  cancelled out by comparing the FREL and the actual emissions.  
 
Indonesia clarified during the consultation process that the accuracy of AD has improved over time (e.g. the 
accuracy of AD in for est land in 1990, 2012 and 2016 is 93.32, 94.60 and 95.98, respectively). This is due to 
various improvements, including the quality of the raw data and the technique of satellite image interpretation. 
Indonesia also improved its uncertainty estimates; nam ely, moving from a single uncertainty value in the FREL 
to improved uncertainty values generated to improve AD for each year, considering the issue identified during 
the TA of the FREL. The LULUCF experts commend Indonesia for these efforts and noted that this improvement 
helps to reduce uncertainties in accordance with decision 4/CP.15, paragraph 1(d)(iii).  
 
Indonesia clarified during the TA that the NFMS is continuously being improved to increase the accuracy of 
data generated.  
 
The LULUCF experts commend  Indonesia for continuing to improve the accuracy of its estimates, specifically 
in reference to consideration of alternative approaches for estimating emissions from peatland decomposition, 
as a future improvement of the FREL.  
 
 
(vi) Indicate  the number of years that took place between the last year of the FREL/FRL period, and the year 
corresponding to the results being proposed for payments :  
 
The results period being proposed for payment through the GCF is  2014- 2016. The last year of the FREL period 
included in the FREL submission to the UNFCCC is 2012. Two to f our years took place between these periods.  
 
B.2.2. Additional criteria related to the achieved results  
(vii) Uncertainties:  Explain whether the country has provided information on aggregate uncertainties  of the 
results , taking into account national capabilities and circumstances . Include the percentage of aggregate 
uncertainties and provide information on assumptions and sources. If applicable, indicate the process 
implemented to minimize systematic and random errors.   
 
The uncertainties of the biomass stock  estimates used in the estimation of REDD+ results  ranged from 3% to 
50%, depending on the availability of NFI  plots of each land cover stratum in each island.  
 
A re-design of the current NFI  system is being initiated to ensure the sustainability of NFI data measurement, 
covering all vital land cover cla sses and reduction of uncertainties of the emission factors.   
 
The most considerable uncertainty , however,  came from the estimates of the peatland emissions. Current  
estimates were based on the IPCC default values, which indicate 50% uncertaint y. Therefore, moving to a Tier  
2 emission factor for peatlands  is a priority technical improvement and work is already underway . BRG and 
other donor organisations  have already installed 66 groundwater level monitoring system (GWLMS) at various 
degraded peatlands (BRG,  2018). In addition, the MOEF  is compiling peatland GWLMS data from timber 
concessions. The GWLMS  data will be available in the future and it will be used for estimating the CO 2 
emissions due to peat . 
 
It is important to reiterate, as was described above in B.2.1(v) and was part of a response to the LULUCF 
experts during the TA, that the overall accuracy estimates for the results were improved to be more 
comprehensive when compared to the uncertainty val ues reported for the FREL estimates. Indonesia moved 
from a single uncertainty value in the FREL to improved uncertainty values generated to improve AD for each 
year, taking into account the issue identified during the TA of the FREL.  Further improvements are ongoing, 
with the Olofsson et al (2014) methodology being tested and the results compared.  
 
 
(viii) Preventing double payments:   
- Provide information on payments that have been, or are expected to be received from other sources 
of funding for results recognized by the country for the same area for the same period,  for which the 
country is applying for payments from the GCF .  
- Include relevant information regarding the payment s paid or expected to be paid, including the 
year(s), results volume in tCO2e, quantities for which payments were received/are expected to be 
received, and entity/entities paying for the results as well as any type of agreement involved .


---
*Page 20*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 17 OF 80 
 
 
 
- Provide sufficient  assurances that the results that have been paid, or are expected to be paid for by 
other sources (or are under any type of analogous agreement) been excluded from the volume 
offered to the GCF.  
- Provide a description of measures to ensure that the results paid by the GCF will not be transferred, 
offered for future payment or otherwise used (for example for offsets) and information on how the 
results proposed for payment by the GCF will be treated or used.  
- Provide information on how different financi ng contributed to the achieved results.  
 
As of now, Indonesia has not yet received any REDD+ results -based payments from any donors or 
other sources.  
 
Payments that are expected to be received  
 
Under the Indonesia- Norway Partnership, Indonesia has reported 7.4 MtCO2e/yr as results for 20172. Third -
party verification is ongoing, but assuming the verified results match the results reported in the Emission 
Reduction Report for the Indonesia- Norway Partnership (2019), the 2017 emission reductions expected to be 
available for payments are 4.8 M tCO2e.  
 
Reductions were estimated against a baseline value of 278.5 MtCO 2e/yr, representing the total annual average 
emissions for deforestation and forest degradation.  
 
The total emission reductions reported for 2017 under this Partnership was 7.4 MtCO 2e/yr for 2017, which was 
then reduced by the agreed deductions (20% to account for uncertainty and 15% to reflect Indonesia’s own 
ambition), so that only 65% of the reported emission reductions can be rewarded by Norway or other financiers, 
which is 4.8 MtCO 2e. The year 2017 has been excluded entirely  from this GCF proposal. There is, therefore, 
no risk of double payments for this year . The exclusion of 2017 was a decision taken exclusively for this GCF 
proposa l. 
 
 
 
This information3 will be published in the Lima Information Hub once Indonesia receives the payments from 
Norway.  
 
REDD+ results paid by the GCF  
 
Indonesia will retire  27MtCO2e upon receipt of payment by the GCF . Indonesia considers retirement of 
emission reductions a measure of high environmental integrity. Retirement prevents any further use, for 
offsetting or other purposes, and therefore preempts any possibility for double counting or double claiming.  
This information will also be published in the Lima Information Hub once payment is received from GCF. Only 
the emission reductions achieved between 2014 and 2016 that are paid for by GCF will be retired.  These will 
be evidenced through Indonesia’s registr y upon receipt of payment by the GCF.  
 
 
Potential direct and indirect finance contribution  to the achievement of REDD+ results in period 2014 
to 201 6 
 
2 http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/igrk/Progres_penurunan_emisi.pdf  
3 The table listing payments that are expected to be received is accessible at http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/admin/berita-
admin/redd -2/3470- track -emission -reduction-and -corresponding-paymens.html   Period AreaUNFCCC Results 
(t/CO2e/year)UNFCCC Assessed 
FREL/FRLIndonesia-Norway 
Results-based 
payment baseline Links to additional documentationEntity Eligible 
to Receive 
PaymentsIndonesia-Norway 
Reported Results  
(t/CO2e/year) Results for 
payments 
(t/CO2e/yr)Status (if 
received/committed
/pledged)EntityRemaining results 
available for 
payments
2013 National 48,978,427 48,978,427
2014 National 48,978,427 48,978,427
2015 National 48,978,427 48,978,427
2016 National 48,978,427 48,978,427
2017 National 48,978,427
278,500,000http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/imag
es/adminppi/dokumen/igrk/Progres_penuru
nan_emisi.pdf7,406,056 4,813,933* Committed Norway
41,572,371**
** For 2017, results have been negotiated as part of Indonesia-Norway Partnership, and are estimated according to the baseline that applies under that Partnership. When applying that baseline, there are zero remaining results 
available for payment. Therefore, 2017 results have not been offered to the GCF as part of this funding proposal. *Reflects the expected emission reductions available for payments after the agreed deductions under the Indonesia-Norway Partnership, as of the time of development of this funding proposal. This may not reflect final 2017 emission 
reductions paid for by Norway.From 
568,859,881 (for 
2013) to: 
593,329,235 (for 
2020)https://redd.unfccc.int/submisions.html?cou
ntry=id-
Government 
of Indonesia


---
*Page 21*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 18 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
It is impossible to attribute specific REDD+ results achieved in different years to specific sources of finance. A 
variety of finance sources, both national : central, province, district and village level public budget s, NGOs, 
private sector , and international : donor countries, multilateral organizations, non- governmental organizations, 
private sec tor, have contributed directly and indirectly to the government of Indonesia’s efforts to reduce 
deforestation.  
 
Table 3 below presents the various projects and programmes from ODA that may have contributed directly or 
indirectly to Indonesia’s own efforts  to achieve the results reported, for a total of about USD  56 million over the 
2014- 2016 period . 
 
Project name  Donor  Period  Amount  
(M USD)  
REDD+  Read iness Preparation Activities (FCPF)  World Bank  2011 - 30/11/2019  3.20 
FIP I Prepara tion: Community  Focused 
Investments to Address  Deforestation and Forest  
Degradation  ADB, World 
Bank, IFC 2014 - 2015  1.30 
FIP I. Community Focused Investments to 
Address Deforestation and Forest Degradation  ADB 12/2016 - 2021  17.00  
Forest and Climate Change (FORCLIME) FC 
Mobile  KfW 2010 - 2020  20.00  
Forest and Climate Change (FORCLIME) FC 
Mobile Phase II  GIZ 2009 - 2020  24.78 
Support to Indonesia Climate Change Response  EU 12/2012 - 12/2017  8.01 
Support to the Establishment of REDD+ 
Infrastructure and Capacity Transition Phase  UND P 
(Norway)  11/2015 - 12/2016  12.84 
The Cooperation Activities on Development of 
Environmental Management in Collaboration with 
Local Government in Indonesia  JICA  2016 - 2018  2.74 
Promoting Conservation of  Selected High -Value  
Indigenous Species of  Sumatera  ITTO  08/2014 - 08/2017  0.48 
Follow up Research on  Rehabilitation of 
Degraded  Forest and Land  Komatsu  2015 - 2018  0.13 
Enhancing Smallholder Benefits  from Reduce 
Emissions from  Deforestation and Forest  
Degradation in Indonesia  ACIAR  04/2013 - 04/2017  0.25 
Strengthening the Capacity of  Local Institution to 
Sustainability  Manage Community Forest in 
Sanggau for Improving  Livelihood  ITTO  12/2014 - 12/2016  0.51 
Implementing a DNA Timber  Tracking System in 
Indonesia  Adelaide 
University  2015 - 2017  0.20 
Institutional Strengthening  Phase -10 UNDP  2016 - 2018  0.35 
Sustainable Management of  Peatland 
Ecosystem in  Indonesia (SMPEI)  IFAD  07/2017 - 09/2021  4.77 
Agricultural Policy Research to  Support Natural 
Resource Management in Indonesia's  Upland 
Landscape  ACIAR  02/2018 - 12/2021  0.18 
Forest and Peatland  Management to Reduce  
Emission in Indonesia through  Local Actions  UK (UKCCU)  04/2016 - 03/2019  4.22 
USAID Support for Indonesia  Climate Change 
Trust Fund  (ICCTF)  USAID  06/2015 - 12/2019  5.00 
Total    105.96  
Table 3: ODA support to Indonesia that may have contributed directly or indirectly to the results reported  
(Source: adapted from Performance report on loans & grants . BAPPENAS,  2018)  
 
As mentioned in the second BUR , the financial support received for mitigation actions  in the period 2015- 2016 
alone was USD  16.63 million for the forestry sector , of which  USD  9.92 million  from bilateral and USD  6.71 
million from multilateral sources.  
 
(ix) Tracking emissions reductions : Indicate whether the achieved results are included in a registry or similar  
system that tracks emissions reductions and corresponding payments , and ensures that there is no past or 
future double payment or use of such results , including information to identify the area where the results were 
achieved, the entity eligible to receive payment, year(s) generated, source(s) of p ayments  received, and 
identifying code,  where possible. Provide the link or information where to find the registry or similar system


---
*Page 22*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 19 OF 80 
 
 
 
Regarding a transparent, accurate, consistent, comparative and comprehensive (TACCC) MRV 
implementation, Indonesia has established modalities for National MRV System, which included:  
• National MRV Scheme (Ministerial Regulation No 72/2017) ; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/permen/P72.pdf   
• Registry System (Ministerial Regulation No 71/2017) ; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/permen/P71.pdf   
• Guideline for MRV REDD+ (Annex of Ministerial Regulation No 70/2017) ; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/P.70.pdf  
• MRV team under DG CC Regulation Number SK.8/PPI -IGAS/2015.  
 
Indonesia's MRV scheme for REDD+ outlines the flow of general national MRV process with proper adjustments 
to accommodate alignment with REDD+ funding schemes and its requirements. Indonesia's MRV scheme for 
REDD+ is officially pre sented in the Annex of Ministerial Regulation on the guidance for implementing REDD+ 
in Indonesia. The detail guideline for the MRV for REDD+ is provided in Guideline for MRV REDD+ activities 
(http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/pedoman_mrv_redd.pdf ). Within the above-
mentioned regulations, the role of NFMS is prominent . 
 
Indonesia has established a National Registry System (or SRN) for the implementation of REDD+ at national 
and subnational levels. The SRN is intended for: data collection action and support for climate change including  
on REDD+ actions and resources and for the avoi dance of double- counting. The SRN includes data and 
information on the FREL/FRL, MRV of results, as well as the contribution to achievement of the NDC. The 
National Registry System Manager is responsible for maintaining consistency between data and information on 
the implementation of REDD+ at the national and subnational levels and avoidance of double counting.  
 
 
C. Non -carbon elements  
 
Please provide link  to the summary on information on safeguards: 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/8360571_Indonesia-NC3 -2-Third %20National%20Communication%20-
%20Indonesia%20- %20editorial%20refinement%2013022018.pdf ;  https://redd.unfccc.int/files/sisredd_versi_eng.pdf   
and http://www.forclime.org/documents/Books/SIS%20REDD+_Final%20English.pdf  
 
C.1. Cancun safeguards   
C.1.1. Compliance with Cancun safeguards . Please provide any additional information that supplements the 
information included in the “summary of information on safeguards” that allows understanding how each of 
the safeguards below w as addressed and respected in the full period during which results  were generated in 
a way that ensures transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness:  
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of national forest programmes 
and relevant international conventions and agreements.  
 
Comments:  
 
The Moratorium Termination of the Granting of New Permits and Perfecting Natural Primary Forest and 
Peatland Management (Moratorium) and the Social Forestry programmes were two key initiatives operating 
during the period for which there are results -based p ayments.  Each contributed to the reduction of emissions 
while striving for consistency and complementarity of REDD+ actions in Indonesia with the national forest 
programs and relevant international conventions and agreements. Therefore, responses in C1.1 will focus on 
providing additional information related to these two initiatives, from the perspective of implementation and 
what happened in practice to demonstrate how the Government of Indonesia (GoI) addressed and respected 
the Cancun safeguards in the implementation of the Moratorium policy and Social Forestry programme during 
the period of 2014- 2016  (the period upon which results based payments are sought).  This will complement 
information already provided in the Summary of Information (SOI). The requ ired Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) reviewed these two efforts and found that while notable alignment exists with the Cancun 
Safeguards, opportunities for improvements and strengthening still remain, particularly with the respect to the 
Social F orestry programme.  That concluded, the ESA further found that during 2014- 2016  (including up and 
until today) the GoI already increased its support for  the moratorium and Social Forestry  through the adoption 
of new policies, laws and regulations ( PLRs ), commitment of resources, and outreach to stakeholders aimed 
at enhancing the programme’s effective implementation and consistency with the Cancun Safeguards. It is 
understood that in the implementation of the RBP Project, these measures will continue and ne w ones will be 
pursued to not only ensure avoidance and mitigation of harms, but also take advantage of opportunities to 
increase the benefits the programme can yield for both peoples and the environment.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 20 OF 80 
 
 
 
As it currently stands, with the latest revision  of the Indic ative Map of the Termination of the Granting of new 
Permits (Moratorium map/PIPPIB), the GoI has committed to protect 66,287,067 hectares of natural primary 
forest and peatlands.  Consistent with the national forest framework and applicable international conventions, 
this means no concessions and permits , so no exploitation of forest resources in the Moratorium area.  This 
means protection, conservation, no conversion and reduced emissions.  This also means a level of protection 
for any local communities, Villages and Adat communities living within this Moratorium map area, and in theory, 
an enabling environment for them to thrive according to their self -determined priorities and pursuant to their 
distinct relationship with the forests and biodiversity within.  
 
The Social Forestry programme allows for the same. The Government has essentially delimited an area of 12.7 
million hectares and said that it would only be open for social forestry, that is  overwhelmingly for : use and 
access r ights for local communities and Villages, increased participation of these collectives , often as leads , in 
sustainable management of the forest resources within those areas, and a path to recognition as Adat forests 
where applicable.  This is consistent wi th national forest programming and international conventions ’ 
highlighted goals such as improved governance over forest resources, multi -stakeholder participation in climate 
change initiatives, conservation, protection, sustainable development of forest materials and alternative timber -
free economies, as well as rights -based forest management where inclusion of local populations and greater 
land tenure security for these collectives is considered essential to climate change mitigation.  
 
Both the Moratorium and Social Forestry initiatives were established to be implemented in a manner that 
contributes to consistency with the national Constitution, and the various policies, REDD+ guidelines, national 
laws and Indonesia’s duties and obligations under international law related to forest management, biodiversity, 
conservation, public participation, non- discrimination, and human rights (particularly of indigenous peoples and 
minorities), among others.  
 
The ESA performed on these initiatives  analyses a number of these PLRs  that were in existence at the start of 
the review period 2014, and that evolved and were supplemented over the period of review , i.e., 2014- 2016 .  
The ESA recognizes that as resourced and applied, the  Government has continued to increase the 
imple mentation consistency with the Cancun Safeguards , starting during the period of review and immediately 
thereafter, especially in 2017 . This started with cornerstone of Indonesia’s forest policy, the 1999 Forestry Law.  
This law provides that forests will b e “sustainably maintained in a wise, transparent, professional and 
accountable manner” and “be capable of accommodating the dynamics of community aspirations and 
participation, customary and cultural, as well as social values in accordance with national legal norms”.  Other 
laws applicable to Indonesia provide a further enabling environment, such as: the Convention on Biological 
Diversity, the Climate Change Convention, UNDRIP, the Forestry Law, the Social Forestry Decree, the Decrees 
on Adat Forest and Tit led Forest, the One Map Policy, and the Resolution of Control over Lands in Forest Area, 
and several MOEF  regulations guaranteeing a grievance mechanism and establishing monitoring requirements 
and processes related to social and environmental impacts, and the Cancun Safeguards more specifically.   
 
Further, as required by UNFCCC REDD+ decisions, a system has been developed for providing information 
on how the activities of the Moratorium, Social Forestry and other REDD+ policies and measures are 
implemented to complement and ensure consistency with the Cancun safeguards and consequently, the 
national forest programs and relevant international conventions and agreements (the Safeguards Information 
System ( SIS-REDD+ )).  While developed and released earlier, including throughout the review period,  
Indonesia’s SIS -REDD+ (along with its principles, criteria and indicators (PC&Is) was formally enshrined in law 
in 2017 via a MOEF  regulation. Strengthening in uptake and application since 2013, i t has since  been 
operationalized via pilot implementation in three provinces (see below), and as seen by the RBP Project outputs 
and activities, continues to enjoy the support of the GoI.  Efforts continued to ensure that the SIS -REDD+ is 
strengthened and widely socialized, especially in terms of training those expected to contribute information to 
the system and increasing the public’s access to information via its online platform 
(http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/sisredd/ ).  Most significantly, consistent with national norms and international 
obligations related to stakeholder involvement and transparency, the development of SIS -REDD+ and its 
supporting materials was the product of an extensive multi -stakeholder process (for  more this, see section 
C.1.2 below).  
 
Additional information on complementation and consistency with PLRs can be found in the ESA of the two 
initiatives found in the Annex to this FP.  
 
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, taking into account national 
legislation and sovereignty.  
 
Comments:


---
*Page 24*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 21 OF 80 
 
 
 
The anchor of Indonesia’s forest policy is the Forestry Law, Law No. 41 (1999) which  promotes  that the forests 
of Indonesia are managed “ for the people’s maximum benefit ” and  that such management is to be done 
sustainably, transparently and with community participation, and that all other laws should be consistent with 
the Forestry Law.  The same law emphasizes the coordinated, multi -stakeholder approach to forest governance 
and management providing that the national and regional governments, along with Community and individuals, 
shall participate in forestry supervision.  
 
Under President Joko Widodo (2014- present ), governance changes over forest and the climate change 
mitigation portfolio were put in place to enhance forest management through renewed focal points, increased 
coordination, and most significantly, by combining two leading ministries , Ministry of Forestry and Ministry of 
Environment,  into the single MOEF  in October 2014.  Per the Forestry Law, the government refocused 
coordination in climate change by tasking the recently established MOEF  to absorb the roles and 
responsibilities of REDD+ Agency and National Council for Climate Change (DNPI). MOEF  then establ ished 
the Directorate General of Climate Change to be the focal point in Indonesia and globally. The Forestry Law 
then establishes a number of directorates under the umbrella of the MOEF  allowing for an increased 
coordination over a broad array of key elem ents to forest management, including: the Directorate General of 
Forestry Planology and Environmental Administration (DJPKTL); the Directorate General of Climate Change 
(DJPPI) to be the focal point in Indonesia and globally ; the Directorate General of Pol lution and Environmental 
Destruction Prevention (DJPPKL); the Directorate General of Natural Resources and Ecosystem Conservation 
(DJKSDAE); the Directorate General of Sustainable Production Forest Management (DJPHPL), the Directorate 
General of Forest and Environmental Law Enforcement (DJPHLHK); Directorate General of Social Forestry 
and Environmental Partnership (DJPSKL); and the Directorate General of Management of Watersheds and 
Protection Forests (DJPDASHL). The Secretariat General of the MOEF  and Data and Information Center 
(Pusdatin) provided coordination support. In addition to the Focal Point (DJP PI), MOEF  appointed a senior 
negotiator for Indonesia in UNFCCC, as Director General of the REDD+ Division now sitting within the DJP PI 
and responsible for  managing the SIS -REDD+ process.  Placing so many of these relevant directorates under 
the MOEF  umbrella has created an enabling environment for improved forest governance.  
 
Improved forest governance is also achieved through the design and implementation of various measures to 
increase transparency. One way to achieve transparency is through the centralization of critical data and the 
harmonization of the same.  For instance, in Indonesia there is the National Registry System (SRN) on Climate 
Change made operational in 2016 (Ministerial Decree 71/2017).  It is a web- based platform intended to, among 
other things: collect data on actions and resources for the implementation of climate change adaptation and 
mitigation; and document activities and resources on adaptation and mitigation of climate change, including 
the contribution made by multiple actors : ministries/government institutions, local government, business 
community and civil society organization, all while making public data and information on documented 
measures.  There is also the NFMS and the operation through a web- based system of the National Inventory 
System for Greenhouse Gas Emissions (Sistem Inventarisasi Gas Rumah Kaca Nasional, SIGN -SMART). The 
mandate of SIGN -SMART requires the publishing of an annual GHG inventory report (Presidential Regulation 
no. 71/2011).  
 
Another flagship of Indonesia’s efforts to improve transparency and the systematization and harmonization of 
forest governance is the One Map Policy.  The One Map Policy (Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 
9 of 2016 on Accelerating One Map Policy through use of 1:50.000 Scale) is being pursued and further 
strengthened by Law 4/2011 which gives the Geospatial Information Agency the mandate to work with the 
Presidential Deliver y Unit for Development Monitoring and Oversight and take the lead in developing a single 
reference map.  Valuing increased transparency, the law defines “open ness” as “the establishment of 
geospatial information (GI) is intended to be utilized by many parties by providing easy access to the society 
to obtain GI.”  The objective of this policy is to create a single 1: 50,000 scale map that can serve as a standard 
geospatial reference, based on a single standard, a single database, and a single geoportal.  The use of one 
map that various decision- makers , including ministries, regional and district governments , and other actors can 
access will help to increase transparency, and the sharing and comparison of information ac ross multiple users.   
 
The GoI has also heard and begun responding to demands about the need to be more transparent in the 
revision of the Moratorium and Social Forestry indicative maps.  This is particularly salient if governance over 
forest resources is  to be improved – including through the increased share of information across stakeholders 
and the use of materials to identify potential opportunities and conflict.  In the case of the Social Forestry 
Programme, and per MOEF  Regulation No. 21/2019 on Adat  Forest and Titled Forest, the Directorate for 
Handling Tenurial and Customary Forestry Conflict of the Directorate General for Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership ( MOEF ), launched the production of an indicative map of Adat customary forests 
which can be used, at least, in parallel with the indicative Social Forestry map, if not used to modify or reform 
it. The indicative  Adat forest map can also be used along with provincial and district spatial maps and 
consultations with local actors to coordi nate national, regional and local efforts to verify customary rights and


---
*Page 25*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 22 OF 80 
 
 
 
land tenure upon receipt of applications under the Social Forestry framework.  This map can also help with 
conflict resolution in the moment and avoid future grievances arising from overlapping claims.  The production 
of this map counts with inputs from various stakeholders, and efforts are underway to reconcile the mapping 
done by the civil society actor, AMA N, of over 9.3 million hectares of Adat customary forests.  Finding 
mechanisms to share and reconcile these maps no doubt provides for informed decision- making, greater Adat 
community participation in forest governance, the avoidance and resolution of conflicts,  and most simply , a way 
that various actors can use the same language to work together to manage forest resources across wide 
landscapes.  
 
Further, transparency is enhanced through the SIS -REDD+ and MOEF  grievance online platforms 
(http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/sisredd/   and http://pengaduan.menlhk.go.id  respectively). Consistent with the laws 
governing both matters ( MOEF  Regulations Nos. 70/2017 and P.22 (2017) respectively ), each platform strives 
to increase the quality and volume of information accessible on its websites regarding the demonstration of 
compliance with the Cancun Safeguards and the manner in which the REDD+ activities not only identifies risk, 
but mitigates them, tracks them, and resolves them should complaints arise. (These two platforms are further 
discussed below at E.1.3).  
 
The GoI has also made concerted efforts to improve forest fire management system per Presidential Instruction 
11/2015 on Enhancing Forest and L and Fire Control. MOEF  mandates all level of governments to develop land 
and forest fire management system at their jurisdictions and implement sanctions for business players who do 
not implement fire management within the area under their jurisdictions. Furthermore, MOEF  Regulation 
32/2016 on Control of F orest and Land Fires has created different entities from the national to community and 
village level , including permit holders t o work together to prevent fires. These entities include the National Task 
Force for Handling Forest  and Land Fires, the Forest Fire Control Core Team, Fire Concerned Communities, 
Forest Fire Control Supporting Team and Village Facilitating teams.  
 
While the above contains only a few highlights related to REDD+ forest governance and transparency, 
collectively the material  described efforts to make access to information simpler and eventually facilitate the 
sharing of information across decision- maker s, programme beneficiaries, and those that are charged with, 
and/or seek to influence decision- makers through the various sub- national and multi -stakeholder taskforce, 
working groups, and advisory committees and independent advocacy initiatives.  This is f urther facilitated 
through the establishment of REDD+ institutions in 11 pilot Provinces (in the form of a Working Group, 
Commission, or Task Force) and the maintenance of no less than 10 portals/information systems that facilitate 
the sharing of informati on between the national and sub- national governments as well as local communities.  
These are each listed in Indonesia’s most recent SOI.  
 
The REDD+ programming also strengthened forest governance at the local level through the establishment, 
and now a renewed commitment to strengthen the Forest Management Units (FMUs) (see RBP Project, Activity 
2.1).  The Forestry Law enables forest management through Kesatuan Pengelolaan Hutan (forest management 
units (FMUs/KPHs)), which are responsible for developing, implementing, and/or overseeing site level forest 
governance and management —including preparing participatory plans, enforcing forest regulations such as 
forest fire control and other illegal practices, supporting local communities and Villages in applying f or one of 
the arrangements available under the Social Forestry Programme. Both central and local governments have 
joint authority over state forests , with a strong role from  subnational governments  (provincial and district level ).  
 
FMUs  are the basis for governing and managing all forest areas and functions at the local level based on forest 
management plans, and in close consultation and collaboration with all stakeholders , increasing accountability 
to local stakeholders. In 2007, the government passed legislation to prioritize FMUs and safeguard the public 
function of forests. This resulted in the formation of 600 FMUs over the whole forest estate. State Ministry of 
National Development Planning ( BAPPENAS ) informed the MOEF that the budget is conditional on achieving 
FMU implementation targets —a requirement referred to as “no KPH no budget.” The transition to a 
decentralized management regime for forests remains central to the mission of MOEF . A priority of the National 
Medium- Term Devel opment Plan 2015- 2019 is to have 629  FMU s operational by 2020. FMUs play an important 
role in bringing stakeholders together to develop from the site level, forest management plans that depend on 
multiple actors for proper implementation and monitoring.  
 
Also contributing to forest governance, within the Social Forestry Programme (MOEF  Decree No. 83/2016 ), 
the Forest Partnership Agreement creates the vehicle for a cooperative relationship between the local 
community and the forest manager, the holder of a forest utilization / forest service business permit, a lease -
to-use forest area permit, or the holder  of a forest product primary industry business permit. These agreements 
enable private sector individuals (or groups) and local community or Village peoples to work together to 
determine and implement an activities plan to sustainably manage the forest  resources within distinct areas of 
State Forests This  decree did not invent social forestry, but did place in a single instrument  practices already


---
*Page 26*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 23 OF 80 
 
 
 
in place under other policies, laws and regulations governing community and village forest management.  
Ultima tely, Social Forestry is  is a recognition that forest governance is best achieved when those depending 
on forest resources for their livelihoods work in harmony and potential conflicts between such users are 
resolved through agreement.  
 
Additional informat ion on transparency and national forest governance structures can be found in the ESA 
found in the Annex to this FP.  
 
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and members of local 
communities, by taking into account relevant international obligations, national circumstances 
and laws, and noting that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  
 
Comments:  
 
The matter of the rights of local communities, Villages and Adat communities in the context of the Moratorium 
and Social Forestry programming is discussed at length in the ESA and it two annexes.  Incorporated by 
reference into the response to this C.1(iii ) is the text at section C.1(iv) below on stakeholder participation, 
(including indigenous peoples), and the material found at section E.5 (Indigenous Peoples) below discussing 
a number of the challenges and critiques of the Social Forestry Programme as related to indigenous peoples  
(in Indonesia referring instead to “Adat communities”) .  The opportunities for improvement are being addressed 
by mitigation measures defined for the new RBP project (see annexed ESMF), many of which build upon 
initiatives alrea dy commenced by the Government, specifically the Director General of Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership.  
 
Considering the intersect of local community, Village and Adat community lands with forests (it is estimated 
that 70% of the Social Forest ry indicative map (PIAPs) overlaps the customary forests of these collectives), the 
GoI has taken notable measures to affirm the rights of these populations to have access, use and effective and 
meaningful participation in the management of forest resources.  As highlighted in the ESA, when the Joko 
Widodo administration fortified the Social Forestry programme in 2014 by increasing the previously designated 
0.45 million ha for Social Forestry to 12.7 million ha, this was a State response to considerable stakeholder 
advocacy and an expression of a political commitment to provide both protection and opportunities for  Adat 
communities , villages  and local communities.  It was also a recognition that land tenure security, traditional 
knowledge, and the distinct w ays of life of these populations were of integral value to avoiding deforestation 
and achieving the national objectives of climate change mitigation through reduced GHG emissions.   
 
Acknowledging that there are vast numbers of communities and Villages sti ll awaiting recognition as an Adat 
(indigenous) peoples, as well as recognition of their customary Adat forests  (per titles), for many the Social 
Forestry has provided at least an interim level of protection for their forests, livelihoods, and cultural identity. 
The current PIAPs sets aside 12.7 million hectares of State Forest to be subject to leases, permits or forest 
partnership agreements, or to be excised from the State Forest once formally recognized with a title as an Adat 
(customary) forest.  While not done through an established and written protocol on free, prior and informed 
consent (FPIC), (albeit the principle of FPIC was already affirmed in the 2013- released Principles, Criteria and 
Indicators related to monitoring the impacts of REDD+ activities) these processes are done by communities 
and Villages voluntarily applying for and agreeing to  these legal arrangements and in many cases  doing so, 
through their designated leaders and governing institutions. The Social Forestry Programme respects the self -
determined decision- making of these collectives and their political institutions of self -gove rnance. The 
programme does not impose the lease, permits and partnership agreements on them.  What does exist 
regardless of community acceptance, is the forest category : production, conservation, or protection,  that is 
designated solely by the State. Altho ugh, every five years when spatial planning is reviewed, there are 
opportunities for these collectives to participate in that review and any potential recategorizations.  
 
The subject of some debate, the mechanism by which a permit/lease for use or access r ights will be transitioned 
into a full Adat forest title --should the community or Village so desire-- has not been defined yet , though it is 
arguably not prohibited by law.  (This is a matter addressed by mitigation measures and recommendations in 
the ESMF  that accompanies this FP).  International law recognizes Adat communities ’ rights to full ownership, 
control and administration of their traditional lands, resources and territories , not just use, access or 
participatory management. Nevertheless, while many communities and Villages still desire full titles to their 
Adat forests and the more ample property rights that go along with such recognition, the Social Forestry permits, 
licenses and agreements are recognized by many as providing a step in that direc tion.  While recognition 
processes are pending, the programme offers a mechanism to exclude those that would otherwise intrude into 
their lands and irreparably exploit the very forest resources upon which their physical and cultural survival 
depends.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 24 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
Through opportunities to secure both support and resources from the State to engage in sustainable forestry 
(Community Timber Plantations) and alternative timber -free economic endeavours, the initiative also provides 
opportunities to reduce poverty and improv e livelihoods. Through new laws emerging after the 2013 
Constitutional Court decision which recognized the legitimacy of Adat communities to land title, declared 
unconstitutional the Forestry Law inclusion of Adat forests within State Forests, and ordered all forest 
boundaries to be gazette before being legally recognized as part of the State Forest Estate, the application of 
the Social Forestry Programme  has become more complementary and consistent with the objectives of the 
Cancun Safeguards. For instance, procedures have been clarified for requesting and securing Adat titles, and 
mechanisms have been put in place to issue titles for Adat communities who can prove control over their lands 
prior to the State forest designation over their traditional lands. Per Ministerial Decree 83, access to the benefits 
of the Social Forestry Programme has been made more equitable and possible through new, simpler 
applica tion processes. Additionally, Social Forestry teams have been established and empowered to carry out 
field investigations and verifications of license, permits, and partnership agreements to identify potential 
conflicts, including overlaps with Adat forest s, even if not yet titled.  Also, through measures advanced 
throughout the review period, by December of 2017, 430 local FMUs were established, and 29 of 34 provinces 
in Indonesia have Social Forestry Working Groups consisting of NGOs, Local Government, Ac ademics, donors, 
Local Champions , – all empowered to accelerate the programme, socialize it with communities, and assist in 
the application processes for access, use rights and titles.   
 
Furthermore, as a signatory to the Convention on Biological Diversit y which provides that States will “respect, 
preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying 
traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation”, Indonesia’s PLRs as related to the Social Forestry 
Programme  demonstrate this respect. Specifically, a rticle 52 of Decree No. 83 on Social Forestry provides 
recognition of the important contribution that traditional knowledge of communities can make. The decree 
further provides that “[u]tilization of timber  forest products and / or non- timber forest products and / or 
environmental services in customary forests based on local wisdom / traditional knowledge that is recognized 
and approved by traditional institutions”. Technical guidance on local wisdom / tradi tional knowledge are further 
regulated and holders of licenses to Village Forests Community Forests, and Community Forest Plantations 
are entitled to manage and utilize these forests “in accordance with local wisdom including integrated farming 
systems.”  Reinforcing this aspect going forward, and replacing MOEF Regulation of 2010 concerning 
Procedures for Complaints and Handling of Complaints due to Alleged Pollution and / or Environmental 
Damage,  MOEF  Regulation P.22 on Procedures for Management of Compl aints for Pollution and / or 
Environment Damage and / or Forest Damage (2017) affirmed  a ground for a complaint if there is “utilization 
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge” (Art. 5(j)).  
 
Nevertheless, the Social Forestry Programme is not without its critics.  In response, the Government has largely 
acknowledged where its ambitions to put 12.7 million hectares under Social Forestry must also be met with 
additional resources, further PLR ref orms and mechanisms to ensure that this is done in a way that fully 
respects the rights of Adat communities.  As highlighted in section E.5 below, a number of the shortcomings of 
the programme and enabling PLRs are already subject to measure aimed at improvement. See for example, 
the DG of Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership’s creation of an indicative Adat forest map, as well 
as is intent to provide technical support for local governments to adopt umbrella regulation that would facilitate 
their recognition of local communities as Adat communities (a precondition to land titling).  The ESMF attached 
to this FP for implementation during the RBP Project includes a host of additional recommendations and 
mitigation measures  (R&MMs) to improve delivery of benefits and opportunities to indigenous peoples and 
local communities in a rights -based manner (see for example, R&MMs 10  and 11 ). There are also two bills 
before the legislature (a lands bill and bill on Adat rights) which will eventually strengthen the RBP as it pertains 
to Adat communities.   
 
Taking a broader overview of the REDD+ programming that provides the backdrop and foundation of the Social 
Forestry and Moratorium initiatives, it is also worth highlighting that representatives of indigenous communities 
and their supporting NGOs meaningfully and effectively participated in the various multi -stakeholders forums 
discussed in this section and section E below (including to development the SIS -REDD+, PC&Is, APP S tools 
and NDC).   
 
In terms of Adat and local community and Village women, while collective rights of use, access, even ownership 
of lands and resources are not typically held by a single man or woman, many (not all) of the benefits received 
through the Social Forestry (whether through the protection and conservation of forest resources, ecotourism 
or sustainable timber free production) would have been shared communally,  positively  affecting multiple sectors 
within the collective : women, youth, elderly.  As the Social Forestry programme is strengthened through the 
proposed RBP Project (Activity 2.2.), it is envisioned that all mitigation measures and overall, all program 
activities will be implemented with a gender responsive appro ach. This includes, for example, special measures


---
*Page 28*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 25 OF 80 
 
 
 
to target women  systematic use of gender analysis and collection of gender responsive and sex -disaggregated 
data, and increased gender equity in participatory forums : capacity sessions, multi -stakeholder bodies, parties 
to partnership agreements, etc. For more on this, see section E.3 below as well as the results of the ESA, 
ESMF, and Gender Assessment and Action Plan found in the Annex XIII (c)  to this FP.  
 
Also as a form of respecting rights  that includes  the right to justice and a remedy, the national grievance 
mechanisms hosted by the MOEF  (see discussion of this in the ESA and below at section E.1.3 of this FP), 
was and continues to be available to receive grievances from local communities, Villages and Adat 
communities. It is now more accessible via an online platform.   
 
Taking into account the above provided information, it is anticipated that the strengthening of REDD+ enabling 
framework, including monitoring mechanisms, and the expansion and strengthening of the FMUs and Social 
Forestry programme will provide increased benefits to indigenous peoples.  Implemented with the mitigation 
measures recommended to date and building upon the efforts the Government has already begun, there is 
great space to sei ze opportunities for improvement and perfect project consistency with the Cancun Safeguards 
related to local community and indigenous peoples’ rights.  
 
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in particular indigenous peoples 
and local communities, in the actions referred to in paragraphs 70 and 72 of 1/CP.16.  
 
Comments:   
 
Please refer to the relevant comments in sections C.1.2 (Stak eholder Involvement), E.1.3 (Consultation with 
Stakeholders) and E.5 (Indigenous Peoples) below for a fuller response to the program’s consistency with this 
safeguard.  
 
In addition to the information provided in the aforementioned sections, it is to be hig hlighted that the Moratorium 
and Social Forestry initiatives  were both commenced with substantial support by civil society. They each 
responded to a call by a broad section of stakeholders to provide for the protection of natural primary forests 
and peatlands , through prohibitions on licensing and concessioning , and for the rights of use, access and 
participation in forest management (even lead roles) to the local communities, Villages and Adat communities 
that most depend on forest resources for their livelihoods and cultural identity. The two initial indicative ma ps 
guiding each of these initiatives were developed based on stakeholder inputs. The implementation of the 
Moratorium was not heavily dependent on stakeholder engagement , in terms of local populations, except with 
respect to enforcement. Local populations have been essential to early warning systems for fires and other 
threats , including intruders. This  facilitated Moratorium enforcement and forest protection.  
 
On the other hand, the Social Forestry Programme involved regular stakeholder engagement as the 
participants that entered into legal arrangements : license, permits, forest partnership agreements etc , did so in 
a voluntary participatory way, via applications that involved regular exchanges with local communities and the 
government, and in many cases, the subsequently provision of financial and technical support to these 
collectives and other private actors trying to engage in sustainable community timber plantations and/or the 
dedication to alternative deforestation free products and economies.  
 
As noted below, while the voluntary application for licenses, permits and forest partnership agreements was a 
baseline requirement of the Social Forestry, concerns were raised as to the extent to which all grants of forest 
resource use and access counted w ith the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) of Adat communities that 
might have sustained claims to the underlying lands.  Where the local communities or Villages were in fact 
Adat community, but not yet recognized as such by Indonesia, this may not have been an issue since they 
were still the soliciting parties and programme beneficiaries. Consistent with the UNDP’s Social and 
Environmental Standards (SES), the ESMF has required development of an FPIC protocol  - identifying the 
when and how  - for futur e applications to activities that may affect Adat communities’  rights and interests, lands, 
resources, territories : whether titled or untitled to the people in question,  and traditional livelihoods of the Adat 
communities  concerned.  
 
(v) That actions are cons istent with the conservation of natural forests and biological diversity, 
ensuring that the actions referred to in paragraph 70 of this decision are not used for the 
conversion of natural forests, but are instead used to incentivize the protection and 
cons ervation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and to enhance other social and 
environmental benefits.  
 
Comments:


---
*Page 29*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 26 OF 80 
 
 
 
Per Decree No. 83, the GoI vows to facilitate in the context of the Social Forestry Programme  “forest / land 
rehabilitation programs / activities, soil and water conservation, biodiversity conservation, conservation- based 
community empowerment, sustainable forest management certification and / or timber legality certification.”  
Conversion is not permitted in protection and conservation forests. The programme also emphasizes 
sustainable forest management through community patrols, ecosystem service payments for Village Forest 
conservation and community transitions to livelihoods that are non- timber based.  
 
Hutan Kemasyarakatan/HKm (community forests) provide for permit holders/community groups that are only 
allowed to harvest Non- Timber Forest Products (NTFPs ) if permits are issued in the protection forest zone. 
Timber extraction is only allowed in the production forest zone and this is regulated. Hutan Tanaman 
Rakyat/HTR (community timber plantations) aimed at supporting community groups who work in the timber -
based industries. Community groups who have received an HTR license can develop forest plantations and 
can sustainably harvest the timber. For Hutan Desa/HD (village forests) , if permits are issued in the protection 
forest zone, use of forest resources is limited to NT FPs and other environmental services, such as ecotourism. 
Again, sustainable timber harvesting is allowed in the production forest zone.  
 
The DG of Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership reported in its last performance su mmary that 356 
communities and 4,136 peoples are now participating in what they categorize as “[n]umber of natural resources 
and environmental rescue communities in river basins, lakes/water springs, karst, swamps, peatland, 
coastland, oceans, and small is lands, communities around industry areas and settlements, and environmental 
communities in conservation areas.”  
 
The Moratorium itself is designed to expressly prohibit permits and concessions in designated natural primary 
forests and peatlands identified in the Moratorium’s indicative map thereby having elements of conservation 
and protection both of forests and the biodiversity, including through no- conversion.  The Instruction does 
contain a number of exceptions, however, that permit further development of forest resources, but these existed 
prior to the adoption of the Moratorium.  Substantial natural forest areas under the Moratorium protection are 
also under the protection of other laws, such as ‘Conservation Areas’ as designated under Law No 41/1999.  
This further strengthens forest conservation efforts.  
 
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  
 
Comments:  
Concept of Reversals/Non -permanence of Carbon  
 
Reversal is a major technical issue that was widely discussed as part of the REDD+ negotiations under the 
UNFCCC as well as for the development of the Terms of Reference (ToR) of the GCF REDD+ RBP pilot 
program. Under both the UNFCCC and the GCF REDD+ RBP p ilot program, it was decided to include reversals 
under safeguards, whereby countries need to describe “actions to address the risk of reversal”.  
 
The risk of “reversals” describes the possibility of reversing climate benefits through the loss of forest carbon 
biomass, for example through fires or pest outbreaks. There are two types of reversals (i) intentional, such as 
harvesting, or (ii) unintentional, such as damage/carbon losses caused by a hurricane.  
 
Recognizing the challenges in attributing and se parating natural from anthropogenic effects on emissions, i.e., 
factoring out “natural emissions and sinks” countries report emissions/removals only for those lands that are 
considered “managed.” Parties to the Kyoto Protocol have agreed to allow countries  with commitments the 
option of excluding emissions from natural disturbances. There is also flexibility to do so in the Nationally 
Determined Contribution guidance as adopted in Katowice.  
 
There is no such flexibility under REDD+ even though there is also no agreed definition for reversals , neither 
under the UNFCCC nor the GCF REDD+ RBP pilot program. Due to unintentional circumstances, emissions 
may increase in one year, and then reduce in following  years . One single year above, for example, with other 
years decreasing below the FREL again, may not be considered a reversal trend. It is unclear i f a single 
occurrence in a specific year could be considered a reversal if not part of a trend.  
 
Indonesia’s actions to address the risk reversals  
 
In this proposal, Indonesia is seeking results -based payments for the emission reductions of 9 MtCO 2eq 
annually (average of annual emissions) and 27 MtCO 2eq as the total for 2014 –2016, out of a total 14 5 MtCO 2 
eq. The GCF will be paying for about 1 9% of the total volume of emission reductions achieved reducing 
deforestation in Indonesia in years 2014 to 201 6. This means that the risk of reversals of emissions paid for by


---
*Page 30*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 27 OF 80 
 
 
 
the GCF is relatively low and could be compen sated with surplus emissions that are not being paid for by the 
GCF.  
 
It is important to note, nevertheless, the important policies and measures that the Government of Indonesia 
has put in place as safeguards measures to address the risk of reversals both at the national and subnational 
level. The following are examples of such initiatives:  
 
1. Policies, laws and regulations have been introduced to prevent and manage forest fires: 
a. Presidential Instruction 11/2015 on Enhancing Forest and Land Fire Control that mandates all 
level of governments to develop land and forest fire management system at their jurisdictions 
and implement sanctions for business players who do not implement fir e management within 
the area under their jurisdictions.  
b. MOEF Regulation 32/2016 on Control of Forest and Land Fires that empowered different 
entities from national to community and village level such as National Task Force for Handling 
Forest and Land Fires, Forest Fire Control Core Team, Village Facilitating t eams to prevent 
fires.  
c. Ministry of Agriculture Regulation No. 5/2018 on Land Clearance and Management for 
Plantation Without Burning that mandates all estate crop concession holders to maintain 
environmental sustainability and not use fire for land cleari ng and land management.  
d. Other practices to avoid fires are described in the ESA Annexes (Annex A, indicator “PLRs 
seek to detect and reduce forest fires and other disturbances”; Annex B “Conserve biodiversity. 
Maintain and enhance benefits of ecosystem services”).  
 
2. Community engagement in forest and land fire prevention. Community engagement to protect the 
environment and prevent forest and land fires that have been implemented by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry, one example is in Daops Dumai  in Riau province, where the following 
actions have been undertaken:  
• SOCIALIZATION: Awareness efforts through socialization and other efforts to increase 
community knowledge of forest and land fire control efforts.  
• SIGNAGE: Creation of Warning Boards and fire h azard rating information.  
• RIVER NORMALIZATION: Firebreaks and water system improvement through river 
normalization, canal block construction, reservoirs, and bore wells.  
• COMMUNITY RADIO: Making community radio as a means of providing information, 
warning a nd prevention campaigns.  
• EARLY WARNING SYSTEM: Efforts to detect early through patrol and environmental 
safety system (Sistem Keamanan Lingkungan or siskamling  in Indonesian language) by 
doing a simple analysis to see the condition of vegetation and water level.  
 
Figure 1 : Results of 7  Provinces of Fire -Prone Areas Avoided from the Fire of the Year 20194 
The minimum area of fire that can be detected by satellite imagery is 6.25 ha.  
• 60-69%: <5 months the province can be protected from forest and land fires  
• 70-79%: 6- 8 months province can be protected from forest and land fires  
• 80-99%: 9 - 11 months of the province can be protected from forest and land fires  
• 100%: 12 months the province can be protected from forest and land  fires 
 
4 Ministry of Environment and Forestry 2019 Performance Report available at 
https://www.menlhk.go.id//s ite/download_file?file=1583722632.pdf


---
*Page 31*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 28 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 2019 performance value is done by calculating the frequency of non- occurrence of forest 
fires in a year. The values  from each province is averaged to approximate provincial performance 
that can be protected from the dangers of forest and land fires. Each percentage value in the 
achievements of the seven fire- prone provinces that are protected from the danger of fire shows 
the frequency of months in a year that can be protected from forest and land fires. The higher 
the frequency value indicates the more protect ion from forest and land fires.  
 
Areas identified for further improvement in which the Government of Indonesia is currently 
working on:  
• Improve synergies between parties from the central level to the village leve l 
• Continually developed systems for early detection, weather prediction, weather 
modification throughout the year  
• Establish an emergency alert condition early as a preparedness step  
• Enhance Infrastructure Revitalization and improve forest and land fire control skills  
• Prevention efforts need to be made at the site level by involving various sectors to 
increase livelihood  
• Improve monitoring systems for Groundwater Levels (TMAT) through technology in peat 
areas  
• The role of the Regional Government is further en hanced in providing support for human 
resources and the budget  
• Continue to improve law enforcement for forest burners  
• Steps to diversify  types of village- based community land production such as fisheries, 
animal husbandry, social forest.  
 
 
3. Centralized forest monitoring and information systems to track mitigation activities.  Ministry 
Regulation No. 18/2015 provides for a Directorate of Forest Resources Inventory and Monitoring 
(IPSDH, in Indonesian) to manage the National Forest Monitoring Sy stem (NFMS). It has four sub-
units to perform distinctive tasks and responsibilities, i.e.: (a) forest inventory, (b) forest monitoring, (c) 
forest mapping and (d) spatial data networking. These systems have been essential to avoiding 
reversions. Indonesia’s NFMS and corresponding regulations related to evaluation, reporting, and 
verification of reductions in carbon emission levels have been pivotal to avoiding reversion through real 
time knowledge of forest changes. Equally important is the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory System 
(Sistem Inventarisasi Gas Rumah Kaca Nasional, SIGN -SMART ) enacted by Presidential Regulation 
No. 71/2011 which mandates the development of annual GHG inventory report to be published 
periodically. Through this web- based system, data on the activities of relevant agencies, including from 
sub-national level, can be delivered and centralized through MOEF, improving the analysis and 
accuracy of GHG emissions. The National Registry System (SRN) on Climate Change per Ministerial 
Decree 71/2017 was operationalized since 2016 and collects information on all activities undertaken


---
*Page 32*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 29 OF 80 
 
 
 
in support of climate change adaptation and mitigation. This has helped to, among other things, 
synchronize actions where needed to avoid forest destruction.   
 
4. Period performance evaluation of Social Forestry. Decree No. 83 on Social Forestry provides that 
the Village, Community, and Community Forest Plantation licenses are valid for a period of 35 years 
and during this period are evaluated every 5 years (Arts. 53( 1) & (3)).  This measure, combined with 
government monitoring, implementation assistance where resources permitted, as well as respect and 
strengthening of community institutions, development priorities, and decision- making –create an 
environment of accoun tability, a viable, lengthy period of sustainability, and regular motivation 
to continue producing positive results.    
 
Figure 2: Number of Production FMUs ( KPHP ) that apply the principles of sustainable production forest 
management  
  
 
 
 
5. Peatland Restoration Information & Monitoring System (PRISM)  web-platform . Online Web GIS 
platform that provides the most recent restoration progress in seven priority provinces. PRIMS enable 
users to monitor restoration activities, peat degradation indicators and restoration impact.  
o Also helps cross -agencies coordination, and multi -stakeholders’ collaboration  
o Includes:  
 Dashboard : restoration activities; detection of hotspots with year -to-year comparison 
and trends; GLAD tree cover loss alerts with 6- month trends, and trends for tree cover 
loss in peatlands over 1990 -2017; Peat Care Villages.  
 Restoration Implementation Spatial Distribution : allows users to observe the 
spatial distribution of restoration intervention points already implemented in 7 
restoration priority provinces  since 2016. Types of restoration implemented by 
Peatland Restor ation Agency (Badan Restorasi Gambut or BRG in Indonesian 
language) consists of:  
 Canal blocking, for peat rewetting  
 Deep well, for peat rewetting 
 Canal backfilling, for peat rewetting  
 Revegetation, through active interventions such as establishing nurseri es, 
breeding, and planting, as well as passive interventions such as the promotion 
of natural regeneration and seed dispersal  
 Livelihoods revitalization, by developing peat -friendly, water -based, and 
environmentally sustainable income- generating activities   
 Monitoring of Hotspot distribution in Peat Hydrological Uni t (PHU): Hotspot is 
one of several indicators  of forest/land fires, whereby the higher the number and 
concentration of hotspots, the higher the potential for forest/land fires in the area. 
These pre- set displays hotspot  distribution in the past 24 hours,  with a confidence 
level of 30% -  100%). Hot spot distribution data from: FIRMS (Fi re Information for 
Resource Management System), Terra/Aqua's Moderate Resolution Imaging 
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) with a spatial resolution of 1000 meters, and Visible 
Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) with a spatial resolution of 375 meters. This  
data is updated daily.  
 Global Land Analysis and Discovery ( GLAD)  alerts  for tree cover loss.  
 Distribution of Peat Care Village (DPG) in peatland : allows user to see the location 
and distribution pattern of Peat Care Villages (DPG) withi n peatland areas in 7 BRG


---
*Page 33*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 30 OF 80 
 
 
 
restoration priority provinces. 'Peat Care Villages' ( Desa Peduli Gambut  - DPG ), is a 
village development program in BRG priority restoration areas. Among other things, 
the DPG program facilitates spatial planning activities, conf lict identification and 
resolution, recognition and legalization of rights and access, institution building for 
water and land management, inter -village cooperation, economic empowerment, 
strengthening of local knowledge, and community fire prevention in r ural areas and 
villages.  This is consistent with MoEF 2020 strategy of further including local 
communities in fire prevention, detection, remediation, and ties well with the project 
(SF/FMUs).  
 
6. Peatland Water Monitoring System (SIPALAGA) : The BRG, through the Deputy for Research and 
Development, developed the latest information technology innovation in the form of a Peatland Water 
Monitoring System (SIPALAGA), a real -time data monitoring platform derived from a water level 
monitoring tool (TMA) that can measure peat soil moisture, rainfall levels, air temperature and humidity 
as well as wind direction and speed.  By December 2018, BRG had installed 142 TMA monitoring 
equipment, spread in 7 Restoration Priority Provinces.  Monitoring TMA on peatlands is important 
for preventing forest and land fire (karhutla) disasters and greenhouse gas emissions.  TMA 
monitoring prevents peatlands from losing water uncontrollably.  The reduced water on peatlands has 
a negative impact,  among others are decreasing TMA, decreasing peat surface, CO2 emission, fire 
occurrence and total dryness (irreversible drying).  The government has  tried to prevent damage to the 
peat ecosystem by issuing a policy, namely Government Regulation (PP) No.  57/2016, which confirms 
that the utilization of peat ecosystems must be done by maintaining the hydrological function of 
peat5. The Peatland water mon itoring system (SIPALAGA) was also prepared to prevent potential 
forest and land fires (karhutla) due to drought. The system was introduced by the BRG as a 
preventive measure to keep the peatlands wet.  A real time sensor will be installed in each peatland.  
If something unexpected happens, the BRG Head immediately informs the Task Force to 
increase patrol . Then the local government will look after BRG and village facilitators so that 
they can come in together with the Village Head and the community to help . 
 
7. Results- based payments as key financial incentives for the permanence of REDD+ results.  The 
implementation of REDD+ activities and the permanence of results achieved require the provision, on 
a continuous basis, of adequate and predictable results -based payments in accordance with the 
relevant UNFCCC decisions. Operationalizing REDD+ results -based payments through GCF project 
to support decentralized sustainable forest governance will be a central strategy to address the risk of 
reversals in Indonesia. Ind onesia has been working for many years on readiness for REDD+. 
Agreements with donors have been signed but no resources have been received so far. In this process, 
expectations have been raised that forest conservation would be valued. For many years now, people 
on the ground have been waiting to receive resources from results -based payments that have yet to 
materialized. Providing on- the-ground incentives for forest conservation is a key strategy to ensure the 
permanence of the results already achieved in Indonesia.  
 
Conclusion  
 
The actions described above provide a general summary of the initiatives that the Government of Indonesia 
has put in place to address the risk of reversals and ensure the permanence of its REDD+ results. These 
actions are in accordance with international best practices and with the GCF current rules. Actions to address 
the risk of reversals are not guaranteed/100% effective until f urther into the future to prevent any type of 
increase in deforestation. It is nevertheless clear  that the Government of Indonesia is committed to anticipate 
this risk and put the measures in place to mitigate it. This RBP proposal comes in the right direction to assist 
the Government of Indonesia in these efforts.  
 
 
(vii) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions.  
 
Comments:  
 
Indonesia’s national REDD+ strategy (STRANAS) is a multifaceted initiative to achieve results at the national 
scale. Emission reductions result  from a series of interrelationships of different enabling policies , e.g. inter -
institutional coordination, centralizing of forest monitoring data, and the acceleration of the Social Forestry 
programme which also looks at forest / land rehabilitation programs / activities, soil and water conservation, 
 
5 https://ptpsw.bppt.go.id/index.php/produk/93- sipalaga and https://www.bppt.go.id/teknologi -sumberdaya- alam -dan-
kebencanaan/3485-inovasi -teknologi -sipalaga- pantau- muka -air-lahan-gambut -siap- antisipasi -karhutla


---
*Page 34*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 31 OF 80 
 
 
 
biodiversity conserva tion, and sustainable forest management certification and / or timber legality certification, 
the enforcement of a moratorium, and the overall promotion of sustainable deforestation free markets and 
economies.  
 
Given that there is an integrated package of  policies and measures to address the drivers of deforestation on 
a national  scale, the risk of displacement is reduced.  For example, existing programs like the Social Forestry 
programme could - if these were the only programmes - displace emissions outsi de of the areas covered by 
the programme , thereby counteracting the positive GHG mitigation effects . Protected areas other than those 
found in the Moratorium area, provide continued protection. STRANAS also supports development and 
enforcement of land- use planning across the landscape and promotes policies and the enhancement of its 
legal framework to create positive incentives to stop deforestation or the drivers of deforestation. As identified 
in the PLR analysis (ESA Annex XIII (i)-Annex A)  (see responses to “Criteria F&G”), this includes PLRs seeking 
not only to detect and reduce forest fires and other forest disturbances, but also to implement effective law 
enforcement to combat and eradicate illegal forest -related practices, as well as support for the development 
and enforcement of land- use planning across the landscape.  
 
C.1.2. Stakeholder involvement .  
Please describe and provide evidence that the  Cancun safeguards information was made transparently 
available to stakeholders.  
 
Stakeholder engagement in REDD+ began early in the preparation phase including with the development of 
the National REDD+ Strategy  (STRANAS) .  Building upon that inclusiveness, stakeholders were then involved 
in key discussions , through multi- stakeholder Focus Group Discussions, around how to monitor and 
demonstrate project respect and compliance with the Cancun safeguards.  
 
National REDD+ Strategy  (STRANAS)  
The STRANAS  was released on 19 September 2012 under Decree No. 2/Satgas REDD+/09/ 20126. It was 
coordinated by the State Ministry of National Development Planning (BAPPENAS) based on its mandate from 
the Coordinating Minister for the Economy. To ensure the development process was transparent, inclusive, 
accountable and reliable, BAPPENA S upheld the following four key principles:  
1. Inclusiveness , involving men, women, youths as well as institutional stakeholders that will either 
implement  or be affected directly and indirectly by the policies.  
2. Transparency , through a formulation process that adheres to the values of openness, honesty, and 
clarity, and with the public having access to information concerning the stages of implementation as 
well as access  to monitor the process . 
3. Credibility , with the formulation proces s managed by reputable institutions or individuals, and 
conducted based on an inclusive, transparent, and reliable approach.  
4. Institutionalization , in that ideas, knowledge, values, legal foundations, resources, structure and 
organizational mechanism which describe the six key aspects : order, autonomy, adaptability, 
comprehensiveness, coherence, and functionality  are institutionalized.  
The STRANAS development process was guided by (i) a team of seven writers with REDD+ expertise; (ii) a 
working group compris ing civil society  including among others, the Aliansi Masyarakat Adat Nusantara7 
(AMAN) , university and government representatives who provided technical inputs to the draft strategy; and 
(iii) a steering committee consisting of high government officials f rom BAPPENAS, the then- Ministry of Forestry, 
Ministry of Public Works and other relevant line ministries who provided policy guidance.  
Multi -stakeholder consultations were held in seven regions that covered 33 provinces in Indonesia, at the 
national as well as international levels. This was followed by a national expert meeting which further revised 
the draft based on these broad consultative meetings , and a final national workshop before the final draft was 
presented to the multi -stakeholder  conformed REDD+ Task Force  which  consist s of ten working groups which 
are each led by one government and one non- government representative. The final STRANAS also included 
integrates gender considerations and attention to equality in roles, needs, and  responsibilities of men and 
women  reflecting the increasing awareness and commitment to integrated gender equalit y into REDD+ policies 
 
6 http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/resources/redd/StrategiNasionalREDD_SatgasREDD_201209_in.pdf ; and  
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/reddnationalstrategyidn_english.pdf  
7 AMAN is the national umbrella organization for the indigenous peoples of the Indonesian archipelago.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 32 OF 80 
 
 
 
and implementation.  Lessons learnt8 from the process to develop the STRANAS  was produced by the UN -
REDD Programme, who provided support for a National Programme from 2010  to 2012 . While  the STRANAS  
was released in 2012, it still remains largely relevant to date in substance.  Furthermore, 11 provinces , i.e. Aceh, 
Riau, Jambi, South Sum atera, West Sumatera, East Kalimanta n, West Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan, 
Central Sulawesi, Papua and West Papua have formulated provincial REDD+ strategies and action plans  
(SRAPs ). These SRAP development processes  also upheld the principle of gender equity and social inclusion .    
The REDD+ Task Force remained in place until 30 June 2013 when it was replaced by the REDD+ Agency . 
Under the Presidential Regulation No. 16/2015 , the tasks of the REDD+ Agency were then taken over by the 
Directorate General of Climate Change (DGCC)  under a new Ministry of Environment and Forestry ( MOEF ). 
At least 11 REDD+ working groups in the 11 provinces mentioned above, have also been established since 
2011.  
 
Figure 3: Institutional Arrangements for REDD+ in Ministry of Environment & Forestry  
 
 
Safeguards Information System  
In early 2011, the previous  Ministry of Forestry commenced a multi- stakeholder process  to develop a 
Safeguards Information System (SIS) that: 
1. Analysed existing policies and instruments to evaluate their relevance to the Cancun safeguards.  
2. Translated the Cancun safeguards into the national context with appropriate pr inciples, criteria and 
indicators.  
3. Identified the most suitable structure and mechanism for SIS-REDD+  and drafted its institutional 
design.  
4. Determined and developed assessment tools for safeguards implementation.  
 
The result  from the multi -stakeholder process is a web -based information system  at the national level , named 
SIS-REDD+, that compiled information , based on 7 principles, 17 criteria and 32 indicators,  on safeguard 
implementation in each province. Indeed, through this multi -stakeholder process, the “ Principles,  Criteria and 
Indicators” (PC&Is)  for each of the Cancun Safeguards were established (and made public in 2013) , along with 
various assessment tools, including the “ Safeguards Implementation Tool and Assessment Procedures for 
using Safeguards Implementation (APP S) based decision in COP -16 Safeguards Implementation System (SIS) 
REDD+ Indonesia annexed to REDD+ regulations of the MOEF  (No. 70/MENLHK/SETJEN/ KUM.1/12/2017).  
 
During 2011 to 2012 the development of the PC&Is for SIS -REDD+ was an inclusive process, punctuated by 
multi -stakeholder participation through three national workshops and 3 Focus Group Discussions. Nine public 
consultation events were conducted, including  national workshops and focus group discussions, and a number 
 
8 https://www.unredd.net/documents/un -redd- partner -countries -181/asia -the-pacific -333/a- p-knowledge-management -a-
resources/fpic -repository -2668/fpic -lessons -learned-and -recommendations -2669/by -countries -2696/indonesia-
2707/11122-multi -stakeholders -approach-for -developing- indonesia-s -first-redd -strategy -lessons -learned- from-
consultation-process -english -11122.html  Minister of 
Environment and 
Forestry
REDD+ Division
Provincial Forestry 
AgencyProvincial REDD+ 
Working Group 
(Multistakeholder)


---
*Page 36*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 33 OF 80 
 
 
 
of interviews with various stakeholders.  This was companioned with the APP S tool which provides REDD+ 
implementors and Responsible Parties with a template for gathering information about safeguard 
implementation in REDD+ programming which will eventually be uploaded to the SIS -REDD+ system to feed 
into the annual SOI’s and be par t of the safeguard information that is transparently available to the public on 
the SIS -REDD+ website.  
 
The SIS -REDD+ system is a cornerstone to the safeguard system.  It is being developed to serve as  an 
amalgamation of existing information systems, sourc es and institutional arrangements that will meet the SIS 
objectives (Figure 4 ).   
 
 
                                             Figure 4 : Development of PCI for SIS REDD+  
Source: DJPPI9  (2015)  
 
The information presented in SIS -REDD+ was adapted to the implementation of the existing and relevant 
safeguards frameworks such as Environmental Impact Assessment (AMDAL), Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (KLHS), Timber Legality Assurance System for Sustainable Forest Management and Production 
(SVLK/PHPL), Sustainable Forest Management Certification (SFM), High Conservation Value (HCV), Free, 
Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC), and Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).  
 
The SIS -REDD+ web -platform consist s of two parts:  
1. Database to collect, compile and manage data and information on REDD+ safeguards 
implementation, and  
2. Web platform to display  the information on safeguards implementation.  
 
Collection of data, management and provision of information on the implementation of safeguards is 
conducted by actors at  site level through self -assessment process by completing a Safeguards 
Implementation Assessment T ool (APPS) . This APPS was dev eloped based on the principles of simplicity, 
transparency, accountability, completeness and comparability . The aim is for  this information on safeguards 
from the site level to be  progressively centralized to the SIS management in districts,  onward to provinces and 
finally the national level. The respective roles at these  various levels of government governance are therefore 
expected to be as  follows: (i) “REDD+  implementers”  at local level : collection and transmission of information, 
(ii) “REDD+ Managers”  at District and Province level  will compile, “validate “and then transfer data to the 
national level, (iii)  The REDD+ Unit at the national  level will then compile  and analyze all inputs, and then 
report  to relevant audience (government, UNFCCC , donors, etc ). 
 
 
9 Directorate General for Climate Change, Ministry of Environment and Forestry


---
*Page 37*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 34 OF 80 
 
 
 
The exception  to this three -layered structure  is for REDD+ actions  that are conducted (i) in conservation 
forests , which are managed by the central government  rather than by the provinces  as for other forests , or 
those by (ii) international projects, which have their own Project Management Units, with M&E and safeguards 
officers  to provide quality assurance and preliminary analysis . In these cases, safeguards reporting is 
submitted directly t o the national level  (potentially through their  relevant internal units at subnational &/or 
national level ).  
 
Figure 5 below summarizes the information flow  for the main three- layered information structure and f urther 
description for each step of the information flow is available in Indonesia’s 2018 REDD+ Performance Repor t 
and Safeguards Information System for REDD+ in Indonesia: Moving towards and Operational SIS -REDD+ .10 
As seen below, it is anticipated that a stakeholder forum will continue to play an important role in safeguard 
implementation.  
 
 
 
Figure 5: Institutional structure and information flow in SIS -REDD+  for the main three -layered structure of 
information management  
Source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry (2018)  
 
SIS-REDD+ is now operational in three provinces: East Kalimantan, Jambi and West Kalimantan. C hallenges 
faced in these provinces , include especially the capacity to provide  relevant data demonstrat ing that safeguards 
have been implemented , especially at the district level . Also, d ocuments required for verification by SIS -REDD+ 
 
10 See Safeguards Information System for REDD+ in Indonesia: Moving towards and Operational SIS -REDD+  at 
https://www.forclime.org/documents/Books/Safeguards%20Information%20System%20for%20REDD+%20in%20Indonesi
a_Engl_Full_med%20res.pdf  
and Indonesia Report on REDD+ Performance 2018:  
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/Book_IRPR_KLHK_B5_revisi_4_opt.pdf


---
*Page 38*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 35 OF 80 
 
 
 
are more readily a vailable at provincial rather than  district leve l, but this is not considered a significant challenge 
since the province is the overall administrator of SIS -REDD+ at the subnational  level and thus, information 
supporting the fact that safeguards are respected will still be forthcoming. Capacity still need s to be built in 
other key Provinces for REDD+.  
 
The iterative processes for the SIS development, which took place from 2011 to 2013, helped to engage many 
core REDD+ actors as well as broader REDD+ actors in the country. By promoting gr eater transparency and 
participation, there was a stronger sense of ownership and legitimacy. This also helped ensure that the 
principles, criteria and indicators of the SIS fit within national and subnational contexts and can be applied 
effectively.  
 
Notably, after stakeholders involved themselves in the development of the SIS -REDD+, PC&Is and APPs tool, 
in 2015 an ongoing consultative process began to develop the NDCs. The process consulted with stakeholders 
in 34 provinces.  
 
The ESMF recommendations provide for the multi -stakeholder review and update of the PC&Is, accounting for 
new developments in policy, law and practice.  The RBP project plans to further develop and strengthen the 
SIS-REDD+ (see propose Activity 1.1).  This is to be done in the contex t of multi -stakeholder processes.  The 
development of a project -level GRM (complementing the national GRM hosted by MOEF ) will also be done 
with stakeholders and potential complainants –each with a vested interest in having a mechanism to raise 
safeguard non- compliance issues as necessary.  
 
(See also E.1.3. below “Consultations with Stakeholders”).  
 
 
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
C.2.1. General description:  
Provide a description on how the proceeds will be reinvested in activities consistent with the country’s NDC, 
national REDD -plus strategy and/or low carbon development plans and policies . The description should also 
include how the proceeds will be used in a manner that contributes to the long- term sustainability of REDD -
plus activities, including non- carbon benefits .  
 
Indonesia submitted its first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC in November 2016. 
In its NDC, Indonesia voluntarily commit s to reduce its gr eenhouse gases emissions against the business as 
usual scenario nationwide:  
• By 29% by 2030, unconditionally;  
• With a possible conditional increase of ambition to 41% by 2030, subject to availability of international 
support for finance, technology transfer and development and capacity building.  
 
The importance of REDD+ is clearly reflected in the 1st Indonesian NDC, which mentions explicitly that “ REDD+ 
will be an important component of the NDC target from land use sector ”. Accordingly, the government of 
Indonesia has considered that REDD+ must be mainstreamed into national policies and implemented at sub 
national levels to support the achievement of Indonesia’s emission reduction target as well as access positive 
incentives through REDD+ res ults-based payments.  
 
The NDC highlights the significant steps that Indonesia has already taken to reduce emissions in the land use 
and forestry sector, including by instituting a moratorium on the clearing of primary forests and by reducing 
deforestation and forest degradation of its remaining forests, restoring ecosystem functions, as well as 
sustainable forest management through various programmes and initiatives, including social forestry .  
The NDC also points out the important role attributed to landscape- scale and ecosyste m management 
approach, emphasizing the critical role of sub- national jurisdictions to ensure greater and more enduring 
benefits from these initiatives. In both planning and implementation  phases , Indonesia has constantly ensured 
the active participation of  the civil society organizations, local communities and the most vulnerable groups, 
especially adat communities ( Masyarakat Hukum Adat , internationally known as Indigenous People) and 
women, as well as the private sector, including small and medium enterpr ises.  
 
The National Action Plan for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions  2010- 2020  (RAN -GRK) , adopted in 
2011,  established the national emissions reduction target of 26%  below BAU by 2020,  and up to 41 % below 
BAU with adequate international support. The RAN -GRK provides the basis for the implementation of various 
mitigation actions in the forestry, agriculture, energy, transport, industry, and waste sectors. It reshapes 
Indonesia’s commitments in its INDC and NDC submissions.  RPJMN sets two targets for th e forestry sector: 
land and  forest restoration targets and social forestry targets  (more details on this below).


---
*Page 39*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 36 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
The National Medium -Term Development Plan 2015 -2019  (RPJMN 2015- 2019) established GHG emissions  
reduction for five priority sectors (forestry and peat lands,  agriculture, energy and transportation, industry, and 
waste) to achieve the 2020 target in line with the RAN -GRK . 
The National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS ), which  was released in 2012 and which substantive content 
remains relevant under the leadership of the Directorate General of Climate Change, is structured around five 
pillars: 1. Institutions and processes , 2. Laws, 3. Strategic programs , 4. Cultures and paradigm shifts , 5. Multi-
stakeholder’s involvement. The status of implementation of each pillar is summarized in Table 4 below . It 
presents the many Policies and Measures (PAMs) that Indonesia has implemented to collectively : 
1. Address the direct and underlying drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, and to tackle the 
barriers to sustainable management of forests, conservation and enhancement of carbon stocks, in 
line with UNFCCC decisions related to REDD+ national strategies and action plans, while  
2. Contributing to a more sustainable and equitable development.   
More information on key programmes is provided after  the table.  
 
The STRANAS is complemented by REDD+ Provincial Strategy and Action Plans  (Strategi dan Rencana 
Aksi Provinsi  - SRAPs ) in the eleven REDD+ pilot provinces. SRAP documents describe drivers of deforestation 
and forest degradation, strategies to address the m and plans for actions for REDD+ implementation based on 
the specific circumstances of each province. SRAPs are aimed to be reviewed periodi cally to ensure alignment 
with policies, programmes and development plans at national and subnational levels.  Indeed, REDD+ SRAP 
documents aim to serve as reference documents supporting the mainstreaming of climate change and REDD+ 
into sub- national develo pment planning processes and  systems.  
 
Pillar of the National 
REDD+ Strategy / 
Status  Remarks  
(i) Institutions and Process  
REDD+ Institutions :  
In place  • At the national level, a REDD+ Institutional Preparation Task Force was established in 
2010, and replaced by the REDD+ Agency once established in 2013;  
• Since 2015 (based on Presidential Regulation No. 16/2015) the tasks of the Agency 
were  taken up by the Ministry of Environment and Forestry ( MOEF ) under the 
Directorate General of Climate Change (DGCC);  
• At the sub national, REDD+ institutions were establis hed in 11 pilot Provinces in the 
form of a Working Group, Commission, or Task Force;  
• As REDD+ is part of  the NDC, REDD+ institutions at sub -national level are encouraged 
to participate in NDC institutions , which are led by DGCC in MOEF  in coordination with  
BAPPENAS.  
Funding Instrument : 
Established,  
operationalization 
ongoing  • Government Regulation 46/2017 on the Economic  Instrument for Environment, giving  
mandate to government to establish a Public Service Agency  on environmental funds, 
including climate  change funds ; 
• Ministerial Decree 70/2017 on REDD+ governance, g iving mandate that REDD+ funds 
should be managed by the Public Service Agency;  
• Presidential Regulation ( PERPRES) 77/2018 establishing the Environmental Fund and 
its management , and giving mandate  to the Public Service Agency  to manage 
environmental funds , includ ing REDD+ finance;  
• Ministry of Finance Ministerial Regulation 137/2019 on the organization and working 
procedures of the Environmental Fund;  
• Ministry of Finance Ministerial Decree 779/KMK.O5/2019 authorizing BPDLH to use the 
BLU modalit y for the En vironmental Fund . 
MRV Institution:  
In place  • The National Registry System ( SRN) on Climate Change is operational since 2016, and 
now under Ministerial Decree 71/2017 on National Registry . The SRN  includes the 
REDD+ registry,  for: (i) data collection on REDD+ actions and resources; and (ii) avoid 
double counting of REDD+ actions and resources according to the principle of clarity, 
transparency and understanding;  
• Guidance for MRV of climate change actions and support is in place;  
• Guidance for MRV of REDD+ is part of the Ministerial Regulation on REDD+ (Ministerial 
Decree 70/2017) and in line with the Minis terial Regulation on MRV (Ministerial Decree 
72/2017);  
• A Panel on Methodology has been established.  
(ii)  Laws and Programs  
Land rights:  
Continuous progress  • Land and forest governance reform is established  
• Recognition and Protection of Customary Right is given by the national government;  
• Agrarian and Social Forestry Reform is ongoing


---
*Page 40*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 37 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Ministerial Decree related Indigenous Forests are issued11 
Spatial planning , data 
and mapping : 
Continuous progress  • The One Map policy is established;  
• Cadastral baseline database is developed ; 
• Presidential Regulation 27/2014 on National Geospatial Information Network 
(improvement of Presidential Regulation 85/2007 on National Spatial Data Network);  
• Presidential Regulation 9/2016 on Acceleration to One Map Policy Implementation 
(1:50.000) is in place . 
Review of law 
enforcement and 
corruption prevention:  
Continuous progress  • Road map of Law Reform is established;  
• Conflict resolution is carried out in 6 National Parks;  
• Permit moratorium and conflict resolution are carried out through the multi -door 
approach to address forest -related crimes . 
Concession 
Moratorium:  
In place  • Indonesian forest concession/ license moratorium implemented through Presidential 
Instruction 8/2015 and Ministerial Decree SK.2312/Menhut -VII/ IPSDH/2015 (PIPIB),  
reviewed every 2 years  and recently made permanent through Presidential Instruction 
5/2019.  
Harmonizing the 
incentive systems:  
Continuous progress  • Some initiatives developed result based payment system related to emission reduction 
measures from deforestation and forest degradation by local community at the district 
level;  
• Engagement of private sector built as one of resources for REDD+ financing 
(iii)  Strategic Programs  
Sustainable 
management of 
landscape:  
Continuous progress  • Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with local government s to develop sustainable 
management of landscape at sub national level established;  
• Watershed management  is implemented;  
• Forest Management Unit s (KPH)-based on watershed are established  
Sustainable economic 
system in terms of 
resource utilization:  
Continuous progress  • Low emission development strategies are developed at provincial level, including 
Provincial Conservation Strategy ; 
• REDD+ Provincial Strategy and Action Plans  (SRAPs) developed in 11 pilot provinces  
Conservation and 
rehabilitation: 
Implemented  • Conflict resolution in national parks are carried out;  
• Prevention program of peat and fores t fire are carried out : Presidential Instruction No. 
11/2015 on social forestry  mandates all level of governments to develop land and forest 
fire management system in their jurisdictions and implement sanctions for business 
actors  who do not implement fire management within the area under their jurisdictions ;  
• In addition, Minister of Agriculture Regulation No. 5/2018 on Land Clearance and 
Management for Plantation Wit hout Burning, mandates all estate crop concession 
holders to maintain environmental sustainability and not using fire for land clearing and 
land management  
• Presidential Regulation No. 57/2016 on the Revision to the Presidential Regulation No. 
71/2014, provides for stricter regulati on in the use of peatlands. This policy also 
mandates governments at all levels to develop integrated peatland protection and 
management actions and to restore/rehabilitate the degraded peatlands  
• MOEF  Regulation No. 39/2016 on the Revision to the Ministerial Regulation No. 9/2013  
provides supports and incentives for the rehabilitation of degraded lands and forests and 
the use of unproductive lands through the planting of multi -purpose tree species (MPT S) 
under an agroforestry system  
• Rehabilitation national movement is implemented, including replanting on burnt area, 
degraded land, and firebreaks;  
• Restoration programs are implemented, including those are embedded in a livelihood 
program  
(iv)  Paradigm and work culture shifts  
Enhancement of forest 
management and land 
use:  
Continuous progress  • A robust and transparent NFMS was established;  
• Improvement and update of data from permanent sample plot at sub national level are 
ongoing;  
• National Reg istry System on Climate Change (web platform), National GHG Inventory 
System (web platform), SIS REDD+ (web platform) were developed;  
• FREL REDD+ Indonesia is established  
• MOEF Regulation No. 30/2016 on the Performance Evaluation of Forest Management  
Policy mandates all forest concession holders to obtain forest sustainable management 
certification, to ensure they apply sustainable management practices  
 
11 SK.6737/menlhkpskl/ kum.1/12/2016; Sk.6738/m enlhkpskl/ kum.1/12/2016; SK.6739/menlhkpskl/ kum.1/12/2016; 
SK.6740/menlhk -pskl/ kum.1/12/2016; SK.6743/menlhkpskl/ kum.1/12/2016; SK.6744/menlhkpskl/ kum.1/12/2016; 
SK.6744/menlhk -pskl/ kum.1/12/2016 in 5 provinces and 6 districts


---
*Page 41*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 38 OF 80 
 
 
 
Empowering local 
economy in 
accordance with 
sustainability principle:  
Implemented  • Minister of Environment and Forestry Regulation No. 83/2016 strengthens sustainable 
forest management by communities to improve their livelihoods and life quality as well 
as developing the forest potentials.  
• Support to the development of Indicative Maps f or Social Forestry provided;  
• Strengthening capacity of local facilitators;  
• Support to local community in partnership mechanism with private sectors;  
• Introduction of performance- based payments pilot activities (payment for ecosystem 
services) using commu nity grants;  
• 200,000 hectares proposal involving local communities;  
• Example of an agreement on ‘payment for ecosystem services’ to private sectors 
between Nagari Malalo with PT. PLN and Nagari Sungai Buluh with PT. Angkasa Pura 
II were established 
National campaign for 
forest saving activities:  
Continuous progress  • Several events and programs are carried out: the REDD+ Indonesia Day, The Indonesia 
Climate Festival, Dissemination of Paris Agreement, Launching of National Registry at 
national and international forum, The Indonesia Peat Forum, and others  
(v)  Multi -stakeholder involvement  
Conducting 
interactions with many 
groups (sub-national 
government, private 
sectors, 
nongovernmental 
organization, indigenous/ 
local and international 
community) :  
Continuous progress  • Capacity and local institutional building;  
• Stakeholder engagement;  
• Multi -stakeholders forum;  
• MoU with local government;  
• Engagement of private sector as one of the resources for REDD+ financing;  
• Continuous engagement wi th 11 pilot provinces, especially the 6 provinces under 
transition program;  
• Cooperation with universities and research institution (Climate Change and Forestry 
Expert Network);  
• Citizen journalism program.  
Developing social and 
environmental 
safeguards:  
Implemented  • Principle, Criteria, Indicator and Assessment Tools for a System for Providing 
Information on REDD+ Safeguards Implementation is developed;   
• SIS REDD+ web platform is operational  
Striving for a fair 
benefit sharing:  
Continuous progress  • Some research and studies on benefit sharing mechanism related to emission reduction 
measures from deforestation and forest degradation are developed, involving local 
community at district level.  
• Part of Ministerial Regulation on REDD+.  
Table 4. Implementation status of the National REDD+ strategy as of January 2018  
 
As highlighted  in the 2nd Biennial Update Report  (BUR ), the five priority policies issued and implemented by 
Indonesia to address the causes of deforestation and forest degradation were (i) combating illegal logging and 
forest fires , (ii) restructuring the forestry sector industries including enhancing plantation development, 
(iii) rehabilitati ng and conservi ng forest s, (iv)  promoting sustainable forest area, and (v)  strengthening local 
economies . 
 
Some  key policies are further presented hereafter:   
 
Moratorium  
Among the key programmes and organizations  to achieve th ese 5 priority policies , Indonesia imposed in 2011 
a moratorium on the issuance of new concessions in primary forests and peatlands, renewed by Presidential 
Instruction  every two years  (2011, 2013, 2015, 2017) , and most recently made permanent12 in August 2019.  
Through this moratorium, 66 million natural forests and pe atlands are legally protected from planned 
deforestation activities . In addition, the government at each level cannot reduce the functional status of forest 
areas, such as legally reducing the function of conservation forests to production forests in order to grant use 
permit to applicants.  
  
This moratorium sends a clear and strong message about the importa nce of protecting peatlands and result ed 
in substantial emission reductions . According to Wijaya et al. (2017), the moratorium has actually the greatest 
potential of all Indonesia’s mitigation policies, and that if it is extended to 2030 in its present for m (which is now 
the case  having been made permanent in 2019)  it could reduce emissions by nearly 200 million tonnes of 
CO 2eq. 
 
To facilitate governance around the Moratorium, an “ Indicative Map of the Termination of the Granting of New 
Permits ” (i.e. “Moratorium map” or PIPPIB) was established. As mentioned in the ESA ( cf. Annex  XIII (i) , the 
 
12 A copy of this Presid ential Instructions in Indonesian language is available at https://gapki.id/wp -
content/uploads/2019/08/Inpres -Nomor -5-Tahun-2019-Salinan.pdf


---
*Page 42*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 39 OF 80 
 
 
 
Moratorium has also helped to promote increased cooperation among ministries, information sharing from the 
central to local levels (as elements of monitoring, for est management, and permit issuance needed 
improvement, along with greater transparency and coordination and measures to avoid fires). Over time, the 
August 2019 Presidential Instruction provided even greater details around the responsibilities of the vari ous 
government ministries and units, and affirmed the need for periodic revision of the Moratorium map every six 
months , after coordination with other ministerial and non- ministerial government institutions.  
 
The moratorium is an opportunity for Indonesia to improve its forest governance. It is further supported through 
other initiatives that contribute to forest land and resources planning, decentralized forest management and 
law enforcement, such as Forest Management Unit s and the Social Forestry Programme.   
 
Peat Restoration Agency (BRG)  
The government has  set up a Peat Restoration Agency (BRG ). BRG aims to restore 2.4 million hectares of 
peatland by 2020 in seven priority provinces  (Riau, Jambi, South Sumatra [Sumsel], West Kalimantan, Central 
Kalimantan, South Kalimantan, and Papua) , out of the total 12.9 million hectares of peatlands mapped by the 
agency . The BRG estimated that more than 6.7 million hectares of peatlands are degraded and have the 
potential to be restored, whereas 6.2 m illion hectares of intact peatlands must be protected and conserved. 
The BRG’s priority is to restore peatlands burned in 2015, the high- carbon- stock peat dome areas, and 
peatlands with canals . BRG conducts activities to rewet peat ecosystems, facilitate a nd empower the 
community economy, plan the restoration and mapping of the Peat Hydrological Unit, build demonstrations for 
integrated peat farming plots, and instal l water level monitoring devices. Restoration has been carried out on 
peat areas in protected areas and unlicensed cultivation areas. The BRG peatland restoration program had 
already achieved 679,901 ha during the period 2016 to 2018 . 
 
Land and forest restoration in the National Medium- Term Development Plan ( RPJMN ) 2015- 2019  
The RPJMN  2015- 2019 targets  in terms of  land and forest restoration aimed to reach 5.5 million hectares by 
2019 . Areas of degraded land are designated as forest management units  (kesatuan pengelolaan hutan; KPH) 
or watershed areas (daerah aliran sungai; DAS). The RPJMN  2020- 2024  is still under formulation, but the latest 
draft version indicates  a target of at least 4 million ha by 2024.  
 
Land reform and Social Forestry Program me 
One of the main components of President Joko Widodo “Just Economy ” policy is a n ambitious land reform 
program me through which the government intends to redistribute control over 21.7 million hectares of land to 
communities (about 12% of the nation’ s land area) , of which 16.8 million hectares are on forest land. The land 
reform program me consists of two major components: The agrarian reform  programme , which targets nine 
million hectares of land, and the Social Forestry  programme , targeting 12.7 million hectares of forests , for 
enhanced sustainable forest management .  
 
The Agrarian reform programme  involves the distribution of land and formalization of land ownership, benefiting 
landless farmers or farmers with small landholdings , while the Social Forestry program me grants local 
communities usufruct and management rights to State forest land.   
 
The social forestry ( perhutanan sosial ) programme  is included in the Ministry of National Development 
Planning ’s (BAPPENAS)  National Medium- Term Development Plan for 2015 to 2019 . Its overall objective is  to 
reduce poverty among forest dependent people while reduc ing deforestation and forest degradation, improv ing 
land management and conserv ing forests and valuable ecosystem functions . According to the Ministry of 
Environment and Fores try, there are indeed 25,863 villages located in or around forest areas (2017). This 
translates to 37.2 million individuals, representing 9.2 million households, of which approximately 1.7 million 
are classified as poor.  
 
This program me targets the adjudicat ion, demarcat ion and transfer of 12.7 million hectares of degraded forest 
land (i.e. 10% of the total State forest land13), to communities  for sustainable forest management by 2019. It  
will also support the restoration of these lands to boost econo mic welfare, promote community engagement 
and community ownership in managing lands and forests, and to reduce the pressure to convert old- growth 
forest for agriculture.  As such, the Ministry of Environment and Forestry is the primary actor for the social 
forestry programme given its mandate to control, regulate, manage and administer natural resources under the 
Basic Forestry Act No. 5 of 1967 and its subsequent revisions. According to Wijaya et al (2017) , of the 
designated 12.7 million hectares on the Social Forestry map, 2.2 million hectares of  degraded lands could 
potentially be restored, thus contributing directly to emissions reductions targets.  
 
 
13 The Forest Estate in Indonesia has three sub-classifications: production forest, conservation forest, and protected forest.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 40 OF 80 
 
 
 
Social forestry in Indonesia represents a significant shift  in the role given to communities in forest management , 
from none official ly prior to 1990 , to benefitting from a range of regulations that support the role of communities 
in forest management  in recent years,  through provision of  access, management  and/or ownership rights to 
forest resources  and forest land. In addition  to the central government, the civil society is also playing a 
significant role,  engaging with both the communities and the government  in various capacities to strengthen 
the policy environment  and the actual implementation of this programme . Civil Society Organizations  (CSOs)  
are complemented by local universities  and research institutions , local governments as well as private sector.  
 
The programme  involves selecting, demarcating and registering access and/or ownership rights , as well as 
supporting the development of economic activities compatible with the existing forest cover and land status.  As 
such, the social forestry program me is seen as a key initiative to support the implementation of the various 
policies and regulations that the g overnment has issued to improve community access rights to the forest 
estate, including under a community empowerment programme  which consists of six complementary social 
forestry schemes , aiming at different types of forests, different types or organizati on of forest users , and for 
different uses :  
1. Community forestry  (Hutan Kemasyarakatan – HKM)  provid es community groups with access to 
production and protection forests that are not under license, and capacity building tools for sustainable 
forest management  of timber and non- timber forest products, environmental services, medicinal plants, 
agrofishery, and agrosilvopastoral  uses;  
2. Village forestry  (Hutan Desa – HD) provides villages with access to production and protection forests 
that are not under license, for uses  similar to those of HKM above . 
3. Community forest plantations  (Hutan Tanaman Rakyat  – HTR) provides individuals or cooperatives  
with access to production forests , managed to increase the quality and potency of forest products 
(timber and NTFPs). Under this scheme HTRs individuals may request  up to 15 hectares and 
cooperatives  up to 700 hectares.  
4. Customary forests  (Hutan Adat  – HA) are managed by  customary law communities ( masyarakat hukum  
adat) legally recognized through regional regulation ( perda) , and can be located in production or 
protection forests  or on private land ( i.e. outside forest estate)  for timber and NTFPs (using local 
customary practices) production or designating land for protection purpose.  The formal inclusion of 
customary forests as part of the social forestry schemes is particularly significant, as it material izes the 
legal recognition of customary lands as part of Rights Forests ( Hutan Hak) , thus separate from the 
Forest Area . This is a recognition of the Constitutional Court Decision No. 35 in 2012.  HA is therefore, 
the most significant forest scheme as it recognizes customary territory and offers expansive rights over 
land and forest resources to Adat communities and represents land ownership.  
5. Forestry partnerships  (Kemitraan Kehutanan – Kemitraan)  enable local communities , organized in 
community groups or cooperatives , to access production forest under concession  and in specific area 
(wilayah tertentu) in cooperation with concession holders and forest management units (FMUs) . 
Capacity strengthening is provided to produce timber and NTFPs, environment services, medicinal 
plants, silvofishery, agrosilvopasture, etc  based on FMU management plans.  
6. Forest Utilization Permit for Social Forestry  (Izin Pemanfaatan Hutan Perhutanan Sosial –  IPHPS) 
managed by farmer  groups and cooperatives together with state -owned forestry companies  on 
production and protection forests  for timber and NTFPs production, and environmental services.  
 
In the case of HKM, HD, and HTR , social forestry is formalized through p ermits providing usufruct and 
management rights , in the form of  an agreement between the forest manager or the license holder  (private or 
public forest entities) and communities  in the case of kemitraan. For customary  forests, lands are ceded to their 
customary owners , meaning that land is formally removed from the Forest Area .  
 
Forest Management Units  
In the objective to improve the status  and sustainable management  of open access forest areas,  and curb 
illegal activities,  Indonesia has also established Forest Management Unit s (Kesatuan Pengelolaan Hutan – 
KPH; FMU in  English ) in all  provinces of the country . FMUs  are the basis for governing and managing all forest 
areas and functions at the local level based on forest management plans, and in close consultation and 
collaboration with all stakeholders , including local government, community groups, local industries  or license 
holders. FMUs  are designed to be part of provincial government and to manage forests for their functional 
purpose ( i.e. production, protection and conservation ) while contributing to subnational development  and 
community wellbeing. FMUs aim to  (i) introduc e locally based, professional and publicly accountable forest 
management organizations, responsive to the local context, (ii) ensure the legal demarcation of designated, 
permanent forest areas  while managing potential confli cts and ( iii) define  territorial u nits appropriate for efficient 
management . As such they are expected to improve forest administration and use by aligning participatory 
forest land use planning with the subnational spatial plans, providing on- site management of forests, and being 
responsi ve to local needs, interests and claims.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 41 OF 80 
 
 
 
The FMU has clear economic, social and ecological management objectives. Unless management has been 
handed over to private concession holders or local communities , FMUs are responsible to (i)  create inventories 
of forest resources, (ii)  develop and implement annual  and long- term management plans ( including fire 
prevention) in accordance with forest land status  (i.e. conservation,  protect ion &/or  production forest) , and 
(iii) ensure forest laws enforcement.  Where management has been handed over to third parties  (i.e. license 
holders) , FMU monitor and evaluate them, and provide technical assistance and capacity building. FMUs can 
mobiliz e investment s from various sources (i.e. government, private sector) to achieve the objectives of 
sustainable forest management  and establish their own income by selling forest products or environmental 
services such as through ecotourism, and are encouraged to develop viable business plans based on the 
sustainable management of the forests they oversee . These annual  and long- term management plans and 
related business plans are the basis to engage with the various stakeholders , including communities and the 
private sector. The range of activities will depend on the type of FMU and the various forest functions (e.g. 
ecotourism in conservation FMUs and sustainable exploitation of forest products in production FMUs).  The 
roles and responsibilities of district,  regional and central government are defined as follows:  
• Central government : Determination of norms, standards, procedures and criteria for FMU 
establishment and determining the formation and implementation of Conservation FMU s (KPHK, which 
oversees National Parks) including area determination, zoning and management.  
• Provincial government : Design and propose the establishment and zonation of Protection and 
Production FMUs including the technical and institutional set up if one FMU is located in more than 
one district.  
• District government/city : Design and propose the establishment and zonation of Protection and 
Production FMUs including the technical and institutional set up if one FMU is located in one district  
 
The Medium -Term  Development Plan (RPJM) for 2015 -2019 aimed to complete 100% of forest demarcation, 
establish and make operational 629 FMUs , and foster social forestry partnerships across 12.7 million hectares 
(including customary holdings).  Though the impleme ntation of social forestry has been strongly accelerated, 
only 3.4 million hectares of forests  had been distributed for social forestry by October 2019.  And while 531 
FMUs have been officially established nationwide 2018, covering a total area of about 83  million hectares  (i.e. 
nearly  the entirety of the forest estate), much remains to be done in terms of operationalizing these FMUs.  
While these two programmes  bene fit from strong political support  and very strong ownership from Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry , with of domestic allocation of resources , budgets  are insufficient to achieve such 
extremely ambitious targets  while ensuring the quality of the process  and corresponding necessary support to 
decentralized entities and local communities.  
 
Institutional models such as  FMUs enable the development of  effective collaborative partnerships  with local 
stakeholders, including Adat (customary) communities, to sustainably manage the forests and address  issues  
of access to and/or  ownership of land and natural resources, addressed through social forestry. There are 
therefore powerful synergies to be made between the social forestry and FMU programmes.  
 
 
Use of Proceeds  
Based on elements provided above, t he Government of Indonesia wishes to use the REDD+ results -based 
payments (RBPs) to:  
1. Continue updating, building and strengthening its REDD+ archi tecture , as well as further 
strengthen government  capacity to coordinate and implement REDD+ nationally.  
2. Further extend and enhance Social Forestry and Forest Management Units (FMU ) 
operationalization , as two ambitious and innovative priority programmes which contribute strongly to 
the double objective of sustainable forest management and rehabilitation, as well as community 
empowerment and poverty alleviation.   
Concurrently, both social forestry and FMU  are also part of the focus areas through which the moratorium 
seeks to improve forest governance, thereby contributing to addressing the rate of deforestation and forest 
degradation and meeting REDD+ objectives .  
 
GCF Output  GCF Activities  Responsibili
ty Financing 
Modality  
O1: Strengthening REDD+ 
coordination and 
implementation and overall 
REDD+ architecture  1.1: Update and further develop the REDD+ 
architecture  • Executing 
Entity (i.e. 
Implementing 
Partner ): 
Ministry of 
Finance  
• Co-Executing 
Entity : Upfront 
financing 1.2: Strengthen capacity for REDD+ 
implementation  
1.3: Communication, knowledge management & 
adaptive management  
2.1: Support the establishment and 
operationalization of Forest Management Units


---
*Page 45*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 42 OF 80 
 
 
 
O2: Support to 
decentralized sustainable 
forest governance  (FMUs), as well as SFM investments inside & 
outside FMUs  Ministry of 
Environment 
and Forestry  Performance -
based 
payments  
 
 2.2: Expand and enhance the implementation of 
the Social Forestry programme 
Project Management  3.1: Project Management  Upfront 
financing  
Table 5: Overall structure and operational modalities of the project  
 
Output 1: Strengthening REDD+ coordination and implementation  and overall REDD+ architecture  
This output aims to:  
• Support the continuous updating and further development of the overall REDD+ architecture (Forest 
Reference Level, National Forest Monitoring System and MRV capacity, Safeguards Information 
System, etc);  
• Strengthen the government capacity for REDD+ coordination and implementation at national and 
subnational levels  
This output will use a conventional up- front financing modality.  
 
Activity 1.1 Updat e and further develop the REDD+ architecture  
As context change and capacity develops over time, the government of Indonesia is committed to continuously 
update and improve its REDD+ architecture and related reporting to the UNFCCC. This activity will be 
implemented in synergy with relevant existing or future projects, at national and subnational level.  
 
This activity is foreseen to include:  
• Update and improve the national FREL and allocate it to Provinces, and develop a web- based 
application system for FREL development and REDD+ Performance calculation at national and sub-
national level  
• Further improve the NFMS  
• Develop and operationalize a spatial monitoring system for emissions from the land (SIMONELA)  
• Improve and operationalize the National REDD+ reporting system linked to the SRN, and develop a 
subnational REDD+ reporting system (local to Provincial)  
• Update the national REDD+ Implementation Strategy and contribute to updating or developing them 
at subnational level  
• Improve and operationalize the SIS at national and subnational level  
• Review, revise and/or strengthen REDD+ policies  
• Develop Benefit sharing plans  
• Contribute to reporting requirements under the UNFCCC (i.e. BUR, SOI, etc)  
 
Activity 1.2 Strengthen capacity for REDD+ implementation  
In parallel to the update and further development of the national architecture for REDD+, this project will support 
capacity strengthening for implementation of REDD+ at national, provincial and local level in key areas , in 
synergy with existing and future relevant initiatives. This aims to contribute to further  deploy REDD+ nationally, 
further harness the REDD+ potential of relevant domestic and international initiatives to support additional 
REDD+ results for the next reporting period.  As such it will support key acceleration actions for Output 2 
activities, in cluding to ensure safeguards requirements.  
 
This activity is foreseen to include actions such as: 
• Build government capacity on REDD+ at the provincial level;  
• Enhance the policy and regulatory frameworks and associated guidelines for key policies and 
programmes contributing to REDD+ at national and subnational levels (in particular those related to 
the social forestry programme and forest managements units);  
• Contribute to capacity BPDLH capacity strengthening in relation to REDD + (including GCF 
accredi tation for direct assess) ; 
• Strengthen the capacity to monitor and coordinate REDD+ implementation at the national level;  
• Support acceleration measures for the Social Forestry programme and FMUs and their link with 
REDD+  (training of field facilitators ); 
• Implementation of the Stakeholder Consultation Plan, the Gender Action Plan and the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan for the use of proceeds;


---
*Page 46*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 43 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Independent Assessor  for Output 2 . 
 
Activity 1. 3 Communication, knowledge management & adaptive management  
This activity aims to support adequate communication on the implementation of national -scale REDD+ under 
the UNFCCC, as well as knowledge management and adaptive management for the project as well as REDD+ 
implementation more generally in Indonesia:  
• Communication strategy on the benefits from REDD+ under the UNFCCC  
• Knowledge management  
• Methodological framework for systematic analysis of the contribution from key policies and initiatives 
to REDD+ and Indonesia’s NDC.  
 
Output 2: Support to  decentralized sustainable forest governance  
This output aims to support the government of Indonesia in advancing its objectives of decentralized  
sustainable management of forests through the o perationalization of Forest Management Units (FMUs), as 
well as in its complementary objective of  devolv ing access to and management of forest land and resources to 
communities in adequate areas. This project will therefore support the implementation and f urther refinement 
of the Social Forestry and FMU program mes respectively , looking at opportunities for complementarity and 
synergies between them whenever possible.  Indeed, social forestry licenses are granted within the boundaries 
of FMUs , typically as small “ clusters ” in much wider FMU areas  (as these cover the overall forest estate) , where 
communities are eligible and request a social forestry  license. While FMUs do also collaborate and provide 
benefits with communities that are not eligib le/granted social forestry  licenses ( i.e. developing community 
livelihoods plans and supporting their implementation), social forestry  goes a step further in providing 
formalized and secured user &/or ownership rights. Among others,  the FMU forest management plans , 
business plans  and community development plans developed for the operationalization of the FMUs  are an 
opportunity to identify where social forestry and what specific scheme may be relevant, support these 
communities in requesting and obtaining a social forestry license, as well as support the implementation of 
subsequent investments  necessary to enable sustainable forest management and livelihoods . Rather than in 
isolation , these two programmes must be seen as synergetic, which also enable economies of scale.  
 
This project will support (i)  activities related to operationalization of FMUs and licensing of social forestry 
respectively, and (ii)  actual investments supporting sustainable forest management and sustainable 
livelihoods, both within and outside FMUs. This activity will directly benefit from acceleration activities supported 
through Activity 1.2, including the guidance developed and enhanced regulatory framework at national and 
subnational level , as well as from the trained facilitators th at will be deployed to support FMUs.  This output will 
use a performance- based payments modality . 
 
Activity 2.1:  Support the establishment and operationalization of Forest Management Units  (FMUs), 
as well as SFM investments inside & outside FMUs  
 
While FMUs have been established under the Forestry Law  No.41/1999  in all provinces of the country, covering 
nearly the entirety of the forest estate, much remains to be done in terms of operationalizing them. While 
different FMUs may be at different stages of maturity and with different needs, supporting their 
operationalization require a set of complementary interventions, likely to include supporting:  
• An assessment of the FMU capacity and capacity building needs (incl. sustainable forestry 
management system –  PHPL) ; 
• Awareness raising, capacity building and technical assistance to the FMU staff, provincial and district 
authorities as well as local communities;  
• The development of adequate administration, management and monitoring systems;  
• The creation and/or strengthening (as relevant) of multi -stakeholder platforms to ensure participation 
in forest management planning processes and other relevant subnational land -use planning 
processes. This will build as much as possible on existing structures to avoid the fragmentation of 
support;  
• The participatory development of long- term and annual sustainable forest management plans;  
• The development of quality busines s plans aimed at ensuring the financial viability of the FMU over 
the long- term;  
• The development of site design document and Water Utilization Area Maps, for  FMU conservation 
areas;  
• The participatory development of community sustainable development plans, supporting sustainable 
forest management;


---
*Page 47*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 44 OF 80 
 
 
 
In addition to supporting the operationalization of the FMUs, this project will also support actual investment in 
key areas, both inside and outside of the FMUs. When inside the FMUs, interventions will be guided  as feasible 
on the various plans developed (Forest Management Plan, Business Plan and Community livelihood Plan) , 
though some “no- regret” actions may also be implemented in parallel to ensure motivation and progress.  
The main activities to be supported inc lude:  
• Fire prevention/management  
• Reforestation  
• Forest restoration/enhancement  
• Community livelihood activities  
• FMU business activities  
Support to local communities may be implemented through the Social Forestry programme (Activity 2.2) when 
target areas coincide, or in an independent or complementary manner in cases where social forestry is not 
prioritized at the time on the FMU territory or does  not cover the overall population in the FMU.  
 
Activity  2.2 Expand and enhance implementation of the Soci al Forestry Program me 
 
In moving forward with the social forestry programme , the Government of Indonesia’s first priority is to continue 
to assist Adat and non- Adat communities, villages, individuals to obtain licenses available through the six 
different schemes  of social forestry, thereby increasing the size of forests under this programme. As such, this 
output seeks to strengthen key stages of the process: appli cation, planning, verification, implementation and 
monitoring, through approaches that integrate considerations for the roles and rights of men, women and 
youths in A dat and non- Adat communities, villages, cooperatives and other entities.  
 
The second prior ity is to ensure permit or rights holders are able to improve their livelihoods through the 
implementation of various management or development plans and therefore contribute to addressing drivers 
of deforestation and barriers to carbon enhancement  
 
The Mi nistry of Environment and Forestry introduced Social Forestry Acceleration Working Groups, comprising 
Ministry officers, NGOs, practitioners at national and provincial levels to support community engagement. To 
further support these working groups, multi -stakeholder platforms with balanced gender and social group 
representations,  at relevant governance levels , will be established or strengthened to provide inputs on among 
others, socio -cultural, biophysical, economic contexts , as well as support socialization for the program me.  
 
Support will also be extended to integrate into village and provincial development planning processes  because 
these plans  are key for the central government  to allocate and distribute funds for development. In the case of  
the social forestry programme, these funds are needed to facilitate and support the application process, 
conduct verifications, prepare and implement work plans as well as monitor implementation. Therefore, 
additional support will be provided to develop the forest  management plans, bu siness and annual work plans 
for the various social forestry schemes. These plans will be further supported by developing and implementing 
community investments plans including for small and micro community enterprises.  
 
As stated above, customary forests or Hutan Adat , is a means  to recognize customary territory and accord land 
and forest resource rights to A dat communities. This output will support the development of district -level 
regulations to recognize customary forests, further complemented by establ ishing multi -stakeholder verification 
teams that consist of among others, A dat experts , NGOs including indigenous NGOs,  and supported by 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry officials .  
 
Activities 2.1 and 2.2 shall be implemented ensuring that measures identified in the consultation, ESMP & 
gender plans  have been carried out adequately. They will also be through approaches that integrate 
considerations for the roles and rights of men, women and youths in A dat and non- Adat communities, villages, 
cooperatives and other entities.  
 
Project Management  (See section G for details) . This output will use a conventional up- front financing 
modality based on cash advances.  
 
C.2.2. Expected outputs and outcomes : 
 
Please provide the following information:


---
*Page 48*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 45 OF 80 
 
 
 
Component (s) Outputs  Outcomes  
Supporting decentralized 
sustainable forest 
governance and REDD+ 
implementation capacity  in 
Indonesia  • Output  1: Strengthening REDD+ 
coordination and implementation and 
overall REDD+ architecture  
• Output  2: Support to decentralized 
sustainable forest governance 
• Project Management  M5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory s ystems for low 
emission planning and 
development  
5.1 Institutional and regulatory 
systems that improve incentives 
for low -emission planning and 
development and their effective 
implementation  
5.2 Number of effective 
coordination mechanisms  
 
M9.0 Improved management of 
land and forests  
9.1 Hectares of land or forests  
under improved and effective 
management that contribute to 
CO2 emission reductions  
 
 
C.2.3. Timeframe of implementation  (for monitoring  and reporting  purposes) : 
 
Please provide the following information:  
 
Outputs  Expected y ear 
to be achieved  
Output  1: Strengthening REDD+ coordination and implementation and overall REDD+ 
architecture  Year 4 
Output  2: Support to decentralized sustainable forest governance  Year 4 
Project Management   Year 4  
 
If needed,  provide any additional comments/explanations:  
These activities will be implemented over a four -year period.  
 
C.2.4. Budget estimate  (for monitoring and reporting  purposes) : 
 
Following the procedures of the Terms of Reference for the REDD+ pilot programme for Results -Based  
payments, the iTAP recommended that the Board consider the following:  
(a) Total score achieved 36/48  
(b) GCF volume of E Rs: 20,250,000  tCO2eq ; and 
(c) Additional 2.5 per cent for use of proceeds and non -carbon elements  
(d) Proposed REDD -plus results -based payments (USD 5/tCO 2eq): USD  103,781,250  
Based on this, the budget for the proposal was finalized as described below.  
 
 
Output  Indicative cost 
(USD)  GCF proceeds  Co-financing  (if any)  
Amount  Amount  Source  
Output  1: Strengthening 
REDD+ coordination and 
implementation and overall 
REDD+ architecture  9.40 million  9.40 million  0 - 
Output  2: Support to 
decentralized sustainable 
forest governance  93.40 million  93.40 million  0 - 
Project Management  0.98 million  0.98 million  0 - 
Indicative total cost and 
currency (USD or EUR)  103.78 million  103.78 million  0 
Table 6. Budget at Output  level


---
*Page 49*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 46 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF Output   GCF Activities  Indicative GCF 
amount (USD)  
O1: Strengthening REDD+ 
coordination and 
implementation and overall 
REDD+ architecture  1.1 Update and further develop the architecture for REDD+  2,059,380  
1.2 Strengthen capacity for REDD+ implementation  6,626,637  
1.3 Communication, knowledge management & adaptive 
management  715,108  
Indicative total Output 1  9,401,125 
O2: Support to decentralized 
sustainable forest 
governance  2.1 Support the establishment and operationalization of Forest 
Management Units (FMUs), as well as SFM investments 
inside & outside FMUs  46,701,563  
2.2 Expand and enhance implementation of the Social Forestry 
programme  46,701,562  
Indicative total Output 2 93,403,125  
Project Management  3.1 Project management  977,000  
Indicative total PMC  977,000  
Indicative t otal project budget  103,781,250 
Table 7. Budget at A ctivity level14 
 
C.2.5. Implementation arrangements:  
List and describe the institutions involved in the activities that will be funded with proceeds from this pilot 
programme, and explain their anticipated roles and interactions with one another , including the flow of funds . 
 
The Government of Indonesia has requested UNDP’s assistance for the design and implementation of this 
Project based on UNDP’s comparative advantage, which include vast experience in supporting the Government 
in project implementation, its in- country presence, its large portfolio of biodi versity, climate change and REDD+ 
projects nationally and globally, its success in mobilizing resources, and its role as GCF Accredited Entity (AE).  
 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s national implementation modality  (NIM) , in accordance 
with UNDP Rules & Regulations  and the Country Programme15. The Country Office will provide support 
services to the national implementation, as required by the financing modalities  followed (cf. Financing modality 
sub-section below) . The project  will be implemented over a period of 4 years, starting when GCF funds are 
disbursed to UNDP Indonesia. The  implementation modality may be adjusted during implementation if and 
when needed, upon approval by Ministry of Finance and UNDP.  
 
The Executing Entity (i.e. Implementing Partner in UNDP terminology) for the project is the Ministry of 
Finance .  
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry will be a Co-Executing Entity . 
 
The implementation of this project will be closely coordinated with other relevant projects and initiatives 
supporting the national and subnational  REDD+ processes , as well as those supporting the Forest 
Management Unit and Social Forestry programmes.  This will be ensured directly by  the various General 
Directorates of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry , mandated to oversee these thematic areas, as well 
as through the Technical Committees (cf. below)  
 
REDD+ is coordinated by the REDD+ sub- Directorate under the Directorate General of Climate Change.  
 
Executing Entity (i.e. Implementing Partner ) 
The Ministry of Finance  will be the Executing Entity (i.e.  Implementing Partner ).  
The Implementing Partner is responsible and accountable for managing this project, including the monitoring 
and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of GCF resources. 
The Ministry of Finance will also be responsible at the highest level for ensuring that project implementation 
follows the national policies and standards. The Implementing Partner is responsible for:  
• Approving and signing the multiyear workplan,  
• Approving and  signing the combined delivery report at the end of every quarter; and,  
• Signing the financial report or the funding authorization and certificate of expenditures.  
 
14 Total Direct Project Costs of USD 586,552 are distributed between Project Management, of which USD 97,914 is administrative c osts, 
and Output 1, of which USD 488,638 is for technical support.    
15 https://undocs.org/DP/DCP/IDN/3


---
*Page 50*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 47 OF 80 
 
 
 
BPDLH, under the Ministry of Finance, will be responsible and accountable for the day -to-day implementation. 
BPDLH is an official entity, fully recognized by the Ministry of Finance: its  establishment is enacted through 
Decree of the Minister of Finance No . 779/KMK.O5/2019; its  organization and work procedures are introduced 
in Regulation of Minister of Finance No. 137/PMK.01/2019. Capacity assessment of BPDLH is completed with 
moderate risk rating.  
 
The HACT Framework is part of UNDP’s normal risk -based m anagement approach as per internal policies and 
procedures. The common objective of the HACT framework is to support a closer alignment of development 
aid with national priorities and to strengthen national capacities for management and accountability. It serves 
as a set of procedures on requesting, disbursing, providing assurance and reporting on funds to effectively 
manage risks, reduce transaction costs and promote sustainable development in a coordinated manner.  As 
such, UNDP will apply an integrated suite of assurance measures  associated with the “moderate” risk level 
assigned to BPDLH . These activities include:  
• Spot checks , which  will be conducted at least twice per year instead of at least once for a “Low” risk 
level; these spot checks  are also an opportunity to revise the risk level (upward or downward 
depending on the findings);  
• Internal control audits , which should be conducted in the second and fourth year of the programme 
cycle, instead of in the third or  fourth year for a “Low” ri sk level . 
 
In addition to the above, UNDP intends to provide certain execution support services to BPDLH, which will be 
set out in a country office support arrangement and for which specific provision has been made in the project 
budget. This execution sup port (which is to be considered as separate from UNDP’s oversight function in its 
capacity of Accredited Entity under the terms of the AMA/FAA), will be coordinated and agreed with Ministry of 
Finance, and aims to ensure adequate support, particularly in the first year of the project (i.e. year 2 of BPDLH).  
UNDP is also working with BPDLH in synergy with other partners to address the recommendations in the HACT 
assessment. UNDP expects that all appropriate recommendations and assurance meas ures identified during 
the risk -based HACT assessment will be implemented, in accordance with UNDP requirements, prior to the 
start of the Funded Activities.  
 
Co- Executing Entity  
MOEF will be a Co -Executing Entity . No other Co -Executing Entity  is envisaged at this stage.  
 
The implementing partner may enter into agreements with other organizations or entities, known as 
“Responsible Parties ”, which may carry out project activities and produce project outputs on behalf of the 
Implementing Partner . Responsible Parties are accountable directly to the Implementing Partner.  
 
Appropriate responsible parties may be selected as per UNDP rules and regulations, which include  performing 
a capacity assessment  using the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) framework and following 
UNDP HACT policies, to determine the level or risk and capacities to manage the funds of the project . Parties 
concerned with project formulation and design must review needed capacities. They first determine which t asks 
apply to the project. For each applicable task, the parties define any additional measures to ensure that tasks 
can be performed. The measures must be documented for follow -up action. This may be done, for example, 
through an action plan, an annex to the project document or through minutes of a design meeting or workshop.  
MOEF has already undergone a satisfactory HACT micro -assessment , still valid , resulting in a “low risk” 
categorization with no gap identified.  
 
Additionally, UNDP assures that its partners are screened against UN Sanctions and Eligibility through a UN 
Security Council online system that contains a wide data base of possible violators. In addition, UNDP has 
access to the United Nations Global Marketplace in order to verify if any sup plier has been involved in terrorism 
and corruption. Moreover, UNDP has a policy on Due Diligence and Partnerships with Private Sectors in which 
a Risk Assessment Tool is applied before any agreement is made. This tool includes the following exclusionary 
criteria:  
• Controversial weapons or their components;  
• Armaments and/or weapons or their components, including military supplies;  
• Replica weapons;  
• Tobacco or tobacco products;  
• Violations of UN sanctions, UN ineligibility lists or UNDP vendor sanctions list;  
• Pornography;  
• Substances subject to international bans or phase- outs, and wildlife or products regulated under the 
CITES;  
• Gambling (excluding lotteries with charitable objectives);


---
*Page 51*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 48 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Violation of human rights or complicity in human rights violations;  
• Forced or  compulsory labor;  
• Child labor.  
 
Management of the project 
Three levels of management will be set:  
• Decision making, which includes: a)  Project Board in charge of strategic decision making; 
b) Monitoring and Quality Assurance Unit of UNDP  that will supervise the activities in its role as  
Accredited Entity to the Fund. In line with UNDP Internal Control Framework (ICF) there will be a clear 
division between UNDP´s oversight  function as GCF AE and its role in support ing implementation; 
and, c) National Project  Director  that will ensure coherence of the interventions, the achievement of 
expected results, the management  of risks, and the progress of the planning and procurement 
processes.  
• Technical committee , providing technical support to the Project Board, Management Committee, and 
the Project Management Unit to facilitate informed decision making, as well as help coordinate with 
external initiatives .  
• Project Management and Implementation, which includes the Project Management Unit  (PMU), the 
Project  Manager, the Support Unit for administrative and financial issues and technical team. Multi -
stakeholder  
 
The project organization structure is as follows:  
 
   
Figure 6: Project organization structure  
 
Project Board (PB):  
The Project Board (PB) is responsible for management decisions when guidance is required by the Project 
Manager, including recommendations for approval of project plans and revisions, and addressing any project 
level grievances. Project Board decisions should be made , by consensus,  in accordance with standards that 
shall ensure management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and 
effective international competition.  
 
In case consensus cannot be reached within the PB, the UNDP Resident Representative (or their designate) 
will mediate to find consensus and, if this cannot be found, will take the final decision to ensure project 
implementation is not unduly delayed.  
 
Specific responsibilities of the Project Board include:


---
*Page 52*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 49 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Provide overall guidance and direction to the project, ensuring it remains within any specified 
constraints;  
• Address project issues as raised by the project manager and/or the management committee;  
• Provide guidance on new project risks, and agree on possible countermeasures and management 
actions to address specific risks;  
• Agree on project manager’s tolerances as required;  
• Review the project progress, and provide direction and recommendations to ensure that the agreed 
deliverables are produced satisfactorily according to plans;  
• Appraise the annual project implementation report, including the quality assessment rating report; 
make recommendations for the workplan;  
• Provide ad hoc direction and advice for exceptional situations when the project manager’s tolerances 
are exceeded;  
• Ensure transparency, accountability, and meaningful and effective multi -stakeholder engagement  
throughout the entire project; and  
• Assess and decide to proceed on project changes through appropriate revisions.  
 
The PB will provide overall managerial guidance for project execution. It will: (i)  Analyze and discuss the 
development of the Project activities and recommend changes as required based on project monitoring and  
evaluation processes and products and in line with UNDP policies; (ii)  Discuss and approve the Annual Work  
Plans ensuring that required resources are committed; (iii)  Discuss and approve the Progress Reports and 
Final Report of the Project; (iv)  Analyze Project achievements and assure these are used for performance 
improvement,  accountability and learning; and (v)  Settle controversies arbitrating on any conflicts within the 
project or negotiating a solution to any pr oblems with external bodies.  
 
The PB will be composed of UNDP , the Ministry of Finance,  MOEF  as well as a civil society representative.  
 
As Executing Entity ( Implementing Partner ), the Ministry of Finance will represent the project ownership, 
chairing the PB and organizing its meetings at least twice a year or upon request of either of the Parties. The 
Ministry of Finance will appoint a National Project Director (NPD) who will be a senior staff member and w ill 
be responsible at the highest level for providing guidance on the management and technical feasibility of the 
project and ensuring its implementation leads to the achievement of project’s results. The Project Board’s role 
in project management will be complemented by inputs and recommendations from the Technical Committee 
(see below). In addition, the PB will approve the appointment and responsibilities of a Project Manager who 
will be responsible for the daily project execution.   
 
The composition of the Project Board  must include the following roles : 
 
1) Executive : The Executive is an individual who represents ownership of the project and who will chair the  
Project Board. T he Executive shall be appointed by the Ministry of Finance . It may be the NPD or another 
more senior staff member of the Ministry of Finance.  The Executive is ultimately responsible for the project, 
supported by the Beneficiary Representative and Development Partner . The Executive’s role is to ensure that 
the project is focused throughout its life cycle on achieving  its objectives and delivering outputs that will 
contribute to higher level outcomes. The executive has to ensure that the project gives value for money, 
ensuring cost -conscious approach to the project, balancing the demands of beneficiary and suppler.   
Specific Responsibilities  of the Executive as part of the above responsibilities for the Project Board include:  
• Ensure that there is a coherent project o rganization,  structure,  and logical set of plans;  
• Set tolerances in the AWP and other plans as required for the Project Manager;  
• Monitor and control the progress of the project at a strategic level;  
• Ensure that risks are being tracked and mitigated as effectively as possible;  
• Brief relevant stakeholders about project progress;  
• Organise and chair Project Board meetings.  
 
2) Beneficiary  Representative: The Beneficiary Representative’s primary function within the Board is to ensure 
the realization of project results from the perspective of project beneficiaries . The Beneficiary Representative 
will be appointed by the Ministry of Environment and Forestry . The Beneficiary Representative is 
responsible for validating the needs and for monitoring that the solution will meet those needs within the 
constraints of the project. The Beneficiary Representative monitors progress against targets and quality criteria.  
 
Specific responsibilities of  the Beneficiary Representative as part of the above responsibilities for the Project 
Board  include : 
• Prioritize and contribute beneficiaries’ opinions on Project Board decisions on whether to implement 
recommendations on proposed changes;


---
*Page 53*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 50 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Specification of the Beneficiary’s needs is accurate, complete and unambiguous;  
• Implementation of activities at all stages is monitored to ensure that they will meet the beneficiary’s 
needs and are progressing towards that target;  
• Impact of potential changes is evaluated f rom the beneficiary point of view;  
• Risks to the beneficiaries are frequently monitored.  
 
3) Development Partner : The Development Partner  is an individual or group representing the interests of the 
parties  concerned which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing,  
facilitating, procuring, implementing). The Development Partner ’s primary function within the Board is to provide 
guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project. The Development Partner  role must have the 
authority  to commit or acquire supplier resources required. If necessary, more than one person may be required 
for this role. The Development Partner  is UNDP .  
 
Specific responsibilities for the Development Partner  as part of the above responsibilities for the Project Board 
include : 
• Make sure that progress towards the outputs remains consistent from the supplier perspective;  
• Promote and maintain focus on the expected project output(s) from the point of view of suppl ier 
management;  
• Ensure that the supplier resources required for the project are made available;  
• Contribute supplier opinions on Project Board decisions on whether to implement recommendations  
on proposed changes;  
• Arbitrate on, and ensure resolution of, any supplier priority or resource conflicts.  
 
The PB will be established upon project inception and the responsibilities assigned above may be 
supplemented as deemed appropriate in the final governance structure. In its first meeting the Project Board 
will prepare and adopt detailed terms of reference for its functioning.  
 
4) Representative from the stakeholders : In addition to the three mandatory roles above, a Project Board may 
include a representative of the main stakeholders.  Considering the important focus of the project on local 
communities and indigenous people in order to ensure social as well as climate and environmental benefits, 
the Project Board will include a representative from the civil society , with knowledge and practical experience 
on social forestry and forest management units . Please refer to Annex VI a on the ESMF  for de tails of this 
process.   
 
Project Assurance  
UNDP provides a three- tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and 
at regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Board by carrying out 
objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project 
management m ilestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project 
Management function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the 
Project Manager. The project assurance role is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As 
an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF -specific oversight and quality assurance 
services including: (i)  Day-to-day oversight supervision, (ii)  Oversight of project completion, (iii ) Oversight of 
project reporting.  
 
National Project Director ( NPD ): 
The Project National Director ( NPD ) will be a senior staff member of the Ministry of Finance and will be 
responsible at the highest level for providing guidance on the management and technical feasibility of the 
project and ensuring its implementation leads to the achievement of project’s results. The NPD  will be 
responsible for orienting and advi sing the Project Manager on Government policy and priorities. The NPD  will 
be supported by the Technical Committees and, will review coherence of the intervention, including results, 
risks, planning and procurement processes. The NPD  will sign and approve procurement of services and goods 
corresponding to the project and will delegate to the Project Manager the approval and signature of 
procurement and hiring requests and payments. The Combined Delivery Report (CDR) will be approved on a 
quarterly basis and signed by the NPD . 
 
Technical Committee:  
A Technical Committee already exists under MOEF . Meetings will be arranged when there is a need of technical 
inputs and coordination with the project´s  components and other initiatives  related to REDD+ or other thematic 
areas  relevant to this project . The aim is to provide technical support to the Project Board, Project  National 
Director, Project Technical Experts and Project Manager for decision making.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 51 OF 80 
 
 
 
The Technical Committee , chair ed by MOEF  (authority level) , will include relevant partners , technical experts 
and other stakeholders such as CSOs, academia, indigenous, local community and women groups , private 
sector and other partners . In particular , key partners supporting projects and initiatives related to the national 
and subnational REDD+ processes, as well as those supporting the Forest Management Unit and Social 
Forestry programmes , will be invited to participate, to ensure adequate coordination as well as knowledge 
exchange on challenges and best practices.  
 
The Committee will meet regularly  to review progress and obstacles and to advise on strategic and critical  
Project issues. Matters of institutional concern (i.e. going beyond the Project’s scope and contents) will be  
addressed at the appropriate levels of dialogue between UNDP and the Government of Indonesia. The Project  
Technical Experts will serve as Secretariats of the Committee. The NPD will instruct the Project Technical  
Experts to provide detailed project information to the Committee as needed, to convene meetings and to 
prepare  AC minutes. Extraordinary meetings can be held if deemed necessary by one of the Committee 
members. If  appropriate, the Committee can invite external consultants to assist i n the monitoring process.  
 
The Project Management Unit (PMU)  
The Project Management Unit (PMU), under supervision of UNDP and Ministry o f Finance , will run the project 
on a day -to-day basis within the constraints laid down by the Project Board. The PMU will be coordinated by a 
Project Manager.  
 
The Project Manager  function will end once the project is operationally closed, which is decided by the Project 
Board, and all commitment have been fulfilled, such as completion and submission of the final report and 
project closure process  and any other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP .  
 
The Project Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the project within the 
Annual Work Plan approved by the  Project Board and reviewed by UNDP. The Project Manager’s prime 
responsibility is to ensure that the project  produces the results specified in the project document, to the required 
standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The annual work plan is prepared by 
the Project Manager and reviewed and approved by Project Board. However, the UNDP -Global Environmental 
Finance Unit, as part of its quality  assurance role, provides the final approval. The Project Manager is also 
responsible for managing and monitoring the project risks initially identified, and for submitting new risks to the 
Project Board for consideration and decision  on possible actions if required, and for updating the status of these 
risks by maintaining the project risks log according to the NIM Guidelines.   
Specific responsibilities of the Project Manager include:  
• Provide direction and guidance to project team(s)/ responsible party (ies), and supervise project staff;  
• Liaise with the Project Board to assure the overall direction and integrity of the project;  
• Be the main project contact person for external communications;  
• Identify and obtain any support and advice required for the management, planning and control of the  
project;  
• Responsible for project administration;  
• Plan the activities of the project and monitor progress against the project results framework and the  
approved annual workplan;  
• Mobilize personnel, goods and services, training and micro- capital grants to initiative activities,  
• including dr afting terms of reference and work specifications, and overseeing all contractors’ work;  
• Monitor events as determined in the project monitoring schedule plan/timetable, and update the plan  
as required;  
• Manage requests for the provision of financial resourc es by UNDP, through advance of funds, direct  
payments or reimbursement using the fund authorization and certificate of expenditures;  
• Monitor financial resources and accounting to ensure the accuracy and reliability of financial reports;  
• Be responsible for preparing and submitting financial reports to UNDP on a quarterly basis;  
• Provide for completion, implementation and revision, as necessary, of the ESMF (the ESMP and  
corresponding management plans).  
• Manage and monitor the project risks initially identified  and submit new risks to the project board for  
• consideration and decision on possible actions if required; update the status of these risks by  
• maintaining the project risks log;  
• Capture lessons learned during project implementation;  
• Prepare the annual work plan for the following year; and update the Atlas Project Management module 
if external access is made available.  
• Prepare the Annual Project Report and submit the final report to the Project Board;  
• Prepare progress reports as requested by  Ministry o f Finance , UNDP and/or the Donor, and ensure 
conditions  defined by GCF for disbursements are met;


---
*Page 55*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 52 OF 80 
 
 
 
• Based on the Annual Project Report and the Project Board review, prepare the AWP for the following  
year.  
• Ensure the interim evaluation process is undertaken as per the UNDP guidance, and submit the final  
interim evaluation report to the Project Board.  
• Identify follow -on actions and submit them for consideration to the Project Board;  
• Ensure the terminal evaluation process is undertaken as per the UNDP guidance, and submit the final 
TE report to the Project Board;  
• Ensure implementation of actions under his/her responsibility are articulated with other relevant 
projects and initiatives . 
 
The Assistants in the fields of administration, finance, logistics and procurement will report to the Project 
Manager and provide support in management  and administration of the project, as well as provide logistical 
support to technical components of the project and its team.  
 
The PMU will also count with Project Technical Experts for specific project components who will support the 
Project Manager with the implementation of the project, providing technical expertise, reviewing and preparing  
TORs, and reviewing the outputs of consultants and other sub- contractors. The Project Technical Experts will:  
• Ensure the logistical, administrative and financial effectiveness of the project in each technical area.  
• Prepare project reports, work plans, budgets and related documentation;  
• Prepare drafts of TORs, technical specifications and other documents;  
• Participate in the selection of consultants and suppliers and their supervision;  
• Oversee the implementation of project activities in a timely and efficient manner;  
• Provide  substantive guidelines to organize seminars, workshops and field trips linked to project 
activities.  
• Follow -up agreements under his/her responsibility.  
 
The Project Technical Experts will produce in a timely fashion inputs for annual work plans and budget s of their 
components, to be consolidated by the Project Manager and then presented for approval by the Project Board, 
and annual progress reports for submission to the Board. The reports will provide details about the progress 
made, any shortcomings and t he necessary adjustments made to achieve project outcomes.  
 
The PMU is designed to support Outputs 1 and 3, which use a conventional upfront financing modality (i.e. 
cash advances). As Output 2 will use the performance -based payments modality, whereby (i)  the government 
pre-finances and implements activities using its own staff and processes, while (ii)  UNDP as AE will transfer 
funds annually based on actual results reported and verified by an Independent Assessor (including 
safeguards), the design of the P MU does not need to take Output 2 activities into account.  
 
Upon request by the Ministry of Finance , UNDP will provide technical backstopping during the implementation 
of the  project. The costs corresponding to this technical support towards project execution will be recovered 
following UNDP’s policy.  
 
National  leadership  
The Ministry of Finance will provide the space and facilities for the Project staff, with the PMU located within 
the newly established Environmental Fund Management Agency  (BPDLH) , under DG Treasury.  
 
This is indeed particularly strategic for coordination and integration  as they are foreseen to play a key  role in 
supporting REDD+  nationally , and in further mainstreaming and strengthening REDD+ within Indonesia public 
institutions  and processes .  
 
BPDLH  has been recently established formally following a very comprehensive preparatory process over 
several years. BPDLH has the status of a Full Public Service Agency ( Badan Layanan Umum – BLU). BLU  
status  enables  government public service units to provide their product and/or services for non- profit purposes 
with an autonomous financial administration capacity, as well as  to recruit staff outside public servants.  BPDLH 
include s several funding windows (and sub- windows), one of which for climate change under which REDD+ 
funds will be managed,  with the objective to be the central financing instrument for REDD+ (and environment)  
in Indonesia for both international and domestic finance. This will enabl e a much more coordinated and 
synergetic implementation of environmental actions . At the same time,  it will enable the government of 
Indonesia to enhance its accountability towards its constituenc ies as well as towards  contributing donors . 
 
As such, BPDLH is a key instrument to ensure national leadership in the coordination of climate finance and 
climate action for the implementation of the NDC. For this reason, the project aims to support further  
capacitation of the Fund on REDD+ and to contribute to the process of its accreditation to the GCF for


---
*Page 56*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 53 OF 80 
 
 
 
“direct access”.  Key institutional bodies of BPDLH  include (i)  a Steering Committee, (i i) a Custodian BANK 
(“trustee”), (iii)  BPDLH Secretariat (Fund manager), along with the various (iv)  Line Ministries responsible for 
executing &/or supervising the recipients of funds technically  and financially , and reporting to BPDLH . These 
various bodies and BPDLH team will closely follow and contribute to the progress of the project .  
 
Also, as BPDLH  Steering Committee includes the various m inistries directly involved in the implementation of 
the funds  secured by BPDLH , it will be a key  body for cross -sectorial coordination for REDD+ in general and 
this project in particular.  Ministries represented may include more specifically: M OEF, Coordinating Ministry  for 
Economic Affairs, Ministry  of Agriculture, Ministry  of Home Affairs, Ministry  of National Development Planning, 
Ministry  of Energy and M ineral Resources, Ministry  of Transportation, Ministry  of Industry  and Ministry  of 
Marine and F isheries . 
 
Property of Equipment and Goods : 
Goods and equipment purchased as part of this project will initially belong to the UNDP Country Office. During  
the implementation phase, transfer to national beneficiaries will be undertaken in accordance with UNDP  
procedures and policies, subject to prior agreement with the Ministry of Finance . The goods and equipment will 
be transferred with a delivery -reception minute.  
 
Audit:  
Financial reporting and auditing standards for the programme will follow international financial reporting and 
auditing standards. According to UNDP’s general corporate audit regulations, internal and external audits will 
be carried out and these costs will be covered by the project. The audit will be performed in accordance to 
UNDP  Financial Rules and Regulations and applicable audit policies on National Implementation Modalities 
(NIM)  implemented project on UNDP and GCF projects. UNDP will be responsible for making audit 
arrangements for the project in communication wit h the Ministry of Finance. UNDP  and the Ministry of Finance  
will provide audit management responses and the Project Manager and project support team will  address audit 
recommendations, as applicable.  
 
Learning and knowledge -sharing : 
Results from the project will be disseminated within and beyond the project intervention zone through existing 
information- sharing networks and forums. The project will identify  and participate, as relevant and appropriate, 
in scientific, policy -based and/or any other netw orks, which may be of benefit to project implementation though 
lessons learned. The project will identify, analyse and share lessons  learned that might be beneficial in the 
design and implementation of similar future projects. There will also be a two-way flow of information between 
this project and other projects/programmes of a similar focus.  
 
Communications and Visibility Requirements:  
The project will comply with UNDP’s,  the Ministry of Finance  and GCF Branding Guidelines. Amongst other 
requirements, these guidelines describe when and how the UNDP and the logos of donors to UNDP projects 
are used. In order to  accord proper acknowledgement to the GCF for providing funding, a GCF logo will appear 
on all relevant project publications, including, among others, project hardware and equipment purchased with 
GCF funds. Any citation on publications stemming from the project will also accord proper acknowledgment to 
the GCF.  
 
Financing modalities  
Outputs  1 (enabling environment) and 3 (project management) will use a conventional National Implementation 
Modality  (NIM) , ensur ing timely implementation of the activities for Indonesia to enhance its overall architecture 
and capacity for overall REDD+ implementation, as well as to ensure high quality project management and 
implementation for the project.   
 
For Output 2 (FMU and Social Forestry programmes), the Government of  Indonesia and UNDP opted for the 
use of UNDP’s “Performance- Based Payments” (PBP) financing modality.  
 
The choice of this PBP modality is by the following objectives:  
• Ensure country leadership  by providing more flexibility to the Government of Indonesia in the way it 
provides the desired results;  
• Ensure cost -efficiency by making optimal use of existing government structures, avoiding or keeping 
the duplications of structures and functions to the minimum, while ensuring that UNDP can fulfill its 
role of Accredited Entity adequately, in line with GCF and UNDP standards (incl. safeguards and 
gender);  
• Enable faster disbursements  from UNDP to the Indonesia than a conventional upfront payment 
modality  would allow, depending on the government’s capacity to provide the agreed results, verified


---
*Page 57*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 54 OF 80 
 
 
 
through an Independent Assessor, without compromising the quality of implementation (incl. 
safeguards) and the intended use of proceeds.  
“Performance -based payments (PBPs)  are “ a type of agreement between UNDP and a [development 
partner]  to provide funding upon the verified achievement of an agreed measurable development result. No 
advances are provided, rather payments are made only upon the verified achieve ment of agreed results. This 
approach gives greater incentive to responsible parties to achieve results ” (UNDP Programme and Operations 
Policies and Procedures -  POPP) .  
In this modality, as payments are made only on delivery of verified results, “the [development partner]  is fully 
responsible for the achievement of the result(s), and free to use its own approaches, methods, capacities and 
resources within the parameters s tipulated in the project document and performance- based payment 
agreement. Upon achievement of the result(s), the development partner submits substantive and other 
reporting required in the agreement to trigger payments”. (UNDP POPP) . 
This modality requires support services to the NIM modality, as UNDP has to sign and manage the 
performance- based payments agreement  and the various tasks attached to it. The UNDP Policy on the PBP 
modality as well as template of the PBP Agreement are publicly available in full in UNDP’s POPP, through the 
weblink s provided in this footnote16 
 
The overall  process and requirements for this PBP modality are as follow:  
• Government & UNDP agree on the performance criteria and indicators , targets  and price(s) per unit 
of result ; 
• Government & UNDP agree on an independent assessor , who reviews elements  from step 1 and 
defines a validation methodology ; 
• A project appraisal committee or project board review s and approves  elements defined in step 1 & 2; 
• A Project document  is signed , as well as  the Performance- based payment A greement ; 
• Disbursements are made from UNDP to –  in this case –  the Executing Entity ( i.e. implementing 
partner ), based on the achievement of one or more outcomes verified by the independent assessor 
(including safeguards) . 
 
 
Figure 7: Financing modalities used in the project  
 
 
16 The f ull UNDP policy  for Performance -Based Payments  and template for the PBP Agreement are publicly available 
through the following weblink s: 
https://popp.undp.org/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/P ublic/PPM_Desi
gn_Performance-Based%20Payments.docx&action=default  and 
https://popp.undp.org/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Public/PPM_Desi
gn_Performance%20Based%20Payment%20Agreement%20_Final%20for%20Oct%20OPG.docx&action=default&DefaultI
temOpen=1


---
*Page 58*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 55 OF 80 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Organizational structure of the Ministry of Finance  
 
 
 
Figure 9: Organizational Structure of the Ministry of En vironment and Forestry  
 
C.2.6. Non- carbon benefits:  
Provide information on the non -carbon benefits associated with the implementation of REDD+ activities, 
explaining their nature, scale and importance for the long- term sustainability of REDD -plus activities and 
providing evidence to this regard.  
 
The non- carbon benefits associated with the implementation of REDD+ activities in Indonesia varies across 
communities and is important for the long- term sustainability of REDD+  activities. The country’s rehabilitation 
plans for l and and forest plan s, have the potential to increase forest carbon stock and biodiversity, support local


---
*Page 59*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 56 OF 80 
 
 
 
livelihood, and mitigate natural disasters like floods and landslides while the Social Forestry programme has 
important implications for community engagements and involvement in protecting the REDD+ investments.   
 
With the project  investing  in social  forestry  and establishing  and renewing commitment  to Forest  Management  
Units  (FMUs),  it will directly  lead to improved  forest  management  and provide landscape- platform that allows  
conservation,  rehabilitation  and economic  and sociocultural  activities  that can be complementar ily implemented  
in addressing  ecological  problems,  as well as socioeconomic  and tenurial  conflicts  under  an integrated 
management.  With social  forestry,  access to land leads  to increase in income  of households  and contribute  to 
poverty  alleviation.   
 
Studies have suggested that achieving low -carbon economic development in Indonesia may have important 
co-benefits. For example, Social Forestry Programme can provide livelihood to millions of community members 
living around forests (New Climate Economy 2014).  
 
The non- carbon benefits associated with the implementation of REDD+  activities c an be grouped into 
environmental benefits: hydro- regulation and biodiversity ; social benefits: poverty alleviation, gender 
empowerment and the promotion of human rights. The main non carbon benefits are presented below, and 
more details can be found in the Annex  XIII (h) .  
 
Hydr o-regulation : The nature and value of regulating services provided by forests are dependent on the 
characteristics of the region with respect to the type of forest, forest area, local geographic, climatic and 
socioeconomic profile etc . Typical values include  three regulating services, that is, soil erosion, carbon 
sequestration and storage and water augment . United Nations Office for REDD Coordination in Indonesia 
(UNORCID); United Nations Environment Programme (2015) showed that forestry regulating services are vital 
for the socio- economic well -being of many of Indonesia’s provinces. For example, in Central Sulawesi, the 
forest ecosystem valuation study shows that one hectare of forest prevents soil erosion equivalent to 6,538 
kg/ha/year, which, also considering soil nutrient loss due to surface run- off, translates to an avoided cost of 
approximately USD 30 per hectare of forest in a year. This ‘avoided cost’ provides a significant argument in 
favor of increasing investments in forest protection, as failing to do so will diminish soil quality and considerably 
reduce agricultural yields.  
 
Biodiversity:  Indonesia’s forests indeed provide considerable economic, social, and environmental benefits 
for the people of Indonesia (Ministry of Forestry, 2009). Biodiversity plays a huge role in food security, human 
health and livelihoods, providing clean water, timber, medicinal plants and other important services. Biodiversity 
also enhances community resilience to climate change impacts and contributes to carbon sequestration and 
climate change mitigation.  The project activities will directly support biodiversity conservation through improved 
sustainable forest management , including  – but not restricted to – protected areas (i.e. Conservation FMUs).  
 
Species diversity has been reported in the 4th National Biodiversity Report, especially the number of plant 
species that positions Indonesia in the world big five. Of this species, 55% are endemic plants. In the diversity 
of fauna, about 12% of the world mammals (515 species) occur in Indonesia. Recent status of Indonesia 
biodivers ity (LIPI, 2014) showed that the number of documented species diversity consisted of 1,500 species 
of algae, sporophytic plant such as 80,000 species of fungi, 595 species lichen, 2,197 species fern, and 
spermatophytes plant 30,000 –  40,000 species. These numbers contribute to 15. 5% of total world flora, 
meanwhile fauna consists of 8157 species of vertebrates; mammal, bird, reptile and amphibian and fish; and 
invertebrates, 1900 species of butterflies that contributes to 10 % of the world species.  
 
Social benefits -  Integrating Sustainable Development (Co -benefits) 
To effectively address the underlying causes of the drivers of deforestation, this project will contribute to a 
broader sustainable development agenda. Output 2 of the project with the implementation of decentralized 
sustainable forest governance with operationalization of Forest Management Units and implementation of 
Social Forestry Programmes will have benefits beyond reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation.  It is est imated that around 200,000 households will benefit from the project’s support to the Social 
Forestry Programme.  
 
Across Indonesia, more than 74 percent of the poor depend on ecosystem services for their basic livelihoods. 
Depletion of these services would thus, have dramatic effects on the livelihoods of the poor, whilst widening 
the national inequality gap. For instance, in East Nusa Tenggara, bearing in mind that 80 percent of the 
population is involved in the agricultural sector, a continued degradation  of forests will deplete key regulating 
services for agriculture, which could particularly affect the rural poor within this province and reduce their 
resilience to any unexpected climate change impacts.  
 
Poverty Alleviation


---
*Page 60*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 57 OF 80 
 
 
 
According to the World Bank, out of a population of around 264 million, about 25.9 million Indonesians still live 
below the poverty line. Based on March 2018 data, approximately 20.19% of the entire population remains 
vulnerable of falling into poverty, as their income hovers marginally above the national poverty line.  Effective 
management of forest relies on communities and households to use the forest efficiently given the reliance on 
forests for livelihoods, nutrition and food security. Understanding the co- benefits provides i ncentives to 
communities to manage the forests better. Against this setting, social forestry or community -based forestry has 
become an important feature of forest management in the region.  
 
To alleviate poverty in Indonesia, Government of Indonesia committ ed to increase areas managed by 
communities from only 1% of the total forest in Indonesia as at 2016 to 12.7 million ha (30%). Between 2016 
and 2018, 1.25 million hectares of land has been allocated to communities to involve in forest management 
and recogn ized in economic cycle of Indonesia. The increase in income expected f rom this project  will be about 
$1.48 million benefit per annum.  
 
Gender empowerment : Due to insecure rights to land, forest and tree resources, discrimination and a bias 
towards providing services to males rather than females (Gurung and Quesada 2009, Bandiaky -Badji and Tiani 
2010, Mwangi et al. 2011) REDD+ may undermine women’s capacity t o adapt to climate change (The World 
Bank et al. 2009, Demetriades and Esplen 2010).  
 
Indonesia has adopted a variety of policy tools to mainstream gender issues into broader policy considerations. 
For example, Presidential Instructions No 9/2000 and No 3/2010 promote gender mainstreaming and inclusive 
development. Other legislative and policy measures include the National Machinery for the Advancement of 
Women (Presidential Decree of 1978), the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence against Women 
and Law No 12/2003 under which each political party should consider appointing 30% of female candidates in 
general elections. Pursuant to the 1960 Basic Agrarian law No 5, women may own land and have access to 
loans. The National Development Plan (2005- 2025), furthermore, identifies gender mainstreaming as a target. 
However, legislative efforts are often confronted with local practices and are in contradiction with the other two 
sources of law in Indonesia, customary law and religious law which may so metimes detrimentally affect women.  
 
The project includes a gender action plan that seeks to ensure activities implemented will use a gender -
responsive approach, and not exacerbate gender gaps , but instead, contribute to empower ing wom en. 
 
Human Rights : The benefits relating to human rights, including the right of participation in decision making, the 
collective rights on ancestral lands, the right to self -selection and the right to free, prior and informed 
consultation, are detailed in the Enviro nmental  and Social Assessment in Annex XIII ( i). 
 
D. Investment Framework  
Describe in this section how the proposed REDD -plus results -based programme aligns with each of the 
criteria of the Investment Framework  for the activities that lead to the achieved results  for the full period over 
which the results being submitted in this proposal were achieved.  
D.1. Impact potential  
Describe the potential of the programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result s 
areas . 
 
With 95. 3 million ha of forests in 2016, Indonesia is the country with the third largest tropical forest cover  in the 
world,  after Brazil and DRC . The UNFCCC technically assessed FREL ranges f rom 572.4 MtCO2e/yr  for 2014 
to 582.8 MtCO2e /yr for 2017, while  implementation of the multiple policies described in section C has already 
led to emission reductions of 244,892,137 tCO 2 eq as the total for 2013– 2017 . This  indicates  that the emission 
reductions from the implementation of the STRANAS  have been and will continue to be very significant . 
 
It is important to note that attribution of reduced emissions from deforestation to a single policy or measure is 
flawed for multiple reasons. From a conceptual standpoint, there is not always a direct and linear relationship 
between a specific project component and emissions reductions. Rather, emission reductions result from a 
series of interrelationships of different enabling policies (e.g. moratorium) and direct investments made in the 
field (e.g. subsidies to farmer). Furthermore, individual policies and measures can pose a risk of displacement. 
For example, implementation of the moratorium without accompanying measures could simply displace 
emissions outside of the areas it cover s while  cancelling off the mitigation effects.


---
*Page 61*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 58 OF 80 
 
 
 
From a technical standpoi nt it is extremely challenging to estimate displacement of emissions as recognized 
by the FCPF methodological framework17. Furthermore, it is very challenging to achieve full consistency 
between GHG estimation approaches at national level versus project sca le because sampling design and 
intensity usually differ at national versus project scale. For example, an emission factor based on national scale, 
may be applied at the local level but will not necessarily be representative at that scale given that the sta tistical 
design to gather that data was designed to ensure significance at the national scale. Indonesia deals with these 
conceptual and technical issues by implementing REDD + on a national scale. Having a national FREL and 
national forest monitoring systems allows to account for all possible displacements within the national territory 
and avoids consistency issues across scale by focusing on ensuring that REDD + results can be measured, 
reported and verified at the national scale in line with UNFCCC require ments outlined in the Warsaw 
Framework.  
 
STRANAS is a multifaceted initiative to achieve results at the national scale. Indonesia uses many sources of 
financing, including its own budget , to implement it . With multiple partners supporting multiple activities and 
due to the challenges mentioned above, it is not possible to directly attribute emission reductions to any single 
investment or to a specific actions/component. Rather, each funding source have made a contribution 
alongside many others. This  reality is acknowledged by international REDD + experts18 and it is also  consistent 
with the current GCF PMF which notes that indicator: “ 4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) 
reduced or avoided (including increased removals) as a result of Fund- funded projects/programmes – should 
be Informed by CIF FIP Indicator 1, pending Fund work on the performance framework for REDD+, the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility Methodological Framework (Dec. 2013), UN REDD and emerging United Nations 
Framework Conv ention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) guidance on REDD+.”  
 
As per the UNFCCC Warsaw Framework for REDD+ , the amount of emission reductions that Indonesia will 
achieve by implementing its various policies and measures relevant to REDD+  during the implementation of 
these proceeds  (2020- 2023), will be known once either the BUR with the REDD+ technical annex  or the 
Biennial Transparency Reports (BTRs)  are submitted to the UNFCCC, in  2022  or 2024  and  2026, respectively . 
These results will be compared with FREL- 2. This information will be published on the Lima REDD+  Information 
Hub on the REDD+  Web Platform, in accordance with UNFCCC decision 9/CP.19.  
 
The UNFCCC Warsaw framework for REDD+  does not require, nor provide a methodology for, attribution of  
emission reductions to a specific measure or action or donor. Furthermore, attribution of national emission 
reductions to a single measure, a single project or a single funding source can be flawed because of the risk 
of displacement associated with any sub- national implementation of REDD+ . Indonesia  avoids this risk by 
implementing REDD+  at the national scale, instead of through isolated sub- national projects.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
Describe the d egree to which the REDD -plus activity catalyse d impact beyond a one -off programme 
investment . 
The successful implementation of policies and measures for REDD+ identified in STRANAS or stem ming from 
it (incl. social forestry) , and the achievement of measurable and reportable results generated a paradigm shift 
by building confidence in UNFCCC processes through the demonstration that Indonesia’s completion of the 
requirements of the Warsaw Framework for REDD+ in terms o f tCO 2e can indeed be rewarded by REDD+ 
results -based payments. This is an essential signal to policy makers and their constituencies that pursuing 
REDD+ is not i ncompatible with economic growth but rather a shift towards a greener economy, and that this 
enables financial inflows that incentivize and further support that shift towards low -emissions development.  
In addition, Indonesia would be the first country outside Latin America to access REDD+ RBPs under the 
UNFCCC, which would represent a strong signal that this is feasible also for countries from other regions, and 
in particular those from Asia- Pacific.  
 
The implementation of REDD+ a ctivities in Indonesia contributed to developing an approach that could be 
replicated in many other countries currently engaged in REDD+ around the world. Indeed, to build confidence 
that UNFCCC REDD+ results can make a significant contribution to climate mitigation efforts it is necessary 
for (1) developing countries to gain confidence that they can meet the requirements of the UNFCCC process 
in order to rapidly obtain and receive RBPs, and (2) for the international community to gain confidence in the 
 
17 The FCPF in its methodological framework states that “ ER Programs should seek to minimize and mitigate displacement 
outside the Accounting Area to the extent possible via design of the ER Program. However, due to accounting and 
attribution challenges and f ollowing UNFCCC guidance on REDD+, potential displacement should not have to be 
accounted for or deducted from the ERs credited to ER Programs ”. 
18 See the final report of the Working Group on Scaling Up Performance-Based Transfers for Reduced Tropical 
Deforestation- working group suggestion p.18 https://www.cgdev. org/sites/default/files/look -forests -web -10-15 -15.pdf )


---
*Page 62*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 59 OF 80 
 
 
 
quality of results coming through the UNFCCC process through REDD+ implementation (including the Warsaw 
Framework for REDD+).  
 
At a country and territorial level, Indonesia’s implementation of STRANAS has already and directly contributed 
to a paradigm shift of  reducing deforestation and dependency of natural resources’ exploitation and contributed 
to setting an ambitious forest -sector target into the NDC. Further implementation of STRANAS, including 
through these RBPs, will enable Indonesia to remain on its pat h towards a decarbonized economy, while 
enhancing community and biodiversity co- benefits.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development potential  
Describe the wider benefits and priorities, including environmental, social and economic . 
The implementation of STRANAS contributed and will continue to contribute to create an enabling environment 
to sustainable development by achieving systemic change at the local, national and hopefully international 
levels, and by including social, economic and environmental co- benefits into the proposed paradigm shift, such 
as protection of forests, of biodiversity, of the rights and indigenous peoples and local communities, including 
their ancestral and cultural heritage sites, of watersheds, etc. All the policies and measures prioritized in 
STRANAS have and will directly contribute to limit and reduce greenhouse gas emissions from LULUCF in the 
context of promoting sustainable development.  As such, Indonesia will contribute to meeting the Sustainable 
Development Goals  (SDG) , specifically SDG 1  on poverty, SDG 5 on gender equality , SDG 13 on climate 
action and SDG 15 on life on land.  
 
STRANAS does highlight the importance attributed to “ the creation of additional benefits along with reduced 
emissions: ( a) Improvement of local people’s welfare, ( b) Improved preservation of biodiversity and 
(c) Improved protection for other ecosystem services ”.  
 
As mentioned in section C.2.1, the Social Forestry programme and Forest Management Units , two flagship 
government programmes.  have represent ed and still  represent ambitious and major positive disruptions in the 
way land and natural resources have been managed in Indonesia, and particularly in the role given to 
communities in sustainable forest management.  Both programmes consecrate (i)  the decentralization of land 
and natural resources management to better take local circumstances  into account , (ii) the importance of multi -
stakeholders consultations and participatory processes in the sustainable planning and management of 
resources, to prevent and/or mitigate conflicts across sectors and users, (iii)  the importance of supporting viable 
livelihood options for local communities, building on the sustainable management of the land and forest 
resources. The social forestry progr amme, very complementary to the FMU programme, goes a step further 
into formalizing access and/or ownership rights  from local communities and indigenous people to forest 
resources and land, providing predictability and security over these resources and the terms of their use.  
 
Activities implemented in these programmes, as more widely all policies and measures from STRANAS, have 
strong positive impact not only on the preservation and restoration of environmental services such as carbon 
storage, but also soil preservation, water regulation, among others . In turn, t hese ecosystem services are key 
to sustain Indonesia’s key economic sectors and enhance their resilience to climate shocks, and in particular 
agriculture, which represents the main livelihood for a large part of the population and the second biggest 
source of employment.  
 
See also section C.2.6 on non- carbon benefits for a description of the nature, scale and importance of the 
project’s wider benefits.  
 
D.4. Needs of the recipient  
Describe the v ulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population . 
 
Thanks to a steady economic expansion and helpful government policies, poverty rates and inequality are 
falling  in Indonesia, and access to public services is broadening. Economic growth has been solid at around 
5% per year since 2013, driven by consumption but also, more recently, by much- needed infrastructure 
investment . The deficit rule is containing the growth of debt , but additional spending on infrastructure, health 
and social assistance is limited by low revenues. Though in June 2019 the World Bank was projecting a GDP 
growth at 5.1% overall  2019 with a recovery to 5.2% in 2020, the potential for “severe” capital outflows as global 
risks including the US -China trade war intensify  may act ually compromise this and even lead to a reverse trend.  
 
As mentioned in Indonesia’s second Biennial Update Report, the conservative estimation on financial 
needs from 2018- 2030 to meet the overall conditional target by 2030 is estimated to be about 
USD  247 billion . The estimation is based on projected financial needs using existing public climate financing


---
*Page 63*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 60 OF 80 
 
 
 
(government expenditure) added with estimated financial needs for specific interventions in waste and industrial 
processes and product use  (IPPU ) sectors which would normally be done by the private sectors.   
 
These combined estimat es build the baseline numbers which are used to estimate the projected unit cost of 
emission reduction in each sector. The financial needs are partially developed from disbursed government 
expenditure from 2012 to 2016 which is filtered for climate specific  activities  (MOEF , 2017; MEMR, 2018).   
 
 
Sector  Financial 
needs  
(billion IDR)  Financial 
needs  
(billion USD)  Mitigation policies and programs  
Forest 
and Land 
use 77,824  5.557  Forest conservation/protection programs and forest and 
land fire prevention and suppression1. Expected 
emission reduction in 2030 from the BAU is 650 million 
tons CO2  
Table 8: Estimated financial needs specific to the Forest and land use sector over the 2018- 2030 period.  
 
As mentioned in section C.2.1, the Medium -Term Development Plan (RPJM) for 2015- 2019 aimed to 
complete 100% of forest demarcation, establish and make operational 629 FMUs , and foster social forestry 
partnerships across 12.7 million hectares (including customary holdings).  Though the implementation of social 
forestry has been strongly accelerated, only 3.4 million hectares of forests  had been distributed  for social 
forestry by October  2019  (i.e. 9.3 million hectares remaining) . And while 531 FMUs have been officially 
established nationwide (2018) , covering a total area of about 83 million hectares  (i.e. nearly  the entirety of the  
forest estate), much remains to be done in terms of operationalizing these FMUs.  
 
 
D.5. Country ownership  
Describe the beneficiary country ownership of, and capacity to implement a funded project or programme 
(policies, climate strategies and institutions) . 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry is the national environment authority in charge of designing 
environmental policies and coordinating strategies,  projects and projects for the conservation of ecosystems 
and the sustainable use of natural resources.  It proposes and defines the rules to ensure adequate 
environmental quality, with development based on conservation and an appropriate use of biodiversit y and 
resources that belong to the country. MOEF  General Directorate of Climate Change is  the UNFCCC Focal 
Point , as well as the authority on REDD+ in Indonesia.  
 
In 2016 MO EF was managing a budget 5.95 Tr illion Rp (around USD  450 million) with an execution rate of 
82.1% .  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
Describe the economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the programme . 
REDD+  is implemented by developing countries, through policies and programs, not projects.  
 
Assurance that mitigation results have indeed been achieved is a fundamental element for a results -based  
payment scheme and is done before the resources are disbursed.  
 
Result -based payments are a new modality of climate finance through which resources are received ex -post 
for mitigation results achieved in the past, like payments for environmental services. Developing countries 
willing to receive payments for REDD + resul ts must submit their FRL/ FREL to undergo an assessment by two 
LULUCF experts appointed by the UNFCCC. This evaluation process is conducted annually, following the 
procedures set out by decision 13/CP.19. The mitigation results will be measured  against thi s reference level 
and reported on a Technical Annex to the BUR. This Technical Annex also includes the REDD+ activities 
selected by the developing country, the calculation of results, information on the national forest monitoring 
system, institutional roles, among other information.  
 
The processes for assessing the FRL/FREL (decision 13/CP.19) and for Measuring, Reporting and Verifying 
(MRV) of REDD+ results (decision 14/CP.19) are essential to reduce uncertainties and to provide  an adequate 
level of confid ence in the system, with a view to attract scaled- up investments. This approach assures the 
highest level of efficiency and effectiveness to forest initiatives. Countries will aim to achieve the highest 
possible level of results, so that they can receive m ore payments/ financial resources, therefore  efficient.


---
*Page 64*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 61 OF 80 
 
 
 
Because payments will only be made for fully MRVed results, the mitigation impact is guaranteed  before the 
resources are disbursed, and, therefore, effective.  
E. Compliance with GCF policies  
Describe how the REDD -plus results -based programme that generated the results submitted in this proposal 
or will be supported with the proceeds earned by them aligns with GCF policies for the activities that led to 
the achieved results and for the use of proc eeds.  
E.1. Environmental and social safeguards  
E.1.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Summarize the main findings of the  environmental and social assessment (ESA) report describing the extent 
to which the measures undertaken to identify, assess, and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, 
in the context of the REDD -plus proposal, were consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS 
standards. This supplements information about  the country’s own assessment as to how the Cancun 
safeguards were addressed and respected in the REDD -plus activities.  
 
The ESA report annexed to this FP  describes the extent to which the measures undertaken to identify, assess, 
and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, in the context of the REDD -plus proposal, were 
consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS standards. The ESA found general consistency 
with the GCF ESS standards (see A nnex XIII (i)  for the full report).  
 
The ESA concluded that the Social Forestry and Moratorium initiatives which contributed to the emission 
reductions for which results based payments were requested, were implemented in a context of a substantial 
set of underlying PLRs and project measures and activities that were aligned with the principles and standards 
of the UNDP SES and consequently the Cancun Safeguards, though improvements were still needed and in 
many respects, already being initiated or otherwise accommodated in the design of future projects.    
 
Collectively, the two initiatives sought to protect forests and biodiversity from deforestation and degradation; 
respect the human rights of  communities, Villages and Adat communities to participate in forest management; 
provide for their livelihoods; and empower their own traditional institutions.  This was done by directly prohibiting 
third parties from securing new exploitation rights in th e lands upon which they depend for their physical and 
cultural survival; further guarant eeing rights of use, access, participation and/or land titles to collectives over 
forest resources; and overall improving forest management and governance, including th e mechanisms to 
systematically monitor and report on social and environmental impacts, and to resolve land tenure conflicts and 
other grievances arising from these and other REDD+ activities.  In each case, through the exclusion in whole 
or part of those t hat might otherwise seek economic exploitation of the forest resources, greater swaths of 
forests were protected and an enabling environment was initiated for forest dependent communities to be 
included, rather than marginalized from the management of thei r forests.  
 
It is further acknowledged that on their face, both initiatives had the combined pure purpose of protecting forests 
and peatlands and recognizing local community rights to equitably benefit from and participate (or lead) in 
forest management. C ivil society and in large part, the Government of Indonesia, have highlighted that while 
the objectives and targets of these initiatives, particularly Social Forestry, were and are ambitious, more needs 
to be done.  Documenting the improvements in implementation that have occurred in just a short period of time 
(including during the ESA review period) and observing that the continued multi -stakeholder support for both 
of these initiatives remains strong, the ESA review concluded that these two initiatives w arrant the latitude 
needed for all parties to keep improving the project’s delivery as well as its alignment with applicable social and 
environmental standards.  Having seen the planned RBP project (components and activities) and its 
accompanying Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the ESA concluded that it is 
possible for the both initiatives to fully realize their potential through the transparent, participatory, and well -
funded application of the PLR reforms and mitigation measures reco mmended in the ESA and the subsequently 
drafted, robust ESMF.  In this context, both initiatives and the RBP components and activities building upon 
them can be implemented in full alignment with the UNDP SES and consequently, the Cancun Safeguards.  
 
E.1.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient information describing how environmental and social risks and impacts will be 
identified, screened, assessed and managed in a manner consistent with the GCF’s ESS standards, including 
the determination of the relevant environmental and social risk category of the proposed activities and the 
appropriate environmental and social assessment tools and management plans.   
 
UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards (SES) were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and 
deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit ‘low’ and ‘moderate’ risks projects. The overall social and


---
*Page 65*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 62 OF 80 
 
 
 
environmental risk category for this project is Moderate, with elements that can present high risks only if 
mitigation measures are not implemented.  
  
The RBP, its components and activities were the subject of an ESMF providing an assessment of the social 
and environmental risks as well as the needed associated mitigation measures based on: (i) an earlier Social 
and Environmental S creening Process (SESP), (ii) a consultative process realized to date with government 
parties, (iii) third party analysis of the core REDD+ activities undertaken thus far, (iv) as well as recent interviews 
with key stakeholder s. 
 
As recommended by the ESMF , further impact assessment and management measures will be needed in order 
to manage risks effectively throughout project implementation. The first steps during project inception will be to 
conduct a participatory and comprehensive environmental and socia l impact assessment (ESIA). This will be 
carried out by experts and will involve research, consultations, field work, stakeholder engagement and 
management planning. In this way the findings and recommendations of the ESMF will be further clarified and 
finalized in an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIA will cover the activities planned 
by the project and provide a way forward for future assessments if and as new activities are developed 
consistent with the project’s approved outputs. Benefits and risks pertaining to project activities will be assessed 
(such as those related to Social Forestry and forest management planning at the local level, overall governance, 
stakeholder inclusion, rights over resources, and equitable benefit sharin g). An indicative outline of the intended 
content of the ESIA report can be found in the Annexure 2 to the ESMF  (Annex VI (b)). It will be modified 
accordingly before being attached to the expert’s terms of reference.  
 
The preliminary findings and conclusi ons of the annexed ESMF will be reviewed again based on the findings 
of the ESIA and as appropriate, modifications will be made to the final ESMP and its associated management 
plans.  At present, the preliminary findings of the ESMF concludes that the foll owing management plans will be 
needed: A Stakeholder Engagement Plan, a Biodiversity Action Plan, a Gender Action Plan, a Cultural Heritage 
Management Plan, a Livelihood Action Plan and an Adat Communities  Plan.  A preliminary Gender Assessment 
and Action Plan is already included in the annex to this FP. Indicative outlines for the other plans are attached 
in the ESMF’s annex.  Since they are occurring after project approval, to ensure effective resource use and 
maximum relevancy, it will be expected that the ESIA consultants not only confirm (and modify or make more 
precise, as necessary) the existing risk assessments and recommended avoidance/mitigation measure, but 
also will present management plans that practica lly assist in operationalizing and implementing the avoidance 
and mitigation measures in the context of a range of thematic matters (i.e. governance, stakeholder 
participation, Adat community  rights, grievance mechanisms, monitoring and reporting, etc.).   
 
The ESMF also reviewed the existing national grievance redress mechanism ( GRM  or FGRM ) hosted by the 
MOEF  and intended to be a guide and anchor to the project -level grievance mechanism to be developed with 
stakeholders.  Based on these consultations, UND P guidance on GRMs, and the widely accepted eight 
“effectiveness criteria” for non- judicial GRMs19, the project -level GRM will be developed for the RBP project, 
and will complement and be linked to the national GRM, including its tracking system, its capaci ty to feed into 
the SI S-REDD+, lessons learned, and real time modifications to project activities in response such lessons 
learned.  
 
The execution of the ESIA and the ESMP implementation will be led by the Ministry of Finance (with the 
technical support of  the MOEF ) and overseen by UNDP. Consistent with UNDP SESP requirements, no 
activities that may cause adverse social and environmental impacts will proceed until the ESIA has been 
completed and per the ESMP, adoption of appropriate mitigation and management measures are completed. 
Additionally, as evidenced by the ESMF and the newly applicable Performance Based Payment Modality,  
budget disbursements are scheduled to incentivize and ensure timely completion of all social and 
environmental risk measures –including the prompt completion of the ESIA, the review and modification (as 
needed) of the ESMF, the development of the associated ESMP and management plans, and the adoption and 
readiness of all recommended mitigation measures.  
 
The Project Management Unit ( PMU) will include an environmental and social safeguards expert. The PMU 
will be responsible for the daily activities around monitoring and implementation of the ESMP and its associated 
management plans. This team will be dedicated to the formulation and f ollow -up of these frameworks (including 
their post -ESIA re -evaluation) and to the bi -yearly evaluation of these actions with oversight from the Project 
Board. Roles will be designated across stakeholder groups such as Adat communities, civil society groups , 
local governments and FMUs at the Provincial and District level. As the national SIS -REDD+ is strengthened, 
relevant information generated through the ESMP will be received, incorporated as appropriate, and made 
 
19 See Principle 31 of the guiding principles found at,  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Guiding_ Princ iples_on_  
Business_and_Human_Rights


---
*Page 66*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 63 OF 80 
 
 
 
public. Through the respective roles of MoF, MOEF  and other relevant stakeholders  (i.e. the PMU, FMUs, and 
other local implementers), the project will also be called upon to monitor and produce reports on how it has 
respected and addressed social and environmental safeguards for a Summary of Information (SOI). This 
information will fir st appear in Indonesia’s second SOI. 
 
E.1.3. Consultations with stakeholders  
Provide adequate and sufficient information on the consultations undertaken with all the relevant stakeholders, 
describing who are the identified stakeholders, what the issues and concerns raised and how these are 
responded to and considered in the proposed activities. Information on the stakeholder engagement plan or 
framework will also need to be provided, describing how the activities will continue to engage the stakeholders, 
further consultations, communication and outreach, and process for grievance re dress.     
 
Incorporate by reference, responses to C.1.2.  
 
Continued engagement of stakeholders throughout the life cycle of the RBP project is of utmost importance. 
This is mandated by law, consistent with Indonesia’s STRANAS, made possible based on:  
 
(i) the number of multi -stakeholder forums already in place t o facilitate such engagements;  
(ii) the project’s intention to strengthen the FMUs (which carry out outreach and support activities to local 
communities, Villages and Adat communities, as well as local governments (see Activity2.1)) and provide for 
the continuous updating and further development of the overall REDD+ architecture and its various monitoring 
and reporting mechanisms that will depend on stakeholder cooperation and participation (particularly the SIS -
REDD+ (see Output 1));  
(iii) the strengthen ing of local access to a grievance mechanism; and  
(iv) the overall emphasis on strengthening the Social Forestry programme which has the express function of 
bringing stakeholders within forest management (specifically local communities, Villages and Adat 
communities).  
 
In terms of participation, the Forest Law  provides that “(1) Community shall take part in the forestry 
development. (2) Government shall be obligated to encourage community participation through various 
effective and efficient forestry activities.” Following on this commitment, Indonesia’s National REDD+ Strategy  
(STRANAS) contains a section 2.2.5.1. entitled “Interaction and Strategies for Stakeholder Participation” and it 
provides for the “[]identification and mapping of stakeholders, including an understanding of who among them 
will be most affected either positively or negatively.” In 2013, through a very participatory process (as described 
above), the PC&Is were developed and they provided a broad definition of stakeholder to cover “[a]ny person, 
group of persons or entity that is or is likely to be subject to the effects of the activities of the REDD+ Unit. 
Examples include but are not restricted to (for example in the case of downstream landowners), persons, 
groups of persons or entities located in the neighbourhood of the REDD+ Unit.”  
 
Consistent with the above, and as reported in section C.1.2, the STRANAS itself was developed in the context 
of an ample stakeholder participatory process, as well as the SIS -REDD+, the PC&Is, and the APP S tool which 
will be used to actively monitor social and environmental impacts so as to influence decision- makers about 
project implementation and inform the public of public of project operations.  
 
To further increase the information available to stakeholders,  the GoI has developed, apart from the SIS -
REDD+ system, no less than 10 portals/information systems  that facilitate the sharing of information between 
the national and sub- national governments as well as local communities.  These are each listed in Indonesia’s 
most recent Summary of Information (SOI).  
 
At sub national level, each of the eleven REDD+ pilot provinces, have set up an Ad-Hoc REDD+ institution  
to coordinate REDD+ activities in the province, taking the form of a Working Group, a Task Force, or a 
Commission. These ad hoc institutions are intended to count with multi -stakeholder membership consisting of 
representatives of local governments and other related stakeholders, including local NGOs and 
academia/universities representatives.  
 
Indonesia als o has developed and promoted three types of spaces for dialogue, these were: the Forestry 
Observers Forum, National Forestry Council, and the Social Forestry Task Force (SF Taskforce).  Each of 
these will continue to operate during the period of the RBP Pr oject. The Forest Observers Forum is a 
collaborative decision making stipulated in article 70 of the Forestry Law. The National Forestry Council 
accommodates the existence of this institution.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 64 OF 80 
 
 
 
The Social Forestry Task Force (SF Taskforce) itself was esta blished per Regulation from the Directorate 
General of Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership of the MOEF  (No. P. 14(2016).  These are multi -
stakeholder bodies that exist at the provincial level and, among other tasks, is charged with socializing the 
Social Forestry Programme at the community, Village and Adat level; facilitating community and Village 
applications for the categories of Social Forestry benefits; observing the PIAPS (indicative mapping of the 
Social Forestry area), institutional capacity building, expanding and marketing Social Forestry enterprises, 
facilitating conflicts related to tenure and Hutan Adat (customary forests) in accordance with existing laws, and 
following various communication and reporting protocols.  
 
In addition, the online SIS -REDD+ platform that will provide the public and project proponents and 
implementers with information about compliance with safeguards, among other things.  The SIS- REDD+ 
communicates both way with stakeholders, those responsibl e for reporting on safeguard compliance register 
and submit periodic reports. Others can also log on and access information uploaded as part of the SIS -REDD+ 
information flow. The MOEF  also hosts a national GRM platform in which any stakeholder can downloa d a 
complaint and file a grievance, as well as access information about grievances received, the status of the 
complaint process, and a description of the category of complaint (i.e. related to tenure conflict). In terms of the 
national GRM, it is further provided that a project -level GRM will be established that will be linked directly to 
the national GRM. Forest Partnership Agreements, and licenses and permits issued by the Social Forestry 
programme also will include dispute resolution provisions.  
 
One recalls as well the Social Forestry Programme  (Activity 2.2) depends on the willing and informed 
participation of multiple stakeholders, including local communities, Villages and Adat Communities, as well as 
a number of private actors with business licenses seeking to enter into partners with local communities. The 
FMUs and other local government actors and civil society representatives participate in searching out 
geographic areas and local populations that might be interested in use and access to forest res ources and 
participation in forest management. When these collectives receive licenses, permits, agreement arrangements 
and titles, these come with obligations to be active participants – including with respect to monitoring.  FMU’s 
are also charged with ensuring participation of local actors (representatives of government, civil society, private 
sector, and collectives holding and claiming forest resources rights) in the development of forest management 
plans.  
 
There is also the work carried out by the Soci al Forestry teams (including land tenure investigations) (see 
Decree No. 83 on Social Forestry),  which contemplate the need for engagement with stakeholders. For 
instance, MOEF  has introduced Social Forestry Acceleration Working Groups, comprising Ministry  officers, 
NGOs, practitioners at national and provincial levels to support community engagement  and access to the 
Social Forestry programme benefits . To further support these working groups, multi -stakeholder platforms with 
balanced gender and social group representations, at relevant governance levels, will be established to provide 
inputs on among others, socio- cultural, biophysical, economic contexts, as well as support socialization for the 
program. The role of facilitators is also considered indispens able to achieve the objectives and targets for the 
Social Forestry programme to be strengthened as part of the RBP project. As such, trained facilitators 
supported through Activity 1.2 will be mobilized to support the governance structures such as the Soci al 
Forestry Acceleration Working Groups, multi -stakeholder platforms; support conflict management and build 
entrepreneurial partnerships.  
 
In terms of the STRANAS,  free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is provided for at section 2.2.2.2(3) providing 
that “Harmonization and revision of natural resources management regulations and policies to ensure the 
principle and processes of Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (F PIC) are internalized in the issuance of all 
permits for the exploitation of natural resources.” , but calls on the State to carry out processes for FPIC, though 
when defined and applied in practice, it appears to be more akin to FPI  Consultation . This is i nterpreted as 
securing broad community support. For instance, the Strategy’s Section 2.2.5.2(1) provides that the “[t]he 
application of this protocol [on FPIC] involves consultation with the relevant indigenous peoples, local 
communities, and other members  of the public affected by the implementation of REDD+ 
programs/projects/activities”. The same strategy also provides at 2.2.5.2 that “Consultation is based on 
complete, balanced, honest, unbiased, and easily understood information concerning the alternati ves and 
choices existing for the public within the implementation of REDD+ activities, along with the consequences of 
each alternative choice. This information is meant to create leeway for broad consensus, with all parties having 
access to existing opport unities.”  
 
Going forward, it has been clarified in the ESMF and intended for implementation, the need to further develop 
when and how FPIC (with consent) is applied in the context of REDD+ activities, in particular the development 
of forest management plan s where the subject lands include local community, Village and Adat forests, and all 
titling and process involving the granting of use and access rights.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 65 OF 80 
 
 
 
The recommendation/mitigation measure on consultation and consent provided by the ESMF for the RBP 
Project going forward is only one of several measures designed to increase stakeholder participation and 
engagement. Others include, increased capacity and training (including a Capacity and Training Committee to 
identify needs and Safeguards training), the development of a communications strategy (and communications 
committee), the establishment of a implementation of a Stakeholder Participation Plan and an Adat Community 
Plan (indicative outlines  for the same are already provided for by the ESMF to be further developed by the 
ESIA consultants), the establishment of a Transparency Working Group, inclusive participation of Stakeholders 
in the Project Board (including Adat communities and other Collectives in decision- making and advisory 
bodies), and a review o f existing Multi- stakeholder platforms to identify ways for strengthening and/or the 
establishment of additional mechanisms.  
 
As a form of monitoring stakeholder, the Social Forestry Programme  will also continue tracking annually the 
“number of networks and partners (civil society organizations, business sector, higher education institutions, 
legislators through the environmental and forestry caucus, and other institutions) that partake in building natural 
resources and ecosystem and environmenta l rescue communities”.  Such networks and partners have 
continued to increase every year and it is planned that such expansion will continue.    
 
E.2. Risk assessment  
E.2.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide adequate and sufficient information that allows for an assessment of the historical performance of the 
activities undertaken and their track record against the risk tolerance levels specified in the Risk Appetite 
Statement and the criteria outlined in the Risk Guidelines for Funding Proposals.   
Please note that you should consider only the applicable  and relevant parts of the two above documents to the 
feedback you provide.  
 
Indonesia is presenting emission reductions resulting from a combination of policy and programmatic 
interventions  set out in its REDD+ implement ation (See Table 4 in Section C.2.1) . While it is not possible to 
directly attribute these results  to particular policies or programmes due to a complex set of direct and in direct 
political, social, economic and environmental factors, Indonesia,  has referred to the Forest Moratorium policy 
and the Social Forestry Programme as main contributors . Recognising the significant mitigation contribution 
from the moratorium, i.e. 200 million tonnes of CO2eq by 2030, the latest Instruction of the President No. 5 
2019  has made this permanent by not including an end date.  
 
In the same token, the President has prioritized the Social Forestry Programme as evidenced through a 
dedicated high- level unit , Directorate General of Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership in the Ministry 
of Environment and Forestry . It has, among others,  introduced Social Forestry Acceleration Working Groups 
at both national and provincial levels  as well as facilitators to support activities on- the-ground.  
 
To ensure a sustained performance, Indonesia is regularly updating the Moratorium and Social Forestry 
indicative maps to ensure the protection of community and Adat’s rights in the planning of  forest resources. 
Parallel to the indicative Social Forestry map , Indonesia also launched an indicative Adat customary forests 
map which took into account customary rights of Adat community. These maps will be used to address 
overlapping claims on land.   
 
Grievance redress mechanisms have also been strengthened, for instance the Directorate General on Social 
Forestry and Environmental Partnership, in 2015 and 2016 alone, resolved conflicts covering 2,775,010 ha of 
land. Since 2017, a new web- based platform for GRMs , hosted by the Ministry of Environment and Forestry,  
allows stakeholders to file complaints online for no cost, track the same, and view information about complaints.  
 
Furthermore, Indonesia has established various instruments  to ensure t he performance of the activities 
undertaken in reducing the emission. National Registry System on Climate change, National Forest Monitoring 
System, SIGN -SMART are some of the systems established to track performance of emission reduction. 
Indonesia is als o accelerating the process of systematization and harmonization of forest governance through 
the One Map Policy . This initiative is also a priority under National Movement on Natural Resources Rescue 
(Gerakan Nasional Penyelamatan Sumberdaya Alam – GNPSDA)  administered by Anti -Corruption 
Commission (Komisi Pemberantasan Korupsi –  KPK)  
   
Moreover, transparency and performance assessment can also be done through SIS- REDD+ and MOEF  
grievance online platforms ( http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/sisredd/  and http://pengaduan.menlhk.go.id ) 
respectively. As for ensuring transparent, accurate, consistent, comparative and comprehensive (TACCC) 
MRV implementation, Indonesia has established modalities for National MRV System, which included:


---
*Page 69*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 66 OF 80 
 
 
 
• National MRV Scheme (Ministerial Regulation No 72/2017; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/permen/P72.pdf )  
• Registry System (Ministerial Regulation No 71/2017; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/permen/P71.pdf )  
• Guideline for MRV REDD+ (Annex of Ministerial Regulation No 70/2017; 
http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/reddplus/images/adminppi/dokumen/P.70.pdf ) 
• MRV team under DG CC Regulation Number SK.8/PPI -IGAS/2015.  
 
An environmental and social assessment of the Forest Moratorium and the Social Forestry Programme for the 
results period can be found in Annex XIII ( I).  
 
 
E.2.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient information that details how the plan for the use of proceeds does not violate 
the risk tolerance levels specified in the Risk Appetite Statement and allows for performance monitoring and 
evaluation against the criteria outlined in the Risk Guidelines for Funding Proposals.  
Please note that you should consider only the applicable and relevant parts of the two above documents to 
the feedback you provide.  
 
Regulation of engagement in prohibited practices is described in section E4.  
 
Capacity to deliver project impact:  
As mentioned in section D.1 above, there is a consensus that the  key governmental programmes to which the 
use of proceeds wi ll contribute have a strong potential to contribute to the  GCF  mitigation objectives . 
Identification of priority areas and implementation methodologies used in the implementation of this programme 
will seek to maximize climate mitigation and adaptation benefits, along with social and environmental benefits. 
Also, the application of high environmental and social safeguards will contribute to robust and long- last impact.  
 
Adequate policy and regulatory support  
As mentioned in section C.2.1, this project will contribute to  key existing national programmes which enjoy high  
political support and strong direct ownership from MOEF . These programmes are mentioned explicitly in 
multiple documents, incl. the National Medium -Term Development Plans  for 2015 -2019  and 2020 - 2024, the 
NDC and its October 2019  roadmap, the STRANAS, the RAN -GRK , and others.  
 
AE / EE capability  
As a co -executing entity, MOEF ’s experience includes the development of the National REDD+ Strategy  
(STRANAS),  of the FREL endorsed by the UNFCCC , of the SIS. The GCF project will build on MOEF ’s vast 
experience in sustainable forest management and sustainable land use programmes , including through 
community forestry schemes; rehabilitation of degraded land and peatland restoration; increasing climate 
change adaptation capacity and GHG emissions reduction . 
 
MOEF  has been the leading partner for UNDP Indonesia for decades. The collaboration ranges from advancing 
global and national biodiversity agenda, to tackling climate change mitigation and adaptation,  to enhancing 
forest governance structures and practices . UNDP Indonesia has also been working closely with the Ministry 
of Finance since the 2000s in the areas of climate and biodiversity financing and greening fiscal policy.  The 
following are the relevant projects under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry:   
• Support the establishment of Indonesia REDD+ infrastructure and capac ity. UNDP Indonesia supported 
the Directorate General of Climate Change Control in  the MOEF  who assumed the duties and functions of 
the REDD+ Agency and Indonesia Climate Change Council. The total budget wa s USD 12.6 million, 
covering 2015- 2018, which was funded by the Norway government. Besides the REDD+ infrastructure, the 
project  also support ed the implementation of social forestry, forest moratorium, and forest management 
unit. 
• Support the protection of vulnerable species , for example,  tiger in Sumatra Island and Anoa in Sulawesi 
Island , through better landscape management, community empowermen t and the effective regional 
conservation office and national parks. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) -funded project is USD 15.6 
million, from 2014- 2020, and works closely with the Directorate General for Conservation and Natural 
Resource Management.    
• Support effective law enforcement in tackling environmental and forest -related crimes and illegal wildlife 
trade through law enforcers collaboration, applying multi laws for more deterrent effect and innovative 
monitoring mechanisms, for example,  social  media and satellite tracking. The project is under Directorate


---
*Page 70*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 67 OF 80 
 
 
 
General for Law Enforcement funded by the GEF, the Norw egian  and the Australian Government s. The 
total amount is USD 11.1 million, covering 2017- 2023.   
• Support strengthening Forest Area Planning and Management in Kalimantan island. The project focuses 
on creating more effective land allocations and management of forest areas with high biodiversity and 
ecosystem services in the context of potential estate crop development in Kalimantan and part icularly in 
the Heart of Borneo (HoB) area. The project is under Directorate General for Forestry Planning and 
Environmental Governance, covering 2018- 2024. The total amount is USD 9 million.  
• Support the Second and Third National Communication to UNFCCC S ecretariat. The project is under 
Directorate General for Climate Change Control funded by GEF. UNDP Indonesia is also supporting the 
development of a full project document for strengthening sustainability in commodity and food systems, 
land restoration and land use governance through integrated landscape management for multiple benefits 
in Indonesia, funded by GEF. The total amount is USD 16 million for 2020- 2025.  
For the Ministry of Finance (Executing  Entity ), UNDP has been supporting sustainable development financing 
and biodiversity financing through climate and biodiversity budget tagging, performance- based approach, and 
green investment. The project is under fiscal policy agency with a total amount of USD 2 million.  
 
As shown in Figure 10 below, f ollowing a slow start, areas  allocated by MOEF  to social forestry in the 2015-
2019  period have  increased more than six -fold compared to the 2007- 2014  period, with a very strong, increase 
from 2017 and  especially 2018.  
 
Figure 10: Progress of social forestry programme  
Source: Direct orate General of Social Forestry and Environmental Part nerships (2019)  
 
As mentioned in Resosudarmo et al. ( 2019) , this acceleration was managed through various key measures 
among which:  
1. Streamlining multiple past regulation into one umbrella regulation 83/2016 on Social Forestry.  
2. National -wide indicative map for the allocation of social forestry  schemes.  
3. The establishment of a unit specifically responsible in overs eeing social forestry applications and 
implementation.  
4. Social forestry acceleration working groups.  
5. The development of an online system for SF applications.   
6. The provision of multiple sources of funding.  
 
This provides for strong enabling conditions for r obust progress in the coming years.  In order to further 
contribute to this, the project integrates in Output 1 enabling activities aimed at addressing known remaining 
bottlenecks, such as the availability of  a sufficient number of trained facilitators to support local actors on the 
ground.  This will also contribute to ensure a long- lasting impact after  project closure.  
 
E.3. Gender considerations  
E.3.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide ad equate and sufficient information in the assessment describing the extent to which the measures 
undertaken complied with the GCF gender policy.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 68 OF 80 
 
 
 
Indonesia has made significant strides in integrating g ender equality and the protection of women’s rights in 
national  institutions, laws and policies. The GoI established the State’s Ministry for Women’s Empowerment in 
1978, later changed into Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child Protection ( MOWECP) , as the national 
institution responsible for ensuring the implementation of gender equality and women’s empowerment  
measures nationally, and is the lead government agency with a mandate for mainstreaming gender in the 
government, across sectors and at multiple levels . Indonesia also ratified CEDAW in 1984,  establishing a 
requirement for g ender mainstreaming in the implementation of national development programs through 
Presidential Instruction No.9/2000 on Gender Mainstreaming in the National Development. The former  
addresses the promotion of the positions, roles  and qualities of women to attain gender equality in the family, 
society and nation and mandates all government agencies to mainstream gender in their policies and programs. 
Several  other regulations guide the implementation of gender mainstreaming in the departments and regional 
government , including the development Policy on Improvement of Women’s Lives 2010- 2014 aimed at 
enhancing women’s status in education, health, economic activities, political partic ipation and society and 
culture and the Ministry of  Home Affairs Regulation No.15/2008 on Guidelines for mainstreaming gender in the 
region;  and finally the  Ministry of Finance Regulation No. 119/PMK.02/2009 stipulating gender responsive 
budgeting. For a full treatment of Indonesia Legal and administrative framework in regard to gender, refer to 
the Gender Assessment and Action Plan found in the Annex XIII (c)  to this FP . 
 
In regards to the forestry sector  in particular , MOEF  has made efforts to incorporate gender into its activities, 
including 1) the re- establishment of  its Gender Working Group in 2012 and 2) the initiation of gender responsive 
budgeting and implementation of  gender awareness and gender analysis training courses for its staff. Through 
a MOU  signed in 2016, t he MO WECP also supports MOEF  with their gender mainstreaming efforts, which 
includes its efforts to develop gender indicators for REDD+.20  The activities of the Gender Working Group have 
included training on gender mainstreaming, informat ion dissemination and gender responsive bud geting, 
planning and analysis. In a 2016 ADB study it was  noted , however, given its ad hoc nature the Gender Working 
Group has limited authority to make any significant contribution to gender and organizational change, requiring 
improvement in this regard .21 To note, to help in this effort, in 2017, the MoEF developed a regulation on 
Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming ( P.31/Menlhk/Set Jen/Set.1/5/2017) which aims to help address gender 
gaps, requiring that the M OEF must guarantee the availability of human resources, funding and adequate 
infrastructure to support gender mainstreaming within its scope of work.   
 
In addition, the MOF has a gender working group to support gender mainstreaming within its activities and 
projects. Illustrating its capacity and effective work on gender mainstreaming, the MO F has received a gender 
mainstreaming award (known as Anugrah Parahita Ekapraya) in 2013, 2016 and 2018 . 
 
The public consultation process for the  National REDD+ Strategy included a series of meetings in seven 
regions : Java; Kalimantan; Sulawesi; Sumatera I; Sumatera II, Bali, Maluku and Nusa Tenggara; Papua,  
engaging r epresentatives of government, civil society, academics  and private sector, as well as posting on a 
website to get inputs from a wider audience. Unfortunately, these consultations had low participation of women 
(at 12 percent ), also signalling the need for more comprehensive gender justice focus in national forest 
management strategies, and better coordination between ministries. In this regard, the implementation of a 
Gender Action Plan for REDD+ activities and the use of proceeds nationally provides a sign ificant opportunity.  
 
It should also be noted that from 2010 to 2013, the Government of Indonesia received support from the UN -
REDD Programme on  REDD+ readiness.  In implementation,  the Programme undertook various efforts to 
integrate gender into its efforts , including a training workshop delivered over two days to the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) staff to enhance their understanding on gender issues, develop gender -specific 
indicat ors and determine relevant activities to be integrated in the Programme’s work plan.  A workshop on 
“Gender Safeguards in REDD+ Initiative” was also held in Jakarta in February 2012 to provide inputs and 
guidance on how to integrate gender into the safeguar d’s principles, criteria and indicators. Similarly, a 
workshop on gender safeguards was also held in Central Sulawesi to gain inputs from local communities. The 
Programme also implemented Free, Prior, Informed and Consent (FPIC) activities in several pilot  sites in 
Central Sulawesi which considered gender asp ects and a  “Guidance Note to Integrate Gender in Implementing 
 
20 Center for International Forestry Research (2016). Gender in Forestry and REDD+ in Indonesia. Available at: 
https://www.cifor.org/library/6010/  
21 Asian Development Bank (2016). Gender Analysis for Republic of Indonesia: Community -Focused Investments to 
Address Deforestation and Forest Degradation Project. Available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked -
documents/47084-002 -sd-05.pdf


---
*Page 72*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 69 OF 80 
 
 
 
REDD+ Social Saf eguards in Indonesia ” was completed in 2012, and its results were used by the REDD+ Task 
Force to inform the gender elements of its social safeguards.  
 
In regard to the National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS), gender considerations  are incorporated  into various 
aspect s, including in its principles, as noted below.22 
 
• The principle on fairness of REDD+ implementation notes “REDD+ is implemented on the basis of the 
principles of equality for all and human rights protection in forest management, including for women 
and communities vulnerable to socio- economic and environmental change” (p.5);  
• One principle to be adopted to change the culture and paradigm in the country is “gender sensitivity” 
which calls for the attention to equality in roles, needs, and responsibilit ies of men and women (p.25);  
• Efforts to strengthen forest and resources governance calls for accurate information to be available for 
public participation through capacity -building for community members, especially women and other 
vulnerable groups, to im prove: (i) understanding of available information; and (ii) participation in 
decision -making processes (p.25);  
• The minimal social safeguards to be complied with by REDD+ implementing agencies includes 
assurance of gender equality and the right of vulnerable groups to participate equally in REDD+ 
implementation (p 32);  
• Requirement that the social safeguards framework is designed in such a manner to protect and benefit 
vulnerable groups, including 1) indigenous peoples and local communities living in and ar ound forests, 
whose livelihoods depend on forest resources; 2) women, who face the full brunt of changes in family 
income; and 3) other societal groups, whose social, economic, and political status put them in a weak 
position in terms of fulfilment of thei r human rights (p.29);  
• The guidance noted on the social safeguards framework calls for the inclusion of indicators that 
evaluate the “accountability of verification results relating to the distribution of benefits from the 
implementation of REDD+ activities among groups of men and women” (p.31).  
 
While the SIS -REDD+ was a results of broad multi -stakeholder consultation, it  currently does not contain any 
reference to gender, either in its principles, criteria or indicators, or the APPS tool. As such, future application 
of the SIS -REDD+, the principles, criteria and indicators, the APPS tool, and in general, any articulation of 
future social impact monitoring should consider gender elements, recalling that women often use natural 
resources and are impacted by changes in natural resource uses in manners that are different than men.  Again, 
the implementation of the FP’s  Gender A ssessment and Action Pl an found in Annex XIII (c)  to this FP  provides 
a significant opportunity in this regard, and is described further in Section E.3.2 below.  
 
E.3.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient information on how the AE will undertake activity -level gender assessment s 
and action plans  once the details of the activities become known.  
 
UNDP is committed to reducing gender inequalities in access to and control over resources and within the 
benefits of development , including in the context of forest governance and REDD+ . The project activities have 
been designed to not only  ensure this project will not discriminate against women or girls or reinforce gender -
based discrimination and/or inequalities , but also to ensure that proj ect activities, and evolving REDD+ 
architecture, the SIS -REDD +  and activities  for the use of proceeds is gender -respon sive, in which  both women 
and men are able to participate meaningfully and equitably, have equitable access to resources, and receive 
comparable social and economic benefits.  
 
To help facilitate these outcomes and ensure the integration of a gender responsive approach within the project 
components, UNDP will ensure inclusive and participatory activity -level gender assessments and action plans 
are undertaken. The starting point of this process is the Gender Analysis and Action Plan (GAAP), which 
outlines gender -responsive actions for each of the activities of the project, and includes indicators, targets and 
means of verification to track the gender -responsiveness of the project. The project/national level GA AP is 
intended to be reinforced and contextualized through sub- national (provincial and district level) actions plans, 
which will establish baselines for monitoring, as well as the particular gender issues which exist at the local 
level, given the immense diversity of Indonesia’s population. These assessments and action plans will comply 
with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards, including Principle 2 on Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment and will be developed and validated in consultation with affected stakeholders, including 
 
22 Government of Indonesia (2012). REDD+ National Strategy. Available at: https://www.unredd.net/document s/un-redd-
partner -countries -181/national -redd-strategies -1025/15862 -indonesia-national -redd -strategy.html


---
*Page 73*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 70 OF 80 
 
 
 
equitably and meaningfully with women and men (and youth, when applicable).  
 
In this work, UNDP will identify and assess the different needs, constraints, contributions and priorities of 
women, men, girls and boys within the activity sites. It will then incorporate corresponding measures within the 
action plans to ensure 1) any possible adverse gender impacts are avoided; 2) and that women, men and youth 
can equitably participate in, inform and benefit from the activities being proposed 3) that women’s decision 
makin g roles, and access to and control over forest resources  are supported. Gender budget and indicators 
will be also assigned within the action plans to ensure the gender activities identified have accountability 
mechanisms in place to ensure their implementation. This analysis and planning will be undertaken and then 
validated equitably with affected women, men and youth stakeholders before implementation of the activities 
commence.  
 
The FP’s GAAP , found in Annex  XIII (c)  to this FP, takes into account recent changes in national  legislation 
and operationalization of Gender Mainstreaming in the Environment and Forestry sector, as  outlined in the  
“Regulation of the Minister of Environment and Forestry Number P.31/Menlhk/Set Jen/Set.1/5/2017 on 
Guidelines on the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Environment and Forestry Sector” issued 
by the MOEF  in May 2017. The regulation recognizes t hat acceleration is required in regard to the promotion, 
effectiveness and optimization gender mainstreaming in M&E, policies, programs, and activities in the 
environment and forestry sector and emphasizes implementation in the field on the Guidelines for Gender 
Mainstreaming. The guidelines themselves, issued as a Presidential Instruction in 2000, was a strategy aimed 
at closing the gendered disparity in access, participation, control and benefits of development between women 
and men. The annex to the regulation recognizes that the Guidelines should not only be limited to the gender 
gap between men and women, but also increase the social inclusion of other marginalized groups and resolve 
the disparity of access, participation, control and benefits of development of childr en, the elderly, persons with 
disability, Adat communities and other groups. An MoU was also signed between the MOEF  and the MO WEPC 
in 2016. Accordingly, the GAAP emphasizes capacity building within the MOEF  and Forest Management Units 
(FMUs ) in regard to gender -responsiveness, greater participation of women’s groups in multi -stakeholder 
platforms, and gender -responsive reforms in the Social Forestry program. Actions which support sensitization 
on gendered power dynamics in the deci sion-making processes in Adat communities are also included, as well 
as support to women- led community organizations. These actions in the GAAP will help to accelerate action 
towards the priority areas identified in the Guidelines to Mainstream Gender (Pera turan Menteri LHKH 
P.31/2017).  
 
Additionally, while there is internal support on gender within the MO F and MO EF, the GAAP concluded that 
additional backstopping support on gender will be needed.  As such, a gender consultant/NGO will be hired 
and at least one of the S afeguards  Officer, hired to support the project, will be required to have gender 
expertise.  Furthermore, to ensure the gender teams/working groups within the MOEF and MOF  have sufficient 
knowledge on REDD+ and the ‘how to’ integrate gender into it, capacity building of these teams will take place 
to support effective mainstreaming of gender in project implementation as well as to encourage sustainability 
of project outcomes  once the project is finished. Please reference the GAAP found in Annex XIII (c)  to this FP  
for more information.  
 
E.4. Interim policy on prohibited practices  
E.4.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide appropriate and sufficient information to demonstrate that no Prohibited Practices occurred during the 
implementation of the activities that lead to the REDD -plus results, such as: undisclosed Prohibited P ractices, 
including money laundering and the financ ing of terrorism, which occurred during the implementation of results -
based actions; and double payment or financing for the same results achieved.  
 
Indonesia has established a national financial intelligence unit, Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis 
Center ( Pusat Pelaporan dan Analisis Transaksi Keuangan or PPATK in Indonesian language), through Law 
No. 15 of 2002, and the Financial Services Authority ( Otoritas Jasa Keuangan or OJK in Indonesian language) 
the national authority on financial s ervices through Law No 21 of 2011 on OJK. These two bodies are 
responsible to monitor money flows and detect illicit financial flows that come from national budget or private 
budget.  
 
PPATK is an independent agency that directly reports to the President. I t uses the follow -the-money approach 
in preventing and combating crimes. PPATK has several focus es, including natural resources related crimes, 
corruption and terrorism. To help PPATK’s function, Presidential Decree No. 6 of 2012 establishes a National 
Coordinating Committee to Prevent and Combat Money Laundering Crimes that is chaired by the Coordinating 
Minister for Political, Legal and Security Issues. It s function is to help mainstream PPATK into the executive 
functions of the government . PPATK is also frequently requested by the President and the House of


---
*Page 74*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 71 OF 80 
 
 
 
Representatives to track the financial history of candidates for high -level posts to ensure they are free from 
suspicious financial transactions.  
 
OJK, a newer institution,  is an independent regulator of the financial services, including capital market, banks, 
and non- banks. The sco pe of its authority includes developing mechanism to develop regulation, giving 
technical assistance, monitoring and evaluation as well as investigation to ensure good financial practices by 
financial industry.  OJK introduces various innovations to strengthen monitoring of financial industry. Some 
examples are Integrated Licensing Information system for multi -sectoral licenses that shortened the licensing 
process from 105 working days into 22 days. This integrated and digital based licensing process help minimise 
the opportunity for corruption.  
 
Moreover, Indonesia also has Anti -Corruption Commission (KPK)  that was established through Law No. 30 of 
2002  and an “Anti-Corruption Court” established by Law No. 46 of 2009 concerning Criminal Corruption Courts . 
Article 5 of Law No. 30 of 2002 provides for the court , which is the only court with the authority in Indonesia to 
decide on criminal corruption cases.  These  two bodies are Indonesia’s leading instruments in targeting and 
preventing corruption in the use of national budget.  
 
KPK’s Law was  recently amended in October 2019 for the purpose of strengthen ing its governance  but these 
recent amendments have not been implemented. However, KPK ha s a very strong track record of detecting 
and apprehending many high- level officials at national and local levels . The success rate of KPK prosecution 
is more than 75%.  
 
In addition to its strong legal enforcement presence, KPK  is also leading corruption prevention. One of its main 
focus i s on natural resources. On 19 March 2015,  KPK, together with 27 relevant ministries  and governmental 
institutions launched a National Movement to Save Natural Resources with a  main focus on for estry, plantation, 
mining, and fishery sectors. This movement commenced in 2010- 2011 when KPK conducted a diagnostic 
assessment to understand the governance problems surrounding the forestry sector. After  the launch of the 
movement in 2011, from 11 March 2013 to 11 March 2016, KPK worked with the President’s Delivery Unit 
(UKP4) to develop as well as provide oversight  to 12 ministries  and g overnment institutions to improve land -
based resource governance. T his series of initiatives have helped improve many governance aspects of 
forestry and land- based governance; a  few direct policy output s from this initiative are  the policy to expedite 
forest gazettement  and the policy to improve coordination between land agency and forestry ministry to resolve 
conflict in forest area.  
 
Another important policy is the multi -door approach initiated by the President’s Delivery Unit and REDD+ 
Agency, and the MoU , signed 20 December 2012,  between UKP4/REDD+ agency with l aw enforcement 
agencies such as the p olice, Prosecutor ’s Office, PPATK , and relevant ministries that have civil servant 
investigators: Ministry of Forestry, Ministry of Environment. This MoU allows close cooperation to use various 
legal channels to ensure prohibited practices did not take place. This approach developed understanding and 
capacity of various agencies to use various relevant laws, focusing on corporate crime. Law enforcers often 
missed the opportunity to use many new legal channels provided by sectoral laws due to lack of understanding 
about these laws  as well as  the sectoral approaches to  law enforcement. This approach has successfully 
prosecuted important cases such as Rawa Tripa  where it wa s both a criminal and civil case arising from  a 
private company  given a license to develop palm oil plantation in a protected peat swamp forest , which might 
not be successful if the traditional enforcement approach was used.  
 
E.4.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide a ppropriate and sufficient information  including on control measures  that assures that the proceeds 
will be used in a manner  compliant with the Interim Policy on Prohibited Practices, such as: undisclosed 
Prohibited Practices, including money laundering and the financing of terrorism; improper subsequent use of 
GCF proceeds in the Prohibited Practices; and double payment or financing for the same results achieved, etc.  
 
As per article 9.03 par. (a), of the Accreditation Master Agreement between UNDP and GCF, UNDP will apply 
its own fiduciary principles and standards relating to any ‘know your customer’ checks, anti -corruption, 
AML/CFT, fraud, financial sanctions and embargoes in order to comply with the Policy on Prohibited Practices.  
 
E.5. Indigenous pe oples 
Provide adequate and sufficient information on how the activities to be implemented with the use of proceeds, 
will meet the requirements of the GCF environmental and social safeguards standards and policies relevant to 
indigenous peoples and guided by the prevailing relevant national laws and/or obligations of the countries 
directly applicable to the activities under relevant international treaties and agreements.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 72 OF 80 
 
 
 
The application of UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards  ensure that the project will protect and foster 
full respect for human rights of Indigenous Peoples (Indonesia refers instead of “Adat communities”) under 
international and national law. These standards are also fully aligned with the GCF environmental and social 
safeguards standards and policies relevant to indigenous peoples.  
 
Furthermore, as designed, the R BP outputs and activities are intended to be carried out in a manner that 
complements and is consistent with the objectives of national forest programmes. The outputs and activities 
are designed to carry out national forestry objectives of increasi ng the inclusion of Adat communities in forest 
management to improve forest integrity, sustainable forest economies, and the livelihoods of these 
communities.   
 
The project activities also will be implemented in a manner that is consistent with relevant i nternational 
conventions and agreements, not the least of which include the following which Indonesia has ratified, acceded 
to, or accepted (all providing for the human rights of indigenous peoples and all ratified, acceded to, or 
otherwise accepted by Ind onesia): Convention on the Rights of the Child, Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination, Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change - Decision 1/CP.16, and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
(UNDRIP).  
 
The l ion share of the RBP proceeds will be dedicated to two activities that can benefit Indonesia’s Adat 
communities: supporting the operationalization of Forest Management Units (FMUs) (Activity 2.1) and 
expanding and enhancing implementation of the Social For estry programme (Activity 2.2).  
 
FMUs have a number of tasks. These include working with Adat communities as well as local communities and 
Villages (some Adat communities not yet legally recognized). They communicate the scope and possible 
benefits of the Social Forestry  Programme, help these collectives apply for the benefits of the programme (i.e. 
licenses, permits, forest partnership arrangements, titles etc.), are authorized to assist in implementation of 
responsibilities of these collectives should their applications be approved, and the FMU help to monitor social 
and environmental impacts, and  carry out participatory development, implementation and monitoring of 
sustainable forest management planning processes and other relevant subnational land- use p lanning 
processes, as well as community sustainable development plans. By increasing the FMU’s technical and 
human resource capacities, as well as funding, its capacity to ensure that indigenous peoples have equitable 
access to the benefits of the Social F orestry programme and other opportunities within REDD+ is redoubled.  
 
Also, as summarized above, the Social Forestry Programme has as its main objective to grant forest resource 
rights to Village and local communities (many of which are Adat  communities ) over forests. These include rights 
of management, use and access to forest resources, forest management participation, and a path to recognition 
of Adat (customary) forest (i.e. property titles). Villages, local communities and Adat communities are equal ly 
eligible under the programme, albeit Adat communities must first be recognized as indigenous peoples by local 
governments. The programme is voluntary, and not imposed on these populations –respecting their rights to 
choose their own development path. Ap plication for licenses and permits, including forest participation 
agreements largely depend on applications filed by local community and Village leaders and institutions 
(recognizing their own governance structures). The programme is an ambitious one aimi ng to include, rather 
than exclude local communities and otherwise marginalized populations in national forest management. The 
goal is to formally include them in the sustainable production, protection and conservation of the very forest 
resources upon whi ch they depend for their physical and often cultural survival, and in doing so reduce 
deforestation while improving livelihoods and reducing poverty and conflict.   
 
The programme takes its lead from an indicative map of State Forest Areas. It is well -recognized that this map 
does not show the significant overlap Adat forests claimed, but not yet titled. The D G of Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership has now begun an Adat Forest indicative map and this has been provided for by an 
MOEF  2019 regulati on. Also, the DG is beginning dialogues with the civil society organization,  Aliansi 
Masyarakat Adat Nusantara (AMA N), to reconcile and be informed by the extensive mapping of Adat forests 
already done by this organization. It is also recognized that the G overnment has yet to define a procedure to 
ensure that local communities and Villages soliciting use and access rights, will not be prejudiced in any future 
attempts to claim full title as an Adat forest (thereby being excised from the State Forest areas).  There is also 
no procedure defined yet to transition from a lease or permit to a titled Adat Forest . The same DG is now 
exploring ways to address some of this, and in the meantime, the ESMF for the RBP Project requires that all 
Social Forestry arrangement s reduced to writing (leases, partnership agreements etc) make clear that they in 
no way waive or otherwise prejudice such rights.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 73 OF 80 
 
 
 
As evidenced by the substantial use of proceeds dedicated to this programme evidences Indonesia’s 
commitment to the Soci al Forestry Programme. Key targets to expand Adat titles to forest resources and 
provide in the interim for community/Village use and access rights are ambitious, but both doable and seen by 
Indonesia as necessary for climate change mitigation success (planning to allocate 12.7 million ha under the 
programme).  As mentioned above, t he Government accelerated the implementation of the programme in 
2014/2015 and implemented a number of key pieces of legislation to facilitate implementation in a rights based 
manner (including regulations detailing procedures to apply for Adat forest titles, to resolve land tenure 
disputes, and to simplify the Social Forestry application processes while also establishing teams that will do 
proper due diligence around the subject lands (i.e. investigate/resolve possible overlapping land claims). 
Together with a number of the DG -activities described previously  – these measures evidence the State’s 
responsiveness to challenges and needs for enhancements which have been identified in the past few years. 
Together with the mitigation measures required by the ESMF, Indonesia intends to deliver on its Social Forestry 
targets and commitments in a rights -based manner that provenly improves both forests and the lives Adat 
communities indigenous peoples.  
 
Furthermore, t he ESMP will particularly guide the above efforts through the application of an Adat Communities 
Plan, a Cultural Heritage Plan, and if applicable (should unintended, but possible partial economic 
displacements occur through access and use limitations, a Livelihoods Action Plan). The ESMF also requires 
that: there be inclusion of Adat communities in d ecision- making and advisory bodies; that an expert on the 
rights of Adat communities  be included in the PMU; that capacity building related to indigenous peoples rights 
is provided to relevant project implementers (including FMU staff); that the process for local recognitions of 
Adat communities (a precondition to titling) be examined and as necessary, reformed to expedite and not delay 
Adat forest  titling (begun by the DG); that the indicative maps for Social Forestry be informed by the overlaps 
of Adat customary forests (also a process begun by the DG), that FPIC and compensation procedures be well -
defined, implemented and tracked going forward, and that mechanisms be put in place in practice and 
potentially law that accelerates the recognition of communit ies as Adat communities (precondition to titling) and 
ensures that the grant of forest resource user and access rights for local communities and Villages does not 
prejudice future claims for Adat titles (also being considered by the DG).  
 
E.6. Monitoring and evaluation  
Provide information on the monitoring arrangements that will take place for p rovid ing annual monitoring reports 
based on the information provided for the use of proceeds in sections C.2.3 and C.2.4.  
 
Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy . The M&E Plan will be conducted in accordance with UNDP and GCF procedures by the 
project team and the UNDP Country Office (UNDP CO) , taking into considerations the specificities of the TORs 
of the pilot  programme for REDD+ RBPs , whereby no inception meeting, mid- term evaluation or final evaluation 
are required,  The UNDP project document  will include performance indicators and related means of verification.  
 
The following sections outline the principal components of this plan. The project's M&E plan will be finalized at 
project start with relevant stakeholders   
 
Annual Performance Report  
This key report is prepared by the Project Technical Advisors, consolidat ed by the Project Manager and 
approved by the Project Board to monitor progress made since project start and, in particular, for the previous 
reporting period.  The format and content of the annual report will be adjusted based on the simplified reporting 
regime established for RBP s by the GCF.  
 
As needed, the UNDP Country Office will conduct visits to project sites based on the agreed schedule to assess 
firsthand project progress . Other members of the Project Board may also join these visits. A F ield Visit Report 
will be prepared by the CO and UNDP Regional Office and will be circulated no less than one month after the 
visit to the project team and Project Board members .  
 
In addition, the Ministry of Finance  (assisted by MOEF ) will conduct visits to project sites periodically and field 
visit reports will be prepared.  
 
The UNDP CO will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision missions. 
The UNDP CO is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as outlined in the 
UNDP POPP. Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be 
provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders, 
including th e National Designed Authority, will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E. The UNDP


---
*Page 77*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 74 OF 80 
 
 
 
CO will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial closure in order to 
support ex -post evaluations.  
 
F. Legal arrangements  
E.6.1. Legal title to REDD -plus results  
- Provide an analysis with respect to legal title to REDD -plus results  in the country. This should include 
an analysis of entitlement to claim for the results  to be paid for by  the GCF . 
 
- Covenant that no other party has a competing claim to the results proposed to the GCF in 
accordance with national policy, legal or regulatory frameworks . 
 
It is important to note that there is no transfer of ownership of the emission reductions paid for by the GCF. 
Payments will be recorded in the UNFCCC web portal and Indonesia’s website, and corresponding results will 
no longer be eligible for RBPs under t he GCF or in any other arrangement. Countries can consider, at their 
own discretion, to use the emission reductions towards achievement of their NDCs. The Government of 
Indonesia has chosen to not use the emission reductions paid for by the GCF towards the  achievement of its 
NDC. Such emissions reductions will not be transferred and/or used for any other purposes (e.g. 
offsetting).   
 
The REDD+ results offered by the Government of Indonesia to the GCF for payments amount to about 19% of 
the total volume of r esults in the period 2014 -2016 , as calculated against the FREL for 1993- 2012 . As it is the 
case with all countries that offer a certain percentage of their emission reductions (ERs) calculated against a 
national FREL to the GCF, it is not possible to determine which portion of the results are covered by the offered 
volume. There is no spatial or other delimitation t o trace back the 27  Mt CO2e of emission reductions offered. 
The land areas where these emission reductions were achieved are all found with in the PAA/WPK, which 
includes the following Islands and group Islands: Java, Bali and Nusra, Maluku, Sulawesi, Borneo, Sumatra 
and Papua, with a total area of 96.59 million hectares. There is a certain level of clarity as to which types of 
areas and fores ts are covered, however there is no breakdown on which results correspond to which areas, 
neither to which legal status of land (state or private) nor to which detailed rights and obligations or license 
holders applicable for the relevant land.  
 
In nation al programs such as Indonesia´s REDD+ programme, the title to emission reductions may be 
shown through a general reference to existing legal and regulatory frameworks. The consequence is 
that Indonesia’s title to ER at this point in time is of a general na ture, deriving from laws and regulations.  
 
Ministry of Finance is the entity  with the authority  to receive, distribute and manage REDD+ RBP. The authority 
comes from Article 17 Ministry of Environment and Forestry Regulation No 70 of 2017 on Procedure of REDD+ 
(REIP 2017). The management of REDD+ fund (including from RBP) is conducted by the BPDLH as the unit 
that has the authority to manage environmental funds (article 17 REIP 2017). BPDLH as mentioned above is 
the unit that is established by and is part of the Ministry of Finance (Article 1 Ministry of Finance Regulation No 
137/PMK.01/2019 on Organization and Administration of BPDLH and Article 8 (2) of Presidential Regulation 
No. 77 of 2018 on Management of Environmental Fun ds). 
 
The main regulation in Indonesia for results -based payments for emission reductions from REDD+ is the 
Regulation of the Minister of Environment and Forestry of the Republic of Indonesia Number P. 70 / 12/2017 
about Implementation Procedures for Reduc ing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, Role of 
Conservation, Sustainable Management of Forest and Enhancement of Forest Carbon Stocks (‘Regulation 
REIP 2017’). It sets out the rules related to the implementation of REDD+ including Results -Based Payment 
(‘RBP’). RBPs are defined as ‘positive incentives or payments obtained from the results of verified emission 
reductions and other benefits carbon’, cf definitions para 26.  
 
On a general level, Regulation REIP 2017 states that implementation of REDD+ by RBP can be achieved at 
national level by the Government of Indonesia, and at the sub- national level by local government, private sector, 
management of forest management units and groups society, cf article 6(2). In addition, executors with 
legitimate work areas located in REDD+ locations can propose RBP activities, cf article 6(3). So far, no such 
proposals have been made.  
 
Significant regulatory measures have been taken and progress has been made in clarifying legal status of 
forest emission r eductions in Indonesia. However, the legal framework for forest carbon rights in Indonesia, as 
in many other countries, is still evolving. While Ministry of Forestry Regulation P.20/ Menhut -II/ 2012/ about 
Management of Forest Carbon (´Regulation No 20 201 2´) as well as Regulations No P.30/Menhut -


---
*Page 78*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 75 OF 80 
 
 
 
II/200930/2009 and 36/2009 do not expressly create a right to carbon, ´forest carbon managers´ and license 
holders under these regulations are conferred rights to trade carbon.  
 
The right of the Government of Indonesia to offer emission reductions for payments to the GCF can be said to 
derive from Regulation No 20 of 2012 and REIP 2017. It sets out the basic principles for implementing activities 
related to ‘forest carbon management’, hereunder for activities in th e form of storage and / or carbon 
sequestration. The regulation sets out criteria for obtaining permits for forest carbon management for state 
owned forest that is either production forest or protected forest. According to this regulation, forest carbon 
managers have the right to trade forest carbon they manage, cf. article 9. Such trading right can be understood 
as to implicitly confer the right to forest carbon to those organizations that carry out forest carbon management, 
cf. article 1(6). For the establishment of forest carbon rights, the Regulation sets out three criteria for ‘forest 
carbon management’: (i) permit from the Ministry of Environment and Forestry to manage forest carbon (ii) 
clarity of the ‘carbon manager’, hereunder government, enterprise s (state, regional or private owned), 
cooperatives or society; and (ii i) area clarity, cf article 7 (1) & (2), 6 (1),  5 (a) and (b) and 3(4).  
 
The results offered to the GCF are achieved through legislative and regulatory initiatives undertaken by the 
central government as the main regulator of forest carbon (including within the W PK (article 1 paragraph 7 
Regulation No 20 2012) and as REDD+ implementing agency at the national level ( article 6 (2) REIP 2017) .  
 
The anchor of Indonesia’s forest policy is the Law of the Republic of Indonesia number 41 of 1999 regarding 
forestry (the Forestry Law 1999) which establishes the forests of Indonesia as assets ‘controlled by the State 
‘for the maximum prosperity of the pe ople’, based on justice and sustainability, cf article 4(1) and article 3. The 
Government of Indonesia’s ‘forest control’ is the authority to ‘maintain and manage anything related to forest, 
forest area and forest produces’, cf article 4 (2) (a). Forest ar ea planning includes ‘forest area use’, cf article 
12 (c) and article 11 (2). The Forestry Law makes clear that all existing laws related to forestry remain effective 
‘if not contradictory to this Law’, cf article 82.  
 
The two key initiatives by the Government of Indonesia and operated during the period for which results -based 
payments are being offered were: (i) the Instruction of the President of the Republic of Indonesia (INPRES) on 
the Termination of the Granting of New Permits and Perfecting Natu ral Primary Forest and Peatland 
Management (INPRES No. 10/2011, No. 6/2013, No. 8/2015, No. 6/2017 and made permanent by the recent 
INPRES No. 5 (August 2019) (collectively “the Moratorium”) and (ii) the Social Forest ry (SF) Programme based 
on Decree Number 83/Menlhk/Setjen/Kum.1/10/2016 on Social Forestry (2016) (“Decree No. 83 on Social 
Forestry”).  
 
The Moratorium terminated the granting of new permits for natural primary forests and peatland within 
conservation, production and protection forests. The implementation of the Moratorium in the relevant areas 
meant no new concessions and permits for the exploitation of forest resources in the Moratorium area. This 
measure led to the protection and conservation/ no conversion of the Moratorium areas and, there by, reducing 
emissions. Substantial natural forest areas under the Moratorium protection are also under the protection of 
other laws, such as ‘Conservation Areas’ as designated under Law No 41/1999. This further strengthened 
forest conservation efforts.  
 
The Social Forestry programme had a similar effect. The GoI has delimited an area of 12.7 million hectares to 
open only for social forestry. Article 4 of Ministerial Decree Number P.83 2016 on Social Forestry (Decree on 
Social Forestry) provides for the rul es and procedures for the establishment of village forest; community 
forestry; community plantation forest; forestry partnership; and customary forest. The Decree on Social Forestry 
provides procedures for local or indigenous communities to receive forest management rights, apply for SF 
licenses be part of contractual Forest Partnerships together with other actors in the forestry business, cf article 
1(1), article 2(1) and article 40.  It grants management and access rights, but not ownership rights.  
 
Indonesia is in the process to further clarify title and rights to its forests through the implementation of its Decree 
of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry of the Republic of Indonesia Number 
P.21/Menlhk/setjen/Kum.1/4/2019 on Adat Forest and Titled Forest (‘Decree AFTF’ 2019) as well as the 
Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 88 of 2017 on Completion for Conflict over Forestland 
(Decree CCF 2017). The process is well underway, with initiatives such as the One Map Policy being 
implem ented. The Decree AFTF 2019 is meant to give a degree of legal certainty to holders of ‘Adat forest’ (ie 
indigenous communities forest, recognized by the Constitutional Court as private forests) and ‘Titled forest’ (ie 
private forests) in terms of the proc edures to establish, verify and recognize and the rights and obligations 
attached to these types of forests. It also establishes the Adat forest and its indicative area map, which will be 
used to provide further certainty as to the title of the forest areas, cf articles 5 and 17. Furthermore, it sets out 
the rights of the Adat and titled forest holders such as the right to ‘utilize timber forest commodities, non -timber


---
*Page 79*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 76 OF 80 
 
 
 
forest commodities and environmental services according to the forest function and statut ory and regulatory 
provisions’, cf article 16.  
 
Decree CCF 2017 sets out the procedure for settling conflicts over forestland in stages, hereunder inventory 
and verification of land tenure, the establishment of settlement patterns and utilization in fores t areas, the 
issuance of decisions and certificates of land rights, cf article 20. The decision to change the forest area 
boundary as the basis for the issuance of a certificate of land rights by the Minister of Environment and Forestry 
can be done by structuring through land consolidation, cf article 28(1) and (2). When the clarification of land 
rights is in place, landowner  then can submit a request of permit to manage forest carbon to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry  and registering their activit ies in SRN  according to the Regulation No 20 2012 and 
REIP 2017.  
 
The Law of the Republic of Indonesia number 41 of 1999 regarding forestry (Forestry Law 1999) establishes 
the authority of the Government of Indonesia to undertake ‘forest control’ which includes determining ‘forest 
area’ or ‘forest area and non- forest area’ and to ‘maintain and stipulate legal relations’ of actors within the 
forestry sector, cf article 4. Furthermore, it establishes principles of forestry management and planning which 
includes ‘forest inventory taking’ at national and regional level, cf ar ticles 12 and 13. Forest inventory is 
conducted to ‘identify and obtain complete data and information on forest resources, forest national wealth 
potential and environment thereof’, cf article 13 (1).  The result of the forest inventory taking is the ‘forest area 
affirmation’ by the Government of Indonesia, cf article 14. The forest area affirmation is meant to provide a 
process for designation, forest area designation, forest area boundary management, forest area mapping and 
forest area stipulation, cf art icle 15.  The forest area affirmation provides ‘security of law’ for forest areas, thus 
clarifying the forest boundaries, its status, function and the different activities undertaken as part of forest 
management.  
 
The right to emission reductions can also be established through licenses, hereunder the business license for 
utilization of carbon sequestration in production and protected forests as well as the business license for 
utilizing carbon storage or through contractual arrangements, for example through the forestry partnerships or 
other private partnerships.  
 
Several safeguard measures have been implemented in order to avoid the establishment of competing claims 
to emission reductions : 
 
1. The National Registry (SRN) ( http://srn.menlhk.go.id/ ) has been designed in such way as to provide 
information and transparency on all forest carbon transactions. This way, any possible competing claim 
should be listed and become immediately apparent.  
 
2. Emission reducti ons by any private or sub- national entity would most likely fall outside the PAA/WPK 
area designated for REDD -plus, and therefore are outside the calculations of REDD -plus results.  
 
3. The Government of Indonesia has issued a circular letter (SE 3/MenLHK -PHPL/Set/Set.1/71/2017/A) 
on 17 July 2017, where it informed that until a Regulation on Carbon Credits and a revision to 
Regulation No P.30/Menhut -II/2009 are issued, there will be no new  contracts or business to business 
transactions of carbon credits by license holders. Furthermore, existing license holders are to report to 
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry any plans for business to business transactions of carbon 
credits or on any existing contracts to this end.  
 
Finally, if despite the existing regulation and implemented additional safeguards, competing claims were to be 
presented by a third party, the Government will take full responsibility and take all necessary legal 
measures.   
  
G. Accredited entity fee and project management costs  
Provide a list of the activities that are expected to be conducted  using  the AE  fees and project managemen t 
cost with corresponding costs as follows : 
 
Accredited entity fee:  
Accredited Entity Fee Request 
Budget        
  
Accredited entity: UNDP  GCF Total Financing:  
103,781,250  Total Proj. 
Financing (incl. 
GCF):          103,781,250


---
*Page 80*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 77 OF 80 
 
 
 
Project: REDD+ Results Based 
Payments for 2014 -2016 GCF grant  :                  
103,781,250          Total grant :         103,781,250  
Country: Indonesia       
Duration (years): 4  years      
Year:  1 2 3 4 
Currency:  USD    
1. Project/Program 
Implementation and Supervision          
1.1 Use of Proceeds Reporting 
and Oversight  4,315  12,043  14,437  14,999  
Overseeing the preparation of the 
required reports for submission to 
the GCF Secretariat   4,315  12,043  14,437  14,999  
1.2 Environmental and social 
management risk and impact 
oversight**  292,505  807,181  966,848  1,004,373  
Provide review and oversight to 
project implementation teams to 
ensure project quality and 
compliance with UNDP’s SES and 
associated procedures and 
frameworks (SESP, ESIA, ESMP, 
management plans, M&E).  9,272  145,229  187,559  197,507  
Provide review and oversight in 
addressing critical safeguard-
related implementation issues, 
including e.g. related to grievances 
and/or non- compliance with 
UNDP’s SES.  6,250  194,065  252,254  265,930  
Provide review and oversight to 
maintenance of administrative and 
environmental records, especially 
procedures related to stakeholder 
engagement, FPIC and a log of 
complaints together with records of 
any measures taken to mitigate the 
cause of the complaints.   276,983  467,888  527,035  540,936  
2. Project/Program Completion 
and Evaluation      
2.1 Program closure  - - - 45,713  
Preparing project closing 
documents for submission to GCF 
Secretariat  - - - 36,045  
Preparing the financial closure of 
the project for submission to GCF 
Secretariat  - - - 9,667  
Other (please specify):  - - - - 
 - - - - 
3 Reporting, as required under 
AMA & FAA      
3.1 Reporting requirements as 
agreed in the AMA and FAAs  87,489  87,489  87,489  87,489  
  - - - - 
3.2 Oversight of the ownership 
and legal title to the ERs and 
actions to avoid double payment 
*** 42,848  25,709  25,709  25,709


---
*Page 81*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 78 OF 80 
 
 
 
Ensure GCF Volume of ERs and 
the REDD+ RBP paid by the GCF 
for those ERs are recorded in the 
Info Hub and host country registry  17,139  - - - 
Audit of the Host Country’s national 
registry to asses if (A)GCF Volume 
of ERs and the REDD+ RBP paid 
by the GCF for those ERs remain 
properly recorded (B) the GCF 
Volume of ERs are no longer 
eligible for RBPs under the GCF or 
in any other arrangement, and  (C) 
the Host Country will retire the 
GCF Volume of ERs and will not 
transfer or otherwise use them 
(e.g. offsetting);  25,709  25,709  25,709  25,709  
  - - - - 
Total  427,157  932,421  1,094,482  1,178,283  
GRAND TOTAL     3,632,344  
Fee Percentage     3.5%  
 
The agreed fee will be disbursed to the Accredited Entity in addition to the REDD+ RBP. The Accredited 
Entity’s fee will be disbursed in four (4) equal annual disbursements. The first instalment of the fee will be 
disbursed together with the disbursement of the REDD+ RBP. Table 9  below provide t he AE fee 
disbursement schedule.  
 
Table 9: AE fee disbursement schedule  
Description  GCF Accredited Entity Fee  
For Year 1 activities  908,086  
For Year 2 activities  908,086  
For Year 3 activities  908,086  
For Year 4 activities  908,086  
Total  3,632,344  
 
 
Project management costs:  
 
List of activities  Costs (USD)  Explanation/justification  
Project Manager @  100,000  USD /year for 4 years  (10%)  40,000   
Administration & Finance assistant @ 17,045 USD/year  for 4 
years  68,178  
Logistics assistant @7 ,977 USD/year  for 4 years  31,908  
Procurement associate @ 18,000 USD/year  for 4 years  72,000  
Audits  @ 50,000  USD  * 2 100,000   
HACT Micro Assessment Service  @ 15,000 USD  15,000   
Spot Check Service ( 8 times in 4 years)  @ 6,000 USD  48,000   
Car rental for PMU staff  @ 13,500  USD  for 4 years  54,000  
Desktop Computers  (Total)  25,000  
Printers  (Total)  6,400  
Furniture  (Total)  10,000  
Communication and other basic services  (Total)  96,100  
Supplies  (Total)  12,500  
PMU staff t ravel cost/month for 4 years  300,000  
DPC admin for 4 years * 97,914   
Total  cost 977,000  
* Total Direct Project Costs (DPC)  of USD 586,552 are distributed between Project Management, of which USD 97,914 is 
administrative costs, and Output 1, of which USD 488,638 is technical support.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 79 OF 80 
 
 
 
H. Annexes  
• No objection letter  
• Term Sheet (draft)  
• Social and environmental screening procedure (SESP)  
• Environmental and social management framework (ESMF)  
• Environmental and social report disclosure  
• Appraisal meeting report  
• Timetable of project implementation  
• Economic analysis  
• Economic analysis (excel)  
• Gender assessment and action plan  
• Stakeholder consultation  
• Stakeholder engagement plan  
• HACT assessment  
• Project activities and responsibilities  
• Non- carbon benefits  
• Environmental and social assessment (ESA)  
• Accredited Entity Fee request  
• REDD+ Focal Point consent  
• LOA 
• Responses to GCF comments on funding proposal  
• Endorsement letter from UNDP  
• Responses to iTAP comments  
• Recalculations of FREL and results  
• Regulation, taxation and insurance 
• MoEF Letter on n o competing claims


---
*Page 83*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA 
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY 
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2"° FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710 
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484 ; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049 ; WEBSITE www.fiskal.de pkeu.go.id 
Ref. : S-3 /KF/2020 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund 
175, Art center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, lncheon 406-840 
Republic of Korea 
Subject: Annulment of No-Objection Letter (NOL) -S-211/KF/2019 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 8 January 2020 
We refer to Indonesia's NOL for the project "Indonesia's REDD-plus results-based payments 
(RBP) for results period 2014-2017", reference number S-211/KF/2019, dated 28 November 
2019. 
The undersigned is the Acting Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance of Indonesia 
as the National Designated Authority of Indonesia. 
We would like to express our intention to annul the abovementioned Letter due to inaccuracies 
within the document. Accompanying this letter, we hereby send to you the revised version of the 
NOL. Accordingly, we kindly request that you ignore and/or dispose the previous NOL and accept 
the revised Letter as the correct document. 
This revision does not imply, nor should it be inferred as, any change in our decision regarding 
our no-objection towards the project proposal. 
Thank you for your kind understanding and continued cooperation. 
Yours faithfully, 
Acting Chairm�.,No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 84*
---

KEMENTERIAN KEUANGAN REPUBLIK INDONESIA
BADAN KEBIJAKAN FISKAL
GEOUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTAI 2 JL, OR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (02113441484-i FAKSIMItE (021) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskat.depkeu.go.id
DIKETIK OLEH : Merryn Ester Augina
DIBACA OLEH : Dudi Rulliadi
DIPERIKSA OLEH : Adi Budiarso
DIKIRIM PADA TANGGAL :
DIAJUKAN KEMBALI PADA TANGGAL : -
HAL : Revision of No-Objection Letter (NOL) -
Funding Proposal for the GCF by the UNDP
Regarding Indonesia's REDlplus Results-
Based Payments (RBP) for Results Period
2014-20170l -ol ?
JAKARTA, B Januari2}2}
Memperhatikan:
Direktur Eksekutif GCF
Ketua Kelompok Analis Kebijakan KSIPPI
9t4-JJ
Dudi Rulliadi
Terlebih Dahulu
Pusat Pembiayaan
lklim ilateral
(
Adi Budiarso
Ditetapkan :
Plt. Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
Ynrir 
Jaruoin
Kp: KF.6/Al(2020


---
*Page 85*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2NO FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+6221)3441484i FACStMtLE (+62 21) 3848049: WEBSTTE www.fiskat.depkeu.go.id
Ref. : S-! xrnozo B January2Q20
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175. Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
Subject: Revision of No-Objection Letter (NOL) - Funding Proposal for the GCF by the UNDP
Regarding Indonesia's REDD-plus Resufts-Based Payment (RBP) for Results Period
2014-2017
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the project Indonesia's REDD-plus resufts-based payment (RBP) for results period
2014-2017 as included in the Funding Proposal (FP) submitted by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to us on 30 October 2019.
The undersigned is the Acting Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance of Indonesia
as the National Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10 and 8.13121, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objeclion to the project as included in the FP.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the project as included in the FP;(b) The project as included in the FP is in conformity with Indonesia's national priority,
strategies and plan;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the FP is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulation.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project Indonesia's
REDD-plus RBP FP has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the project.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicty available on the GCF website.
Yours faithfully,
chairma2(/


---
*Page 86*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
RM. NOTOHAMPRMJO BUILDING 2IO FLOOR JAI.AN DR. WAH]DIN RAYA NOTIOR 1 JAKARTA 1O7IO
TELEPHON€ (+62 21| 3441484: FACSIMILE (+62 2t ) 3848Oa9; WEBSITE umrv.fiskd.depk€u.go.id
Ref. : S- lll lKFl2A19 trg Novernber 2019
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Direc'tor
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsugu, Incheon 406{40
Republic of Korea
Subiect: Indonesia's GCF REDD-plus results-based payments (RBP) funding proposalfor resufts
period 201+2017 by UNDP
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the project Indonesia's GCF REDD-plus results-based payrnents (RBP) funding
proposaf for results period 2O1+2A17 by UNDP as included in the Funding Proposal (FP)
submitted by UNDP to us on 30 October 2019.
The undersigned is the Acting Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance of lndonesia
as the National Designated Authority of fndonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10 and 8.13121, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the Funding
Proposal.
By communicating our no-obiection, it is implied that:
(a) The govemment of Indonesia has no-objection to the Proiect Preparation Facility as
included in the PPF proposal;
(b) The PPF Proposal is in conformity with Indonesia's national priorities, strategies and
plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the PPF activities as
included in the PPF proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations;
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-ot{ection to Indonesia's GCF
REDD-plus RBP FP has been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
$,ai*$.


---
*Page 87*
---

KEMENTERIAN KEUANGAN REPUBLIK INDONESIA
BADAN KEBIJAKAN FISKAL
GEDUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTA,I 2.[.. OR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (02'l\ 3441484', FAKSIMILE (021 ) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.depkeu.go.id
DIKETIK OLEH
DIBACA OLEH
DIPERIKSA OLEH
D]KIRIM PADA TANGGAL
Annulment of No-Objection
211tKF12019Letter (NOL) - S-
NOMOR TS- ) lKF.6t2O2O
NOTA :
Ketua Kelompok Analis Kebijakan KSIPPI
q,.JU
Dudi Rulliadi
Terlebih Dahulu
Pembiayaan
Multilateral
Adi Budiarso
Ditetapkan :
Plt. Kepala Badan Kebijakan FiskalMerryn Ester Augina
Dudi Rulliadi
Adi Budiarso
DIAJUKAN KEMBALI PADA TANGGAL : -
l,lo. Agenda :
ol - 0ll
(l
JAIGRTA, 0 Januari2l2}
Memperhatikan:
Drektur Eksekutif GCF
Y
nr(aruoin
Kp: KF.6/Al(2019


---
*Page 88*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or 
programme 
title Indonesia REDD-plus RBP for results period 2014-2016 
Existence of 
subproject(
s) to be
identified
after GCF
Board
approvalNo 
Sector 
(public or 
private) Public 
Accredited 
entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environme
ntal and 
social 
safeguards 
(ESS) 
category  Category B 
Location – 
specific 
location(s) 
of project or 
target 
country or 
location(s) 
of 
programme Indonesia 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure 
on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) 
of disclosure English and Bahasa Indonesia 
Explanation 
on language Bahasa Indonesia is the official language of Indonesia. 
Link to 
disclosure English: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOCS /INS-
Annex%20VI_b_%20ESMF%20Environmental%20and%20Social%20Manage
ment%20Framework.pdf  
B
ahasa Indonesia:


---
*Page 89*
---

https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Lampiran%20VI_b_ESMF%20Kerangka%20Kerja%20Manajemen %20Lingku 
ngan%20dan%20Sosial.pdf   
Other link(s) UNDP Indonesia website: 
https://www.id.undp.org/content/indonesia/en/home/l ibrary/environment 
_energy/ESS-Disclosure.html  
 
Ministry of Finance website:  
English: 
https://djpb.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/id/component/con tent/article.html?id= 
3311  
 
Bahasa Indonesia:  
http://www.djpbn.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/id/berita/la innya/pengumuman/ 
3310-kerangka-blu-bpdlh.html  
 
English: 
https://djpb.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/05/2 0/kerangka-kerja-
blu-bpdlh-e.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
http://www.djpbn.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/ 05/20/kerangka-
kerja-blu-bpdlh.pdf  
Remarks The ToR for the ESIA, consistent with the requireme nts for a category B 
project, is included in the “Environmental and Soci al Management 
Framework”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if  applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure 
on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) 
of disclosure English and Bahasa Indonesia 
Explanation 
on language Bahasa Indonesia is the official language of Indone sia.  
Link to 
disclosure English: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Annex%20VI_b_%20ESMF%20Environmental%20and%20Social %20Manage 
ment%20Framework.pdf   
 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Lampiran%20VI_b_ESMF%20Kerangka%20Kerja%20Manajemen %20Lingku 
ngan%20dan%20Sosial.pdf    
Other link(s) Ministry of Finance website:  
English: 
https://djpb.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/05/2 0/kerangka-kerja-
blu-bpdlh-e.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia:


---
*Page 90*
---

http://www.djpbn.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/ 05/20/kerangka-
kerja-blu-bpdlh.pdf  
Remarks An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a cate gory B project is 
contained in the “Environmental and Social Manageme nt Framework”.  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if appl icable)  
Date of 
disclosure 
on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website N/A 
Language(s) 
of disclosure  N/A 
Explanation 
on language N/A 
Link to 
disclosure N/A 
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement A ction Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description 
of 
report/discl 
osure on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) 
of disclosure English and Bahasa Indonesia 
Explanation 
on language Bahasa Indonesia is the official language of Indone sia.  
Link to 
disclosure Soc ial and Environmental Screening Procedure  (SESP):  
English: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Annex%20VI%20_a_%20SESP%20Social%20and%20Environmen tal%20Scre 
ening%20Procedure.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Lampiran%20VI_a_SESP%20Prosedur%20Penapisan%20Lingk ungan%20da 
n%20Sosial.pdf  
 
Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA):  
English: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Annex%20XIII_i_%20ESA%20Environmental%20and%20Socia l%20Assessm 
ent.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2020/DOC S/INS-
Lampiran%20XIII_i_ESA%20Penilaian%20Lingkungan%20da n%20Sosial.pdf    
Other link(s) Ministry of Finance website:


---
*Page 91*
---

S
ESP: 
English: 
https://djpb.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/05/20 /prosedur-
penapisan-blu-bpdlh-e.pdf  
B
ahasa Indonesia: 
http://www.djpbn.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/0 5/20/prosedur-
penapisan-blu-bpdlh.pdf  
E
SA: 
English: 
https://djpb.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/05/20 /penilaian-
lingkungan-blu-bpdlh-e.pdf  
B
ahasa Indonesia: 
http://www.djpbn.kemenkeu.go.id/portal/images/2020/0 5/20/penilaian-
lingkungan-blu-bpdlh.pdf  
Remarks Description of other documents disclosed: 
1. SESP, and
2. ESA.
The ESA provides the assessment by UNDP on the extent to which the REDD+ 
actions and the relevant policies, laws and regulations for which the results-
based payments are requested were consistent with the applicable ESS 
standards. 
The SESP is a UNDP document that is used to identify social and environmental 
risks and mitigation measures. It does not replace or conflict with GCF ESS 
requirements and policies.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Place The links to the English and Bahasa Indonesia versions have been shared with 
the National Designated Authority, Ministry of Finance, and Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s 
Board 
meeting N/A 
Date of GCF’s 
Board 
meeting Tuesday, June 23, 2020 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 92*
---

G
CF/B.26/ 02/Add.02 
Page 92 
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP130 
Proposal name:  Indonesia REDD- plus RBP for results period 2014 -2016  
Accredited entity:  United Nations  Development Programme  (UNDP)  
Country( /ies): Indonesia 
Project/programme size : Medium 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.1 Project background  
1. The project presents Indonesia ’s REDD -plus results for the period 201 4–201 6,
ca
lculating a volume of around 27 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) in
e
mission reductions from reducing emissi ons from deforestation  have been offered to the GCF.
The reported emission reductions have  undergone technical assessment
2. These results are presented to GCF for a results-b ased payment (RBP) under  the REDD -
plus  RBP pilot programme and are fully compliant with the eligibility criteria set out in the
terms of reference (TOR) for the pilot program me (decision B.18/07) . The presented results ,
which compl y with UNFCCC standards and the GCF TO R, have been analysed based o n the
scorecard  and are presented i n the annex  to this assessment .
3. Indonesia  will use the proceeds from the RBP to invest in  the implementation of its
National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS), which is  fully aligned with its nationally determined
contribution ( NDC ). STRANAS is complemented by the REDD+ Provincial Strategy and Action
Plans in the chosen pilot provinces. The proposed RBP project will focus on the following
outputs :
(a) Output 1 : Strengthening REDD -plus  coordination and implementation an d overall
REDD -plus  architecture; and
(b) Output 2 : Support to decentralized sustainable forest governance .
Scorecard  results  
Table 1:  Scorecard results  (see annex for details)  
Scorecard section  Results  
Carbon elements  Score: 36 All criteria “pass ” 
Non -carbon 
elements  Cancun Safeguards  All criteria “pass”  
Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  Score: 2 
GCF investment framework  All criteria “ high”  
GCF policies  All criteria “pass”


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 93 
 
 
1.2 Proposed payments  
4. In line with  the procedure defined in the T OR, the following equation was applied to 
estimate the volume of results  to be translated in to payments : 
Volume of ERs offered (x) total score achieved  = GCF volume of ERs  
Maximum score  
 
5. The resulting GCF volume of results and the proposed amount for payments that the 
Republic of Indonesia is eligible for are provided  in table 2  below:   
 
Table 2:  Resulting GCF volume of results and the proposed amount for payments  
Values  Results  
Volume of ERs offered:  27 million t CO 2eq  
Total score achieved:  36 
Maximum score:  48 
Valuation of results: USD 5/tCO 2eq 
Non -carbon benefits  score :    2 GCF volume of ERs : 20,250,000  tCO 2eq  
Additional 2.5%  of payments for non -
carbon benefits  
Proposed results -based payments:  
USD 103 ,781 ,250   
Abbreviations:  tCO 2eq = tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ; ER = emission reduction . 
 
1.3 Strengths and points of caution  
6. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks . 
Strengths  Points of clarification  
Indonesia’s initiatives operating during the 
results -based payments period are 
consistent with the best practices of forest programming with far -reaching non -
carbon benefits. As well as  the National 
REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS), the proposal highlights measures to improve data transparency via the One Map Policy  and 
local fore st governance via f orest 
management units Strategic use of funds for Indonesia’s forestry programmes is crucial , especially given 
competing land uses. The proposal can set a 
very transformative course for the forest ry 
sector in Indonesia  
The proposed use of proceeds aims to 
augment current efforts on forest governance , working with key agencies at 
the national, provincial and local levels. It builds on previous efforts on REDD -plus


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 94 
 
 
8. The Board may  wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum  XVIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Assessment performance against the investment criteria  
2.1 Impact potent ial                                   Scale:  High  
9. Indonesia has developed several policies, programmes and projects under the policy  
umbrella of STRANAS . These efforts and interventions  in the forest sector have  resulted in 
emission reductions of 244,892,137  tCO 2eq between 201 4 and 201 6. Indonesia has not received 
payments for REDD- plus  results for the period 2014 –2016 from any other source. T he total 
volume of emission reductions achieved by Indonesia  in this period , including those proposed 
under  the REDD- plus  RBP  pilot programme , are included in the technical annex to the biennial 
update report submitted to the UNFCCC . Indonesia offers 27 million tCO 2eq of these to the GCF 
for RBP.  
10. These results were technical ly assessed in accordance with the Conference of the Parties 
decisions on REDD -plus . The achievement of these past results contributed directly to GCF 
objectives and targets in the forest and land -use result s area and , through the use of the RBP 
proceeds , will  lead to an ongoing  reduction of emissions from deforestation  and will help to 
leverag e finance to continue the Government’s efforts to reduc e deforestation.  
11. The proposed use of proceeds intends to further support the main interventions applied 
during the REDD- plus RBP pilot programme , focus ing on enhanced monitoring and 
implementation of REDD- plus  related efforts and decentraliz ing forest governance through the 
operational ization of the f orest management units.  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential                     Scale: High  
12. Indonesia ’s transformative strategy document, STRANAS , aims  to help the country 
manage its forests in the best and most sustainable way. There are two major i nitiatives that 
have helped Indonesia cope with deforestation, namely the “Moratorium termination of the 
granting of new permits and perfecting natural primary forest and peatland management ” 
(hereinafter referred to as the “ moratorium ”); and the social forestry programme.  
13. The use of the proceeds from REDD -plus RBPs  is innovative and strategic  because  it 
aims to support forest management units  and social forestry  programmes at the decentralized 
level. In addition, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP ), which is the accredited 
entity (AE),  has chosen to use Performance Based Payments (a new modality the AE has 
engaged in recently) as an incentive to provide the RBPs to the G overnment  of Indonesia . 
Further , the project strengthens the already important work carried out regarding 
decentraliz ation  of the management regime for forests and involv es communities, 
acknowledging their important role. Other innovative components include further support to 
social forestry groups, a safeguard ing information system and the improvement of forest 
monitoring.  
2.3 Sustainable development potential                                  Scale:  High   
14. REDD -plus  investments and initiatives in Indonesia have contributed towards 
sustainable development by promot ing non- carbon benefits  relevant to S ustainable 
Development Goals  1, 5, 13 and 15 . In particular, the various ecosystem services provided by


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 95 
 
 
forests are ess ential for providing the key regulating services needed for basic livelihoods in 
Indonesia, contributing to poverty reduction. The conservation of Indonesia’s forest s directly 
supports biodiversity preservation and enhanced soil and water  management throug h 
improved sustainable forest management.  
15. STRANAS especially highlights the involvement of local communities,  especially Adat 
(indigenous ) peoples , in the protection of the country’s forests. This has co -benefits relating to 
cultural identi ty and social co hesion. The proposed use of funds further supports  the enabling 
environment by contributing to the formal recognition of local communities’ access rights to 
forest resources.   
2.4 Needs of the recipient                       Scale: High  
16. Local communities , especially indigenous peoples , are important stakeholders in the 
REDD -plus  investments proposed for the proceeds of the RBP. Through the protection and 
conservation of Indonesia’s forests, the economic and social needs of local populations are 
targeted at  the ecosystem level (e.g. via the regulation of soil erosion, carbon sequestration and 
water storage)  in order to provide the foundation for livelihood diversification. Indeed, 74 per 
cent  of Indonesia’s impoverished populations depend on these ecosystem services for their 
basic livelihood s. REDD -plus  interventions also have a positive impact on crucial needs such as 
improvements in the forest fire management system and peatland management.  
17. The proposed use of proceeds  aims to enhance the implementation o f REDD -plus  in 
Indonesia  and support the operationalization of decentralized forest governance. Overall 
domestic funding is limited , given the scale of ambition required to protect Indonesia’s forests. 
Continuing the efforts to increase capacity -building, policy reform and concrete forestry 
investments will require the creation or development of  institutions to support more 
sustainable interventions. GCF funding would be used to support a more robust REDD- plus  
architecture and decentrali zed forest governanc e, especially increas ing the role of communities 
in forest management  which is grounded on a human -rights approach , especially on the right of 
participation, land  ownership, self -selection , and consultation.   
2.5 Country ownership                          Scale: High  
18. The proposed project and use of funds are fully aligned with national policies  and 
strategies and NDC  priorities . Indonesia’s NDC  highlights  the importance of REDD -plus  and the 
need to mainstream REDD- plus  in national and local policies and ins titutions. This is reflected in 
key development plans such as Indonesia’s National Medium -Term  Development Plan . 
19. UNDP has a strong track record in REDD -plus  activities. It has  considerable experience 
of working in forestry, climate change and biodiversity issues in Indonesia . 
20. The executing entity , the Ministry of Finance  (MoF)  has very solid knowledge and 
experience in implementing projects of a similar nature.  
21. Indonesia  has continuously invested in REDD -plus  efforts throughout the years  since the 
introduc tion of the concept . Anchored by the Forestry Law ( Law No. 41 , 1999), several policies, 
new resources and renewed focal agencies have been created and supported by Indonesia , 
underpinned by a broad stakeholder approach which emphasi zes community participation in 
forestry governance. As evidenced by the p roject board and t echnical committee, t he propos al 
intends to use the proceeds of RBP to work with relevant stakeholders at t he national, 
subnational (provincial) and community levels to ensure accountability and appropriate 
consultation , as mandated by law . Although there have been concerns regarding the extent of


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 96 
 
 
free, prior and informed consent of the Adat  communities, the ba seline for participation is that it 
remains voluntary and participatory in implementation .  
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: High  
22. The REDD -plus  results for 201 4–201 6 presented to GCF and the suggested budget 
clearly highlight that a fixed price of US D 5 per tCO 2eq will be applied to the project , which is 
cost -effective and in accordance with the TOR of the RBP pilot programme. The proposed use of 
proceeds, as discusse d in the previous sections, is an innovative and transformative 
reinvestment into Indonesia’s forestry sector.  
23. The preservation and conservation of forests , resulting in improved ecosystem systems,  
is cost -effective because it translate s the RBP into soli d benefit streams which are needed to 
sustain Indonesia’s economy and local communities’ resilience and livelihoods.  
III. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
3.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
24. The Government of Indonesian and UNDP, whic h is the AE, have  submitt ed a proposal 
for payment of REDD -plus results on the basis of actions undertaken from 2014 to 2016 as part 
of Indonesia’s REDD+ National Strategy, focusing on two REDD- plus  initiatives: (1) the social 
forestry programme  and (2) the m oratorium.   
25. To meet the requirements of the GCF REDD -plus  RBPs programme, the AE completed an 
environmental and s ocial assessment (ESA) that retroactively reviews actions for which RBPs 
are sought in order to determine whether the actions were und ertaken in a manner consistent 
with the GCF environmental and s ocial safeguards (ESS)  standards . The AE has review ed the 
consistency of both initiatives against the  UNDP Social and Environmental Standards (SES), with 
a focus on their alignment with the Can cun Safeguards and the application of the Cancun 
Safeguards through established policies, laws and regulations (PLRs)  in Indonesia  – the lens 
through which the Government of Indonesia  defined its REDD -plus  safeguards approach, its first 
“Summary of Informa tion ”, and develop ed its safeguards information system (SIS) for tracking 
and reporting o n safeguards requirements.  
26. The AE also provided a detailed e nvironmental and social management framework 
(ESMF) that describes the due diligence and management of the identified risks and impacts.  
The framework has 11 annexes : the AE screening procedures for the RBP project; indicative 
outlines for an environmental impact a nd social assessment ; the environmental and social 
management plan ; the b iodiversity action plan; the Adat  communities plan; the l ivelihood s 
action plan; a sample TOR  for a project -level grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and guidance 
for submitting a grievance to the GRM  of the AE ; guidance and an indicative outline for a 
stakeholder engagement plan; considerations for the elaboration of s ocial forestry ; licenses and 
partnership agreements; and recommendations and m itigation measures divided by 
operational themes.  
3.1.1.  Consistency of th e design and implementation of REDD-plus  activities with the 
Cancun Safeguards, the AE SES and GCF ESS  
27. The UNDP social and e nvironmental screening procedure (SESP) was used to identify 
potential social and environmental risks and determine the risk category of the RBP project. The 
SESP is a UNDP -required screening tool that covers the AE thematic safeguards issues and the 
UNDP SES principles of ( 1) human rights  (encompassing risks and benefits related to


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 97 
 
 
indigenous peoples, property and land; tenure, benefits sharing, access to information, and 
grievance redress ); (2) gender equality and women’s empowerment; and ( 3) environmental 
sustainability.  
28. On the basis of the SESP, the A E determined the RBP project’s overall risk category as 
moderate. Identified risks are described and analy sed throughout the ESA report and the ESMF, 
and are captured in a comprehensive manner in the ESMF  the recommendations and mitigation 
measures matrix .   
29. The social forestry programme and the moratorium were two key initiatives operating 
in Indonesia during the 2014 –2016  period . According to the AE, each contributed to emission 
reductions while striving for consistency and complementarity of REDD -plus  actions in 
Indonesia with existing national forest program mes and applicable international conventions 
and agreements. The ESA document provide s an analys is of information related to these 
initiatives focused on implementation and what happened in practice t o demonstrate how the 
Government of Indonesia  addressed and respected the Cancun S afeguards for both 
programmes. The ESA concludes that the initiatives to achieve the REDD -plus  outcomes for 
2014 –2016 aligned with most of the principles and standards of the  UNDP SES (and 
consequently the Cancun Safeguards). However, c ivil society and , in large part, the Government 
of Indonesia, have highlighted that these two initiatives have not yet met their stated goals and 
targets and more work needs to be done. Documenting the progressive improvements in 
implementation that have occurred , and observing that the continued multi -stakeholder 
support for both of these initiatives remains strong, th e ESA review concludes that these 
initiatives warrant the latitude needed for all parties to keep improving the project’s delivery 
and alignment with applicable social and environmental standards. It also notes that following  
the 2014 –2016 review period, the Government of Indonesia  further increased its support for 
both initiatives by adopting  new PLRs, commitments of resources and outreach to stakeholders. 
The AE expects that , through the RBP p roject, these measures will continue and new ones will 
be pursued – helping to further avoid and mitigate potential harm while increasing benefits to 
people and the environment.   
30. The AE considers the RBP p roject to be an opportunity for a paradigm shift that will 
advance the sustainable development and carbon -reduction goals  set by the Government of 
Indonesia . For example, while acknow ledging that the country is far from achieving the full 
enabling environment required to meet the desired targets on the social forestry programme, 
the AE notes that Indonesia’s efforts in relation to this initiative provided a key pathway for 
continued pr ogress and consistency with applicable safeguard policies. Through the RBP 
project, the AE envisions systemic change at the local, national and international level, and 
additional social, economic and environmental co -benefits of the project. Such benefits  would 
include protection of forests through participatory management, protection of biodiversity, and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples and other collectives (including rights to their 
ancestral and cultural heritage sites). The project seeks  to limit and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions through develop ing and implement ing forest management plans involving relevant 
village, local community and Adat  community stakeholders.  
31. The ESA is well researched and comprehensive in its analysis in terms of  both the 
alignment between the country’s PLRs  and the REDD -plus  safeguards, and the alignment of the 
AE SES and the two reviewed initiatives  (i.e. the social forestry programme and the 
moratorium) . However, in some areas  the ESA  does not categorically est ablish full alignment 
between the PLRs, the SES and the REDD- plus  safeguards. Instead, it describes “substantial 
alignment” , noting that the initiatives considered in the ESA have yet to meet their stated goals 
and targets. In t he ESA the AE takes a view t hat, in the future, the ESMF will make it possible for 
the country’s PLRs to be applied  in full alignment with the required safeguards. The AE 
considers this to be a progressive realization and stepwise approach to full compliance with the 
requirements of the various safeguards. The AE sees the “transparent and honest assessment of


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 98 
 
 
national PLR frameworks” of the ESA as a promotion of safeguard compliance through the 
resulting design of responsive project activities, and avoidance and mitigation measures, while 
reducing future grievances.  
32. The assessment leaves some questions as to how rights holders are identified, how 
benefits are determined and delivered to forest stakeholders, and consistency of Indonesian 
laws governing Adat  recognition and rights generally. The AE notes that Ministerial Decree No. 
83 involves the identification of target beneficiary groups, including customary communities, 
villages, and indigenous ( Adat ) communities, and specifies the information that must be 
included in applications to become a licensee or permit holder, as well as the procedure for processing application s. In addition to Decree No. 83, the AE envisions further accurate and 
accountable recognition of beneficiaries and rights holders (in the context of the s ocial forestry 
program me) as proposed in RBP activity 2.2, which will establish multi- stakeholder ver ification 
teams that include Adat  experts, communities, non -government organizations and relevant 
government officials.  
33. Regarding the absence of Indonesian laws specifically on the rights and recognition of 
Adat  communities, the AE notes that official Ada t recognition is not a precondition for securing 
benefits from the initiatives, and the AE conclud es that the absence of Adat  recognition should 
not hinder involvement in the RBP program me. More broadly, while there is no law exclusively 
on Adat  rights, th e AE notes that Adat  communities’ rights (including to their lands) are 
nonetheless recognized in various Indonesian laws. Until a comprehensive law on Adat  rights is 
adopted, the AE notes that Adat  rights are enshrined in current PLRs and in the applicati on of 
international laws, and that the AE SES provide increased protection (and requirements) for RBP project activities.  
34. Regarding stakeholder engagement, the ESA describes strong stakeholder consultation 
and engagement related to Indonesia’s REDD -plus a ctivities, reflecting previous efforts by the 
government and stakeholders in developing its national REDD -plus  strategy (STRANAS) which 
involved more than 300 experts representing 200 organizations; a four -year multi -stakeholder 
process to develop the REDD- plus  safeguards implementation; and the “Safeguards 
Implementation Tool and Assessment Procedures for using Safeguards Implementation (APPS)” 
– which is conducted by stakeholders at the site level through a self- assessment process. Two 
other initiatives t he ESA determined to be “participatory and inclusive” are  the development of 
(1) the national forest reference emission level for d eforestation, and (2) the NDC. The ESA 
shows that both initiatives were responsive to stakeholder calls for participatory forest 
management and the prohibition on concession areas key to carbon storage.  
35. Regarding grievance redress, the ESA describes the national grievance mechanisms that 
were available to those impacted by REDD -plus  activities during the review period, but 
concludes that a project -level grievance mechanism will need to be developed for the RBP 
project. It notes that the project- level mechanism should not necessitate inventing a new system 
unrelated to the national GRMs, but must ensure that poten tial claimants can access existing 
national GRMs through local/project level personnel and systems. The ESMF addresses these 
findings, and provides detailed recommendations for refining the national GRM and developing 
the required project -level mechanism. It also recommends additional measures aimed at 
avoiding conflicts and resolving disputes.  
3.1.2.  Environmental and social due diligence for the use of proceeds  
36. Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments prepared for 
the project . The ESMF w as prepared as the main safeguards document for the project. As 
already noted  (see paras . 27–28 above) , the project has been screened against the UNDP SES 
using the AE SESP , and deemed to be moderate risk. This categorization was based on the AE 
finding re garding the nature of the proposed activities – characterized mostly as capacity


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 99 
 
 
development, institutional strengthening, and tools and process development. Activities that 
may have physical aspects and footprints are considered community -based and design ed to 
improve forest resources management. The review by the Secretariat confirms the Category B classification of the activities that will use the proceeds.  
37. For RBP activities that the AE has identified with a reasonable degree of certainty, the 
ESMF incl udes indicative outlines of management plans required for addressing likely social 
and environmental  impacts and the requirements of applicable policies and standards, 
including the SES. These plans are to be finalized and periodically reviewed by the 
envi ronmental impact and social assessment consultant , who will be retained upon project 
approval. To accommodate new activities that are yet to be defined, as well as new or 
unexpected circumstances that arise throughout the project ’s lifespan, the AE has a s eparate 
risk screening procedure, and any activities with potential risks and impacts will be managed and mitigated in accordance with applicable safeguard standards, or all together eliminated 
from consideration.   
38. Key impacts and mitigation measures . The  ESMF contains extensive information 
about the project, the legal and policy basis of due diligence, the high -level risks and impacts 
expected to be generated (directly or indirectly) by the project, institutional arrangements, and 
the various plans that w ill be developed. The framework was developed with the aim of 
providing a detailed risk assessment tool and set of mitigation measures to capture most if not all of the risks that might accompany the known activities, and a roadmap for ensuring those 
activ ities are compliant and implementable.  
39. As noted previously, the AE screening procedure will always need to be applied  for new 
activities that may be specified in the future . If necessary, on the basis of  those new screenings, 
the project will need to be u pdated to determine where additional social and environmental 
impacts may exist and whether they require additional assessment and treatment in management plans. New activities may not proceed until such an assessment has been 
conducted and appropriate man agement measures are in place. Activities categorized as high 
risk would need to be redesigned to eliminate or minimize risk, or be excluded from the project.  
40. Indigenous peoples . Some of the activities may have adverse impacts on affected 
indigenous peopl es, such as  restriction of access to lands under customary use, loss of 
livelihood s and means to support their communities, lack of recognition of their land and use 
rights, and use of their traditional knowledge systems and heritage. Such adverse impacts can 
lead to further impoverishment owing to indigenous peoples’ high dependency on the land and 
natural resources. The ESMF proposes to manage these impacts, in particular by including an 
indicative outline of the Adat  communities plan provided in annex 7 of the ESMF . The AE is 
recommended to include GCF standards, including the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy within the 
project’s policy frameworks.  
41. Risks regarding displacement of Adat  communities . Although the ESMF determined 
that the risk is low for physical displacement/forced eviction of indigenous communities, it did 
indicate a higher potential risk of partial or whole economic replacement. The ESMF therefore 
include s mitigation measure s to address such displacement ; namely, an indicative outline of the 
Adat  communities plan (annex  7) and the l ivelihoods action plan (annex  8). Regarding concerns 
involving physical displacement, as determined by the environmental impact and social 
assessment , the AE notes that a r esettlement action plan would be developed through a 
participatory process.   
42. Capacity of executing entities . Implementation arrangements will follow the AE 
national implementation modality, in accordance with UNDP r ules and r egulations and the 
country programme. UNDP is res ponsible for assuring the project complies with its SES; that all 
country staff are trained in the requirements of the SES, the ESMF measures, and GCF 
safeguards and reporting requirements; and for training p roject management unit staff and


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 100 
 
 
other project s taff. The AE is also responsible for any additional training and capacity -building 
for project personnel to ensure implementation of management plans.   
43. Monitoring and e valuation . The ESMF lays out the project’s monitoring and evaluation 
approach, which will be based on a set of performance p rinciples, criteria and i ndicators 
(PC&Is) developed in 2011 through a multi -stakeholder process for REDD -plus  programming. 
The AE notes that these PC&Is are a starting point to be used in conjunction with the 
Government of Indonesia’s Safeguards Implementation Tool (APPs), and has provided examples 
of documents and proof of implementation for each PC&I. Monitoring and evaluation  will be 
informed by the Indonesian SIS , which relies on the collection, transmission, analysis and 
validation of information from the subnational to the national level on how safeguards are 
managed and addressed during the implementation of REDD -plus  activities. As well as 
informing the SIS, the findings from monitoring and assessments will be fed directly to the 
Ministry, the p roject board and the p roject management unit so that decisions can be taken in 
real time, and project activities can be modified as needed to ensure safeguards compliance. The 
AE notes that , due to the iterative and ongoing nature of screening, assessments and risk 
management, the p roject board and the p roject management unit will be required to regularly 
review management plans and develop amendments where necessary.  
44. Stakeholder engagement . The AE provided a comprehensive review of stakeholder 
engagement activities undertaken during the review period (as described above), as well as plans and requirements for ongoing stakeholder engagement and information disclosure during 
project implementat ion. Indicative outlines for a stakeholder engagement plan and an Adat  
communities plan include assurances and protocols for good -faith consultation and free, prior 
and informed consent requirements – including consent. A number of the recommendations and 
mitigation measures in the ESMF include strategies and approaches for carrying out meaningful 
engagement, consultation, consent and information disclosure processes. The engagement plan 
consists of a scaled approach to stakeholder engagement activities – either simplified or 
comprehensive, dependent upon a range of project -specific factor s. All such plans , whether 
simplified or comprehensive , commit to addressing a set of basic minimum criteria which are 
included in a checklist of key issues and questions pertinent to any engagement activity.  
45. Grievance redress mechanism . The ESMF contains detailed information on the 
development of a project -level GRM describing the procedures for project -affected people to 
register, elevate and resolve grievances, and for disclosure, feedback and closure of complaints. 
A sample TOR is provided in the ESMF t hat lays out the mandate, structure, composition and 
overall management of a responsive and transparent mechanism to be developed upon project 
approval , with stakeholder input. Until that time, the AE notes that the Government of Indonesia  
has an existing national GRM to which the project -level GRM will be directly linked – including 
its tracking system, its capacity to feed into the REDD -plus SIS, lessons learned, and real time 
modifications to project activities in response to the lessons learned. The GCF  Indigenous 
Peoples Policy also states that the GCF I ndependent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s 
indigenous peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.  
3.2 Gender policy  
46. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the G ender Policy of the GCF . 
47. The AE , through the gender assessment , provides the context and indicates the country’s 
commitment to gender equality and women’s empow erment. The assessment identified a broad 
range of national -level gender inequalities , and challenges and risks faced by women and other 
marginalized groups. The challenges in Indonesia in relation to REDD -plus  action s arise in


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 101 
 
 
national policies and regula tions, decision -making processes, agricultural production, forest use, 
land tenure, education and so on . 
48. Indonesia has ratified and/or signed a number of key international conventions, treaties 
and plans of actions on gender equality, women ’s empowerment and human rights, including 
the Convention on the Elimination of A ll Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and 
the Optional Protocol for CEDAW. However, gender -related  gaps in national policies and laws 
are still present. Indonesia continue s to improve its legal frameworks, at national and local 
levels, particularly in terms of implementing policies and program mes that focus on the 
promotion and protection of the rights  of women, children, people with disabilities and older 
people . In Indonesia , political parties are required to have a minimum of 30 per  cent women 
candidates in parliament ary elections , although in practice representation falls significantly 
below this le vel. The National Medium -Term Development Plan includes gender equality and 
women’s empowerment as part of its human and society and development targets.  
49. Despite gaps in law and policy, the enabling environment can support progress towards 
gender equality in Indonesia. The gender assessment , which was  based on desk reviews , 
indicates that there are persistent gender gaps, as well as social and cultural norms and 
practices that continue to limit women’s access and control of resources and capital,  in areas 
such as land and resource tenure, decision -making, inheritance, employment and education. 
Laws discriminating against women, include dress codes, the public segregation of men and 
women, and rules curtailing women ’s mode s of travel and movement, limit women ’s mobility 
and ability to work outside the home and run for office. On paper, m arried and unmarried 
women have the same rights as men to own, use and make decisions on land and non- land 
assets as collateral. However, there is little awareness that title c ertificates for marital property 
can be issued in the name of both spouses. It is highly likely for women to lose their land rights 
upon widowhood, divorce , or desertion. In rural areas women also face barriers to accessing 
credit and financial services, such as limited knowledge of business development and 
discrimination in dealing with government staff. There is no law prohibiting discrimination by 
creditors based on  gender in access to credit.  
50. Despite the challenges, women engage in many activities cont ributing to their 
communities and households. In rural communities, women generally engage in numerous 
activities around forests, such as collecting firewood, harvesting non -timber forest products 
(e.g. honey, medicinal plants, food animal fodder) and forest protection. The impacts of forest 
degradation and deforestation are especially significant for women, considering that they often 
have a higher degree of dependence on the environment. Further, due to increasing 
development of commercial forestry, women  experience increasing difficulties when collect ing 
necessities such as water, food and firewood from the forests. Almost the entire forest  land is 
owned by the S tate and less than two per  cent of the forest area is formally designated for 
communities and indigenous peoples or owned by firms or individuals. Local communities can 
engage in forest management through mechanisms that include community forest s, village 
forest s, community timber plantations, partnership s and customary forest s. These mechanisms 
are usually available to community groups , cooperatives and farmer forest groups that are 
predominantly male dominated. As such, women have limited involvement in decision -making 
processes related to forests and REDD -plus  projects, leading to limited access to the benefits 
from initiatives, such as access to knowledge and capacity -building activities as well as funds 
and payments. The reasons for women’s limited involvement in forest -related decision -making 
include women’s heavy work, lower rates of literacy and education , and the inaccurate 
assumption that forest -related activities are “men’s work”. Similarly, women also have less 
access to extension support or capacity -building activities related to agriculture and forestry, 
because participation in these activities is us ually limited to household heads or community 
leaders, who are mostly men. It should be noted that female- headed households make up almost 
15 per cent  of households in rural and urban areas. Women are rarely invited to such meetings


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 102 
 
 
and hence women do not have sufficient access to information about relevant activities, 
projects, and so on , concerning their well -being and the forests they depend on.  
51. As required by  the Gender Policy of the GCF , the AE has provided a gender action plan. 
The gender action plan outlines activities and  provides indicators and targets that will address 
challenges faced by women to engage and benefit from REDD- plus  investments made by the 
proposed project/program me. The AE will engage a gender expert (or team of experts) to 
support the implementation of the gender action plan, and  the plan also includes budget and 
timelines.  
52. The gender action plan contains several activities that are linked to the findings of the 
gender assessment, including activities to further establish baselines and tailor gender -
responsive environmental and social impact assessment which will provide additional gender -
sensitive and sex -disaggregated baseline data, and actions at the policy, management and 
implementation levels. Activities included in the plan ai m to integrate gender into the REDD -
plus  architecture by developing gender -responsive benefit sharing plans and gender -responsive 
grievance and redress mechanisms, by further explor ing the potentials for gender -based 
violence occurrence in relation to proj ect activities,  and through activities geared towards the 
increase of land tenure security for women -headed households, among others.  
53. The gender action plan  aims to strengthen the capacity of REDD -plus  implementation by 
mainstreaming gender and supporting  women’s groups, improving the awareness and capacity 
of ministries , and strengthening local forest management units. It also includes activities that 
mainstream gender in community investments, increasing female staffing in extension work, 
and builds lead ership in non- formal women’s groups. The action plan aims to enhance the 
implementation of the Social Forestry Programme by integrating gender into village and provincial planning, land use and management plans, and by increasing the role of women in 
decision -making through awareness and capacity -building. Finally, activities in the gender 
action plan  will aim to improve project management by targeting women involved in the SIS  
REDD -plus  working group and building their capacity to effectively be involved and participate 
in decision -making, integrat ing gender into the e nvironment and social impact assessment and 
integrat ing gender fully into mid -term and final evaluations.  
3.3 Risks  
3.3.1.  Overall p rogramme assessment ( medium risk )  
54. Under the pilot programme for REDD -plus RBPs, GCF is requested to provide a payment 
of USD 1 03,781,250 for the ERs amounting to 20. 25 million tCO 2eq achieved by Indonesia in the 
period 2014 −2016. The volume of ERs for whi ch GCF funding is sought is within 30 per cent of 
the total payable volume,  as required under the TOR of the pilot programme.  
3.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
55. UNDP is the AE and has an extensive track record of implement ing projects in 
developing countries. The AE is considered a reliable partner to support the REDD -plus project 
in Indonesia.  
56. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MoEF) and MoF will be the co -executing 
entities for this project . MoEF has been a leading partner for UNDP Indonesia for decades and it 
will be mainly involved in Component  1 of the project. The track record of MoEF includes 
developing  STRANAS  and supporting  various projects funded by different donors with a budget 
range of USD 9 million to 16 million in the past 3 –5 years. The capacity assessment of MoEF has 
been carried out and its result is satisfactory according to the AE. As for the MoF, the capacity


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 103 
 
 
assessment  results in ‘moderate’ risk and AE is working with other partners to address 
recommendations identified during the assessment. MoF will execute Output 2 , which accounts 
for 90  per cent  of the RBP  received under this project.  
3.3.3.  Programme -specific exec ution risks (medium risk)   
57. Use of proceeds . The proceeds will be used to continue updating and strengthening 
REDD -plus  coordination and implementation. Proceeds  will also support decentraliz ation  of 
forest governance by establishing and operationalizing fo rest management units and 
sustainable forestry management investments. The funding proposal states that Output 2 , which 
account s for 90  per cent of the total budget , will be implemented through a performance -based 
payment mechanism. The details , such as ac tivities, milestones or size of the performance- based 
payment mechanism , were not available at the time of submission of the funding proposal and 
these will be agreed on between the AE and the G overnment of Indonesia during the 
implementation stage. The end use is as permitted under the REDD -plus TOR .  
58. Competing for the carbon ownership . The funding proposal  states that the title to 
emission reductions is of a general nature, deriving from laws and regulations in Indonesia. The 
legal framework for fo rest carbon rights is still under development and the country is in the 
process of clarifying title and rights to its forest. The  funding proposal  mentions that the right to 
emission reductions can be established through business licen ces for utilization of carbon 
sequestration. It also suggests three safeguard measures ; namely,  the use of the national 
registry, government letter s to suspend the new contracts or business transactions of carbon 
credits until the further revision of regulations, and the desig nation of the areas for the REDD-
plus  results. The AE needs to obtain a covenant (as advised in the REDD -plus  TOR)  from the 
Government of Indonesia to confirm that no other party has and will have a competing claim to 
the results proposed to the GCF for pa yment, in accordance with national policy and legal or 
regulatory framework.  
59. Risk of double payments . The funding proposal s tates that Indonesia has established a 
national registry system to avoid double counting , by providing information and transparency 
on all forest carbon stocks in the country. The registry on climate change has been operational 
since 2016. The ERs submitted to GCF will be retired and registered in the Lima REDD+ 
Information Hub once the RBP is received. Indonesia is also expected to receive an  RBP under 
the Indonesia -Norway Partnership. The result reported for the partnership is  for 2017, 
therefore there is no risk of double counting of ERs submitted to GC F with those to be 
considered under Ind onesia -Norway Partnership .  
60. Disbursement plan.  The implementation of the end -use activities will be over four 
years. The AE has explained  that it will disburse the proceeds to the h ost country based on the 
achievement of outcomes. Accordingly, it is recommended that the disbursement of GCF financing  (from GCF to AE)  is also carried out over the four -year period corresponding to the 
implementation of the activities.   
3.3.4.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)   
61. The AE has provided a detailed description of its program me to address, monitor and 
mitigate the risks of money laundering, financing  of terrorism  and prohibited practices.   
62. Within the funding proposal itself, the AE explicitly outlines its strategy to mitigate the 
risk of money  laundering/  financing  of terrorism  through downstream contractual obligations. 
In addition, as per the accreditation master agreement (AMA), the AE shall apply its own fiduciary principles with regards to money laundering/countering the financing  of terrorism, 
fraud and know -your -customer checks, among others. Indonesia has also implemented an 
aggressive program me to reduce illegal logging, including the use of anticorruption and anti -


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 104 
 
 
money laundering/countering the financing of terrorism measures, which will help to reduce 
the lev el of risks associated with money laundering, financing  of terrorism  and prohibited 
practices in this project. A combination of these measures is expected to reduce the overall risk 
exposure to the medium level.  
3.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
63. In case  of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non -
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal.   
3.3.6.  Recommendation  
64. It is recommended that the Board consider the above points  in its decision .  
 
Summary risk assessment   Rationale   
Overall programme   Medium   The proposed payment is for the 
emission reduction s already achieved by 
Indonesi a. The executing entity ( Ministry 
of Finance)  will implement 90% of GCF 
proceeds. Close monitoring  and a 
covenant from the G overnment  of 
Indonesia are required to mitigate the 
risk of competing ownership of emission 
reduction s Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability   Medium  
Project -specific execution   Medium   
Compliance   Medium   
GCF portfolio concentration   Low   
3.4 Results monitoring and reporting  
65. Following the requirements of the TOR, the proposal will follow simplified reporting for 
which a specific template was developed by the S ecretariat. Reporting will be delivered 
annually, following the AMA .  
66. Monitoring of the use of proceeds will be conduct ed at the main activity level according 
to the description provided in the funding proposal.  
3.5 Legal  assessment  
67. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 5 August 2016, and it became effective on 23 
November 2016.  
68. The Accredited Entity has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
69. The proposed project wi ll be implemented in Indonesia, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further assessed. T he Secretariat sent a draft agreement on privileges and immunities to the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia in 2015 and has  been discussing the document since 
then , but no agreement has been reached to date.  
70. The Heads of the Indepen dent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 105 
 
 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
IV. List of pr oposed conditions  
71. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board be made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the relevant due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 106 
 
 
 
Annex:  Scorecard (aligned to the funding proposal template structure)  
 
Section A: Proposed and projected REDD -plus results  
Criteria  Status 
(Yes/No) Remarks  
Does the total volume of achieved results indicated in the proposal 
match the results indicated in the biennial update report  (BUR) during 
the results period (31 December 2013 to 31 December 2018)?  No The results corresponding to the recalculated FREL for the purpose 
of this funding proposal are higher than those reported in the 
UNFCCC BUR technical annex It is noted that for the purpose of the 
pilot programme, Indonesia has recalculated the FREL because the 
UNFCCC reference period exceeds the maximum of 20 years, as 
indicated in the GCF REDD+ RBP scorecard, in 2a(xiii). Following the 
guidance contained in footnote 3 of row 2a(xiii) of the scorecard, 
Indonesia has recalculated its reference level based on a period of 20 
years.  
Is the v olume of achieved results offered to the pilot  programme equal 
to or less than the total volume of achieved results indicated in the BUR 
during the results period?  Yes In the FP, the volume of achieved results offered to the pilot  
programme is the 13 million tons CO2 eq/ year for the period of 
2014 – 2016 . This is less than the total volume of achieved results 
indicated in the BUR during the results period  
Is the expected volume of REDD -plus results to be achieved significant 
compared to the overall level of REDD -plus results achieved in the 
current funding proposal being submitted?  No According to its FP, Indonesia expects to submit a total of 36 
MtCO2eq to the GCF pilot program, including an additional 9 
MtCO2eq expected to be achieved in 2018.  
Is the total volume expected to be submitted to the pilot programme 
within the available allocation of funding for the pilot programme and 
below the cap per country?  Yes In the FP, the volume of achieved results offered to the pilot  
programme is the 9 million  tons CO2 eq/ year for the period of 2014 
– 2016  or 27 million tons in total. In addition, the FP indicates that an 
additional 9 million tons would be offered fin the future for 2018, 
bringing the total to 36 million tons  prior to the application of the 
scorecard.  
Section B: Carbon elements  
B.1. Forest r eference emission level/ forest reference level (FREL/FRL)


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 107 
 
 
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Is the FREL/FRL consistent with the greenhouse gas  (GHG) 
inventory, including the definition of forest used?  1 In the TAR, t he AT commends Indonesia for establishing overall 
consistency of data sources between the FREL and the national 
greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory contained in the BUR.  
The AT notes that the forest definition in the FREL submission is 
slightly dif ferent from that used in Indonesia’s national GHG 
inventory for its first BUR. The FREL encompasses six forest types 
that are considered natural forest, and the FREL does not include 
plantations, while the BUR does include plantations. During the TA, 
Indonesia explained that this discrepancy results from natural 
forests being the main concern for REDD -plus implementation.  The 
FP further clarifies that in the exchanges with the AT, during the TA,  
it was explained that  the definition of forest is not being ch anged in 
the FREL, but rather excluding the plantations given the objectives of 
REDD+ and the focus on natural forests. Indonesia explained that 
what is applied can be considered a “working definition” that also 
considers the concept of practicality and cost -effectiveness 
associated with measuring REDD+ performance in the future.  
 
(ii) Is the FREL/FRL based on historical data and is it equal to or below 
the average annual historical emissions during the reference period, 
unless a country is an HFLD country?  2 The FREL is calculated as the annual average of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions associated with deforestation and forest degradation 
occurring in the areas that were natural forest in 1990 . The FREL is 
considering that part of the deforestation is taking place on peatland 
and therefore the FREL increases annually becau se of accumulating 
emissions from peat decomposition,  
The original FREL proposed by Indonesia and assessed in the TAR is 
based on the historical reference period 1990 –2012 . In accordance 
with footnote 22 of the TOR for the pilot programs, Indonesia 
therefore submitted a recalculated FREL for the period 1993 -2012 
(refer to criteria xiii).  
In accordance with the footnote, the recalculation of the FREL/FRL 
and results shall be based on submitted and technically assessed and 
analyzed data/information, without c hanging the annualized


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 108 
 
 
estimations  and using the same methodologies . An annex was 
submitted as part of the Funding Proposal.  
 
  
(iii) Is the FREL/FRL in accordance with the guidelines in decision 
12/CP.17 ? 2 The TAR did not flag any issues based on the modalities in decision 
12/CP.17  
(iv) Are the data and information provided for the FREL/FRL 
transparent? (Has information been provided to allow an understanding 
of how UNFCCC guidance on submission of information on reference 
levels has been addressed?)  2 The TAR concludes that t he information used by Indonesia in 
constructing its FREL for deforestation and forest degradation is 
transparent . 
(v) Is the FREL/FRL complete?  (Has information been provided that 
allows for the reconstruction of the FREL/FRL?)  2 The TAR concludes that t he information used by Indonesia in 
constructing its FREL for deforestation and forest degradation is 
complete.  
(vi) Is the FREL/FRL consistent? ( Were data and methodologies applied 
consistently over the time series used for the construction of the 
FREL/F RL?)  
1 The TAR highlighted several issues as areas for improvement in 
relation to consistency.  
• It was noted that the FREL uses different approaches to 
calculating means for the biomass pools over the 
reference period. For calculating average deforestation 
emissions and degradation emissions in the 
aboveground biomass pool, a simple arithmetic mean is 
used across all available periods, although the 
underlying forest -cover change is measured for unequal 
time intervals according to the availability of land- cover 
maps. For calculating peatland emissions in the soil 
organic carbon pool, however, the applied regression 
approach reuses the estimates according to the different 
lengths of time interval. The AT notes that it would be 
useful if the submis sion explained the reasons for such 
methodological differences.  
• To identify activity data for soil organic carbon 
emissions from peatland drainage in areas subject to 
deforestation or forest degradation, the FREL 
submission overlays land- cover maps with Indonesia’s 
peatland map. For deforestation and forest degradation  
occurring on peatlands, additional emissions from the


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 109 
 
 
soil organic carbon pool are then calculated. These two 
data sets are not perfectly harmonized.   
• During the TA, Indonesia provided land- cover matrices 
for peatlands. The AT observed some discontinuity in 
these data that may indicate difficulties in ensuring 
consistency. The AT noted that maintaining a consistent 
interpretation approach across diverse interpreters is 
very difficult and that this is a potential source of the 
observed discontinuity.  
(vii)  Is the FREL/FRL accurate? (The data and methodologies used 
neither over - nor under- estimate emissions and/or removals during the 
reference period, so far as can be judged .) 
1 The TAR highlighted several issues as areas for improvement in 
relation to potential over -or underestimation of emissions and/or 
removals:  
• In its submission, Indonesia includes only the gross 
emissions from deforestation that are associated with 
clear -cut forests, excluding any potential biomass 
regrowth and associated removals after the 
deforestation event. The AT noted that this is a 
reasonab le approach when forest is converted to 
cropland with annual crops, but not necessarily when 
the crops are perennial or when there are other woody 
biomass stocks. In response, Indonesia clarified that 
when natural forest has been converted to non -forested 
lands, they rarely grow back into natural forest. 
Therefore the proposed FREL excludes plantation 
forests and non- forest classes such as croplands, 
agricultural lands, shrubs, savannah and grasses, paddy 
fields, transmigration areas, settlement areas, port s and 
harbours, mines and bare lands. The AT notes that this 
exclusion of removals in post- conversion carbon stocks 
likely leads to an overestimation of emissions from 
deforestation.  
• Indonesia’s FREL includes soil organic carbon emissions 
from peatland decomposition associated with 
deforestation and forest degradation on peatlands. 
Indonesia calculates these emissions for all areas of 
deforestation or forest degradation that occur on 
peatlands using detailed information on the post-
conversion land cover, w hich determines decomposition


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 110 
 
 
rates. The decomposition rate is variable; for example, 
the rate in peatlands with annual crops may differ from 
that in peatlands with secondary forest. The AT noted 
that while the emission factors from the Wetlands 
Supplement  are intended to be applied only to “drained 
organic soils”, the FREL does not distinguish areas with 
and without drainage. During the facilitative exchange 
for the TA, Indonesia explained that deforestation and 
forest degradation on peatlands are usually 
accompanied by drainage. Indonesia also explained that 
it is impossible to trace back the drained and the 
negligibly small areas of undrained secondary peat 
forest and therefore Indonesia considers it justifiable to 
consider all of the secondary forests as  drained forests. 
The AT notes that the FREL submission does not 
currently include data to substantiate this. The 
submission does, however, highlight Indonesia’s plans 
to improve the data on peatlands, chiefly with regard to 
emission factors and their depe ndency on the water 
table. The AT acknowledges these plans and agrees that 
collecting more detailed data on the management of 
peatlands is an area for improvement  
(viii) Have all REDD -plus activities that are significant source s of 
emissions been included?  
2 Indonesia’s proposed FREL covers emissions from gross 
deforestation (defined as loss of natural forest cover below a certain 
threshold) and forest degradation (defined as a change from primary 
forest to disturbed secondary forest)  associated with deforestation 
and forest degradation occurring in the areas that were natural 
forest in 1990 . In its submission, Indonesia explains that data gaps, 
in particular those related to carbon stock enhancement, led to the 
exclusion of the other three REDD -plus activities (conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks and sustainable management of 
forests).  
The TAR notes that the activities included in the FREL that are likely 
the REDD -plus activities with the most significant emissions in 
Indonesia  
(ix) Have all of the most  significant pools been included?  1 The carbon pools included in the FREL are aboveground biomass and 
soil organic carbon. Aboveground biomass is included for all strata, 
while soil organic carbon is included only for deforestation or forest


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 111 
 
 
degradation occurring on peatlands. Belowground bi omass, litter 
and deadwood are not included. Soil organic carbon on any soils 
except peatlands is also not included.  
 
According to the TAR, b ased on preliminary data from the 
Indomalaya ecozone, Indonesia estimates that belowground 
biomass, deadwood and litter amount to 13.6 per cent, 14.5 per cent 
and close to 2 per cent, respectively, of forest biomass (excluding soil 
organic carbon). The low  biomass volume in litter is an indication of 
its low significance. In the modified FREL submission Indonesia 
explains that, at the national level, the information about other 
carbon pools is very limited. If the quantitative information 
presented in the s ubmission is confirmed to be similar in other 
ecozones, the deadwood and belowground biomass carbon pools 
would likely be significant sources of emissions. The AT considers 
the treatment of emissions from belowground biomass, deadwood 
and soil organic carb on as an area for technical improvement.  
(x) Have all gases that are a significant source of emissions been 
included?  
1 The submitted FREL includes only CO 2 emissions and does not cover 
emissions of other GHGs. The FREL states that CO 2 contributes mor e 
than 99.9 per cent of total GHG emissions from LULUCF. The AT 
noted that, according to Indonesia’s first BUR as well as its second 
national communication, fires occur frequently in the country and 
these could result in large amounts of non -CO2 emissions,  in 
particular on peatland forests. In addition, the TAR notes that the 
submitted FREL does not include emissions from peatland fires. 
According to the first BUR, peatland fires make up 30.6 per cent of 
emissions from the land use sector  which is more than  forest and 
grassland conversion, which total 23.9 per cent. In the submission 
Indonesia explains that peatland fires have not been included in the 
FREL owing to the complexity and high uncertainty of related 
activity data, but that the Party has plans to include peatland fires in 
the FREL in the future.  
The AT considers the inclusion of non -CO2 GHG emissions an area 
for technical improvement.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 112 
 
 
(xi) Is the information provided in the construction of the FREL/FRL 
(data, methodologies and estimates) guided by the most recent 
applicable IPCC guidance and guidelines as adopted by the Conference 
of the Parties ? 2 The TAR states that the methods used by Indonesia are consistent 
with the IPCC Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land -Use 
Change and Forestry and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories, as applied to the construction of the 
FREL. For the estimation of emissions from peat decomposition the 
2013 Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Invent ories: Wetlands was used.  
(xii) Have any significant issues related to the application of IPCC 
GLs/GPGs been raised in the TA report?  1 No significant issues were raised  
(xiii) What is the ref erence  period for the FREL/FRL?  
1 The FREL proposed by Indonesia  and assessed in the TAR is based 
on the historical reference period 1990 –2012 . This is longer than 20 
years which according to the scorecard should be considered as fail. 
However, footnote 22 of the TOR for the pilot programs states that 
countries that have already submitted FREL/FRLs with longer 
reference periods as of the launch of this RfP, or those submitting for 
assessment in 2018, may provide  a recalculation of the FREL/FRL . 
The Indonesia FREL was submitted on 4 January 2016 . 
 
Indonesia submitted a recalculated FREL in the FP with a reference 
period of 20 years (1993 -2012)  
(xiv) How does the reference level for the results included in the 
proposal compare to the previous reference level that applies to the 
same area?  1 No previ ous FRELs have been submitted  
(xv) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
taking into account national capabilities and circumstances?  
0 Indonesia carries out an uncertainty analysis of its FREL  concluding 
that the average uncertainty of the emission during the period 
covered by the FREL is 16.1%  
 
 
 
Criteria  Score


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 113 
 
 
(i) Are the reported results in the technical annex to the BUR consistent 
with the FREL/FRL ( including the same pools, activities and gases) ? 
2 The TATR states that the LULUCF experts noted that Indonesia 
ensured overall consistency between its FREL and its estimation of 
the results of the implementation of the activities reducing emissions 
from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation 
in 2013 –2017 by:  
(a) Using consistent methodologies and data to generate AD on the 
deforestation area, the forest degradation area a nd the degraded 
peatland area where deforestation or forest deg radation have 
occurred;  
(b) Using consistent methodologies and data to generate EFs, in 
particular the same EFs associated with specific land -cover changes 
based on the consistent land -cover stratification;  
(c) Including the same carbon pools: above- ground  biomass and SOC;  
(d) Including the same gases: CO2 only;  
(e) Covering the same area: entire national territory;  
(f) Using the same assumption that all peatland where deforestation 
or forest degradation has occurred is considered as degraded 
(drained);  
(g) Using the same forest definition as that used in constructing its 
FREL.  
It is noted that according to the TAR, Indonesia identified in the 
technical annex an inadequacy in the reference level for emissions 
from peat decomposition. In the FREL, the referen ce level of peat 
decomposition was based on the future projection of emissions, 
which was estimated using a linear regression of historical emissions 
during 1990– 2012. As the new annual degraded areas in 2010 –2012 
were larger than before, the linear regres sion approach estimated 
projected emissions in 2013 –2015 to be smaller than the actual 
emissions in 2012. The AD for the emissions from peat 
decomposition are the total degraded peatland area in each year, and 
the new degraded area is added to the total degraded area from the 
previous year. The AD and the associated emissions do not decrease


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 114 
 
 
unless those degraded peatlands are restored or rewetted. The 
LULUCF experts agreed with the Party on the inadequacy of the FREL 
and acknowledge Indonesia’s intention f or the future improvement 
of the peat emission estimates included in the FREL . 
(ii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
transparent? ( Has information been provided to allow an understanding 
of how UNFCCC guidance on results reporting has been addressed?)  2 The TATR states that t he data and information provided in the 
technical annex are considered to be transparent, consistent, 
complete and accurate to the extent possible  
(iii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
complete?  (Has information been provided that allows for the 
reconstruction of the results?)  
2 The LULUCF experts concluded that Indonesia provided the 
necessary information to allow for the recon struction of the results 
of the implementation of the activities reducing  emissions from 
deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation. 
Although some of the elements required by COP decisions or 
allowing for the reconstruction of results wer e not explicitly 
described in the technical annex, relevant information and data to 
allow for the reconstruction of results were obtained from the 
documents referred to in the technical annex or the responses from 
the Party to the questions of the LULUCF e xperts during the TA.  
(iv) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
consistent? ( Were data and methodologies applied consistently over the 
results time series?)  
 2 The TATR concludes that the method and procedure of AD collection 
are consistent in both the construction of the FREL and the 
calculation of the result. The same EFs are used in the calculations 
for the FREL and the results of the activities.  
(v) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
accurate? ( Does the annex  neither over - nor under- estimate emissions 
and/or removals?)  
2 The TATR notes that b oth the  FREL and the results obtained for 
2013 –2017 from the implementation of the activities reducing 
emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from forest 
degradation are based on the assumptions that the amount of above -
ground biomass per are a in each forest type does not change over 
time, all losses of carbon in above -ground biomass are estimated as 
CO2 emissions in the year of land- cover change (i.e. by applying 
instantaneous oxidation), regrowth after land- cover change is not 
considered, an d all peatland areas where deforestation or forest 
degradation appear are treated as degraded. The LULUCF experts 
noted that these assumptions may affect the accuracy of the 
estimated emissions from the activities; however, the effect of the 
assumptions on  the emission reduction results, in terms of accuracy,


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 115 
 
 
may be limited because such effects are likely cancelled out by 
comparing the FREL and the actual emissions.  
 
Furthermore , it was noted that  Indonesia expressed concern about the 
accuracy of the estimated emissions from peat decomposition expressed 
as increases of emissions compared with the reference level of peat 
decomposition. However, overall consistency between the FREL and the 
results of the activities is ensured, and the LULUCF experts concluded 
that the results are accurate to the extent possible  
 
(vi) How many  years are there between the last year of the FREL period, 
and the year corresponding to the results being proposed for payments?  2 The recalculated FREL covers the period 1993 -2012. Payments are 
requested for the years 2014 -2016  
(vii) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
considering national capabilities and circumstances?  
0 The technical annex discusses uncertainty of selected parameters 
but does not provide information on aggregate uncertainties.  
The technical annex was submitted on by Indonesia on 21 December 
2018 , so before 2019   
(viii) Has information been provided on payments that have been (or 
are expected to be) received from other sources for results recognized 
by the countrya from the same national or subnational area during the 
period for which a country is proposing to receive payments from GCF? 
And has the count ry provided sufficient assurance that results already  
paid for by other sources have been excluded from the total volume 
offered to GCF?  2 
 The FP states that a s of now, Indonesia has not yet received any 
REDD+ results -based payments from any donors or other sources.  
 
However, the FP mentions p ayments that are expected to be 
received . Under the Indonesia -Norway Partnership, Indonesia has 
reported 7.4 MtCO2e/yr a s results for 2017. The year 2017 has been 
excluded entirely from this GCF proposal. There is, therefore, no risk 
of double payments for this year. The exclusion of 2017 was a 
decision taken exclusively for this GCF proposal.  
(ix) Are the results proposed  to GCF for payment included in a registry 
or similar system, that tracks emission reductions and corresponding 
paymentsb to ensure there is no past or future double payment (or use) 
of such emissions reduction?  2 Indonesia has established a National Registry System (or SRN) for the 
implementation of REDD+ at national and subnational levels. The SRN 
is intended for: data collection action and support for climate change 
including on REDD+ actions and resources and fo r the avoidance of 
double counting . The SRN includes data and information on the 
FREL/FRL, MRV of results, as well as the contribution to achievement


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 116 
 
 
of the NDC. The National Registry System Manager is responsible for 
maintaining consistency between data a nd information on the 
implementation of REDD+ at the national and subnational levels and 
avoidance of double counting.  
Total score section B  36  
Any fails  ☐ Yes   ☒ No  
a Through the REDD -plus national entity or focal point, where appointed.  
b For each of these results, tracking information should identify (at a minimum) the corresponding national or subnational area , the entity eligible to receive payment, 
the year generated, and the source of results -based payments received and, w here possible, the identifying number.  
 
 
Section C: Non -carbon elements  
C.1. Cancun Safeguards  
Does the summary of information on safeguards provide information on how each of the safeguards below were addressed and resp ected in a way  that ensures 
transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness ? 
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/ Fail) Remarks   
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of 
national forest programmes and relevant international conventions 
and agreements.  Pass  The actions complement and are consistent with the National REDD+  
Strategy  and related policies and strategies.  
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, 
taking into account national legislation and sovereignty.  Pass  The structures  fully complement the ongoing work on transparency 
and effective governance structures including national legislation 
and sovereignty.  
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and 
members of local communities, by taking into accou nt relevant 
international obligations, national circumstances and laws, and noting 
that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  Pass  The summary provides adequate information and  
overview of how the respect for the knowledge and rights 
of indigenous people have been fully observed and 
integrated.


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 117 
 
 
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in 
particular indigenous peoples and local communities, in the actions 
referred to in paragraphs 70 and 72 of this decision.  Pass  The summary provides sufficient adequate details on how 
the participation of relevant stakeholders have been 
fulfilled.  
(v) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural 
forests and biological diversity, ensuring that the actions referred to 
in paragraph 70 o f this decision are not used for the conversion of 
natural forests, but are instead used to incentiviz e the  12 protection 
and conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and 
to enhance other social and environmental benefits.  Pass  
The actions are well described and provides adequate details  
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  Pass  
(vii) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions.  Pass  
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/F ail) Remarks  
Has information been provided on how proceeds will be used 
consistent with GCF policies? Has information been provided on how 
the proceeds will be used in a manner consistent with the country’s 
NDC, national REDD- plus  strategy and/or low carbon development 
plans and policies? Has information been provided on how the 
proceeds will be used in a manner that contributes to the long -term 
sustainability of REDD -plus activities, including non -carbon benefits?   
2 The use of proceeds are described in detail and fully consistent with 
GCF policies as well as how they are fully consistent with national 
priorities.  
Total score section C  2  
Any fails  ☒ Yes   ☐ No  
 
Section D: Investment framework  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(High/ Medium/ Low)  Remarks


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 118 
 
 
Impact potential  High  
 ☒ The relevant mitigation and/or adaptation impact is specified.  
☒ The GCF core indicators (and other indicators) are provided with specific values.  
☒ Methodologies provided for calculating non -GHG indicators are clear and robust.  
☒ The proposal compares the indicator values against appropriate benchmarks to 
demonstrate the impact potential.   
Paradigm shift potential  
 High  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the potential for scaling up to the country’s NDC, national REDD -plus strategy 
and/or low -carbon development plans and policies.  
☒ explains how the programme contributes to strengthening knowledge and learning.  
☒ describes how proposed measu res will create an enabling environment and contribute 
to innovation, market development and transformation.  
☒ explains how the programme strengthens the regulatory framework and policies.  
☒ demonstrates paradigm shift potential for catalysing impact b eyond a one -off payment.  
Sustainable development potential 
 High  
 ☒ The proposal demonstrates environmental, social and economic impact, including the 
gender sensitive development impact.  
 
Needs of the recipient  
 High  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the degree of vulnerability of country/population and demonstrates that the 
programme addresses  the issues.   
☒ explains in detail how the programme addresses financial, economic, social and 
institutional needs.  
Country ownership  
 High  
 The proposal:  
☒ sufficiently explains how the programme contributes to a national climate strategy 
and/or policy.  
☒ specifies in detail how the multi- stakeholder consultation was conducted.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  High  The proposal : 
☒ clearly describes adequateness of the financial structure for cost -effectiveness and 
efficiency.


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 119 
 
 
☒ provides i nformation on financial viability in the long run.  
☒ explains in detail the application of best practices and the degree of innovation.  
Section E: GCF policies  
For the period of the results considered in the request for proposal  
Criteria  Evaluation ( Pass/ Fail) Remarks  
Environmental and s ocial  
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
assessment report describing the extent to which the measures undertaken to identify, 
assess and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, in the context of the 
REDD- plus  proposal, were consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS 
standards.  
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided that allows for an assessment of the 
historical performance of the activities undertaken (track record) against the risk 
tolerance levels specified in the r isk appetite statement and the criteria (where 
applicable) outlined in the r isk guidelines for funding proposals.  
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in the assessment describing the extent 
to which the measures undertaken complied with the GCF gender policy.  
The assessment by the AE determined the alignment of the PSB and the PLRs with its 
Social and Enviro nmental Standards which include an overarching principle of gender 
equality and women’s empowerment.  
Interim policy on prohibited 
practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided in a due diligence report to 
demonstrate that no prohibited practices occurred during the implementation of the 
activities that lead to the REDD -plus results, such as: undisclosed prohibited practices, 
inclu ding money laundering and the financing of terrorism occurred during the 
implementation of results -based actions; and double payment or financing for the same 
results achieved.  
For the use of proceeds  
Criteria  Evaluation ( Pass/ Fail) Remarks  
Environmental and social  
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
management framework that will describe how environmental and social risks and


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 120 
 
 
impacts will be identified, assessed and managed in a manner consistent with ESS 
standards  of GCF , including the determination of the relevant environmental and social 
risk category of the proposed activities.  
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided  that details how the plan for the use of 
proceeds does not violate the risk tolerance levels specified in the risk appetite statement 
and allows for performance monitoring and evaluation against the criteria (where 
applicable) outlined in the r isk guidelin es for funding proposals.  
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided  on how the AE will undertake an 
activity -level gender assessment and action plan once the details of the activities become 
known.  
Monitoring and e valuation  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided  on how the activities to be undertaken 
with GCF proceeds comply with the GCF monitoring and a ccountability framework.  
Policy  on prohibited practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided that assures that the activities with 
use of proceeds will follow the interim policy on prohibited practices, such as: undisclosed 
prohibited practices, including money laundering and the financing of terrorism; 
improper subsequent use of GCF proceeds in the prohibited practices; and double 
payment or financing for the same results achieved, etc.  
Indigenous Peoples  policy  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided on how the activities will meet the 
requirements of the policy and guided by the prevailing relevant national laws and/or 
obligations of the countries directly applicable to the activities under relevant 
international treaties and agreements.  
Section F: GCF legal arrangements  
E.6.1. Legal title to REDD -plus results  
Requirement  Remarks  Status 
(Complete/ Pending)  
☒ Analysis with respect to legal title to REDD -plus results in the 
country is provided. It includes an analysis of entitlement to claim 
for the results to be paid for by GCF.  
   Under Indonesian legislation, the Ministry of Finance is the 
entity with authority to receive, distribute and manage 
REDD+ results -based payments (Ministry of Finance 
Regulation No. 137/PMK.01/2019 and Presidential 
Regulation No. 77 of 2018).   
Complete


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 121 
 
 
Results paid  for are recorded in the National Registry on 
Climate Change and cannot be transferred or otherwise 
transacted.    
The following measures will be taken to ensure that the GCF 
Volume of ERs will not be transferred and/or used for any 
other purposes e.g. off setting:  
1. The GCF Volume of ERs, expressed in tonnes 
CO2/year will be registered in the Lima REDD+ Information 
Hub on the UNFCCC REDD+ Web platform (“ Info Hub” );  
2. The Project Document (as defined below) will 
stipulate that (i) the GCF Volume of ERs will be  retired, (ii) 
GCF Volume of ERs will not be transfered or used for any purposes other than those set out in the Funding Proposal, 
and (iii) any breach under the Project Document (as defined 
below) will result in the exercise of remedies pursuant to the 
TOR; and  
3. The GCF Volume of ERs are included in Indonesia’s 
National Registry System on Climate Change that tracks 
emission reductions and corresponding payments to ensure 
there is no past or future double payment or use of such ERs.  
 
☒ A covenant provided that no other party has a competing claim 
to the results proposed to GCF in accordance with national policy, 
legal or regulatory frameworks.  A covenant is included in the term sheet   
Complete  
Section G: Accredited entity fee  
Requirement  Remarks  Status 
(Complete/ Pending)  
Is the proposed list of activities clearly specified and justifiable as 
part of the AE fee?  Yes, the accredited entity fee includes properly justified 
information on the use of the expected fees by the AE  Complete


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add.02  
Page 122 
 
 
Is the fee amount considered reasonable and justifiable?  The agreed amount was 3.5% which is reasonable 
considering the nature of this results -based payments 
proposal which requires less responsibilities from the AE to 
the GCF and a simplified reporting. Although it is also 
acknowledged that the AE will need to implement additional 
activities specific to REDD -plus  Complete  
Is the proposed list of activities justifiable as part of the P roject 
Management Cost (PMC) ?  The proposed activities included in the PMC seem 
reasonable.  Complete  
Is the PMC  amount considered adequate and justifiable?  Although the PMC costs seem significantly high compared to 
other projects with similar activities, the amount was 
defined in agreement  between the host country and the AE, 
considering that the PMC costs are included within the 
payments provided to the host country,  Complete


---
*Page 123*
---

G
CF/B.26/02/Add.02  
Page 123 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP130 
Proposal name:  Indonesia REDD- plus RBP for results period 2014 -2016  
Accredited entity:  United Nations  Development Programme  (UNDP)  
Country(/ies):  Indonesia 
Project/programme size: Medium 
I. Scorecard application
1. As per decision B.18/07 , the proposal has been  assessed using  the scorecard for REDD -
plus  results- based payments ( RBPs) . This assessment has  been conducted by the S ecretaria t
w
ith the support of L and Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry ( LULUCF ) experts . The
p
reliminary results will be  discussed with the independent Technical Advisor y Panel ( TAP). Th e
fi
nal score will  need to be  discussed and agreed with the independent TAP.
1.1 Summary of scorecard results  
Table 1:   Scorecard results  (see annex 1 for details)  
Scorecard section  Results  
Carbon elements Score: 36 All criteria “pass”  
Non -carbon 
elements  Cancun Safeguards  All criteria “pass”  
Use of proceeds and non- carbon 
benefits  Score: 2 
GCF investment framework  All criteria “high”  
GCF policies  All criteria “pass”  
1.2 Proposed payments  
2. Following the procedure defined in the terms of reference, the following equation was
applied to estimate the volume of results to be translated into  payments :
Volume of ERs offered (x) Total score achieved  = GCF volume of ERs  
Maximum score  
Abbreviation:  ERs = emission reductions


---
*Page 124*
---

G
CF/B.26/02/Add.02  
Page 124 
3. The resulting GCF volume of results and the proposed amount for payments are  
provided in table 2 below:
Table 2:  Resulting G CF volume of r esult s and p roposed a mount for p ayments 
Values  Results  
Volume of ERs offered:  27,000,000 tCO 2eq 
Total score achieved:  36 
Maximum score:  48 
Valuation of results: USD 5/tCO 2eq 
Non -carbon benefits  score : 2 GCF volume of ERs : 20,250,000  tCO 2eq 
Additional 2.5 per cent  of payments for 
non- carbon benefits 
Proposed results- based payments: 
USD 103,781,250  
Abbreviations:  ERs = emission reductions ; tCO 2eq = tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent.  
II. Main findings
4. The following paragraphs describe the main findings i n those sections of the scorecard
where the assessment was found to be lower than the maximum score for each criterion (s ee
d
etails in annex):
(a) B.1.(i) Consistency between the fo rest reference emissions level  (FREL) /forest
reference level  (FRL ) and the greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory. The Assessment
Team ( AT) noted that Indonesia achieved consistency between the FREL and th e
na
tional GHG inventory contained in its first biennial up date report (BUR) in terms of
using the same principal data sets ( see para . 39 of the technical assessment report
(TAR) ). However, the AT noted that the FREL applies a different forest definition than
that used in the national GHG inventory contained in Indonesia’s first BUR  (see para . 25
of the TAR). In its funding proposal , Indonesia explains that  it addressed consistency
concerns in the modified FREL submission. As explained in the exchanges with the AT ,
d
uring the technical assessment (TA), the definition of forest was not  changed in th e
FR
EL, but  plantations  were excluded  in accordance with  the REDD -plus  objectives and
shifted the focus on natural forests. Indonesia explained that  the definition used  can be
considered a “working definition” that also considers the concept of practicality and
cost -effectiveness associated with measuring REDD -plus  performance in the futur e.
Mo
reover , the AT noted in para . 25 of the TAR that the GHG inventory estimates
emissions and removals from forest land remaining forest land by taking into account
statistical wood harvesting data and adjustments for illegal logging. As to w hether these
estimates were fully consistent with the FREL data for forest degradation could not b e
as
sessed because the forest degradation estimates for the FREL were prepared using  a
d
ifferent methodology that applies emission factors based on different average carbon
stock va lues according to land- cover changes from primary to secondary forest, as
discovered by remote -sensing. In the modified FREL submission, Indonesia addressed
this concern by explaining that emissions from the further degradation of secondary
forest were not  included in the construction of the FREL because, at present, Indonesi a
d
oes not have the capacity or data to assess the different levels of degradation occurring
within secondary forests. In light of these findings, the score is 1 , “evidenc e
in
consistencies will be resolved in the next GHG inventory or FREL/FRL or  justified”;


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 125 
 
 
(b) B.1.(vi) Consistency of  the FREL/FRL  (data and methodologies applied). During the 
TA, Indonesia provided a large amount of background information and material, 
including land -cover m atrices for peatlands. The AT observed some discontinuity in 
these data that may indicate difficulties in ensuring consistency . According to the FREL 
submission, land -cover maps were derived largely using visual interpretation, with a 
large number of image  interpreters contributing to the task. The AT acknowledged the 
immense effort that went into building the time series of land -cover maps but  noted that 
maintaining a consistent interpretation approach across diverse interpreters is very difficult and that  this is a potential source of the observed discontinuity. In response, 
Indonesia explained that it is exploring ways to develop the existing  National Forest 
Monitoring System ( NFMS ), for example , by combining automated methods and visual 
interpretation, in order to improve the land -cover data. In line with this, in the view of 
the AT, quality management is an area for improvement  (see para s. 17 and 40 ( a) of the 
TAR ). Moreover, in paragraph 20 of the TAR , the AT noted that  in order  to identify 
activity data for soil organic carbon emissions from peatland drainage in areas subject to 
deforestation or forest degradation, the FREL submission overlays landcover maps with 
Indonesia’s peatland map. For d eforestation and forest degradation occurring on 
peatlands, additional emissions from the soil organic carbon pool are then calculated. These two data sets are not perfectly harmonized.  During the TA, Indonesia 
acknowledged that such imperfect harmonizatio n may occur in “sliver areas”. While 
maps and definitions could technically be harmonized, Indonesia explained that fully 
harmonizing data sets would require collaboration and arrangements between several 
ministry -level agencies and is therefore not easy t o achieve. The AT acknowledged  that 
Indonesia has plans to improve peatland mapping and agree d that ensuring consistency 
between the land -cover map and the peatland map is an area for improvement . 
Consequently, the score is 1, “ Significant issues were raised and were resolved; or issues 
that were not resolved due to the limitation of time and data but were not material to 
the consistency of the FREL/FRL, and the country has provided a plan on how it will 
seek to overcome them ”; 
(c) B.1.(vii) Accuracy of the FRE L. The AT pointed out a couple of areas for future 
technical improvement related to the accuracy of the FREL: ( i) to improv e accuracy and 
consistency in satellite image interpretation, time series satellite images could be 
directly compared and automated i mage processing techniques could be introduced  (see 
para . 40(a) of the TAR) ; and (ii) Indonesia  should  broaden the scope of the uncertainty 
analysis to cover further potential sources of error and differentiat e between land -cover 
classes with regard to emi ssion factors and activity data  (see para . 41(b) of the TAR). 
Additionally, the review of the funding proposal  by the i ndependent TAP found that both 
the FREL assessed by the AT and the one included in the funding proposal contain 
calculation errors that significantly modify the FREL. In both FRELs, Indonesia calculates 
the historical average emissions from deforestation and degradat ion by dividing the 
sum of annual average emissions in each measurement period, regardless of the period ’s 
length in years, by the number of measurement periods ( i.e. seven ). Instead, the FREL 
should have been calculated as the sum of annual averages over the reference period divided by the number of years in such period. The differences arising from this error 
were estimated by the i ndependent TAP to be around 37,800,857  tonnes of carbon 
diox ide equivalent ( tCO
2eq) for 2014, 37,800,345  tCO 2eq for 2015 and 37,799,834  
tCO 2eq for 2016 . In all cases , the FREL estimated by Indonesia was lower than the one 
calculated by the i ndependent TAP. In its revised funding proposal , Indonesia revised 
the FREL  so it  represent ed an annual average over the historical period. Therefore, the 
score is 1, “Significant issues were raised and were resolved; or issues that were not 
resolved due to the limitation of time and data but were not material to the accuracy of


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 126 
 
 
the FREL/FRL, and the country has provided a plan on how it will seek to overcome 
them” ; 
(d) B.1.(ix) Inclusion of the most significant pools  in the FREL/FRL . The FREL limits its 
scope to above -ground biomass and soil organic carbon on organic soils,  which are the 
most significant pools in terms of emissions from forests  (see para . 37 of the TAR) . 
However, t he AT consider ed the i nclusion of other significant pools, such as below -
ground biomass, deadwood and soil organic carbon , as an area for technical 
improvement  (see para . 41(c) of the TAR) . Moreover, in its fund ing proposal  (section 
B.1.1 (ix)) , Indonesia points out that below -ground biomass  is being considered for 
inclusion in the resubmission of the national FREL to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) planned for 2020 . Consequently, the score is 1, 
“No, but justified due to lack of data and/or the omission does not overestimate 
emissions or underestimate removals, noting that countries should indicate a plan to 
include data in the future” ; 
(e) B.1.(x) Inclusion of all significant sourc es of emissions. The submitted FREL includes 
only CO 2 emissions and does not cover emissions of other GHGs. The submission states 
that CO 2 contributes more than 99.9 per cent of total GHG emissions from LULUCF. The 
AT noted that, according to Indonesia’s first BUR as well as its second national communication, fires occur frequently in the country and these could result in large 
amounts of no n-CO
2 emissions, in particular on peatland forests. Consequently, t he AT 
consider ed the inclusion of non -CO 2 GHG emissions an area for technical improvement  
(see para . 31 of the TAR) . As shared with the LULUCF experts during the TA , the funding 
proposal (section B.1.1 (x)) points out that Indonesia has already been making progress 
on peatland fire emission estimates by collating new findings from published peer 
reviewed literature. Advancing remote -sensing technology to improve burned scar  and 
peat depth of burn estimation mapping w ill increase the accuracy of peat fire emission 
calculations so that these estimates may be included as an improvement in a future 
FREL. Progress has already been made to develop a methodology applying the manual 
analysis of Moder ate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS ) data for “hot 
spots” and yearly burned scar areas . In light of this, the score is 1, “ No, but justified due 
to lack of data and/or the omission does not overestimate emissions, noting that 
countries should in dicate a plan to include data in the future” ; 
(f) B.1.(xii) Significant issues related to the application of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) Guidelines ( GLs )/Good Practice Guidance ( GPGs ) in the 
construction of the FREL/FRL . Indonesia’s FREL includes soil organic carbon 
emissions from peatland decomposition associated with deforestation and forest 
degradation on peatlands. The AT noted that while the emission factors from the 
wetlands supplement are intended to be applied only to “drained organic soils”, the 
FREL does not distinguish areas with and without drainage. During the facilitative 
exchange for the TA, Indonesia explained that deforestation and forest degradation on 
peatlands are us ually accompanied by drainage. Indonesia  also included information in 
the modified FREL submission explaining that it is impossible to trace back the drained 
and the negligibly small areas  of undrained secondary peat forest , and therefore 
Indonesia conside red it justifiable  to consider all the secondary forests as drained 
forests. The AT noted that the FREL submission does not currently include data to 
substantiate this, but that the submission does, however, highlight Indonesia’s plans to improve the data on peatlands, chiefly about  emission factors and their dependency on 
the water table. The AT acknowledged these plans and agreed that collecting more detailed data on the management of peatlands is an area for improvement ( see para . 21 
of the TAR).  The sco re is therefore 1, “ Significant issues were raised and could not be


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 127 
 
 
resolved due to the limitation of time and data, and the country has provided a plan on 
how it will seek to overcome them”;  
(g) B.1.(x iii) Reference period for the FREL/FRL . The reference peri od applied for the 
construction of the UNFCCC technically assessed FREL  was 1990 –2012. However, 
following the guidance contained in footnote 3 of row 2a(xiii) of the scorecard, 
Indonesia recalculated its reference level based on a period of 20 years  and in cluded 
these estimates in its funding proposal . The score is 1, as the reference period is 
between 5 –9 or 16 –20 years ; 
(h) B.1.(xiv) How does the reference level for the results included in the proposal compare to the previous reference level that applies to the same area . No previous 
REDD -plus  reference level had been submitted by Indonesia to the UNFCCC , thus the 
score is 1 ; 
(i) B.1.(xv) Inclusion of information on aggregate uncertainties. Indonesia did not provide information on aggregate uncertainti es related to its FREL (which was 
submitted in 2016, according to para.  1 of the TAR). The score is 0 ; and  
(j) B.2.(vii) I nformation on aggregate uncertainties associated with the results. 
Indonesia does not provide information on aggregate uncertainties relat ed to the 
results;  thus the score is 0.  
2.1 Impact potential                           Scale: High  
5. Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous nation with a population of around 267.3 
million and is also the largest economy in Southeast Asia and the tenth  in the world. It is a 
diverse archipelago nation of more than 300 ethnic groups and is one of 17 “mega diverse” 
countries rich in biodiversity and all types of natural resources .1  
6. Natural- resource -based production (minerals, energy, agriculture, forestry , and fishing) 
accounted for one -fifth of value added in 2017 .2 The economic growth of the country  has been 
accompanied by a  decline  in forest cover . The change during 2005 –2015 was the world's largest 
after that of Brazil. Illegal forest and peatland fires were used  to clear land, notably for  oil palm  
and timber plantations. The large islands of Sumat ra and Kalimantan have been particularly 
affected, with deforestation on these two islands alone accounting for almost 90 per  cent of 
national forest loss .3 
7. A moratorium on new concessions for plantations and logging of primary forests and 
peatlands has been in place since 2011 but has not been fully effective (Austin et al., 2017; 
Busch et al., 2015). In 2018 the p resident signed a three -year moratorium on new licenses for 
oil palm plantations. More clarity over land rights and better law enforcement would  help 
control deforestation .4  
8. In the  technical annex of its  BUR , Indonesia reported  the results of implementing  REDD -
plus activities for 2013 –2017, calculated against the FREL, which amount to emission 
reductions of 48,978,427 tCO 2eq annually (average of annual emissions) and 244,892,135 
tCO 2eq as the total for 2013 –2017. The reference period applied for the construction of the 
UNFCCC technically assessed FREL was 1990 –2012.  
 
1 See < https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/indonesia/overview >. 
2 OECD Economic Survey Indonesia . 
3 See < https://forestdeclaration.org/the -latest/case -study -indonesia#_edn1 >. 
4 OECD Economic Survey Indonesia .


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 128 
 
 
9. The funding proposal is accounting the period 2014 –2016 for determini ng the volume 
to be offered to GCF for REDD -plus  RBPs . The 2013 results are not eligible for the GCF REDD -
plus RBP pilot programme, given that the start date is December 2013 , and the 2017 results 
have been negotiated and committed as part of the Indonesia/Norway partnership. It is worth 
mentioning that Indonesia has not received any payments for REDD -plus results for the period 
2014 –2016 from any other source.  
10. In this proposal, Indonesia is seeking RBPs  for the emission reductions of 9 MtCO 2eq 
annually (a verage of annual emissions) and 27 MtCO 2eq as the total for 2014 –2016 .  
11. In 2015, Indonesia, on a voluntary basis, proposed and submitted to the UNFCCCC 
secretariat the national FREL based on average historical emissions from 1990 to 2012 , 
covering REDD- plus activities. The FREL, which  successfully pas sed the technical assessment by 
UNFCCC experts in 2016, includes only natural forests , which in 1990 covered an area of 113.2 
million hectares, comprising up to 60 per cent of the national territory and 78.6 per cent of the 
country’s total forest land ( excluding plantation forests). The assessed FREL of Indonesia was 
568,859,881 tCO 2eq for 2013 , but increases annually because of accumulating emissions from 
peat decomposition, reaching 593,329,235 tCO 2eq for 2020.  
12. However, Indonesia’s FREL reference period exceeds the maximum of 20 years, 
required by  the GCF REDD -plus  RBP scorecard.  Following  the guidance contained in footnote 22 
of row 2a(xiii) of the terms of reference for the GCF scorecard, the historical reference period  
used for Indonesia ’s UNFCCC FREL was modified to cover a  period of 20 years (1993 –2012).  
13. The independent TAP review of the funding proposal  found that both the FREL assessed 
by the AT and the one included in the funding proposal  contain ed calculation errors that 
significantly modif ied the FREL. In both FRELs, Indonesia calculated  the historical average 
emissions from defor estation and degradation by dividing the sum of annual average emissions 
in each measurement period, regardless of the period ’s length in years, by the number of 
measurement periods ( seven ). Instead, the FREL should have been calculated as the sum of 
annua l averages over the reference period divided by the number of years in such period. The 
differences arising from this error were estimated by the i ndependent TAP to be around 
37,800,857 tCO 2eq for 2014, 37,800,345 t CO 2eq for 2015 and 37,799,834 t CO 2eq for 2016 . In all 
cases , the FREL estimated by Indonesia was lower than the one calculated by the i ndependent 
TAP. In its revised funding proposal , Indonesia changed  the FREL  so it represented  an annual 
average over the historical period. The recalculated FREL period still draws on data for all 
interval periods , which were analysed  for the technical assessed FREL starting in 1990. The 
resulting annual average across the reference level period i s calculated as seen in table 1. 
Table 1:  Recalculated 1993 –2012 forest reference emission level and corresponding results  
Years  Total FREL  
(1993 –2012)  Total actual emissions  
(tCO2eq)  Total emission 
reductions  (tCO2eq)  
2014  568,988,033  369,384,991  199,603,043  
2015  568,988,033  574,438,172  (5,450,138)  
2016  568,988,033  618,151,083  (49,163,049)  
Total    144,989,855  
Abbreviations : FREL = forest reference emission level, tCO2eq = tonnes  of carbon dioxide equivalent.  
14. The project proponents specifically noted  that t his recalculation  is exclusively for the  
purpose of this funding proposal and does  not impact the UNFCCC FREL or results already 
submitted or reported in the BUR technical annex , and technically assessed or analy sed, 
respectively. It does not necessary pre -empt future submissions to the UNFCCC by Indonesia.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 129 
 
 
15. In calculating the FREL, it is worth pointing out that peat decomposition accounts for a 
large portion of Indonesia’s  emiss ions. Indonesia has included soil organic carbon emissions 
from peat decomposition in the UNFCCC FREL in the spirit of including all significant pools and 
sources of emissions, despite the fact that its omission from the FREL might have been justified 
by the high level of uncertainty associated with these emissions. However, emission factors 
from peatland still require a lot of improvement , as current estimates were based on IPCC 
default values with 50  per cent  uncertainty. Moreover, in order to reflect the fact that peat 
decomposition in drained peatland areas generates  CO 2 emissions for long periods of time , 
Indonesia decided to take an in creasing ly linear trend approach to estimate such emissions in 
the FREL submitted to the UNFCCC .  
16. Considering  the above, the independent TAP  noticed that the requirements of the GCF 
RBP pilot programme do not allow for increasing FREL emissions from non -high forest low 
deforestation countries.  Following the independent TAP  assessment, this has been modified to 
represent a historical annual average with a recalculated FREL for all activities and carbon pools reaching 568,988,033 tCO
2eq for 2020 for the purpo se of this funding proposal.  
17. With regard to  Indonesia 's remark in highlighting that the scorecard does not consider 
this very important element of its own national circumstances, the independent TAP  would like 
to suggest that the GCF S ecretariat and the B oard revise the scorecard,  which  has already shown  
a lack of clarity in certain aspects regarding  the REDD -plus  RBP pilot program me. It must be 
noted that limiting the use of increasing FRELs due to the  country’s status as high forest low 
deforestation  is exclusive to the scorecard, as the UNFCCC decisions refer more widely to 
national circumstances to justify FREL adjustments.  
18. Based on a well -developed National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS) initiated  in 2012, 
Indonesia  made a real reduction in emissions during 2014 –2016, aside from the setback in 
2015 when massive fires burned large swaths of peatland. The 2015 fires also led to Indonesia taking various steps to detect and prevent forest fires. The fires led to new and enhanced 
regulations, the establishment of a Peatland Restoration Agency, and increased policy priorit ies 
for fire prevention, law enforcement and social forestry. From 2015 onwards, fires can be  
delineated from Landsat , with initial indications of the hotspots.  
19. The use of the proc eeds will further strengthen the Government  of Indonesia ’s capacity 
to coordinate and implement its REDD+ Strategy nationally. The support to update and further 
develop the overall REDD -plus  architecture includes the areas of FRL;  national forest 
monitorin g system s; measurement, reporting and verification  capacit ies; and  safeguards 
information system s, among others. It will also aim to strengthen the G overnment  of Indonesia ’s 
capacity for REDD -plus  coordination and implementation at the national, provincial  and local 
levels.  
20. The proceeds will also be used to further extend and enhance the operationalization of 
social forestry and f orest management units (FMU s), which  contribut e to sustainable forest  
management and rehabilitation as well as community empowerment and poverty alleviation. Both social forestry and FMU s will improve forest governance, helping address  the rate of 
deforestation and forest degradation and meet REDD- plus  objectives.  The progr amme will 
devolve  access to and management of forest land and resources to communities in adequate 
areas, refining social forestry. 
21. RBPs provide Indonesia with a major opportunity in the fight against deforestation, 
complementing  the overall strategy of th e country , which  has proven to be effective. RBPs alone 
cannot carry the whole financing weight , nor can they be a substitute for decisive political 
support and a high level of ambition.  
22. The impact of the RBP cannot  only be judged by the results of the pa st, but it can be 
judged mainly for the continuous improvement of the country’s deforestation strategy and the


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 130 
 
 
effective use of proceeds. The refinement of the REDD- plus  architecture , together with the 
strengthening of the FMUs  and the passing  of more resp onsibility to communities in different 
regions of Indonesia to manage forest land , will certainly have the potential to have an impact 
on the fight to combat deforestation. However, the social forestry strategy has not  been  shown 
to be as successful as exp ected so far, and it therefore needs to be accelerated and scaled  up. 
Moreover, as communities are not the ones making the biggest impacts in terms of 
deforestation, there needs to be  a more evident effort to include the major land owners  and 
forest concessions, uniting  communities and enterprises located in the selected areas in a 
common approach towards deforestation and regeneration.  
23. It is reassuring to note that the official defor estation numbers of the G overnment  of 
Indonesia  show that the rate of forest loss has continue d to decline after 2016 . The data 
reported deforestation of 440,000 hectares in 2018, slightly lower than the 2017 figure  of 
480,000 hectares. Indonesia seems to be moving in the right direction to achieve its NDC 
forestry sector goal of limiting  annual deforestation to 325,000 hectares between 2020 and 
2030.  
24. However, Indonesia is so big and diverse that there is also a need to look at specific 
regions and target the main hotspots of  deforestation. For example, the provinces  of East 
Kalimantan, Maluku and West Papua experienced a 43  per cent , 40 per cent , and 36  per cent  
increase in deforestation in 2018 , respectively, compared to 2017 ,5 and provinces like C entral 
Kalimantan , Riau  and West Kalimantan have seen the most loss of forests by total area. The 
funding proposal will  focus actions on 11 regions that have formulated provincial REDD -plus  
strategies and action plans (SRAPs) to support regional interventi ons: Aceh, East Kalimantan, 
Central Kalimantan, Central Sulawesi, Jambi, Papua , Riau, South Sumatera,  West Papua , West 
Kalimantan  and West Sumatera. Efforts to save the rich biodiversity and uniqueness of these 
forest areas is of crucial importance.  
25. Finall y, the forest moratorium should be strongly enforced to avoid leakage, especially 
by avoiding pressure to clear forests in peatlands.  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential                         Scale: High  
26. Indonesia ’s vast forest areas  and rich biodiversity make it a unique country to prove  the 
efficacy of the  REDD -plus  program. Compared to other countries, Indonesia has made great 
progress to reduce deforestation in recent years. It has been one of the few exceptions of the GCF REDD -plus RBP pilot program me where , aside from the results of the RBP period, the 
country continues to slow deforestation rates.  The country has been implementing STRANAS 
since 2012 and has complemented it with the REDD -plus  SRAPs in the 11 RED D-plus  pilot 
provi nces.  
27. Indonesia made an early commitment in 2009 to reduce GHG emissions by 26  per cent  
by 2020 , or by 41 per  cent if international assistance was forthcoming. In 2011 , the Government  
of Indonesia  decided to issue a presidential instruction ( hereinafter  the “moratorium ”). 
postponing the issuance of new permits for  concessions in natural primary forest and peatlands 
This moratorium was extended on f our occasions : (in 2011, 2013, 2015  and 2017 ) and was  
recently made permanent in Augus t 2019. The permanent status  of the moratorium on forest 
concessions has been applauded by many, hoping that it achieves further reduction s in 
deforestation.   
 
5 See < https://wri -indonesia.org/en/blog/indonesia -reducing -deforestation -problem- areas -remain >.


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 131 
 
 
28. However, and as noted by the World Resources Institute ,6 Indones ia has focused more 
on REDD and less on addressing the “plus” components, which include forest conservation. For 
example,  a recent analysis found that protecting the primary forest of Papua, coupled with the 
restoration of degraded lands, could avoid 2.8–3.3 gigaton nes CO 2 emissions, which is like the 
baseline emissions projected for 2030 in Indonesia’s NDC. Failing to protect these primary 
forests could put the government’s emission reduction target out of reach.7 The same analysis 
by the World Resources I nstitute  notes that , due to the rapid deforestation of biodiversity  
hotspot  areas, there could be a need to expand the moratorium policy by including high -
biodiversity forests and degraded forests with high  carbon stocks. The use of the proceeds of 
the proposal will target important biodiversity areas as noted above, but more effort should be 
given to the “conservation” component to make a real paradigm shift.  
29. The use of the proceeds  of the proposal will target two different but related outcomes. 
The fir st outcome will be to continue updating, building and strengthening its REDD -plus  
architecture, and to further strengthen government capacity to coordinate and implement 
REDD -plus  nationally. Within this framework there could be elements of innovation , such as the 
development of a web -based application system for FREL development and REDD -plus  
performance calculation s at the national and subnational level, the develop ment  and 
operationalization of a spatial monitoring system for emissions from the land and the 
improvement and operationalization of the n ational and subnational (local to  provincial)  
REDDplus  reporting system. The size of the country, the remoteness of some areas and the 
evident need to  decentralize  management and control o f the use of forest r esources mean that  
effective tools to monitor deforestation and forest degradation  are required . 
30. Regarding  the second outcome , the use of the proceeds will support decentralized 
sustainable forest governance. The G overnment of Indonesia is rightly advancin g to decentralize 
the sustainable management of forests through the operationalization of FMUs. The country 
needs to have the necessary  capacity at the provincial level to be able to manage natural 
resources in an accurate manner. The FMUs  are responsible for developing, implementing 
and/or overseeing site -level forest governance and management , including preparing 
participatory plans, enforcing forest regulations,  such as forest fire control and other illegal 
practices, and supporting local communities and  villages in applying for one of the 
arrangements available under the s ocial forestry programme. The idea to have joint authority 
by central and local governments over the state forests is interesting, as it promotes the 
effective imp lementation of the national policies while allowing local governments to act. The 
independent TAP  believes that  the effective decentralization of the governance of the REDD -
plus  scheme will certainly be innovative, especially if the G overnment  of Indonesia  retains 
financial leverage through the recently established environmental fund  to give a clear political 
signal that resources will be channelled  only to those provinces able to implement their 
provincial REDD -plus  strategies and action plans.  
31. The Governm ent of Indonesia has had a clear understanding of social forestry since 
1970. The country started a community -based management forestry program me targeting  2.5 
million hectares of social forests, which was scaled up in 201 4 to 12.7 million hectares between  
2015 and 2019. The overall objective of the social forestry programme  is to reduce poverty 
among forest -dependent people while reducing deforestation and forest degradation, improving 
land management and conserving forests and valuable ecosystem functions. According to the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, there are 25,863 villages located in or around forest 
areas (2017), representing 37.2 million individuals or 9.2 million households, of which 
approximately 1.7 million are classified as poor. The pro gramme involves selecting, 
demarcating and registering access and/or ownership rights, as well as supporting the 
 
6 Indonesia Is Reducing Deforestation, but Problem Area s Remain. World Resources Institute , Wijaya et all, July 2019  
7 See < https://www.wri.org/blog/2019/07/indonesia -reducing -deforestation -problem- areas -remain >.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 132 
 
 
development of economic activities compatible with the existing forest cover and land status. 
However, the social forestry program me has been s low, and , by 2019 , only 3.4 million hectares 
of forest had been distributed for social forestry.  
32. In moving forward, the  Government of Indonesia’s firs t priority is to continue to assist 
Adat (indigenous communities) and  non- Adat communities, villages and individuals in 
obtaining  licenses available through the six different schemes of social forestry, thereby 
increasing the size of forests under this programme. The second priority is to improve rural 
livelihoods issuing  permit s or rights to holders  through t he implementation of various 
management or development plans.  
33. The independent TAP believes that the social forestry  program me could end up proving 
a paradigm shift  if the G overnment  of Indonesia  continues to resolve legal and regulatory 
bottlenecks and strengthens the Forest Management Unit s specifically responsible to oversee  
the social forestry programme . 
2.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale: High  
34. The historic and contemporary rat es of deforestation in Indonesia suggest a changing 
trend in the government  approach , which is  seeing the consequences of alarming deforestation 
rates in ecosystem services and is acting to prevent further forest and biodiversity loss.   
35. Conserving the rema ining forests of Indonesia is of paramount importance not only for 
the sustainable development of the country but also for the world at large. These forests are not 
only vital as carbon storehouses ; they are also home to some of the richest biodiversity on  the 
planet. As noted above, the use of the proceeds and the REDD- plus  strategy should focus more 
in the conservation component, especially in rich biodiversity hotspots in the country.  
36. The benefits of standing forests are also crucial to regulat ing rain a nd water provision 
for consumption and agriculture. Ensuring water for agriculture is only possible if the 
ecosystem services provided by forests are guaranteed. Other non -carbon benefits include the 
mitigation of soil erosion and soil stabilization.   
37. Impr oved forest governance will not only increase transparency , but it will also allow 
for a multi- stakeholder approach to forest governance and management , provid ed that the 
national and regional governments, along with the c ommunity and individuals, are able  to and 
encouraged to participate in forestry supervision.  
38. The social forestry programme  will allow for a Forest Partnership Agreement, bri nging 
private sector individuals (or groups) and local communities or v illage s together to work on  
determin ing and implement ing plans to sustainably manage the forest resources within distinct 
areas of state forests. The agreements would  serve to  avoid potential conflicts between the 
communities that are dependent on the natural resources for their livelihoods and  the private 
sector users of the forests.  
39. It is also recognized that land tenure security, traditional knowledge,  and the distinct 
ways of life of these populations were of integral value to avoiding deforestation and achieving 
the national objectives of climate change mitigation through reduced GHG emissions.   
40. The social forestry program me will support the recognition of  land tenure of several 
communities and v illages still awaiting recognition as an Adat (indigenous) peoples, as well as 
recognition of their customary Adat forests (per titles). This is important not only to protect the 
forests on which community livelihoods depend but also to protect the traditional knowledge 
and cultural identity that is so incredibly diverse in Indonesia.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 133 
 
 
41. Moreover, soci al forestry will allow the communities to develop options based on the  
sustainable management of the forests with the establishment of community timber plantations 
and also the development of non -timber endeavo urs with economic benefits to increase their 
standards of living, reduce poverty levels and improve livelihoods.  
42. With regard to  Adat and local community, while collective rights of use, access,  and even 
ownership of lands and resources are not typically held by a single man or woman, many (not 
all) of  the benefits received through the social forestry programme  are expected to be shared 
communally, resulting in positive affect s in multiple sectors within the collective, with special 
focus on  women, youth and the elderly.  
43. Indonesia has gender gaps, which  are visible in education, employment and wages. The 
Gender Inequality Index ranks Indonesia 104 out of 160 countries  (2017). While the n ational 
constitution does provide a sound foundation for promoting equal rights between men and 
women, there is a n ational instruction  (9/2000) on gender mainstreaming in national 
development  that provides more precise instructions to enhance the position, role and qualities 
of women to achieve gender equality.  
44. Regarding  the social forestry program me, permits are usually granted to community 
groups that form local institutions, such as cooperatives and farmer forest groups,  which are  
normally headed by men. This limits access to the benefits from the initiatives by wome n, such 
as access to knowledge and capacity -building.  
45. The preliminary gender action plan provides suggested entry points for gender -
responsive actions to be taken under the applicable activities of the proposed project. The p lan 
will ensure a  gender analysis is conducted to inform gender -responsive project planning and 
implementation. In many cases, the project will need to collect baseline information to develop 
responsive actions.  The plan will also provide equal access to project activities and to decision -
making processes at all levels. It will further increase women ’s access to productive assets, 
including a benefit -sharing mechanism on forest resources.   
46. Overall, the independent TAP  believes that the use of the proceeds could provide a 
paradigm shift in the way regional governments and local communities are involved in the 
REDD -plus  scheme s in the country, giving special priority to indigenous communities (Adat 
communities), with an overarching national framework to improve the REDD- plus  architecture , 
including tools to better monitor and act to reduce deforestation and forest degradation.  
2.4 Needs of the recipient                          Scale: High  
47. In recent  decades , Indonesia ’s living standards have risen and the economy is more 
resilient. Gross domestic product  per capita has risen by 70  per cent  during the past two 
decades. Poverty rates have fallen in both rural and urban areas. Prudent macroeconomic 
policies and progress in structural reforms have been recognized by credit rating agencies, and 
Indonesia has climbed up international rankings on competitiveness and the business 
environment .8 Economic growth in recent years, before the coronavirus disease 19 ( COVID -19) 
crisis,  had stabilized around a  solid 5 per cent  range. The agricultural sector contributes 12.8  
per cent  to the country’s gross domestic product  and employs 30.2  per cent  of the active 
population. Indonesia is the largest producer of palm oil and the second -largest producer  of 
rubber in the world.  
48. For many years , Indonesia favo ured economic growth at the expense  of losing wealth in 
forests and biodiversity. Reversing the trend and transforming the business as usual  model that 
for years favo ured private sector enterprises dedicated to palm oil, forest concessions and 
 
8 See < http://www.oecd.org/economy/indonesia -economic -snapshot/ >.


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 134 
 
 
mining , among other  activities,  will be difficu lt, especially in rich biodiversity hotspot areas that 
drive the appetite of many potential investors.  
49. Nationally, palm oil plantations caused the largest portion of forest loss in 2001 –2016, 
driving 23 per  cent of deforestation. The next largest portion w as from fires that caused the 
conversion of forests to grass/shrubland, responsible for 20 per  cent of deforestation 
nationwide. The impact of forest fires was especially strong in 2015, a particularly dry year, 
which led to an unusually high number of for est fires. Timber plantations and smallholder 
agriculture were also significant drivers, each accounting for almost 15 per  cent of forest loss in 
the years 2001 –2016.9 
50. The expansion of the agricultural frontier and the lack of effective land tenure systems  
are great problems that will be further challenged by a changing climate. In recent years , climate 
change has had major impacts on the frequency and intensity of fires, and consequently there is a growing risk of wildfire -related deforestation (Langner an d Siegert, 2009). Under global 
warming, Indonesia is projected to experience significant changes in rainfall patterns, with 
substantial decreases in rainfall in coming years (Lestari et al., 2014) and increased frequency 
of extreme El Niño events (Cai et al., 2014).
10 
51. Controlling deforestation and ensuring regenerative agriculture will require  continuous 
efforts from the G overnment  of Indonesia  and global action to ensure deforestation -free value 
chains, especially in the palm oil, timber and rubber industri es. Indonesia is already seeing the 
effects of stronger import regulations by the European Union , Indonesia’s second largest palm 
oil importer and a key timber trade partner  and has voluntarily signed the Voluntary 
Partnership Agreement on Forest Law Enfor cement, Governance and Trade with the European 
Union. However, there are risks of  these markets  shifting  to supply Indian and Chinese markets, 
where sustainability requirements are less stringent.  
52. The government enacted  the moratorium in the context of a national strategy on REDD-
plus , a USD 1 billion bilateral c o-operative agreement with Norway signed in 20 10. Even though 
this agreement has been slow to go into effect,  the two countries have recently agreed to 
proceed with a first payment .11 Other governments and donors have also supported the ongoing 
efforts by Indonesia to control deforestation.  
53. The fact th at Indonesia has more than 300 islands spread over a vast geographical area  
makes it even harder to control deforestation. The resources from the GCF RBP s will represent 
just a small portion , and the amount estimated by the Government of Indonesia in the s econd 
BUR , which  includes a conservative estimation on financial needs from 2018 –2030 to meet the 
overall conditional target by 2030 of about USD 247 billion. The GCF RBP resources will come 
during  the recession caused by the COVID -19 crisis , which makes t hem even more important , 
especially to support vulnerable communities associated with  the social forestry scheme.  
54. Based on the size of the country, the degree of vulnerability of many different 
communities in the many islands of the country and the country ’s exposure to climate risks, the 
independent TAP believes there is sufficient justification with regard to the need  to support 
Indonesia.  
2.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
2.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy  
 
9 See < https://forestdeclaration .org/the -latest/case -study -indonesia#_edn6 >. 
10 See < https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378016305933>.  
11 See < https://forestdeclaration.org/the -latest/case -study -indonesia#_edn6 >.


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 135 
 
 
55. In 2011, Indonesia adopted a National Action Plan for Reducing Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions 2010 –2020 (RAN -GRK) that established the national emissions reduction target of 26  
per cent  below business as usual  by 2020, and up to 41  per cent  below business as usual  with 
adequate international support. The RAN -GRK provides the basis for the implementation of 
various mitigation actions in the forestry, agriculture, energy, transport, industry  and waste 
sectors. It sets  for the forestry sector: land and forest restoration targets , and social for estry 
targets.  
56. Within  the RAN -GRK, the country delivered a National Medium -Term Development Plan 
2015 –2019 with GHG emission reduction targets for five priority sectors (forestry and peat 
lands ; agriculture ; energy and transportation ; industry ; and waste).  
57. Moreover, in 2012 Indonesia released STRANAS , structured around five pillars: ( 1) 
institutions and processes ; (2) laws ; (3) strategic program mes;  (4) cultures and paradigm 
shifts; and  (5) multi-stakeholder involvement. The project presents a comprehensive  table that 
summarizes the status of implementation of each pillar, presenting several policies and 
measures that Indonesia has implemented.  
58. The STRANAS is complemented by the SRAPs in the 11  REDD -plus  pilot provinces. SRAP 
documents describe drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, strategies to address them,  
and plans for actions for REDD -plus  implementation based on the specific circumstances of each 
province. These documents guide the way to  mainstream climate change and REDD- plus  into 
subnational development planning processes and systems.  
59. Aside from policies, one of the most important instrument s has been the moratorium on 
the issuance of new concessions in primary forests and peatlands, renewed by p residential 
instruction every two years (2011, 2013, 2015, 2017), and most recently made permanent12 in 
August 2019. This m oratorium sends a clear and strong message about the importance of 
protecting peatlands , and it resulted in substantial emission reductions.  
60. The social forestry program me is part of President Joko Widodo ’s “just economy ” policy , 
which  is an ambitious land reform programme through which the G overnment  of Indonesia  
intends to redistribute control over 21.7 million hectares of lan d to communities (about 12  per 
cent  of the nation’s land area) . Of this,  16.8 million hectares are on forest land, including the 
12.7 million hectares to be covered by the  social forestry program me for enhanced sustainable 
forest management.  
61. The independen t TAP believes the country has the right policies and institutional 
framework s in place to move STRANAS forward in line with the purpose of the proposed 
project.  
2.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entit y and executing entities to deliver  
62. The Ministry of Finance will be the e xecuting entity (i.e. implementing partner) 
responsible for project management, monitoring and evaluation of the project interventions, 
and ensuring outcomes in line with the effective use of GCF resources. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MOEF) will be a c o-executing entity.  REDD -plus activities are  
coordinated by the REDD+ S ub-Directorate under the Directo rate General of Climate Change 
under this Ministry.  
63. The experience of MOEF includes the development of STRANAS, the FREL endorsed by 
the UNFCCC  and of the safeguards information system (SIS) . The GCF project will build on the 
vast experience of MOEF  in sus tainable forest management and sustainable land -use 
 
12 A copy of this Presidential Instructions in Indonesian language is available at <https://gapki.id/wp -
content/uploads/2019/08/Inpres -Nomor -5-Tahun -2019- Salinan.pdf >.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 136 
 
 
programmes, including through community forestry schemes;  the rehabilitation of degraded 
land and peatland restoration; increasing climate change adaptation capacity ; and GHG 
emission reduction s. In 2016 , MOEF managed  a budget  of IDR 5.95 trillion (around USD 450 
million) with an execution rate of 82.1  per cent . 
64. As the accredited entity to GCF , the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) 
will be responsible for supervising and providing technical backstopping during project 
implementation. UNDP has experience in developing REDD- plus  proposals for GCF as well as 
projects related to f orestry. UNDP has been a partner of MOEF since 2000, supporting the global 
and national biodiversity agenda, tackling clima te change mitigation and adaptation, and 
enhancing forest governance structures and practices with several program mes. 
65. There will be a project board composed of representatives of the Ministry of Finance, 
MOEF, UNDP and a representative of the civil societ y. The project board  will provide overall 
managerial guidance for project execution. UNDP will play the role of ensuring  quality 
assurance and supporting the p roject board by carrying out objective and independent project 
oversight and monitoring functions . 
66. The project national director will be a senior staff member of the Ministry of Finance 
and will be responsible at the highest level for providing guidance on the management and 
technical feasibility of the project and ensuring  that its implementation leads to the 
achievement of results. The p roject national director  will run the p roject management unit on a 
day-to-day basis within the constraints laid down by the p roject board . This will be done in 
close supervision with  UNDP and th e Ministry of Finance.  
67. The project management unit  will be hosted in the newly established Environmental 
Fund Management Agency (BPDLH) , under Directorate General Treasury of the Ministry of 
Finance.  This Ministry of Finance will establish fund that will p lay a key role in supporting 
REDD -plus  nationally and in further mainstreaming and strengthening REDD- plus  within 
Indonesia ’s public institutions and processes. P art of the activities of the funding proposal , is to 
strengthen the f und and build  capacity on  REDD -plus,  aiming to support its accreditation t o GCF 
for “direct access”.  
68. The Technical Committee , which already exists and is chaired by MOEF, will provide 
technical support to the project board. It includes relevant partners, technical experts and other 
stakeholders such as civil society organizations, academi cs, indigenous  peoples , local 
community and women ’s groups, the private sector , and other partners. In particular, and to 
address the activities that will be supported by the use of the proceeds, key partners supporting 
the REDD -plus  process , including those supporting the FMU  and social forestry programme, will 
be invited to partici pate to ensure adequate coordination as well as knowledge exchange on 
challenges and best practices.  
69. The implementation of this project will be closely coordinated with other relevant 
projects and initiatives supporting the national and subnational REDD- plus processes, as well as 
those supporting the FMU  and social forestry programmes. This  coordination  will be ensured 
directly by the various General Directorates of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, which 
is mandated to oversee these thematic areas, as well as through the Technical Committee.  
2.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
70. Indonesia has been engaging stakeholders in REDD -plus  since 2011 for the preparation 
of STRANAS with focus group discussions around how to monitor and demonstrate project impacts and compliance with the Cancun safeguards. Multi -stakeholder consultations were held 
in seven regions that covered 33 provinces in  Indonesia, at the national as well as international 
levels.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 137 
 
 
71. Furthermore, 11 provinces ( Aceh, Central Kalimantan, Central Sulawesi, East 
Kalimantan, Jambi, Papua , Riau, South Sumatera, West Kalimantan, West Papua,  and West 
Sumatera)  have formulated provinc ial SRAPs involving relevant stakeholders in REDD -plus  
working groups. These SRAP development processes upheld the principle of gender equity and 
social inclusion.  
72. Moreover, in early 2011, the previous Ministry of Forestry commenced a multi -
stakeholder pro cess to develop a SIS  that evaluates the relevance of the Cancun s afeguards, 
translates them for the Indonesian contex t, and draft s a structure and mechanism for SIS-REDD -
plus  and an assessment tool. The SIS -REDD -plus,  including its web  page, is a cornerst one to the 
SIS and allows all relevant stakeholders to be informed and involved.  
73. The proposal places  great emphasis on  continu ing engagement with stakeholders 
throughout the life cycle of the RBP project. Moreover, this is mandated by law, consistent with Indonesia’s STRANAS, using several multi- stakeholder  forums already in place. The project will 
strengthen the FMUs , which involve s outreach and  the involvement of communities, villages and 
Adat communities,  as well as local governments. The program me also foresees strengthen ing 
local access to a grievance mechanism  and will bring together  stakeholders in forest 
management through th e social forestry program me. 
74. Overall, the independent TAP  believes that the Government of Indonesia is deeply 
involved in the proposed project, with strong institutions and policies in place.   
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: High  
75. Indonesia has presented the payment for results report, accounting for 18.6 per cent of 
the total volume of REDD -plus results between 2014 and 2016 (measured against FREL , 
corresponding to the average emissions in the historical period 1993 –2012), which is  
equivalen t to a total of 144,989,856 tCO 2eq. The evaluation of the scorecard has reduced  the 
total score from 48 to 36, and, relevantly , submitted emission reductions were reduced to 
20,250,000  tCO 2eq.  
76. Payment is equivalent to USD 103,781,250  at USD 5 per tCO 2eq, including 2.5 per cent 
for non -carbon benefits.  
77. The effectiveness of the use of proceeds can only be evaluated in the future, upon 
understanding the impact of the measures implemented through the STRANAS strategy, and 
when there is s ufficient evidence to assess the success of the implementation of the FMUs in the 
11 selected regions as well as the amount of forest hectares in the hands of communities 
through the social forestry program me. 
78. So far, the Government of Indonesian has made ambitious plans with targets that have 
been difficult to achieve. As explained in the project proposal, the Medium -Term Development 
Plan for 2015 –2019 aimed to complete 100  per cent  of forest demarcation, establish  629 FMUs  
and make them operational, and foster social forestry partnerships across 12.7 million hectares 
(including customary holdings). Though the implementation of social forestry has accelerated 
markedly , only 3.4 million hectares of forests had been d esignated  for social forestry by October 
2019 (i.e. 9.3 million hectares remaining). And while 531 FMUs have been officially established 
nationwide (2018), covering a total area of about 83 million hectares (i.e. nearly the entirety of the forest estate), much remains to be done in terms of operat ionalizing these FMUs.  
79. In terms of budget  allocation, the project will invest around 7.7  per cent  of the proceeds 
for continuing  to update, build and strengthen  its REDD -plus  architecture, as well as further 
strengthen ing government capacity to coordinate and implement REDD -plus  nationally;  around 
90 per cent  of the budget will be used to  further extend and enhance social forestry and FMU


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 138 
 
 
operationalization. Around 2.2  per cent of the proceeds  will be for project management. The 
distribution seems well bala nced, as most of the resources aim to support the implementation of 
REDD -plus  activities in the selected territories.  
80. It is impossible to attribute specific REDD -plus  results achieved in different years to 
specific sources of finance, including the resources from the GCF RBP. So far, the G overnment of 
Indonesia has received funds from a variety of finance sources, including  national, central, 
provinc ial, district and v illage -level public budgets, non- governmental organizations , the private 
sector, and the international donor community.  
81. The establishment of the BPDLH under the Ministry of Finance provides both a high -
level political signal and a mechanism to incentivize  provinces to implement their provincial 
REDD -plus  strategies and action plans. B PDLH includes several funding windows (and sub 
windows ), including one for climate change under which REDD- plus  funds will be managed, 
with the objective of serving as the cen tral financing instrument for REDD -plus  (and 
environment) in Indonesia for both international and domestic finance. This will enable a much 
more coordinated and synergetic implementation of environmental actions. At the same time, it 
will enable the G overn ment of Indonesia to enhance its accountability towards its 
constituencies as well as towards contributing donors.  
82. Provinces that intend to access the BPDLH are expected to demonstrate both carbon and 
non- carbon benefits through the implementation of their  REDD- plus  strategies or action plans. 
As such, BPDLH is a key instrument to ensure national leadership in the coordination of climate finance and climate action for the implementation of the NDC.  
83. The Jokowi administration has prioritized  the social fores try programme  and FMU  as 
part of its main program me, and it is aiming to achieve results in the next five years of the 
development program me. To ensure efforts are successful in achiev ing these ambitious targets, 
the Government of Indonesia has set aside a more significant allocation from the national 
budget. Based on budget tracking covering the period 2017 –2019, the G overnment allocated 
USD 39 million of its national budget for social forestry, while for 2020 –2024, the indicative 
national budget for socia l forestry increases to USD 111 million.  
84. For the FMUs , the Government  of Indonesia  disbursed USD 288 million from 2017 –
2019 , both for enhancing the institutions and investment activities. The allocated budget 
increases significantly for the next five -year period, amounting to USD 1.4 billion. The most 
significant portion is allocated for forest rehabilitation related activities.   
85. However, more funding from various innovative and legitimate sources are required to 
meet the ambitious targets to achieve more significant impacts. Moreover, there is a need to 
ensure that private sector companies, e specially from  the palm, rubber and forestry sectors , are 
more conscious every day  of the need to support the efforts to stop deforestation in Indonesia 
and to promote regeneration actions. In the mi dst of the COVID -19 crisis , Indonesia , like  many 
other countries,  will have to prioritize the transformation of its food and land -use systems into 
powerful engines of growth, but this time  by strengthening local food systems with diversified 
food production, enhancing rural prosperity and preserving their irreplaceable natural capital. To this end,  the independent TAP  believes that the GCF RBP will come at  the right time and that 
Indonesia has the institutional capacity and policies in place to make effective and efficient use 
of these resources. 
III. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Adviso ry Panel  
86. The Indonesia  REDD- plus project proposal presents a good case for financing under the 
GCF REDD -plus RBP pilot programme. However, because of its nature, the project proposal


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 139 
 
 
lacks sufficient information on the efficacy of the utilization of procee ds for the independent 
TAP to make specific and decisive remarks.  
87. The independent TAP recommends this project be approved by the Board.  
88. The independent TAP further recommends that Indonesia  strengthen its quality 
assurance/ quality control procedures in or der to avoid errors in the calculations of the FREL 
and the results in the future. Additionally,  certain areas for future improvement were already 
identified during  the technical assessment , and the revision of the BUR technical annex by the 
AT and LULUCF experts need s to be addressed.


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 140 
 
 
Annex I:  Scorecard  (aligned to the funding proposal template structure)  
 
Section A: Proposed and projected REDD -plus results  
Criteria  Status 
(Yes/No)  Remarks  
Does the total volume of achieved results indicated in the proposal 
match the results indicated in the biennial update report (BUR) during 
the results period (31 December 2013 to 31 December 2018)?  No  As stated in the funding proposal , Indonesia noted that the reference 
period of the FREL submitted to the UNFCCC exceeds the maximum 
of 20 years established in the GCF REDD+ RBP scorecard, section 
2a(xiii).  Following the guidance contained in footnote 3 of row 
2a(xiii) of the scorecard, Indonesia recalculated its reference level 
based on a period of 20 years. The results corresponding to the 
recalc ulated FREL for the purpose of this funding proposal are 
higher than those reported in the UNFCCC BUR technical annex (total 
259,511,225 t CO2 eq for 2013 -2017 and 51,902,245 tCO2 eq 
average annual emissions) compared to 48,978,427 tCO2 eq 
annually (averag e of annual emissions) and 244,892,137 tCO2 eq as 
the total for 2013 –2017 as reported in the BUR  
Is the volume of achieved results offered to the pilot programme equal 
to or less than the total volume of achieved results indicated in the BUR 
during the results period?  Yes The funding proposal  states that Indonesia offers 9 million tons of 
CO2eq/year for the period 2014 -2016 , for a total of 27 MtCO2eq. The 
total emissions reductions for the period 2012 -2017 reported in the 
BUR REDD+ technical annex is  244,892,135 tCO2eq. However, as 
noted before, the results included in the BUR TA are not comparable 
to those presented in the funding proposal  due to the re estimation 
of the FREL. The volume offered is however lower that the total 
volume of achieved resu lts in the results period 2013 -2017, which 
amounts to a total 259,511,225 t CO2 eq.


---
*Page 141*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 141 
 
 
Is the expected volume of REDD -plus results to be achieved significant 
compared to the overall level of REDD -plus results achieved in the 
current funding proposal being s ubmitted?  No According to its funding proposal , Indonesia  expects to submit a total 
of 36 MtCO2eq to the GCF pilot program, including an additional 9 
MtCO2eq expected to be achieved in 2018 . The results offered to the 
GCF by Indonesia  in the current proposal (27 MtCO2eq)  therefore 
represent about 10.4% of  the REDD -plus results achieved in the 
current funding proposal.  
Is the total volume expected to be submitted to the pilot programme 
within the available allocation of funding for the  pilot programme and 
below the cap per country?  No As pointed out in the funding proposal, approximately a total of 36 
MtCO2eq are expected to be submitted by Indonesia to the pilot 
programme, which is above the available allocation of funding for the 
prog ramme and at the established cap per country (30 MtCO 2 eq)  
Section B: Carbon elements 
B.1. Forest reference emission level/forest reference level (FREL/FRL)  
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Is the FREL/FRL consistent with the greenhouse gas (GHG) 
inventory, including the definition of forest used?  1 The AT noted that Indonesia achieved consistency between the FREL 
and the national GHG inventory contained in its first BUR in terms of 
using the same principal data sets (paragraph 39 of the TAR).  
However, the AT noted (paragraph 25 of the TAR)  that the FREL 
applies a different forest definition than that used in the national 
GHG inventory contained in Indonesia’s first BUR. In addition to the 
six natural forest classes contained in the FREL, the GHG inventory 
includes information about plantation forests . During the TA, 
Indonesia explained that this discrepancy results from natural 
forests being the main concern for REDD -plus implementation (see 
paragraph 35 of the TAR). The AT considered that this could partially 
explain the difference between the deforestation estimate in the 
FREL and the area estimate for conversion of forest to other land-


---
*Page 142*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 142 
 
 
cover categories in the GHG inventory.  In its funding proposal , 
Indonesia explains that in the modified FREL submission, they 
addressed consistency concerns . As explained in the exchanges with 
the AT, during the TA, the definition of forest is not being changed in 
the FREL, but rather excluding the plantations given the objectives of 
REDD+ and the focus on natural forests. Indonesia explained that 
what is app lied can be considered a “working definition” that also 
considers the concept of practicality and cost- effectiveness 
associated with measuring REDD+ performance in the future.  
Moreover, the AT noted (paragraph 25 of the TAR) that the GHG 
inventory estimate s emissions and removals from forest land 
remaining forest land, by taking into account statistical wood 
harvesting data and adjustments for illegal logging. Whether these 
estimates were fully consistent with the FREL data for forest 
degradation could not be assessed, because the forest degradation 
estimates for the FREL were prepared using a different methodology 
that applies emission factors based on different average carbon stock 
values according to land -cover changes from primary to secondary 
forest, as  discovered by remote sensing. In the modified FREL 
submission, Indonesia addressed this concern by explaining that 
emissions from further degradation of secondary forest were not 
included in the construction of the FREL because, at present, 
Indonesia does  not have the capacity or data to assess the different 
levels of degradation occurring within secondary forests. The AT 
commends Indonesia for including an explanation of the forest 
definition in the modified FREL submission  
(ii) Is the FREL/FRL based on historical data and is it equal to or below 
the average annual historical emissions during the reference period, 
unless a country is an HFLD country?  2 According to the TAR (paragraph 6), the FREL proposed by 
Indonesia for the historical reference period 1990 –2012 is the 
annual average of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions associated with 
deforestation and forest degradation occurring in the areas that 
were n atural forest in 1990. For the funding proposal , the historical 
period has been modified to cover the years 1993 -2012 (see section


---
*Page 143*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 143 
 
 
B.1. of the funding proposal ). However, it must be noted that the 
FREL increases over time due to emissions from peatland 
degradation, which are estimated as a lineal trend , and therefore 
represents an emission volume above the historical average 
emissions from peatlands.  Consequently, Indonesia revised the FREL 
as part of its revised funding proposal  to make it reflect a histor ical 
annual average.  
 
(iii) Is the FREL/FRL in accordance with the guidelines in decision 
12/CP.17?  2 The AT noted that the data and information used by Indonesia in 
constructing its FREL are transparent and complete, and are in 
overall accordance with the guidelines contained in the annex to 
decision 12/CP.17 (paragraph 36 of the TAR).  The AT notes that the 
transparency and completeness of information improved 
significantly in the modified FREL submission, without the need to 
alter the approach or values used to construct the FREL, and 
commends Indonesia for the efforts it made (paragra ph 38 of the 
TAR).  
(iv) Are the data and information provided for the FREL/FRL 
transparent? (Has information been provided to allow an 
understanding of how UNFCCC guidance on submission of information 
on reference levels has been addressed?)  2 The AT noted that the data and information used by Indonesia in 
constructing its FREL are transparent and complete, and are in 
overall accordance with the guidelines contained in the annex to 
decision 12/CP.17 (paragraph 36 of the TAR). The AT notes that the 
transparency and completeness of information improved 
significantly in the modified FREL submission, without the need to 
alter the approach or values used to construct the FREL, and 
commends Indonesia for the efforts it made (paragraph 38 of the 
TAR).  
(v) Is the FREL/FRL complete? (Has information been provided that 
allows for the reconstruction of the FREL/FRL?)  2 The AT noted that the data and information used by Indonesia in 
constructing its FREL are transparent and complete, and are in 
overall acc ordance with the guidelines contained in the annex to 
decision 12/CP.17 (paragraph 36 of the TAR).


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 144 
 
 
(vi) Is the FREL/FRL consistent? (Were data and methodologies 
applied consistently over the time series used for the construction of 
the FREL/FRL?)  1 During the TA, Indonesia provided a large amount of background 
information and material, including land- cover matrices for 
peatlands. The AT observed some discontinuity in these data that 
may indicate difficulties in ensuring consistency. According to the 
FREL submission, land- cover maps were derived largely using visual 
interpretation, with a large number of image interpreters 
contributing to the task. The AT acknowledged the immense effort 
that went into building the time series of land- cover maps, but noted 
that maintaining a consistent interpretation approach across diverse 
interpreters is very difficult and that this is a potential source of the 
observed discontinuity. In response, Indonesia explained that it is 
exploring ways to develop the existing NF MS, for example by 
combining automated methods and visual interpretation, in order to 
improve the land- cover data. In line with this, in the view of the AT, 
improving quality management is an area for improvement 
(paragraph 17 and 40 a) of the TAR) . 
Moreov er, the AT noted (paragraph 20 of the TAR) that, to identify 
activity data for soil organic carbon emissions from peatland 
drainage in areas subject to deforestation or forest degradation, the 
FREL submission overlays landcover maps with Indonesia’s peatland 
map. For deforestation and forest degradation occurring on 
peatlands, additional emissions from the soil organic carbon pool are 
then calculated. These two data sets are not perfectly harmonized. 
During the TA, Indonesia acknowledged that such imperfect  
harmonization may occur in “sliver areas”. While maps and 
definitions could technically be harmonized, Indonesia explained 
that fully harmonizing data sets would require collaboration and 
arrangements between several ministry -level agencies and is 
therefore not easy to achieve. The AT acknowledged that Indonesia 
has plans to improve peatland mapping and agreed that ensuring 
consistency between the land -cover map and the peatland map is an 
area for improvement.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 145 
 
 
(vii) Is the FREL/FRL accurate? (The data an d methodologies used 
neither over - nor under- estimate emissions and/or removals during 
the reference period, so far as can be judged.)  1 The AT pointed out a couple of areas for future technical 
improvement related to the accuracy of the FREL:  
• improving accuracy and consistency in satellite 
image interpretation, time series satellite images 
could be directly compared (rather than analysing 
satellite images for time points individually by 
overlaying maps to detect changes) and automated 
image processing techniques could be introduced 
(paragraph 40 (a) of the TAR), and  
• Broadening of the scope of the uncertainty analysis 
to cover further potential sources of error, and 
differentiating between land -cover classes with 
regard to emission factors and ac tivity data 
(paragraph 41 (b) of the TAR)  
Additionally, the review of the funding proposal  by the independent 
TAP found that both the FREL assessed by the AT and the one 
included in the funding proposal  contain calculation errors that 
significantly modify the FREL. In both FRELs, Indonesia calculates 
the historical average emissions from deforestation and degradation 
by dividing the sum of annual average emissions in each 
measurement period, regardless of the period´s length  in years , by 
the number of measu rement periods (7). Instead, the FREL should 
have been calculated as the sum of annual averages over the 
reference period divided by the number of years in such period. The 
differences arising from this error were estimated by the 
independent TAP  to be aro und 37,800,857 TCO2eq for 2014, 
37,800,345 TCO2eq for 2015 and 37,799,834 TCO2eq for 2016 , in all 
cases the FREL estimated by Indonesia was lower than the one 
calculated by the independent TAP . In its revised funding proposal , 
Indonesia revised the FREL fo r it to represent an annual average 
over the historical period.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 146 
 
 
(viii) Have all REDD -plus activities that are significant sources of 
emissions been included?  2 The AT acknowledged that Indonesia included in the FREL emissions 
from deforestation and forest degradation, which are the two most 
significant REDD -plus activities in Indonesia (paragraph 37 of the 
TAR). In its submission, Indonesia explains that data gap s, in 
particular those related to carbon stock enhancement, led to the 
exclusion of the other three REDDplus activities (conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks and sustainable management of 
forests). The AT note d that Indonesia could explore whether the data 
set used for estimating the emissions from degradation could also be 
used for estimating the opposite conversions, which would lead to a 
carbon stock enhancement. The AT commend ed Indonesia for its 
plans to include additional REDD -plus act ivities and consider ed this 
inclusion an area for improvement (paragraph 33 of the TAR) . 
(ix) Have all of the most significant pools been included?  1 The FREL limits its scope to aboveground biomass and soil organic 
carbon on organic soils, which are the most significant pools in terms 
of emissions from forests (paragraph 37 of the TAR). However, the 
AT considered the inclusion of other significant pool s, such as 
belowground biomass, deadwood and soil organic carbon, as an area 
for technical improvement (paragraph 41 (c)  of the TAR) . Further, 
the AT noted that default IPCC root- to-shoot ratios could be used to 
estimate belowground biomass, and soil organic carbon on mineral 
soils could be estimated using IPCC stock change factors, which 
would allow a first indication of the importance of these carbon 
pools in Indonesia to be gained.  (paragraph 30 of the TAR). 
Moreover, in its funding proposal  (section B.1.1 (ix))  Indonesia 
points out that belowground biomass is being considered for 
inclusion in the resubmission of the national FREL to the UNFCCC 
planned for 2020.  
(x) Have all gases that are a significant source of emissions been 
included?  1 The s ubmitted FREL includes only CO2 emissions and does not cover 
emissions of other GHGs. The submission states that CO2 contributes 
more than 99.9 per cent of total GHG emissions from LULUCF. The 
AT noted that, according to Indonesia’s first BUR as well as its second


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 147 
 
 
national communication, fires occur frequently in the country and 
these could result in large amounts of non -CO2 emissions, in 
particular on peatland forests. Consequently, the AT considered the 
inclusion of non -CO2 GHG emissions an area for techn ical 
improvement (paragraph 31 of the TAR)  The funding proposal  
(section B.1.1 (x)) points out that, as shared with the LULUCF experts 
during the TA, Indonesia has already been making progress on peat 
land fire emission estimates by collating new findings from 
published peer reviewed literature. Advancing remote sensing 
technology to improve burned scar and peat depth of burn 
estimation mapping will increase the accuracy of peat fire emission 
calculations so that these estimates may be included as an 
improvement in a future FREL. Progress has already been made to 
develop a methodology applying manual analysis of MODIS data, for 
“hot spots” and yearly burned scar areas . 
(xi) Is the information provided in the construction of the FREL/FRL 
(data, meth odologies and estimates) guided by the most recent 
applicable IPCC guidance and guidelines as adopted by the Conference 
of the Parties?  2 The TAR (paragraph 11) notes that the methods used by Indonesia 
are consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on C limate Change 
(IPCC) Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land -Use Change and 
Forestry and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories as applied to the construction of the FREL. For the 
estimation of emissions from peat decomposition the 2013 
Supplement to the 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories: Wetlands was used.  
(xii) Have any significant issues related to the application of IPCC 
GLs/GPGs been raised in the TA report?  1 Indonesia’s FREL includes soil organic carbon emissions from 
peatland decomposition associated with deforestation and forest 
degradation on peatlands. The AT noted that while the emission 
factors from the Wetlands Supplement are intended to be applied 
only  to “drained organic soils”, the FREL does not distinguish areas 
with and without drainage. During the facilitative exchange for the 
TA, Indonesia explained that deforestation and forest degradation on 
peatlands are usually accompanied by drainage. The Par ty also 
included information in the modified FREL submission explaining


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 148 
 
 
that it is impossible to trace back the drained and the negligibly 
small areas of undrained secondary peat forest and therefore 
Indonesia considered it justifiable to consider all of the secondary 
forests as drained forests. The AT noted that the FREL submission 
does not currently include data to substantiate this, but that the 
submission does, however, highlight Indonesia’s plans to improve 
the data on peatlands, chiefly with regard to  emission factors and 
their dependency on the water table. The AT acknowledged these 
plans and agreed that collecting more detailed data on the 
management of peatlands is an area for improvement (paragraph 21 
of the TAR).  
(xiii) What is the reference period for the FREL/FRL?  1 The reference period applied for the construction of the UNFCCC 
technically assessed FREL was 1990 -2012. However, following the 
guidance contained in footnote 3 of row 2a(xiii) of the scorecard, 
Indonesia recalculated its reference level based on a period of 20 
years  and included th ese estimates in its funding proposal .  
(xiv) How does the reference level for the results included in the 
proposal compare to the previous reference level that applies to the 
same area?  1 No previous REDD+ reference level had been submitted by Indonesia 
to the UNFCCC.  
(xv) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
taking into account national capabilities and circumstances?  0 Indonesia did not provide information on agg regate uncertainties 
related to its FREL (which was submitted in 2016 , according to 
paragraph 1 of the TAR ). 
B.2. REDD -plus results reporting  
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Are the reported results in the technical annex to the BUR consistent 
with the FREL/FRL (including the same pools, activities and gases)?  2 According to paragraph 15 of the TATR, the LULUCF experts noted 
that Indonesia ensured overall consistency between its FREL and its 
estimation of the results of the implementation of the activities


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 149 
 
 
reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from 
forest degradation in 2013 –2017. Moreover, the LULUCF experts 
noted that the inclusion of carbon pools and gases was fully 
consistent between the FREL and the estimation of the results 
(paragraph 31 of the TATR). In its funding proposal , Indonesia notes 
that in recalculating the FREL to represent 1993 –  2012, and 
presenting the corresponding results, for the sake of the funding 
proposal , full consistency has been maintained, as there have been 
no changes to methodologies, definitions, or comprehensiveness for 
either the recalculated FREL or corresponding results. Indonesia 
further reports that the only change made was the modification to 
the time period over which the methodological approach was 
applied . 
(ii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
transparent? (Has information been provided to allow an 
understanding of how UNFCCC guidance on results reporting has been 
addressed?)  2 According to paragraph 24 of the TATR, the data and information 
provided in the technical annex were considered by the LULUCF 
experts to be transparent, consistent, complete and accurate to the 
extent possible. Although some of the elements required by COP 
decisions or  allowing for the reconstruction of results were not 
explicitly described in the technical annex, relevant information and 
data to allow for the reconstruction of results were obtained from 
the documents referred to in the technical annex or the responses 
from the Party to the questions of the LULUCF experts during the TA.  
(iii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
complete? (Has information been provided that allows for the 
reconstruction of the results?)  2 The LULUCF experts con cluded that Indonesia provided the 
necessary information to allow for the reconstruction of the results 
of the implementation of the activities reducing emissions from 
deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation. The 
data and information p rovided in the technical annex are considered 
to be transparent, consistent, complete and accurate to the extent 
possible. Although some of the elements required by COP decisions 
or allowing for the reconstruction of results were not explicitly 
described i n the technical annex, relevant information and data to 
allow for the reconstruction of results were obtained from the


---
*Page 150*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 150 
 
 
documents referred to in the technical annex or the responses from 
the Party to the questions of the LULUCF experts during the TA 
(paragr aph 24 of the TATR).  
(iv) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
consistent? (Were data and methodologies applied consistently over 
the results time series?)  
 2 According to the TATR (paragraph 15), the LULUCF experts noted 
that Indonesia ensured overall consistency between its FREL and its 
estimation of the results of the implementation of the activities 
reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing emissions from 
forest degradation in 2013 –2017, including with regards to the use 
of consistent methodologies and data to generate AD, EFs, and the 
use of the same forest definition that was used in the construction of 
the FREL. In view of the above, the LULUCF experts concluded  
(paragraph 17 of the TATR)  that the results pre sented of the 
implementation of the activities reducing emissions from 
deforestation and reducing emissions from forest degradation are 
consistent with the assessed FREL. The LULUCF experts commend ed 
Indonesia for ensuring the full consistency of the data and 
methodologies described in the FREL for 1990 –2012 and in the 
technical annex with the results of the implementation of the 
activities reducing emissions from deforestation and reducing 
emissions from forest degradation for 2013 –2017 . In its funding 
proposal , Indonesia notes that in recalculating the FREL to represent 
1993 – 2012, and presenting the corresponding results, for the sake 
of the funding proposal , full consistency has been maintained, as 
there have been no changes to methodologies, definition s, or 
comprehensiveness for either the recalculated FREL or 
corresponding results. Indonesia further reports that the only 
change made was the modification to the time period over which the 
methodological approach was applied  
(v) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
accurate? (Does the annex neither over - nor under- estimate emissions 
and/or removals?)  2 The LULUCF experts considered the data and information provided 
in the technical annex to be transparent, consistent, com plete and 
accurate.  Moreover, they found that the results are accurate to the


---
*Page 151*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 151 
 
 
extent possible, based on the assumptions used  (paragraph 24 of the 
TATR) . 
 
Nevertheless, as mentioned before, the independent TAP  found that 
the FREL used by Indonesia to estima te the results is not accurate 
because the average annual emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation over the reference period were not calculated properly. 
This implies that the results estimated based on such FREL are also 
erroneous.  However, as  noted before, in its revised funding proposal  
Indonesia corrected these issues.  
(vi) How many years are there between the last year of the FREL 
period, and the year corresponding to the results being proposed for 
payments?  2 The results period being proposed for payment through the GCF is 
2014 -2016. The last year of the FREL period included in the FREL 
submission to the UNFCCC is 2012, so the number of years between 
the last year of the FREL period and the year corresponding t o the 
results being proposed  is 2.  
(vii) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
considering national capabilities and circumstances?  0 Indonesia does not provide information on aggregate uncertainties 
related to the results.  
(viii) Has information been provided on payments that have been (or 
are expected to be) received from other sources for results recognized 
by the countrya from the same national or subnational area during the 
period for which a country is proposing to receive payments from GCF? 
And has the country provided sufficient assurance that results already 
paid for by other sources have been excluded from the total volume 
offered to GCF?  2 
 In its funding proposal , Indonesia notes that, to date, it has not 
received any REDD+ results -based payments from any donors and 
other sources, and provides information on payments expected to be 
received )mainly from the government of Norway under the 
Indonesia -Norway Partnership) and the GCF, as well as data on 
indirect and direct finance contributions to the achievement of 
REDD+ results (section B.2 (viii).  
In order to ensure that the results paid for by other sources are 
excluded from the total volume offered to the GCF , Indonesia has 
excluded the year 2017 in its entirety from its proposal to the GCF.   
(ix) Are the results proposed to GCF for payment included in a registry 
or similar system, that tracks emission reductions and corresponding 2 In its funding proposal , Indonesia notes that it has established a 
National Registry System (or SRN) for the implementation of REDD+


---
*Page 152*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 152 
 
 
paymentsb to ensure there is no past or future double payment (or use)  
of such emissions reduction?  at national and subnational levels. The SRN is intended for: data 
collection action and support for climate change including on REDD+ 
actions and resources and for the avoidance of double -counting. The 
SRN includes data and information on the FREL/FRL, MRV of results, 
as well as the contribution to achievement of the NDC. Indonesia 
further notes that the National Registry System Manager is 
responsib le for maintaining consistency between data and 
information on the implementation of REDD+ at the national and 
subnational levels and avoidance of double counting.  
Total score section B  36  
Any fails  ☐ Yes  ☒ No  
a Through the REDD -plus national entity or focal point, where appointed.  
b For each of these results, tracking information should identify (at a minimum) the corresponding national or subnational area , the entity eligible to receive 
payment, the year generated, and the source of results -based payments received and, where possible, the identifying number.  
 
Section C: Non -carbon elements  
C.1. Cancun Safeguards  
Does the summary of information on safeguards provide information on how each of the safeguards below were addressed and respected in a way that ensures 
transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness?  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of 
national forest programmes and relevant international conventions 
and agreements.  Pass


---
*Page 153*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 153 
 
 
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, 
taking into account national legislation and sovereignty.  Pass   
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and 
members of local communities, by taking into account relevant 
international obligations, national circumstances and laws, and noting 
that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted t he United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  Pass   
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in 
particular indigenous  peoples and local communities, in the actions 
referred to in paragraphs 70 and 72 of this decision.  Pass   
 
(v) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural forests 
and biological diversity, ensuring that the actions referred to in 
para graph 70 of this decision are not used for the conversion of natural 
forests, but are instead used to incentivize the 12 protection and 
conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and to 
enhance other social and environmental benefits.  Pass   
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  
Pass  In its funding proposal , Indonesia summarizes a number of  policies 
and measures it has put in place to address the risk of reversals. It 
also notes that the risk of reversals of the emissions reductions paid 
by the GCF is relatively low (in the sense that they don´t represent a 
significant amount of the total volume of emissions reductions 
achieved by Indonesia in the period 2014 -2017) and that it could be 
compensated with surplus emissions reductions that are not being 
paid for by the GCF. In this respect, it is important to note that such 
compensation is not en sured, as nothing prevents the government of 
Indonesia from obtaining payments for the rest of the results 
obtained in the 2014 -2017 (e.g. there is no proposal to create a 
buffer in order to guarantee that the ERs offered to the GCF will be 
backed up in an  amount reflecting the risk of reversals).


---
*Page 154*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 154 
 
 
(vii) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions.  
Pass  Indonesia presents information on the actions it is undertaking to 
reduce the displacement of emissions resulting from the 
implementation of REDD+ in the country, including the country´s 
national REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS), which is considered as an 
integrat ed package of policies and measures to address the drivers of 
deforestation on a national  scale, and therefore is deemed to reduce 
the risk of displacement.   
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Has information been provided on how proceeds will be used 
consistent with GCF policies? Has information been provided on how 
the proceeds will be used in a manner consistent with the country’s 
NDC, national REDD -plus strategy and/or low carbon development 
plans and policies? Has information been provided on how the 
proceeds will be used in a manner that contributes to the long -term 
sustainability of REDD -plus activities, including non -carbon benefits?   
2  
Total score section C  2  
Any fails  ☐ Yes  ☒ No  
 
Section D: Investment framework  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(High/Medium/Low)  Remarks


---
*Page 155*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 155 
 
 
Impact potential  Evaluation  
 ☒ The relevant mitigation and/or adaptation impact is specified.  
☒ The GCF core indicators (and other indicators) are provided with specific values.  
☒ Methodologies provided for calculating non -GHG indicators are clear and robust.  
☒ The proposal compares the indicator values against appropriate benchmarks to 
demonstr ate the impact potential.  
Paradigm shift potential  
 Evaluation  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the potential for scaling up to the country’s NDC, national REDD -plus strategy 
and/or low -carbon development plans and policies.  
☒ explains how the programme contributes to strengthening knowledge and learning.  
☒ describes how proposed measu res will create an enabling environment and contribute 
to innovation, market development and transformation.  
☒ explains how the programme strengthens the regulatory framework and policies.  
☒ demonstrates paradigm shift potential for catalysing impact beyond a one -off payment.  
Sustainable development potential 
 Evaluation  
 ☒ The proposal demonstrates environmental, social and economic impact, including the 
gender sensitive development impact.  
 
Needs of the recipient  
 Evaluation  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the degree of vulnerability of country/population and demon strates that the 
programme addresses  the issues.   
☒ explains in detail how the programme addresses financial, economic, social and 
institutional needs.


---
*Page 156*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 156 
 
 
Country ownership  
 Evaluation  
 The proposal:  
☒ sufficiently explains how the programme contributes to a national climate strategy 
and/or policy.  
☒ specifies in detail how the multi- stakeholder consultation was conducted.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  Evaluation  
 The proposal:  
☒ clearly describes adequateness of the financial structure for cost- effectiveness and 
efficiency.  
☒ provides information on financial viability in the long run.  
☒ explains in detail the application of best practices and the degree of innovation.  
Section E: GCF policies  
For the period of the results considered in the request for proposal  
Criteria  Evaluation (Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
assessment report describing the extent to which the measures undertaken to identify, 
assess and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, in t he context of the 
REDD- plus proposal, were consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS 
standards.  
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient  information provided that allows for an assessment of the 
historical performance of the activities undertaken (track record) against the risk 
tolerance levels specified in the risk appetite statement and the criteria (where 
applicable) outlined in the ris k guidelines for funding proposals.


---
*Page 157*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 157 
 
 
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in the assessment describing the extent 
to which the measures undertaken complied with the GCF gender policy.  
The assessment by the AE determined the alignm ent of the PSB and the PLRs with its 
Social and Environmental Standards which include an overarching principle of gender 
equality and women’s empowerment.  
Interim policy on prohibited 
practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided i n a due diligence report to 
demonstrate that no prohibited practices occurred during the implementation of the 
activities that lead to the REDD -plus results, such as: undisclosed prohibited practices, 
including money laundering and the financing of terrori sm occurred during the 
implementation of results -based actions; and double payment or financing for the same 
results achieved.  
For the use of proceeds  
Criteria  Evaluation (Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
management framework that will describe how environmental and social risks and 
impacts will be identified, assessed and managed in a manner consistent with ESS 
standards of GCF, i ncluding the determination of the relevant environmental and social 
risk category of the proposed activities.  
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided that details how the plan for the use of 
proceeds does not violate the risk tolerance levels specified in the risk appetite statement 
and allows for performance monitoring and evaluation against the criteria (where 
applicable) outlined in the risk guidelines for funding proposals.  
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient in formation provided on how the AE will undertake an activity -
level gender assessment and action plan once the details of the activities become known.  
Monitoring and evaluation  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided on how the activities to be undertaken 
with GCF proceeds comply with the GCF monitoring and accountability framework.


---
*Page 158*
---

 
GCF/B.26 /02/Add.02  
Page 158 
 
 
Policy on prohibited practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided that assures that the activities with 
use of proceeds will follow the interim policy on prohibited practices, such as: undisclosed 
prohibited practices, including money laundering and the financing of terror ism; 
improper subsequent use of GCF proceeds in the prohibited practices; and double 
payment or financing for the same results achieved, etc.  
Indigenous Peoples policy  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient  information provided on how the activities will meet the 
requirements of the policy and guided by the prevailing relevant national laws and/or 
obligations of the countries directly applicable to the activities under relevant 
international treaties and agr eements.


---
*Page 159*
---

G
CF/B.26/02/Add.02  
Page 159 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment  (FP130) 
Proposal name:  Indonesia REDD- plus RBP for results period 2014 -2016  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country(/ies):  Indonesia  
Project/programme size: Medium 
Impact potential  
UNDP welcomes ITAP findings that the proposal has a High Impact potential.  
UNDP  agrees with the need to focus investments and I TAP acknowledgement of the 11 pilot 
provinces. It is important to highlight however , that the use of proceeds will be considered by 
the government in coordination with other sources of funding (of which the vast majority 
originates from domestic budget).  
Regarding  strong enforcement of the f orest moratorium, UNDP  agree s on its importance and 
refer to the role of the Indonesian Cabinet Secretary Office that coordinates and tracks 
progress made by each ministry and agency with assigned responsibilities to implement this 
Presidential Instruction.  
Paradigm shift potential  
UNDP is in agreement with  ITAP assessment findings that the proposal has a High Paradigm 
Shift potential , thanks to the strong s upport to decentralized sustainable management of 
forests  through the operationalization of Forest Management Units (FMUs)  – as well as social 
forestry (SF) – and the effective decentralization of the governance of the REDD+ . 
UNDP agrees and confirms that the government of Indonesia is committed, including through 
this project , to continue to resolve legal and regulatory bottlenecks and strengthen the Unit 
specifically responsible to oversee SF Program . 
Sustainable development potential  
UNDP agrees  with ITAP assessment findings that the proposal has a High Sustainable 
development potential, thanks to the social forestry programme  – and FMUs – in combination 
with further improvement and operationalization of the REDD + architecture including tools 
to better monitor and act to reduce deforestation and forest degradation . 
Needs of the recipient


---
*Page 160*
---

 
       GCF/B.26/02/Add.02  
Page 160 
 
 
 
UNDP fully agrees with ITAP assessment findings regarding the large  needs of the recipient 
considering the sheer size of the country , which are  further worsened by the current COVID -
19 crisis. UNDP believes that the proposed use of REDD+ RBPs can contribute to providing 
relief to targeted vulnerable communities and suppor t sustainable recovery.  
Country ownership  
UNDP agrees  with  ITAP assessment that Indonesia  has the right policies,  strong institutional 
framework and socially inclusive processes in place to advance  the National REDD+ Strategy 
in line with the purpose of the proposed project . 
The Indonesia proposal was the first to apply the guidance for FREL reference periods 
exceeding the maximum of 20 years (footnote 22 of the ToRs). In doing so, maintaining full 
consistency with the UNFCCC assessed FREL without changing annualized estimations 
proved challenging. Particularly for peat decomposition which have a high level of 
uncertainty and tend to grow over  time. Indonesia is improving the accuracy of this data 
noting that this is an important aspect of its national circumstances. We welcome ITAP’s 
recommendation for the revised scorecard to better reflect national circumstances.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
UNDP fully supports ITAP assessment findings that GCF RBP is particularly timely  
(particularly in the context of COV ID-19), the budget balanced  and that Indonesia has the 
institutional capacity and policies in place as to make effective and efficient use of these 
resources , includ ing the importan t role  of the BPDLH (Environmental Fund Management 
Agency) . 
Overall r emarks from the independent T echnical A dvisory P anel : 
UNDP is in general agreement with ITAP assessment finding s and recommendations .  
UNDP noted that the ITAP concluded that Indonesia did not provide information on aggregate 
uncertainties and therefore assigned a score of zero in the case of both the FREL and results. 
Noting that uncertainty estimates were provided in the FREL submission  as well as in the 
BUR technical annex. These covered selected sources of error, while the AT saw broadening 
the scope of the uncertainty analysis to cover further potential sources of errors an area for 
technical improvement.  The government of Indonesia is committed to and has already taken 
step s to address the recommendations from the Technical AT; further improve its FREL and 
BUR REDD+ annex ; further enhance its internal QA/QC  procedures . The use of proceeds from 
this RBPs pilot -program will provide much welcome additional support to this end.  
UNDP reiterate s that REDD+ RBPs projects are inherently very different from usual  projects  - 
proceeds are provided  for results already achieved in the past (i.e. emissions reductions 
expressed in t CO2eq ). As highlighted by ITAP , the use of proceeds will clearly contribute  to the


---
*Page 161*
---

 
       GCF/B.26/02/Add.02  
Page 161 
 
 
 
implementation of the  Indonesia  National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS) , sustainable 
management of forests and  improved decentralization forest governance .  
The GCF will be paying for about 19% of the total volume of emission reductions achieved 
reducing deforestation in Indonesia in years 20 14 to 2016. This means that the risk of 
reversals of emissions paid for by the GCF is relatively low and could be compensated with surplus emissions that are not being paid for by the GCF.  The government of Indonesia has 
nevertheless invested in several po licies and measures to address the risk of reversals ; these 
were presented in the funding proposal.


---
*Page 162*
---

 Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary Ge nder Assessment and Action Plan 
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
1I 
Preliminary Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
Contents 
Preliminary Gender Assessment and Action Plan  .................................................................... 1  
Contents ................................................................................................................................. 1  
1. Introduction ....................................... ................................................................................ 2  
2. Existing Gender Dynamics and Inequalities in Indones ia .................................................. 2  
2.1 Gender Inequality Index  ................................................................................................... 3  
2.2 Education  ......................................................................................................................... 4  
2.3 Health  ............................................................................................................................... 5  
2.4 Political participation and decision-making  ..................................................................... 6  
2.5 Labor force participation and earnings  ............................................................................ 7 
2.6 Access to land, assets and financial resources ................................................................. 8  
3. Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women and Protecting Gender Equality
9
3.1 Key International Protocols and Frameworks Ratif ied by Indonesia in Support of Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and Human Rights  .................................................... 9  
3.2 Key National Frameworks, Policies, Laws and Programs Supporting Gender Equality and 
Women’s Empowerment  ..................................................................................................... 10  
3.2.1 Policies, Laws and Frameworks .............................................................................. 10  
3.2.2 Ministerial Policies and Programs on Gender ........................................................ 12  
3.3 Institutional Arrangements  ............................................................................................ 13 
4. Gender Issues Around Forests and REDD+ ............. ......................................................... 14 
5. Gender integration within forest conservation effort s and REDD+ action in Indonesia. 15
5.1 REDD+ Design  ................................................................................................................. 15 
5.2 REDD+ National Strategy (STRANAS)  ............................................................................. 16 
5.3 REDD+ Safeguards in Indonesia: SIS-REDD+  .................................................................. 18 
6. Recommendations .................................... ....................................................................... 19 
7. Gender Action Plan ................................. ......................................................................... 21 Gender documentation for FP130


---
*Page 163*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 2I 
 
1.  Introduction  
 
The Green Climate Fund recognizes the central impor tance of gender considerations in terms of both 
impact and access to climate funding, and requires a Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan to 
be submitted as part of the funding proposals that it assesses. The main objective of the Gender 
Assessment is to screen the gender aspects of the G CF project, and to subsequently strengthen the 
gender responsive actions within the project. It is  within this context that this gender assessment ai ms 
to provide an overview of the gender dynamics in In donesia, with a focus on REDD+ and related 
thematic areas, specifically as they refer to the r esults period of 2014 to 2016 as well as the invest ment 
of proceeds for this proposal. The information and design considerations in this Annex should not be 
considered additional, but rather part of the basis  of the proposal, including its Stakeholder 
Engagement and Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) Annexes.  
 
This gender assessment also identifies gender issue s that are relevant to the project and examines 
potential gender mainstreaming opportunities. The a ssessment was based upon available data from 
studies conducted by the Government of Indonesia, d onor agencies, and multilateral organizations; 
and included: 
 
1.  Undertaking a desktop review and aligning approache s in this proposal with the national 
priorities of Indonesia; 
2.  Reviewing and considering national aspirations as d etailed in the national policies and 
agenda on gender and women’s empowerment; 
3.  Incorporating information and lessons learned from past studies and assessments on 
gender in Indonesia from the Government of Indonesi a, the United Nations and 
international development organizations;  
4.  Integrating gender considerations in the project in dicators, targets, budget and activities, 
and identifying women as leaders and decision-maker s. 
 
2.  Existing Gender Dynamics and Inequalities in Indone sia 
According to Indonesia’s 2010 Population Census res ults, there are 237,641,326 people in Indonesia, 
of whom 49.7% are women. In total, 52.6 million hou seholds (84 percent) are headed by men, while 
8.5 million households (14 percent) are headed by w omen. This is an increase from 2000, in which the 
number of female-headed households was 6.2 million of the total number, or 12.2 percent. In 2010, 
both male and female household heads were almost ev enly distributed between urban and rural 
areas. Among the female household heads, there was relatively more youth (around 0.7 million out 
of 8.5 million or 8.2 percent) than among male hous ehold heads (around 1.9 million out of 52.6 million  
or 3.6 percent). In addition, when comparing the pr oportion of male and female-headed households, 
female-headed households were found to be slightly poorer than male-headed households within 
both the urban and rural areas. This assessment was  based on the dwelling unit condition and home


---
*Page 164*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 3I 
facilities, such as floor area and materials and ha ving toilet facilities, telephone, access to intern et and 
unprotected water sources.  1 
 
Although a girl cannot legally marry before the age  of 16 in Indonesia, many below that age were still  
recorded as married in the 2010 Population Census. Based on this data, the 2015 United Nations 
Population Fund (UNFPA) Monograph Series on Women a nd Girls in Indonesia shows that 11 percent 
of women had been married under the age of fifteen.  Moreover, about 43.2 percent of women had 
been married under the age of eighteen. Women in ru ral area are more likely to be a child-bride due 
to poverty, limited access to education and informa tion, and certain religious views. 2 
 
In addition, Indonesia’s National Commission on Vio lence against Women (Komnas Perempuan) 
publishes Annual Notes (CATAHU) on violence against  women every year. This Annual Note is the 
yearly data compiled from the real cases reported d irectly from the victims to Komnas Perempuan, 
cases handled by community service institutions for  women victims of violence and cases reported to 
state institutions, including law enforcement agenc ies, religious courts and Komnas Perempuan's 
partner service providers. In 2019, the CATAHU repo rted 406,178 cases, which is an increase from 
2018 and 2017, in which 348,466 and 259,150 cases w ere reported respectively. 3 
 
Within this context, as will be illustrated below, Indonesian women and girls have nevertheless made 
some strides forward in recent years. This has been  achieved due to a number of factors including 
economic growth as well as the Government’s efforts  to promote gender inclusivity, as seen through 
its issuance of the Gender Mainstreaming decree in 2000 (discussed more in Section 3 below). 
However, there still are several areas in which wom en and girls are consistently behind men and boys. 
Gender gaps, for example, continue to be seen in ed ucation, employment and wages and will most 
likely continue unless policies are put in place to  address such gender inequalities and inequities.4 
 
2.1 Gender Inequality Index 
Through the years, several indices have developed t o quantify the concept of gender inequality. The 
United Nations Development Programme uses the Gende r Inequality Index (GII) and Gender 
Development Index (GDI). GII is a composite measure  that shows inequality in achievement between 
women and men in reproductive health, empowerment a nd the labour market while the GDI 
measures achievement in human development in three areas: health, education, and command over 
economic resources. The GDI considers the gender ga ps on human development between men and 
women.  
 
 
1 United Nations Population Fund (2015). “Women and Girls in Indonesia: Progress and Challenges”. Avail able at: 
https://indonesia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -pdf/Women%20and%20Girls%20in%20Indonesia.pdf  
2 Ibid 
3 National Commission on Violence against Women (Komn as Perempuan). “National Human Rights Institution 
Independent Report on 25 Years of Implementing the Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA+25) in Indonesia” . Submitted to the 
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) 27 Septembe r 2019. Available at: https://ngocsw.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/Komnas-Perempuan-Independen t-Report-BPFA25.pdf 
4 United Nations Population Fund (2015). “Women and Girls in Indonesia: Progress and Challenges”. Avail able at: 
https://indonesia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -pdf/Women%20and%20Girls%20in%20Indonesia.pdf


---
*Page 165*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 4I 
Indonesia has a GII of 0.453, ranking it 104 out of  160 countries in the 2017 index. The 2017 female 
Human Development Index (HDI) value for Indonesia i s 0.666 in contrast with 0.715 for males, 
resulting in a GDI value of 0.932, which places the  country into Group 3 (medium equality in HDI 
achievements between women and men).5 
  
The Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) of the World Eco nomic Forum examines the gap between men 
and women in four categories: economic participatio n and opportunity, educational attainment, 
health and survival; and political empowerment. Out  of 149 countries, Indonesia’s rankings, based on 
GGGI in the year 2018, are given below 6: 
 
Description Score Rank 
Economic participation and opportunity 0.629 96 
Educational attainment 0.967 107 
Health and survival 0.974 79 
Political empowerment 0.193 60 
Gender Gap Index 2018 0.691 85 
  
* Inequality = 0.00; Equality = 1.00. Source: The G lobal Gender Gap Report 2018 
 
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel opment (OECD) developed the Social 
Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI), a composite i ndex that scores countries (i.e., 0 to 1) on 14 
indicators grouped into five sub-indices: discrimin atory family code, restricted physical integrity, s on 
bias, restricted resources and assets, and restrict ed civil liberties to measure the discrimination ag ainst 
women in social institutions across 160 countries. The 2019 SIGI value for Indonesia is 0.401, 
suggesting that discrimination against women is hig h.7 
 
2.2 Education 8 
Prior to 1900, women in Indonesia were given fewer opportunities than men to develop themselves, 
including in terms of education. During this time t hey were generally not allowed to go to school. Aft er 
independence and due to Indonesia’s various constit utions, legislations and policies, which guarantee 
the right for every citizen to education, women beg an to see a slight improvement in being able to 
receive an education. Since the 1970’s, there have also been a series of policies implemented to 
remove various barriers to education. The outcome o f these policies has been positive, with women 
also showing an increased desire for an education. Some key education programmes over the years 
have included the Presidential Instruction (Inpres)  on aid for construction of primary school building s 
and Wajar  (Compulsory Education) for 6 Years, 9 Years and 12  Years. 
 
5 United Nations Development Programme (2018). Brief ing Note for Countries on the 2018 Human Developmen t Report: 
Indonesia. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/ all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/IDN.pdf  
6 World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report  2018: Available at 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf 
 
7 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. A vailable at: https://www.genderindex.org/ranking/ 
8 United Nations Population Fund (2015). “Women and G irls in Indonesia: Progress and Challenges”. Availa ble at: 
https://indonesia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -pdf/Women%20and%20Girls%20in%20Indonesia.pdf


---
*Page 166*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 5I 
According to data within Indonesia’s 2010 Populatio n Census, 95.3 percent of children aged 7-12 years 
and 85 percent of children aged 13-15 actively went  to school. However, senior-secondary school-
aged children and university-aged youth rates were much lower, at 52.8 percent, and 15.1 percent, 
respectively. This data revealed that there are gen der gaps, wherein school enrolment among females 
is higher compared to males up until the 13-15 year  age cohort. For example, for the 7-12 age cohort, 
94.5 percent of males and 95.3 percent of females w ere enrolled in school. Thereafter, the opposite 
is true in the higher levels of education, such as senior high school and university. For example, for  the 
16-18 age cohort, 53.2 percent of males and 52.4 pe rcent of females were enrolled in school. 
This data also revealed that both girls and boys su ffer from inequality when it comes to geographical 
location of education facilities, where there is a marked disparity between urban and rural regions. 
This suggests that location of residence often is a  reason for why a child does not go to school. To 
illustrate, for the 13-15 age cohort, 87.8 percent of males in urban areas and 79.6 of males in rural 
areas were enrolled in school. The similar holds tr ue for females, in which 88.1 percent of females in  
urban areas and 82.2 of females in rural areas were  enrolled in school. 
2.3 Health 
Per data from 2012, maternal and child health conce rns require attention, wherein progress on 
maternal health has slowed in recent years. Its mat ernal mortality ratio, estimated at around 228 per 
100,000 live births, has remained above 200 over th e past decade, despite efforts to improve maternal 
health services. The probabilities of the child dyi ng at different ages are 19 per thousand for the 
neonatal period; 15 per thousand from 2 to 11 month s and 10 per thousand from age one to five 
years. 9  
 
Due to improvements in mothers’ education, househol d and environmental hygiene, income and 
access to health services, Indonesia’s child mortal ity due to infections and other childhood illnesses , 
has declined. Neonatal mortality remains the main h urdle in reducing further child deaths, wherein 
most of the causes of neonatal deaths are preventab le. In both rural and urban areas and across all 
wealth quintiles, progress in reducing the neonatal  mortality rate has slowed down in recent years. 
And while rural households still have an under-five  mortality rate which is one-third higher than that  
in urban households, in some cases, rural mortality  rates are falling faster than urban rates. This co uld 
be due to increases in urbanization rates, leading to overcrowding and poor sanitation conditions 
amongst the urban poor, then paired with the loss o f traditional social safety nets as well. 10  
 
Indonesia continues to also suffer from issues with  malnutrition, which in turn, has large impacts on 
women and children. For example, although data is l imited and a bit dated, health surveys conducted 
in 2007 revealed that many pregnant women suffer fr om anemia. While the prevalence of anemia 
dropped from 40.1 percent in 2001 to 24.5 percent i n 2007, many mothers still do not take sufficient 
supplements. Additionally, infant and child feeding  practices often remain inadequate. Only 43.9 
percent of children start breastfeeding within an h our of birth and young children receive 
complementary food too early. For example, it was f ound that at 4-5 months of age, 52.9 percent are 
 
9 UNICEF Indonesia (2012). Issue Brief: Maternal and Child Health. October. Available at: https://www.medbox.org/id-
mother-child-health/unicef-indonesia-issue-briefs-m aternal-and-child-health/preview?q=   
10  Ibid


---
*Page 167*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 6I 
receiving a form of solid or semi-solid food. 11   
 
In addition, Indonesia is considered to have a one of the fastest growing AIDS epidemic in Asia. While  
the total number of HIV infected individuals remain s low, the rate of the increase is a concern. The 
new cases are concentrated in key populations, such  as sex workers (who are mostly women) and 
their male clients. To make the situation worse, of ten female sex works have limited access to HIV 
testing. 12  
 
2.4 Political participation, decision-making and ag ency  
Per the Constitution, women have the same rights as  men to hold political and public office and there 
are no formal barriers to women’s political partici pation. Nevertheless, traditionally, the political 
arena has been male dominated. Seeing this gender g ap in political participation and the need to 
increase women’s political participation, the Gover nment of Indonesia passed Law No. 10/2008 which 
made it compulsory for political parties to include  a minimum of 30 percent women candidates. The 
revised law also requires parties to place at least  one woman among its top three ranked candidates. 
There are, however, no specific sanctions for non-c ompliance. 13   
In addition, Law 8/2012 (Article 55) on General Ele ctions requires that the list of nominees of 
candidates for members of the House of Representati ves contain at least 30 percent of women’s 
representation. However, per a CEDAW Shadow Report from 2016, the required 30 percent quota of 
women representatives in parliament has not been re ached in either the national and regional 
parliaments. Female participation in politics has n evertheless increased over the last decade, and wit h 
it a decrease in views that politics is a men’s onl y domain. To illustrate, in 1999 women occupied 9.6  
percent of the seats in parliament and in 2014 17.3 2 percent. 14  In 2017, it was reported that there 
were nine women ministers in the Cabinet (25 percen t), 126 women Deputy Ministers or Director 
General (21 percent) and 2,295 women Directors or H ead of Bureau (16 percent) in government 
institutions. In addition, 76 women have also been elected as regents/mayors (14.78 percent). 15   
There does, though, remain a preference for male ca ndidates by many voters. For example, during 
election campaigns in the country, it is common for  community and religious leaders and for male 
legislative candidates to publicly question the mor ality of women running for office. At the local lev el, 
these perspectives are even more prominent, wherein  there are various laws regulating women's 
appearance and conduct. Laws discriminating against  women, typically promoted in the name of 
religious and moral decency, include dress codes, t he public segregation of men and women, and rules 
 
11  Government of Indonesia, World Bank, AusAID, CIDA, The Netherlands Embassy, DFID, and ADB (2011). Indo nesia Policy 
Brief , no. 2: Gender Equality and Health. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/306461468 267883109/pdf/730300REVISED00C00Gender0brief020en.p df  
12  Ibid 
13  OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. Co untry Profile: Indonesia. Available at:  
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/file s/datasheets/2019/ID.pdf   
14  Hillman, B. (2017) Increasing Women's Parliamentar y Representation in Asia and the Pacific: The Indon esian Experience. 
Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 4: 38–49. Availa ble at: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ap p5.160  
15  United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indones ia: National report submitted in accordance with pa ragraph 5 of 
the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.


---
*Page 168*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 7I 
curtailing women's mode of travel and movements at night, all of which limit women's mobility and 
ability to run for office. Furthermore, in the abse nce of public campaign funding, candidates need the  
support from the business community. Given the cult ural stigma with women running for office, this 
funding issue is another significant barrier to wom en's entry into political office in Indonesia, as m en 
are generally better connected within such business  circles. 16  
While gender inequalities exist in many facets of I ndonesian society, as discussed above, women’s 
collective action within groups and civil society i s helping to break down unequal social norms and 
structural barriers to gender equality.17 There are  various organizations at the international level t hat 
are also working to help marginalized women by work ing with civil society organizations (CSOs) to 
empower women and influence government policies at the local and national levels. For example, 
MAMPU, an Australian Government (DFAT) and Governme nt of Indonesia (BAPPENAS) 
partnership, works to improve the access of poor wo men to essential services. Through this 
collaboration alone, this grassroots work has reach ed some 900 villages across 27 provinces. As of 
mid-2018, some 1300 women’s groups with 32,000 memb ers have directly or indirectly benefitted 
from this work.18  
2.5 Labor force participation and earnings 19  
 
While the Constitution notes that every citizen is entitled to employment and a decent living, this 
entitlement has not been fully realized for women. For example, due to societal and cultural norms, 
many women take on unpaid care work at home, includ ing managing the household and raising 
children, instead of paid work outside the home. It  is commonly held that the reasons for why a 
woman does not join the formal work force are eithe r that she is not educated enough to meet the 
educational qualifications demanded of the job, or she has freely chosen to remain at home to fulfil 
her household obligations. 
 
According to data within Indonesia’s 2010 Populatio n Census, men of the working age group were 
mostly employed (79.6 percent), whereas only less t han half of the women (45.1 percent) of the same 
age were employed, with the other half engaged in h ousehold duties. To note, in comparison to data 
from 1990, more women are entering the labor force.  To illustrate, in 1990, only 37.7 percent of 
working age women were employed. 
 
Women’s involvement in the labor force is also more  dependent on her age than it is for men. 
Working-aged men from three groups - youth, adult a nd elderly - were generally involved in income-
earning activities. However, only women belonging t o the adult subgroups were involved in income-
earning activities. Women who were in youth and eld er subgroups were instead doing household 
duties, with the percentage of adult females (37.8 percent) not in labor force shown to be more than 
that of males (3.6 percent). 
 
16  Ibid 
17  Ling, S. “How women are changing Indonesia”, avail able at 
https://arts.unimelb.edu.au/articulation/editions/2 019/december-2019/how-women-are-changing-indonesia 
18 See “Reducing barriers to gender equality in Ind onesia” at https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2019/03/25 /reducing-
barriers-to-gender-inequality-in-indonesia/ for mor e information on this Initiative   
19  United Nations Population Fund (2015). “Women and G irls in Indonesia: Progress and Challenges”. Availa ble at: 
https://indonesia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -pdf/Women%20and%20Girls%20in%20Indonesia.pdf


---
*Page 169*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 8I 
 
Again, according to Indonesia’s 2010 Population Cen sus, employed women and men both contributed 
as much as 40 percent in the agricultural sector. T o note, involvement in agriculture does not mean 
only working in farms but can also include, in the case of some women, of being involved in the 
decision-making about agriculture. The remaining 60  percent of men worked in the following five 
sectors: services (16.5 percent), trade (15.5 perce nt) and manufacturing industry (9.7 percent), and 
construction and transportation (8.1 percent); whil e the remaining 60 percent of women were 
employed in the following three sectors: trade (23. 5 percent), services (19.0 percent) and 
manufacturing (12.7 percent). 
 
In Indonesia, employers are obliged to pay each emp loyee at least the set minimum wage. However, 
this regulation has yet to be extended to cover tho se in the informal sector. When disaggregating 
wage by educational attainment and sex, it appears that the higher the education attainment the less 
the wage difference, in relative terms, between men  and women, other things held constant. In 
general, the average wage received by women was low er than that received by men. The average 
wage of women was IDR 1.4 million while that of men  was IDR 1.7 million. The lowest wage was that 
for workers who had no schooling. In this group the  average wage received by women was inferior to 
that received by men, wherein the average women’s w age was IDR 547,000 while that of men was 
IDR 960,000. In other words, women’s average wage w as only 56.9 percent that of men. The wage 
received by female university graduates was also lo wer than that received by their male counterparts 
at IDR 2,.5 million and IDR 3.6 million, respective ly. The one exception to this trend can be seen in the 
construction, transport and services/finance sector s, wherein women often received wages greater 
than men’s as they were relatively better educated than the men within them.  
2.6 Access to land, assets and financial resources 
Per various civil codes and laws, married and unmar ried women on paper have the same rights as men 
to own, use, make decisions and use land and non-la nd assets as collateral. The default marital 
property regime is partial community of property, w herein both spouses must agree in the 
administration of marital property. Despite this co ncept of joint ownership of property purchased 
during marriage, it is rarely the case that land is  registered in the joint name of husband and wife. It is 
common practice for the husband to register the mar ital property in his name. In addition, there is 
little awareness that title certificates for marita l property can be issued in the name of both spouse s. 20  
About 36.2% of married women aged 15 to 49 years ow n land individually or jointly as opposed to 
54.1% of men.21  
 
In the case of divorce, the law stipulates that bot h spouses keep the properties they owned 
individually prior to the marriage and must divide equally any joint property. Per Islamic Law, under 
registered marriages, in the case of divorce, each wife to a polygamous marriage also has an equal 
right to property that was acquired during marriage .22  However, these rights are not exercised in 
 
20 OECD (2019). Social Institutions and Gender Index 2 019: Country Profile Indonesia. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/file s/datasheets/2019/ID.pdf 
21  Asian Development Bank (2015) Summary of Indonesia ’s Gender Analysis. No.6/Oct. 2015 ADB Papers on In donesia. 
Available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication /177025/ino-paper-06-2015.pdf  
22  OECD (2019). Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019: Country Profile Indonesia. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/file s/datasheets/2019/ID.pdf


---
*Page 170*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 9I 
practice wherein they are highly likely to lose the ir land rights upon widowhood, divorce, or 
desertion.23  
 
In term of forests, according to the Forestry Law N o. 41 of 1999, nearly the entire forestland is owne d 
by the state. Less than two percent of the forest a rea is formally designated for communities and 
indigenous peoples or owned by firms or individuals . However, there are several regulations that allow  
local communities to engage in forest management th rough mechanisms that include community 
forest, village forest, community timber plantation s, partnership, and customary forest. The permits 
for such community-based forest management initiati ves are usually granted to community groups 
that form local institutions, such as cooperatives and farmer forest groups. This arrangement has 
gender implications, as most of the members and lea ders of such institutions are men. As such, 
women have limited involvement in decision-making p rocesses, leading to limited access to the 
benefits from the initiatives, such as access to kn owledge and capacity-building activities as well as  
funds and payments. 24   
 
While there is no legal restriction on married wome n’s rights to open a bank account at formal 
financial institution, Article 108 of the Civil Cod e creates a barrier to the acquisition of assets, a s it 
prevents married women from executing a deed or agr eement on their own behalf and from receiving 
any payment from the latter without consent of the husband. Although there have been recent 
amendments to this law, which requires the same con sent of co-signing for the husbands, this law is 
not always enforced with the men consistently.25   
 
Furthermore, there is no law prohibiting discrimina tion by creditors on the basis of gender in access 
to credit. To note, in the economic sector, there a re various credit schemes available for women, such  
as perkassa  (credit schemes specifically for women in micro an d small enterprises). In the rural sector, 
the barriers to credit and financial services remai ns an issue and the microfinance industry in Indone sia 
does not often target women. In addition, many wome n entrepreneurs have limited knowledge in 
business development and face discrimination in dea ling with government staff. Women also tend to 
register their business in their husband’s name as the men are seen as the head of the household.26  
  
3.  Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women  and Protecting Gender Equality 
3.1 Key International Protocols and Frameworks Rati fied by Indonesia in Support of Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and Human Rights 
Indonesia has ratified and/or signed many key inter national conventions, treaties and plans of actions  
 
23  Asian Development Bank (2015) Summary of Indonesia ’s Gender Analysis. No.6/Oct. 2015 ADB Papers on In donesia. 
Available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication /177025/ino-paper-06-2015.pdf  
24  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note 
to Integrate Gender in Implementing REDD+ Social Sa feguards in Indonesia. UN-REDD Programme. Available  at: 
http://www.wocan.org/resources/guidance-note-integr ate-gender-implementing-redd-social-safeguards-indo nesia  
25  OECD (2019). Social Institutions and Gender Index 2 019: Country Profile Indonesia. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/file s/datasheets/2019/ID.pdf  
26  Ibid


---
*Page 171*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 10 I 
on gender equality, women empowerment and human rig hts. Critical among them are:27  
 
 United Nations Convention on the Political Rights o f Women, ratified by Law 68/1958;  
 United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all  Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW), ratified by Law number 7/1984; 
 Optional Protocol to the CEDAW, signed by the Gover nment in 2000;  
 International Labor Organization’s (ILO) Convention  number 100 on Equal Remuneration for 
Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value, rati fied by Law number 80/1957; 
 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cult ural Rights, signed by the Government in 
2006; 
 International Covenant on Civil and Political Right s signed by the Government in 2006. 
 
The country has also committed itself to acting upo n the recommendations of the 1994 Copenhagen 
Declaration on Social Development, the 1995 Cairo I nternational Conference on Population and 
Development and the 1995 Beijing Platform for Actio n.28  
 
3.2 Key National Frameworks, Policies, Laws and Pro grams Supporting Gender Equality and 
Women’s Empowerment  
3.2.1 Policies, Laws and Frameworks 
While gender gaps in national policies and laws are  still present, Indonesia does continue to improve 
its legal frameworks, at national and local levels,  particularly in terms of implementing policies and  
programs that focus on the promotion and protection  of the rights of women, children, persons with 
disabilities (PwDs), and older persons. 29  Listed below are key policies, laws and regulation s (PLRs) in 
Indonesia that ensure the protection of rights, fre edom and welfare of men and women.  
 
1945 Constitution 30  
 
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia states, “every citizen enjoys equal status before 
the law and government and is obliged to uphold thi s status without exception” (Paragraph 1, Article 
27). Paragraph 2 of the same article states that: “ every citizen shall have the right to employment an d 
to conditions of life commensurate with human digni ty.” The democratic reforms of 1999 caused the 
Government to assess and more intensively track hum an rights issues as well as refine the 
Constitution’s basic definition of the subject. In response, an amendment to the Constitution was 
issued in 2000 which recognizes that “every person shall have the right to be free from discriminatory  
treatment based upon any ground whatsoever and shal l have the right to protection from such 
 
27  Asian Development Bank (2006). Indonesia: Country Gender Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institution al-document/32231/cga-indonesia.pdf ; and UNDP (2017). UNDP 
Indonesia Gender Equality Strategy and Action Plan 2017-2020. Available at: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/indonesia/2019/DOC S/CO%20Gender%20Equality%20Strategy%202017-2020.pdf   
28  Asian Development Bank (2006). Indonesia: Country Gender Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institution al-document/32231/cga-indonesia.pdf  
29  United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indone sia: National report submitted in accordance with p aragraph 5 of 
the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.  
30  Asian Development Bank (2006). Indonesia: Country G ender Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institution al-document/32231/cga-indonesia.pdf


---
*Page 172*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 11 I 
discriminatory treatment."  
 
Although it does not specifically distinguish the c itizens into female and male citizens within it, th e 
Constitution is one of the basic legal foundations for women’s rights in Indonesia. While it does prov ide 
a sound foundation for promoting equal rights betwe en men and women, as this study reveals, much 
remains to be done in ensuring these foundations ar e in fact followed and put into practice.  
 
1984 Law on the Ratification of CEDAW  
In line with its Constitution, through the ratifica tion of this law, Indonesia showed its support and 
approval in the participation of international effo rts to eliminate all forms of discrimination agains t 
women. In the text of the law to ratify CEDAW, it i s noted that in its implementation, the provisions of 
CEDAW must be adjusted to the order of life in soci ety of Indonesia, which contains cultural values, 
customary values, and religious norms applied and w idely followed by the Indonesian people. It also 
notes that its implementation of the provisions of CEDAW aligns with the order of life that is intende d 
by the Indonesian nation. 
 
Presidential Instruction No. 9/2000 on Gender Mains treaming in National Development 
This instruction aims to enhance the position, role  and qualities of women to achieve gender equality 
in the family, society and the nation. It instructs  all government bodies to implement gender 
mainstreaming for planning, formulation, implementa tion, monitoring and evaluation of national 
development policies and programs in accordance wit h their responsibilities, functions and 
authorities. It also guides the State Minister of W omen’s Empowerment to give gender mainstreaming 
technical assistance to government agencies and ins titutions at both the national and subnational leve l 
as well as to report the result of gender mainstrea ming implementation to the President. 
 
Law No. 8/2012 on General Elections 31  
Under this law, the general election of the members  of the House of Representatives, People’s 
Representative Council, and Regional House of Repre sentatives political parties are required to have a  
minimum of 30 percent women candidates to be electe d to the parliament. As of 2017, currently, there 
were 97 women serving in the parliament (17.23 perc ent). Thus, to work towards achieving this target, 
three aspects were also introduced within this law.  Firstly, the law encourages the appointment of 
more women in senior leadership positions in both p ublic and private sectors. Secondly, the law 
stipulates mandatory gender mainstreaming curricula  in all compulsory trainings and education at all 
levels. Lastly, it calls for the implementation of national gender mapping in politics to assess the 
representation and needs of women, as voters and ca ndidates, to help design effective information 
sharing and training programs on politics and leade rship for women. 
 
National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) of 20 15–2019 
One of the Plan’s eight objectives for its vision i ntegrates gender considerations. It calls for equit able 
development, in which discrimination in various asp ects, including gender, is abolished. In addition, 
the Plan states five challenges to human resources development, of which two have direct linkages to 
 
31  United Nations Humand Rights Council (2017). Indone sia: National report submitted in accordance with p aragraph 5 of 
the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.


---
*Page 173*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 12 I 
gender-related issues. For example, it notes that t here is a challenge on accelerating the promotion o f 
gender equality. However it also highlights that wo men’s role in development is helping to address 
this issue by increasing the understanding, commitm ent, and ability of decision makers and 
development actors on the importance of integrating  a gender perspective in all fields and stages of 
development, strengthening gender mainstreaming ins titutions including gender responsive planning 
and financing in central and regional levels. It al so notes that the efforts to increase the protectio n of 
women and children from violence and other wrongdoi ngs is changing society’s permissive attitude 
and other cultural practices. 
 
Furthermore, the Plan includes gender equality and women’s empowerment as part of its human and 
society development targets, in which two indicator s on gender have been established. It also 
promotes gender equitable initiatives, wherein keys  components of its national development agenda 
are increasing the role and representation of women  in politics and development and protecting 
women, children, and marginalized groups. 
 
3.2.2 Ministerial Policies and Programs on Gender  
The Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child Protect ion (MoWECP) launched a flagship program 
called 3Ends Program in 2016. The program focuses o n ending: (i) violence against women and 
children; (ii) human trafficking; and (iii) barrier s to economic justice for women. The strategy to en d 
violence against women and children includes: (i) e nsuring the accessibility of information on the rig hts 
of women and children; (ii) enhancing the capacity of local institutions, including at the village/sub -
district level; (iii) enhancing the capacity of loc al integrated task force on women and children; and  (iv) 
mobilizing the participation and support of all Min istries/Agencies, local government, and civil socie ty. 
The strategy to end trafficking of women and girls includes: (i) developing early detection system on 
trafficking in persons (TIPs); (ii) raising the awa reness of the community, including men and boys, an d 
encouraging their active participation in the early  detection system; (iii) building inter-agencies 
synergies within the National Task Force for Traffi cking in overseeing cases of TIPs; and (iv) ensurin g 
full and mandatory training for all prospective mig rant workers. Lastly, the strategy to end barriers to 
access economic justice for women includes: (i) ens uring relevant Ministries/Agencies conduct training  
and capacity building for women entrepreneurs; (ii)  expanding access and ensuring rights of all women 
to economic resources, including business financing  such as loan and credit from financial institution s; 
(iii) providing an alternative financing and capita l for women entrepreneurs in small and micro 
enterprise; and (iv) building financing support and  alternative facilities for women innovators in 
economic sectors. 32  
 
Particularly relevant in the context of gender and REDD+ in Indonesia is the “Regulation of the Minist er 
of Environment and Forestry Number P.31/Menlhk/Set Jen/Set.1/5/2017 on Guidelines on the 
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Envir onment and Forestry Sector” issued by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MoEF) in May 2017. The regulation recognizes that acceleration 
is required in regard to the promotion, effectivene ss and optimization gender mainstreaming in M&E, 
policies, programs, and activities in the environme nt and forestry sector and emphasizes 
 
32  United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indones ia: National report submitted in accordance with pa ragraph 5 of 
the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.


---
*Page 174*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 13 I 
implementation in the field on the Guidelines for G ender Mainstreaming. The guidelines themselves, 
issued as a Presidential Instruction in 2000, was a  strategy aimed at closing the gendered disparity i n 
access, participation, control and benefits of deve lopment between women and men. The annex to 
the regulation recognizes that the Guidelines shoul d not only be limited to the gender gap between 
men and women, but also increase the social inclusi on of other marginalized groups and resolve the 
disparity of access, participation, control and ben efits of development of children, the elderly, pers ons 
with disability, Adat communities and other groups.  An MoU was also signed between the MoEF and 
the MoWEPC in 2016. 
 
In addition, to ensure proper implementation of Pre sidential Instruction No. 9/2000 on Gender 
Mainstreaming, the Ministry of Finance (MoF), toget her with MoWECP, Ministry of Home Affairs, and 
the National Planning Agency, issued a circular let ter in order to expedite gender mainstreaming 
through gender-responsive planning and budgeting wi thin all ministries/governmental units at the 
national level (SE-33/MK.02/2012). These four minis tries are now also in the process of preparing a 
draft Presidential Regulation to ensure the institu tionalisation of gender mainstreaming. This 
regulation will be legally enforced and will replac e the current Presidential Instruction, which only 
serves as a policy instrument. 
 
 
3.3 Institutional Arrangements 
The Government of Indonesia established the State’s Ministry for Women’s Empowerment  in 1978, 
which was later changed into MoWECP, as the nationa l machinery to ensure the implementation of 
gender equality and women’s empowerment. In line wi th CEDAW and per Presidential Instruction No. 
9/2000 noted above, MoWECP is the lead government a gency with a mandate for mainstreaming 
gender in the government, across sectors and at mul tiple levels. It provides technical assistance to 
other ministries to ensure that gender is mainstrea med in their development plans and that this 
progress is then reported regularly to the Presiden t. 33   
 
The Government has also established the National Commission in Violence Against Women  in 1998. 
The Commission is responsible for nurturing an enab ling environment and supporting efforts to 
eliminate all forms of violence against women and t o protect women’s rights in Indonesia. 34  
 
Indonesia has also established units or focal points on women and children under r elevant 
Ministries/Agencies . These units have been established within the stru cture of the Coordinating 
Ministry of Human Development and Culture, MoWECP, Ministry of Social Affairs, Ministry of Health, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Manpower and the National Police. 35   
 
In terms of the forestry sector, the Ministry of En vironment and Forestry (MoEF) incorporates gender 
 
33  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note 
to Integrate Gender in Implementing REDD+ Social Sa feguards in Indonesia. UN-REDD Programme. Available  at: 
http://www.wocan.org/resources/guidance-note-integr ate-gender-implementing-redd-social-safeguards-indo nesia  
34  Ibid 
35  United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indones ia: National report submitted in accordance with pa ragraph 5 of 
the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.


---
*Page 175*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 14 I 
into its activities, which included re-establishing  its Gender Working Group in 2012. It also began 
gender responsive budgeting and implemented gender awareness and gender analysis training courses 
for its staff. The MoWECP also supports MoEF with t heir gender mainstreaming efforts, which includes 
its efforts to develop gender indicators for REDD+.36  The activities of the Gender Working Group have 
included training on gender mainstreaming, informat ion dissemination and gender responsive 
budgeting, planning and analysis. However, given th e ad hoc nature of the Gender Working Group, an 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) study found that it ha s limited authority to make any significant 
contribution to gender and organizational change, w hich is the fundamental basis for gender-sensitive 
programming in the institution.37  The 2017 MoEF regulation on Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming 
noted above aims to address these gaps, requiring t hat the MoEF must guarantee the availability of 
human resources, funding and adequate infrastructur e to support gender mainstreaming within its 
scope of work. 
 
The MoF also has a gender working group to support gender mainstreaming within its activities and 
projects. Illustrating its capacity and effective w ork on gender mainstreaming, the MoF has received 
a gender mainstreaming award (known as Anugrah Parahita Ekapraya ) in 2013, 2016 and 2018. 
 
4.  Gender Issues Around Forests and REDD+ 38   
Forest resources in Indonesia have not only been th e source of the country’s economic development 
but also contribute to rural poor communities’ live lihood needs. Women of all rural households are 
engaged in meeting their families’ subsistence and livelihood needs, and given that 40 percent of 
households in the country are food insecure and ear n below two USD per day, access to forest 
resources remains necessary for poor rural communit ies to fulfill their subsistence needs. Rural 
communities that are highly dependent on forests, a re most directly and significantly impact by forest  
degradation and deforestation, and this impact is e specially significant for women, considering that 
they often have a higher degree of dependence on th e environment in order to manage daily 
household tasks. As noted in the GoI Guidelines for  Gender Mainstreaming in the Environment and 
Forests, the disappearance of water sources due to forest destruction causes difficulties for women, 
which then have to find water at a greater distance  or purchase it at a high price, in order to cook f or 
their families. 
 
In Indonesia, women play pivotal roles in forest us e and management. While there are variations 
across the country, in general, women engage in num erous activities around forests, such as collecting  
firewood, harvesting non-timber forest products (NT FPs) (e.g. honey, medicinal plants, food animal 
fodder), and forest protection, amongst others. In some instances, women also manage home gardens 
and nearby forest and fallow areas. This, in turn, allows them to combine child rearing and domestic 
 
36  Center for International Forestry Research (2016).  Gender in Forestry and REDD+ in Indonesia. Availab le at: 
https://www.cifor.org/library/6010/ 
37  Asian Development Bank (2016). Gender Analysis for  Republic of Indonesia: Community-Focused Investmen ts to Address 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation Project. Avail able at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-
documents/47084-002-sd-05.pdf  
38  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note 
to Integrate Gender in Implementing REDD+ Social Sa feguards in Indonesia. UN-REDD Programme. Available  at: 
http://www.wocan.org/resources/guidance-note-integr ate-gender-implementing-redd-social-safeguards-indo nesia


---
*Page 176*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 15 I 
chores with other activities to fulfill subsistence  needs. However, due to increasing development of 
commercial forestry, women experience increasing di fficulties to collect items such as water, food and  
firewood from the forests.  
 
Indonesian women often have limited access to decis ion-making processes related to forests, including 
REDD+ projects. While they do play a role and are o ften engaged in forestry projects, they are not 
involved in planning and decision making. To illust rate, in some community forestry projects, such as 
Hutan Kemasyarakatan/HKm, women are often involved in activities such as planting, maintenance, 
replanting trees, and harvesting and marketing NTFP s but rarely engage in the decision making or hold 
a leadership position in forest farmer groups. In m ost cases, members of forest farmer groups are head  
of the households, who are male. The reasons for wh y women are minimally involved in forest-related 
decision making include the following: 1) women’s h eavy burden of work responsibilities; 2) lower 
rates of literacy and education of women in rural a reas; and 3) the inaccurate assumption that forest-
related activities are “men’s work”. 
 
Similarly, women also have less access to extension  or capacity-building activities related to agricul ture 
and forestry, as participation in these activities is usually limited to household heads or community 
leaders, who are mostly men. As such, women are rar ely invited to such meetings. It is common 
practice to only invite the household heads, and th is is viewed as sufficient because the information 
that they gain will be transferred to the rest of t he families, including the wives. However, such 
communication often does not take place, and as a r esult, women do not have sufficient access to 
information about relevant activities, projects, et c., concerning their well-being and the forests the y 
are dependent on. 
 
To note, there are various formal and informal wome n’s groups at the village level that can be 
channeled and empowered through support from REDD+ and other forest conservation initiatives. For 
example, many women’s cooperatives have been establ ished with support from the National Program 
for Community Empowerment. Women’s farmer groups ar e also found in villages across the country. 
Furthermore, many rural women also engage tradition al savings collection and loan distribution 
schemes, which can be leveraged in REDD+ efforts.  
 
5.  Gender integration within forest conservation effor ts and REDD+ action in Indonesia 
5.1 REDD+ Design 
From 2010-2013, the Government of Indonesia receive d support from the UN-REDD Programme to 
help it attain REDD+ readiness. Under the overall o bjective of this support, 3 outcomes were expected.  
Outcome 1 was linked to the policy in the national context. Outcome 2 was related to the activities 
conducted in the chosen pilot province (Central Sul awesi), while Outcome 3 dealt with empowerment 
and capacity building. 39  
Gender elements were for the most inadvertently lef t out in the design consultations held for the 
Programme. To address this oversight, during implem entation of the Programme various efforts to 
 
39  UN-REDD Programme. Indonesia Summary Page. Availab le at: https://www.unredd.net/regions-and-countries/asia-
pacific/indonesia.html


---
*Page 177*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 16 I 
integrate gender were undertaken. For example, seve ral Project Management Unit (PMU) staff 
participated in a two-day gender-mainstreaming work shop held by UNDP Indonesia to enhance their 
understanding on gender issues, develop gender-spec ific indicators and determine relevant activities 
to be integrated in the Programme’s work plan. To n ote, while the workshop did enhance their 
understanding of gender issues, interviews with PMU  representatives revealed that mainstreaming 
gender into Programme implementation was not an eas y task. 40   
 
In addition, during the drafting of the National RE DD+ Strategy (STRANAS), efforts were taken to 
engage both women and men in activities relevant to  REDD+ and provide equal access to knowledge 
and information on REDD+. A workshop on “Gender Saf eguards in REDD+ Initiative” was also held in 
Jakarta in February 2012 to provide inputs and guid ance on how to integrate gender into the 
safeguard’s principles, criteria and indicators. Si milarly, a workshop on gender safeguards was also 
held in Central Sulawesi to gain inputs from local communities. The Programme also implemented 
Free, Prior, Informed and Consent (FPIC) activities  in several pilot sites in Central Sulawesi which 
considered gender aspects. 41  Lastly, a “ Guidance Note to Integrate Gender in Implementing R EDD+ 
Social Safeguards in Indonesia ” was completed in 2012, and its results were used by the REDD+ Task 
Force to inform the gender elements of its social s afeguards. 
 
The evaluation of the Programme concluded that it f ollowed FPIC principles, wherein nearly all 
conceptual preparatory activities for REDD+ were ca rried out through various consultations and focus 
group discussions with a myriad of stakeholders fro m the national and provincial level. However, it di d 
note that the participation rates of women were les s than ideal. In the workshops, consultations, focu s 
group discussions, and even the FPIC trials at the field level, the number of men and women 
participants were skewed more toward men. In line w ith the gender imbalances and inequalities faced 
in the country, men still outnumbered women within the Programme’s personnel team as well.42  
 
5.2 REDD+ National Strategy (STRANAS) 
Developed by the REDD+ Taskforce in 2012, the REDD+  National Strategy (STRANAS) was formulated 
with the following intent: 
1.  To prepare an effective institutional system to imp lement the REDD+ program; 
2.  To provide a basis and direction for integrated gov ernance and regulatory systems to ensure 
the implementation of the REDD+ scheme; 
3.  Develop systematic and consolidated processes and a pproaches to save Indonesia’s natural 
forests and the flora and fauna within them; 
4.  Provide a reference for the expansion of investment  in the utilization of forests and peatlands 
for the production of forest and/or agricultural co mmodities, and the provision of ecosystem 
services that include the conservation and accumula tion of carbon stocks. 
 
40  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note 
to Integrate Gender in Implementing REDD+ Social Sa feguards in Indonesia. UN-REDD Programme. Available  at: 
http://www.wocan.org/resources/guidance-note-integr ate-gender-implementing-redd-social-safeguards-indo nesia  
41  Ibid 
42  UN-REDD Programme (2013). Final Evaluation of the UN-REDD Programme in Indonesia. Available at: 
https://www.unredd.net/documents/un-redd-partner-co untries-181/asia-the-pacific-333/a-p-partner-
countries/indonesia-187/15077-final-evaluation-of-t he-un-redd-programme-in-indonesia.html


---
*Page 178*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 17 I 
 
The drafting process of the National REDD+ Strategy  (STRANAS) included a series of public consultation  
meetings in seven regions: Java; Kalimantan; Sulawe si; Sumatera I; Sumatera II, Bali, Maluku and Nusa 
Tenggara; Papua, engaging 387 participants with rep resentatives of government (46 percent), civil 
society (42 percent), academics (nine percent) and private sector (three percent). The draft was also 
posted on a website to get inputs from wider audien ces. Unfortunately, only 12 percent of public 
consultation participants were women. Furthermore, during a National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS) 
consultation held by members of the REDD+ Task Forc e with representatives of the MoWECP, there 
was an impression that MoWECP representatives had n ot received thorough information about 
REDD+, and had yet to consider REDD+ as an importan t issue that MoWECP should be engaged in.43  
 
Despite this, the National REDD+ Strategy (STRANAS)  does incorporate gender considerations into 
various aspects, including in its principles. These  references are noted below.44  
 
 The principle on fairness of REDD+ implementation n otes “REDD+ is implemented on the basis 
of the principles of equality for all and human rig hts protection in forest management, 
including for women and communities vulnerable to s ocio-economic and environmental 
change” (p.5);  
 One principle to be adopted to change the culture a nd paradigm in the country is “gender 
sensitivity” which calls for the attention to equal ity in roles, needs, and responsibilities of men 
and women (p.25);  
 Efforts to strengthen forest and resources governan ce calls for accurate information to be 
available for public participation through capacity -building for community members, 
especially women and other vulnerable groups, to im prove: (i) understanding of available 
information; and (ii) participation in decision-mak ing processes (p.25);  
 The minimal social safeguards to be complied with b y REDD+ implementing agencies includes 
assurance of gender equality and the right of vulne rable groups to participate equally in 
REDD+ implementation (p 32);  
 Requirement that the social safeguards framework is  designed in such a manner to protect 
and benefit vulnerable groups, including 1) indigen ous peoples and local communities living 
in and around forests, whose livelihoods depend on forest resources; 2) women, who face the 
full brunt of changes in family income; and 3) othe r societal groups, whose social, economic, 
and political status put them in a weak position in  terms of fulfilment of their human rights 
(p.29); 
 The guidance noted on the social safeguards framewo rk calls for the inclusion of indicators 
that evaluate the “accountability of verification r esults relating to the distribution of benefits 
from the implementation of REDD+ activities among g roups of men and women” (p.31). 
 
 
43  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note 
to Integrate Gender in Implementing REDD+ Social Sa feguards in Indonesia. UN-REDD Programme. Available  at: 
http://www.wocan.org/resources/guidance-note-integr ate-gender-implementing-redd-social-safeguards-indo nesia  
44  Government of Indonesia (2012). REDD+ National Str ategy. Available at: https://www.unredd.net/documents/un-redd-
partner-countries-181/national-redd-strategies-1025 /15862-indonesia-national-redd-strategy.html


---
*Page 179*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 18 I 
Finally, efforts by other non-government actors has  also provided ongoing contributions to improve 
gender equality in Indonesia’s forest governance mo re broadly, which are directly relevant to REDD+ 
activities. One such example is the Asia Foundation ’s environmental justice program in Indonesia, 
known as SETAPAK, which promotes regulatory and law  enforcement reforms to protect communities 
whose livelihoods depend on traditional forest reso urces. The second phase of the program (starting 
in late 2015) facilitated a dialogue with the Minis try of Environment and Forestry (MoEF) in 2018, tha t 
resulted in three commitments by the minister: 1) t o include gender in environmental impact 
assessments; 2) to allow women to be recognized as heads of household under the Social Forestry 
program; 3) to strengthen women’s role in tradition al forest management. 45   
 
5.3 REDD+ Safeguards in Indonesia: SIS-REDD+ 
Indonesia has developed several safeguards related to REDD+, including PRISAI (Principles of Criteria 
for Indonesian Safeguards Indicators), Strategic En vironment and Social Assessment (SESA), and Social 
Environment Standard for REDD+. Furthermore, MoEF e stablished the Safeguards Information System 
for REDD+ (SIS-REDD+) as Indonesia's official REDD+  safeguards system, with the main principles based 
on the Cancun Agreement.  
 
The SIS-REDD+ contains  7 principles, 17 criteria and 32 indicators , that are adapted from the 
implementation of the existing and relevant safegua rds frameworks such as Environmental Impact 
Assessment (AMDAL), Strategic Environmental Assessm ent (KLHS), Timber Legality Assurance System 
for Sustainable Forest Management and Production (S VLK/PHPL), Sustainable Forest Management 
Certification (SFM), High Conservation Value (HCV),  Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC), and 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA ). The SIS-REDD+ web-platform consists of two 
parts:  
1.  Database to collect, compile and manage data and in formation on REDD+ safeguards 
implementation, and 
2.  Web platform to display the information on safeguar ds implementation.  
 
Collection of data, management and provision of inf ormation on the implementation of safeguards is 
conducted by actors at site level through self-asse ssment process by completing a Safeguards 
Implementation Assessment Tool (APPS). This APPS wa s developed based on the principles of 
simplicity, transparency, accountability, completen ess and comparability. The aim is for this 
information on safeguards from the site level to be  progressively centralized to the SIS management 
in districts, onward to provinces and finally the n ational level.  However, the SIS-REDD+ currently does 
not contain any reference to gender, either in its principles, criteria or indicators, or the APPS too l. As 
such, future application of the SIS-REDD+, the prin ciples, criteria and indicators, the APPS tool, and  in 
general, any articulation of future social impact m onitoring should consider gender elements, recallin g 
that women often use natural resources and are impa cted by changes in natural resource uses in 
manners that are different than  men.  
 
 
45  Indonesia: Hearing Women’s Voices in Managing Natur al Resources (2018)


---
*Page 180*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 19 I 
6.  Recommendations  
This preliminary gender analysis acts as an entry p oint for gender mainstreaming throughout design 
and implementation of the proposed project. The res ults and findings of the gender analysis has also 
informed and guided the development of a Gender Act ion Plan (please see Section 7 below). 
 
This gender analysis, conducted through desk review , resulted in the following actions:  
 
 Identification of broader national level gender ine qualities and challenges and risks faced by 
women and other marginalized groups in Indonesia ar ound thematic areas of relevance to 
REDD+ action, such as national policies and regulat ions, decision-making processes, 
agricultural production, forest use, land tenure, e ducation, etc.;  
 Identification of gaps, entry points and opportunit ies for mainstreaming gender in the 
proposed project, and in the implementation of REDD + action and governance of forest 
resources in Indonesia more broadly;  
 Development of the gender approach used within this  proposal to effectively integrate gender 
and women’s empowerment considerations within the s ocial, economic, political and local 
context within the country;  
 Demonstration of the need to develop a gender-respo nsive environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA), in which the need for additional  gender-sensitive and sex-disaggregated 
baseline data (e.g. on land tenure, value chains, v iolence against women, etc.) is also assessed 
(and addressed as necessary);  
 Demonstration of the need to ensure the stakeholder  consultations and engagement efforts 
for the ESIA, and for FPIC activities are designed and undertaken using a gender approach and 
equitably include representatives from more margina lized groups, including women, youth, 
single-family households. 
 Establishment of recommendations to incorporate int o the preliminary Gender Action Plan.  
 
More specifically, based on the above analysis and document review, the key entry points and 
recommendations for gender action within programme design and implementation are listed below. 
It should be noted that these recommendations are b ased on preliminary findings of this assessment 
(based solely on a desk review). Thus, the findings  and recommendations of this gender assessment, 
including the gender-responsive actions, indicators , etc., noted in the Gender Action Plan in Section 7 
below, will need to be re-assessed and revised as n ecessary during the ESIA process, as well as will 
need to be consulted with and validated by state an d non-state stakeholders, including those more 
marginalized, such as women, youth, indigenous, peo ple, etc. The MoEF is currently developing a 
strategic plan to mainstream gender for the period 2020 to 2024, which, if available, will be taken in to 
consideration during the revision of the Gender Act ion Plan.  
 
 It is essential that field-based data-collection an d consultations take place in order to conduct 
a contextualized gender analysis at the local level , in order to capture huge variety of social


---
*Page 181*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 20 I 
norms, traditions, and cultures across Indonesia’s regions, which has varying implications for 
the position of women, their land tenure, and relat ionship to forest resources.46  
 To support the effective implementation of the GAP,  a gender consultant/NGO should be 
hired and work with and support/backstop the gender  focal points/working groups of the MoF 
and MoEF.  
 While there is internal support on gender within th e MoF and MoEF, it is important to ensure 
these support teams also have knowledge on REDD+ an d the ‘how to’ in integrating gender 
into it. As such, capacity of these teams should be  built accordingly to support effective 
mainstreaming of gender in project implementation a s well as to encourage sustainability of 
project outcomes once the project is finished.  
 Furthermore, given that Indonesia has a decentraliz ed system of governance, it is also 
important to work closely subnational level stakeho lders to ensure that gender equitable 
policies from the national level are implemented at  the local level  
 Direct involvement of stakeholders, particularly wo men, in decision-making processes in 
regard to the use of proceeds, must occur to adequa tely link social forestry objectives to 
household needs. 
 It should be noted that the simple presence of wome n on decision-making bodies does not 
always correspond with influence in decisions, and hence setting a quota for women’s 
participation should be accompanied by efforts in r egard to norm change, as well as 
establishing forums where women can exercise greate r voice and agency.47  
 The collection of gender disaggregated data in the implementation of REDD+ actions and the 
use of proceeds should be a mandatory contribution to available national and local-level 
databases, in order to establish an adequate baseli ne and measure progress towards targets. 
 Gender concerns need to be adequately mainstreamed in order to ensure that gender 
perspectives and the goal of gender equity are cent ral to all REDD+ related activities. 
 A high level of political commitment toward gender mainstreaming and adequately training 
and resourcing of gender support units at multiple levels is required. 
 
Addressing the gender dimensions and gaps identifie d within this assessment and implementing the 
corresponding recommendations noted above and gende r-responsive actions noted below in the 
Gender Action Plan within project design and implem entation, will help to ensure the project provides 
gender-responsive results. 
  
 
46  CIFOR (2016). Gender in Forestry and REDD+ in Indo nesia. Available at: https://www.cifor.org/library/ 6010/ 
47  Ibid.


---
*Page 182*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
 
 
 21 I 
7.  Gender Action Plan 
Data presented above provides context and an overal l baseline assessment on the gender dynamics, 
inequalities and state-of-play within Indonesia, it s forest sector and in its efforts on REDD+ action to 
date. This analysis identified the differences betw een men and women and has helped to identify gaps 
and provide a baseline for comparison.  
 
Addressing the gender gaps noted above, this Gender  Action Plan provides suggested entry points for 
gender-responsive actions to be taken under the app licable activities of the proposed project. It will  
ensure: first, conducting gender analysis to inform  gender responsive project planning and 
implementation; second, provision of equal access t o project activities and benefits (such as capacity  
building activities, revolving fund, among others);  third, provision of equal access to decision makin g 
processes at all level; fourth, increased women acc ess to productive assets; and finally, systematic 
collection of gender disaggregated data including b enefit monitoring and evaluation. It includes 
measures to avoid potential project risks, such as women’s losing access to forest resources and 
unequal benefit sharing mechanisms. In addition, sp ecific indicators are also proposed to measure and 
track progress on these actions at the activity lev el. This can be incorporated into the detailed M&E 
plan which will be developed at the start of implem entation and provides concrete recommendations 
on how to ensure gender (including disaggregated da ta) continues to be collected and measured 
throughout implementation.  
 
The overall budget for the gender action plan is te ntatively budgeted for 500,000 USD. As the overall 
project budget is not yet known and is subject to c hange, pending feedback from the project review 
and approval process, this gender budget has not ye t been broken down by activity level.  It is planne d 
to assign and allocate these amounts once the final  budget for the project has been confirmed.  
 
To note, as additional gender data collection in th e field still needs to be undertaken in the forest 
sector and around REDD+ issues within the country, detailed gender baseline data, as they pertain to 
the project activities, in many cases are not yet k nown. In these instances, baseline information for 
the activities within the Gender Action Plan are cu rrently marked with a ‘0’, to illustrate that such 
information is not yet available. Such information will be collected during the process of developing 
the gender-responsive ESIA, wherein the generation of gender-responsive baseline data for the 
proposed programmed will be undertaken. Thereafter,  the Gender Action Plan below will be revised 
as necessary and gender baseline information will b e provided.


---
*Page 183*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
22 I 
 Gender Action Plan   
Project Activity  Gender-responsive 
actions  Baseline/Indicators/Targets/Means of Verification Responsible 
Institutions/ 
Individuals  
 Budget 
(USD) Timeline 
 
 
1.1 Update and 
further develop 
the REDD+ 
architecture Undertake sub-national gender analysis to establish baseline data, and tailor gender-responsive actions to the local level 
 
 Develop gender-responsive benefit-sharing plan, based on sub-national level gender analysis and community consultations   Include gender indicators and targets in the Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % of # of sub-national government involv ed in the project_1) 
collecting gender-disaggregated data 2) undertaking  local-level gender 
analysis 
Target: 100% of sub-national governments involved i n the project 
Mean of verification: 1) Evidence of database with gender-
disaggregated data 2) gender analysis reports produ ced at sub-national 
level  
  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # and % of benefit-sharing plans which a re gender-
responsive, based on community consultations and lo cal-level gender 
analysis 
Target: 50% of sub-national governments involved in  the project have a 
gender-responsive benefit-sharing plan 
Mean of verification: 1) Evidence of benefit-sharin g plan (endorsed by 
community) 
    
Baseline: 0  Ministry of Finance To be calculated once a final budget for the program has been determined Project begin – Q4 2023


---
*Page 184*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
23 I 
safeguards information system     Establish a gender-responsive grievance redress mechanism for REDD+ activities.       Implementation of gender-responsive Free, Prior, Informed Consent (FPIC)       Enhance women’s land tenure security to ensure women’s secure Indicator: % and # of gender-responsive and sex dis aggregated 
indicators and targets integrated within the SIS-RE DD+ 
Target: 30% of targets and indicators are gender-re sponsive and sex-
disaggregated under SIS-REDD+ and 100% of indicator s/targets 
concerning number of people are sex-disaggregated  
Means of verification: SIS-REDD+ database and monit oring reports on 
SIS-REDD+ indicators 
  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that gender-responsive mechanis ms have been 
established at the national and sub-national levels  
Target: 75% of sub-national governments have a gend er-responsive 
mechanism in place for REDD+ activities 
Mean of verification: Grievance redress mechanisms 
    Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that consultation meetings have  been organized in 
ways suitable for women’s schedules, using appropri ate terminology 
and allow sufficient time for discussion. Women sho uld have the right 
to give or withhold consent for REDD+ projects to b e implemented 
within their communities.  
Target: Gender-responsive FPIC is fully implemented  in Adat 
communities 
Means of verification: Documentation of FPIC proces s 
   Baseline: 0


---
*Page 185*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
24 I 
control over forestlands and resources by providing licenses to female-headed households  
 Indicator: Increase in % of female-headed household s with secure 
control over forestlands and resources in districts  in which  
Target: 30% increase in female-headed households wi th legally 
recognized documentation of control over forestland s and resources 
Mean of verification: Evidence of legally recognize d documentation  
 
1.2 Strengthen 
capacity for REDD+ 
implementation Train and build capacity of MoEF staff and REDD+ staff, stakeholders and partners on the ‘why’ and ‘how to’ integrate a gender perspective within REDD+ Implementation      
  
Hire a gender consultant/NGO to support implementation of GAP 
 Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % of MoEF and REDD+ staff that have rece ived a training on 
gender mainstreaming in REDD+ 
Target: 80% of MoEF and REDD+ staff and stakeholder s have their 
capacity built/awareness raised on gender and REDD+  
Mean of verification: Pre and Post-training surveys  
  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence of changes in perception/unders tanding of gender 
among Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Environment and Forestry and 
REDD+ staff and stakeholders 
Target: 80% of Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Env ironment and 
Forestry and REDD+ staff and stakeholders trained d emonstrate 
changes in perception/ understanding of gender  
Mean of verification: Pre and post workshop surveys , and key 
informant interviews 
 Baseline: There are gender focal points/working gro ups in the MoF and 
MoEF. Nevertheless, backstopping support on gender and REDD+ could 
be needed 
Indicator: Evidence that a gender consultant/NGO is  actively supporting 
the mainstreaming of gender in the project Ministry of Finance To be calculated once a final budget for the program has been determined Project begin – Q4 2023


---
*Page 186*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
25 I 
      Ensure at least one of the Safeguards Officer hired has expertise on gender 
 
   Map and subsequently support social groups where woman can participate and yield power in regard to forest resources     Conduct REDD+ capacity building training with gender focal points/teams Target: A gender consultant/NGO is hired to support  the mainstreaming 
of gender in the project 
Mean of verification: TOR and procurement paperwork  
 Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # of safeguards officer(s) hired who has  expertise on gender 
Target: At least one of the Safeguards Officer hire d has expertise on 
gender 
Mean of verification: TOR and CV 
   Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # of women-led social groups supported i n each sub-national  
Target: At least 2 women-led social groups are supp orted at each sub-
national level 
Mean of verification: Evidence (documentation) of f inancial agreement 
with women-led social groups 
       Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of gender focal points/team memb ers within the 
MoF and MoEF who have had their capacity built/awar eness raised on 
REDD+ (disaggregated by sex) 
Target: 80% of gender focal points/team members wit hin the MoF and 
MoEF have had their capacity built/awareness raised  on REDD+


---
*Page 187*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
26 I 
within the MoF and MoEF 
 Means of verification: workshop reports, workshop a ttendance sheet 
 
1. 3 
Communication, knowledge management & adaptive management Establish processes 
to facilitate policy coordination between MoEF and MoWECP, as well as information dissemination established at the provincial level  
    
Conduct gender sensitization trainings for men and women staff members in FMUs to change their mindsets and also transform the way they plan and implement forestry development programs at the district level  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Policies of the MoEF incorporate gender analysis of the 
different impacts of REDD+ on women and men, and Mi nistries share 
information at the provincial and national levels 
Target: Gender equality objectives mentioned in MoE F policies, and 
evidence of information-sharing mechanism (e.g. foc al point or shared 
database) 
Means of verification: Evidence (documentation) of gender equality 
objectives in MoEF policies and information-sharing  mechanism.  
    Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # of training and awareness sessions wit h FMUs, REDD+ 
working group and other stakeholders on gender issu es in forest 
management and REDD+ 
Target: 100% of REDD+ working group participants an d FMU staff 
members receive training 
Mean of verification: Training workshop report and pre and post 
training surveys Ministry of 
Finance To be 
calculated once a final budget for the program has been determined Project begin 
– Q4 2023


---
*Page 188*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
27 I 
2.1 Support the operationalization of Forest Management Units (FMUs) Gender-responsive capacity building and technical assistance to Provincial & District authorities, FMUs and local communities    Multi-stakeholder platforms for participatory forest management planning process are gender-responsive    Support small-scale community investments in gender-responsive manner      Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that training and capacity buil ding delivered to 
Provincial & District authorities, FMUs and local c ommunities accounts 
for women’s preference in content, timing and deliv ery as identified in 
sub-district gender analysis 
Target: 80% of women participants involved in works hops for this 
activity who felt training delivery 1) allowed them  to actively participate 
and 2) found the content being discussed relevant a nd useful 
Mean of verification: Workshop reports 
  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of stakeholders involved in the participatory multi-
stakeholder engagement processes who represent wome n’s groups  
Target:  Women’s groups represent at least 25% of participan ts and are 
present in all  multi-stakeholder engagement processes 
Mean of verification: Reports from multi-stakeholde r platform 
meetings with participant list 
   Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # of small-scale community investments t hat take into 
account preferences identified through local-level gender analysis and 
gender-focused consultations 
Target: 50% of small-scale community investments ac count for 
preferences identified by women in community consul tations, including 
preferences of Adat women  
Mean of verification: Records of community consulta tions, Financial 
reports on small-scale community investments 
 Ministry of Finance  To be calculated once a final budget for the program has been determined Q4 2020 - Q4 2023


---
*Page 189*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
28 I 
  Increase number of female extension workers so that the FMUs can more effectively engage with women from the communities.    Recruit more local female and male staff (full-time staff) members for the FMUs to become more effective.     Strengthening the existing women centered non-formal groups, improving women leadership skills        Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of female extension workers hire d 
Target: 50% increase in female extension workers em ployed by the 
FMU  
Mean of verification: Employment agreements/contrac ts 
     Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # of staff hired by the FMU at the local  level 
Target: 50% of staff hired by the FMU at the local level are women 
Mean of verification: Employment agreements/contrac ts 
     Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # and % of women centered non-formal gro ups supported in 
regard to women’s leadership skills 
Target: At least 1 women centered non-formal group in each district is 
given women’s leadership training, capacity-buildin g and support in 
each district, 75% of women training participants r eport increase in 
leadership capacity 
Mean of verification: Training workshop report, pre  and post workshop 
survey


---
*Page 190*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
29 I 
  Ensure women’s equitable and meaningful involvement in multi-stakeholder forums, meetings, consultations, etc., on efforts to support the operationalization of FMUs   Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that women’s equitable and mean ingful 
involvement in multi-stakeholder forums, meetings, consultations, etc., 
on operationalization of FMUs was achieved 
Target: 80% of women participants involved in meeti ngs and workshops 
for this activity felt training delivery 1) allowed  them to actively 
participate and 2) found the content being discusse d relevant and 
useful 
Mean of verification: Workshop reports 
 
2.2 Expand and enhance implementation of the Social Forestry programme Set up and or strengthen gender-responsive multi-stakeholder platforms at relevant levels of territorial governance to engage on social forestry       Baseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of stakeholders involved in the participatory multi-
stakeholder engagement processes who represent wome n’s groups 
engaging on social forestry 
Target: Women’s groups represent at least 25% of participan ts and are 
present in all  multi-stakeholder engagement processes on social 
forestry, 85% of women’s group report satisfaction in regard to 
meaningful participation  
Mean of verification: Reports from multi-stakeholde r platform 
meetings with participant list, Key informal interv iews 
   Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Gender-responsive considerations adopted  in the 
development planning process based on local-level g ender analysis Ministry of Finance To be calculated once a final budget for the program has been determined Q4 2020 - Q4 2023


---
*Page 191*
---

 Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary Ge nder Assessment and Action Plan 
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
30I 
Support village and 
p
rovincial 
development 
planning process in 
gender-responsive manner 
Support land use 
planning, 
development of 
management plans 
and corresponding community development plans 
in a gender-
equitable manner 
Development and 
implementation of community 
investments, incl. 
small and micro community 
enterprise 
development Target: 25% Increase in women’s participation in the planning process 
at provincial and village level, including in Adat communities 
Mean of verification: Village or provincial development plans 
B
aseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of community members consulted on management 
plan for classified forests who are women 
Target: 40% of community members consulted on community 
development plans are women 
Mean of verification: Reports from community development plan 
meetings with participant list 
B
aseline: 0 
Indicator: % and # of community investments that are gender-
responsive in their design  
Target: 30% increase in women who receive investments 
I
ndicator: Evidence of mechanisms established to support women with 
vocational training need to manage micro-enterprises 
Targets: 
100% of community investments are gender-responsive in their
design
50% of community investments are provided directly to women
At least 1 mechanism established in each district to support women
with vocational training need to manage micro-enterprises


---
*Page 192*
---

                      Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary G ender Assessment and Action Plan 
  Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
   
   
31 I 
        Address the gendered nature of Adat institutions, particularly the absence of women in decision-making processes, through sensitization at the local level  Ensure women’s equitable and meaningful involvement in multi-stakeholder forums, consultations and decision-making on efforts to enhance implementation of the Social Forestry programme   Mean of verification: Financial records and reporti ng on community 
investments 
  Baseline: 0 
Indicator: # and % of Adat communities involved in REDD+ activities 
receive gender-sensitization training at the local level focused on 
norms, attitudes and behaviors through workshops an d community 
mobilization activities, including girls, boys, wom en and men 
Target: 50% of Adat communities in each district re ceives sensitization 
training 
Mean of verification: Training workshop reports, pr e and post 
workshop surveys 
   Baseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that women’s equitable and mean ingful 
involvement in multi-stakeholder forums, decision-m aking, 
consultations, etc., on Social Forestry programme i mplementation was 
achieved 
Target: 80% of women participants involved in meeti ngs and workshops 
for this activity felt training delivery 1) allowed  them to actively 
participate and 2) found the content being discusse d relevant and 
useful 
Mean of verification: Workshop reports


---
*Page 193*
---

 Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary Ge nder Assessment and Action Plan 
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
32I 
3.1 Project 
management With assistance from the Safeguards Officer, capacity of women involved in SIS-REDD+ working 
group on 
safeguards themes, and conduct any 
necessary capacity 
building to facilitate their meaningful involvement and inform their decision-making  
Fully integrate a 
gender perspective into the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Indicator: % and # of women who participate in needs assessment on 
safeguard themes from each district 
% and # women from each workshop who report greater understanding 
of safeguard themes 
% and # women from each workshop who report a greater capacity to 
participate in decision-making  
Targets: Capacity-building workshops designed and offered in each 
district in response to needs assessment 
At least 75% of women from workshops indicate greater understanding 
of safeguard themes and how to participate in decision-making 
50% of workshop participants stay engaged with REDD+ RBP 
project/safeguards implementation 
Mean of verification: Training workshop reports and pre and post 
training surveys 
B
aseline: 0 
Indicator: % of findings from in-depth gender analysis and % of 
recommendations/actions of the revised gender action plan that were 
integrated into ESIA and ESMP 
Target: 80% of findings from gender analysis integrated into ESIA and 
80% of actions from gender action plan integrated into ESMP 
Mean of verification: Evidence in ESIA and ESMP reports 
B
aseline: 0 
Indicator: Evidence that a gender perspective was fully integrated into 
mid-term and terminal evaluations Ministry of 
Finance To be calculated once a final budget for the program has been 
determined Project begin 
- Q4 2023


---
*Page 194*
---

 Annex XIII (c)- Preliminary Ge nder Assessment and Action Plan 
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal 
33I 
I
ntegrate a gender 
perspective fully 
into mid-term and 
terminal evaluations Target: A gender perspective fully integrated into mid-term and 
terminal evaluations  
Mean of verification: Evidence in mid-term and terminal evaluation 
reports 
__________