=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20190131135947+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 19 for Word
/ModDate: D:20190201170736+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 19.10.96
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board 
26 – 28 February 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 34  GCF/B. 22/10/Add.0 4 
1 February  201 9 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I V 
Funding proposal package for FP 102  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “Mali solar rural electrification project ”;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or
focal point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response of the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory
Panel's  assessment; and
g)Gender documentation .
The f
unding proposal package for FP10 2 is being submitted for the first time for the Board's 
consideration at its twenty -second meeting.


---
*Page 2*
---

GC
F/B.22/10 /Add.04 
Page b 
3 
68 
69 
71 
84 
99 Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response of the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
Gender documentation  100


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Mali solar rural electrification project  
Country/Region:  Mali (West Africa)  
Accredited Entity:  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)  
Date of Submission: 24th June, 2018. Update : 9th, January 2019


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 Section C  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 Section G  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
 
(*) Some institutions’ names and acronyms are kept in French  
 
AER -Mali : Agence des Energies Renouvelables – Mali 
AFDB  : African Development Bank  
AEDD  : Agence pour l’Environnement et le Développement Durable  
AMADER:  : Agence Malienne pour le Développement de l’Energie Domestique et de l’Electrification Rural  
API-Mali : Investment Promotion Council of Mali  
AML/CFT  : Anti-money  laundering  - combating  finance  of terrorism  
APR  : Annual Performance Report  
BCEAO  : Central Bank of West African States  
BE : Baseline Emissions  
BOAD  : Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement  
BOT  : Build Operate Transfert  
CoP : Conférence of Parties  
CREE  : Commission de Régulation de l’Électricité et de l’Eau  
ER : Emission Reduction  
ESMP  : Environmental and Social Measures project  
EDF : Energy Development Fund  
ESMF  : Environmental and social management Framework  
DNE  : Direction Nationale de  l’Energie  
EDM -SA : Energie  du Mali - Société Anonyme  
DREP  : Decade Rural Electrification Program  
ESIA  : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
FER : Fonds d’Electrification Rurale  or Rural Electrification  Fund  
FSR : Feasibility studies report  
GCF  : Green Climate Fund  
GDP  : Gross Domestic Product  
HDI : Human Development Index  
IRENA  : International Renewable Energy Agency  
IPP : Independent Power Producers  
ISPS  : Isolated Solar Photovoltaic System  
IRF : Investment Renewal Fund  
IFA : International Financial Action  
IRENA  : International Renewable Energy Agency  
LFI : Local financial institutions  
MEE  : Ministère de l’Energie et de l’Eau  
MPPT  : Maximum Power Point Tracking  
MFI : Microfinance institutions  
MEF  : Ministry of Economy and Finance  
MSME  : Micro Small Medium Enterprises  
M&E  : Monitoring and Evaluation  
NDCs  : Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)  
NGO  : Non-Governmental Organization  
NEP : National Energy Policy  
NCSERE  : National Center for Solar Energy and Renewable Energies  
NDSPC  : National Directorate for Sanitation and Pollution Control  
O&M  : Operation and Maintenance  
OECD  : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  
OECD DAC  : Organization for Economic Co -operation, and Development Assistance Committee  
PE : Project Emissions  
PANA  : National Adaptation Program of Action  
PV : Photovoltaique  
PMU  : Project Management Unit  
PPPs  : Public Private Partnership  
RE : Renewable Energy  
SDGs  : Sustainable Development Goals  
TOR  : Terms of Reference  
UNDP  : United Nations Development Program  
UNFCCC  : United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change  
WEEE  : waste management for electrical and electronic equipment’s  
WAEMU  : West African economic and monetary union


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 63 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Mali solar rural electrification project  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Mali 
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Agence pour l’Environnement et le Développement Durable  (THE 
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AGENCY ) (AEDD)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☒  Direct  ☐  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Ministry of Energy and Water.  
Beneficiar ies:  
 
a. 31 000 households ( 310,698 people) across  70 communities in 6 Regions 
(Kayes, Koulikoro,  Sikasso, Segou, Mopti  and Tombouctou)  
b. National  institutions and policy makers  (AER, AMADER and FER) 
responsible to create the enabling environment for RE investments  
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million USD)  ☐ Micro  (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / adaptation f ocus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  1st submission: 24th June 2018  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  - Yacoubou BIO -SAWE, Director for  Environment and Climate Finance  
- Ibrahim TRAORE, Head of Climate Finance Division  
Organization  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)  
Email address  itraore@boad.org ; ybiosawe@boad.org; (cc eamoussou@boad.org ) 
Telephone number  +228 22 23 26 92  
Mailing  address  Avenue de la Libération, Lomé (Togo), BP. 1172 
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high- speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 63 
 
 
 A 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary  
 
The main objective of this project is to promote rural electrification through isolated solar photovoltaic systems as a low -
carbon and resilient  solution to the effects of climate change in the energy sector in Mali.  
 
The project will: (i) strengthen the capacity of public institutions (AMADER, AER and FER) engaged in rural electrification to accelerate solar -powered electrification; and ( ii) increase the rural population's access to electricity in 70 communities  
through installation of isolated solar photovoltaic minigrid systems for a total capacity of 4.83  MW. The project will thus 
catalyze the development of an efficient solar market that will enable Mali to meet its renewable energy and greenhouse 
gas (GHG) r eduction targets. In this case, it will help avoid 41 049  tCO2 / year, and 1 027 227  tCO2 for the entire life of 
the equipment (25 years). Direct beneficiaries are estimated at 310 698 inhabitants, 50% of whom are women in the 
project area. Around 31,000 new households will have access to electrification in rural areas  (28,378 for Tranche 1). The 
project is tranched at the request of GCF Secretariat. First Tranche will achieve 80% of the impact ( 821 782 tCO
2 eq) 
and will target 50 localities  (283 777 inhabitants) . 
 The project has significant potential for paradigm shift in the rural elect rification sector in Mali. Traditionally, the growing 
energy access demand has been met through fossil fuels. This project however provides a total shift in energy production 
i.e. replacing fossil fuels additions with renewable energy solutions.  The projec t will positively contribute to the regulatory 
framework through capacity buildings, demonstration of technologies in areas where not available, putting in place an 
institutional framework for FER to strengthen its capacity to further promote the deployment of renewable energy.  
 
The paradigm shifting potential lies in the joint efforts to create a conducive environment by putting in place an enabling 
regulatory framework and policies,  that will incentivize the private sector  participation in long t erm concessions under a  
sustainable and innovative structural arrangement . It is anticipated that the project model can be replicated accross the 
whole country and in the wider West African subregion, notably to support different African countries  to meet their 
commitment under the Paris Agreement i.e. Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), and to achieve their 2063 
Agenda as well as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).   
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  Q1 March, 2019  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Q1 March, 2019  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/07/2019  
End:  30/06/2023  
Project/programme lifespan  25 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 63 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
Financial Model  
A detailed financial model is attached in the annexes of this funding proposal. The financial model includes the breakdown of  cost 
estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub- component. The project will be financed in EUR. As aforementioned,  the 
project is tranched, and the first Tranche will target 50 communities, then BOAD will submit a request for Tranche 2 funding.  
 
 Table 1: B reakdown of cost  estimates for total project  (70 communities)  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The total amount of the project is EUR 46,282,115, including PMC.  
 Table 2: Breakdown of cost estimates for Tranche 1 (50 communities)  
  
 
 
For Tranche 1, the amount is EUR 34,252,208, including PMC , and the expected GCF funding is EUR 25, 968612.  BOAD will provide 
a co-financing in loan for EUR 8 ,283 595. 
Tranche 2 will cover the remainder of the total project funding and will be submitted after the mid-term evaluation.  
The private sector will provide  additional  EUR 8.5 M at the whole project level and EUR 6.2 M for Tranche 1 as parallel financing , 
which corresponds to 20% of the investment for the installation of the mini -grids.  Component  Indicative cost  GCF funding  Co-financing  
 EUR  EUR Amount  
Institution  
EUR 
1. Capacity building of rural electrification 
institutions and Technical Assistance  487 349 487 349     
2. Detailed Engineering and Installation of solar 
powered minigrids  43 890 497 33 354 043     
10 536 454 BOAD  
3. Support to  Productive Use of Electricity  1 500 000 1 500 000     
Project Management Cost  404 269 307 97 694 BOAD  
Indicative total cost  46 282 115 35 341 699 10 634 148   
Component  Tranche 1  Tranche 2  
Indicative 
cost GCF funding  BOAD Co-financing  Indicative 
cost GCF 
funding  Co-financing 
(Loan)  
 EUR  EUR Financial 
instrument  EUR Financial 
instrument  EUR EUR EUR 
1. Capacity building of rural 
electrification institutions and 
Technical Assistance  487 349 487 349 Grant    -  - -   
2. Detailed Engineering and 
Installation of solar powered 
minigrids  853 214 853 214 Grant    - 341 285 341 285   
31 007 376 22 821 475 Loan 8 185 901 Loan 11 688 622 9 338 069 2 350 553 
      
3. Support to Productive Use of 
Electricity  1 500 000 1 500 000 Loan   -  - -   
Project Management Cost  404 269 306 575 Grant  97 694 Loan - - - 
Indicative total cost  34 252 208 25 968 612   8 283 595   12 029 908 9 679 355 2 350 553


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 63 
 
 B 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  34.25 million euro 
(€)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
 
 
(ii) Grants  
 24.32  
 
  
1.65 
 million euro 
(€) 
  
million euro 
(€) 40 years  
  
 
N/A  0,75 %  
 
 
 
N/A 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF  is expected to  
provide, part icularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspon d to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total r equested  
(i+ii)  25,97 million euro 
(€)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
 8.3 
 million euro 
(€) BOAD  20  years  5.97 %  senior  
Lead financing institution: BOAD  (co-financing) in the amount of EUR 8. 3 M 
The private sector will provide additional EUR 8.5 M at the whole project level and EUR 6.2 M for Tranche 1 as 
parallel financing,  which corresponds to 20% of the investment for the installation of the minigrids.  
Find in annex letter of commitment  issued by BOAD . 
 
Financial instrument 1: Senior Loan: The loan will be used for installation of minigrid systems and need s a lower 
interest rate, for  concessional loans are needed to finance projects as this one in a least developed country such as Mali, 
where national debt ration is over 98% of GDP  since 2016.  It is important to notice that  with a lower concessionality, the 
indebtness level of the country will increase and IMF controls will be triggered, resulti ng in the impossibility for Mali to 
take the loan. Therefore, the project would fall apart.    
 Regarding BOAD’s loan,  it is made in local currency, which limits foreign exchange risks and favors a sustained debt.  
The interest rate is indicative and will be negotiated with the government at the time of project appraisal.  Actually, BOAD  
is the common development financial ins titution for the 8 west African economic and monetary union (WAEMU) countries, 
and though it mobilizes resources at a market rate, its financing conditions are quite the lower one in the subregion’s financial market. Every year, BOAD  makes available to eac h country an amount of € 16 million of concessional financing 
at rates of up to 3%. The government decides in a sovereign way which project will benefit from those resources. So, 
when BOAD will appraise this  project for consideration to its Board, negotiations with the government will help to agree 
on the appropriate rate to be applied.  
 
The loan is directly given to the Mali an Government. The beneficiairies will benefit from the concessionality of GCF 
throug h electricity tariffs that will be capped at 0. 26 EUR/kWh ( 174 XOF/kWh ) including an electricity  price of 0.24 
EUR/kWh , which is within communities’ ability to pay, as informed by the feasibility study . According to the baseline 
scenario, the average tariff generally appl ied in rural areas for minigrid operated by private sector is 0.35 EUR/kWh ( 235 
XOF/kWh)  up to 0.53 EUR/kWh (350 XOF/kWh)  whilst i n urban areas and for grid connected systems, a subsidi zed tariff  
of 0.26 EUR/kWh ( 174 XOF/kWh)  is applied by the government.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 63 
 
 B 
The Mali Government is the borrower and the owner of the assets. Ownership will remain with the public sector while 
concession agreements will be signed with private sector for Operation and Maintenance (O&M).  
The treasury of the Government of Mali will be the source of repayment of the loan. The loan will not be repaid from the 
cash flows to be generated by the project.   
 
Financing instrument 2: grant 
Mali is a highly indebted country with a high poverty rate. The GCF grant is specially needed for capacity building, 
Technical assistance and sensiti zation activities under component 1, with the aim to incentivize the private sector 
participation in long term concessions u nder a sustainable and innovative structural arrangement in clean energy sector, 
and to support the replication of the project's model accross the whole country.  
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate  return was (non -concessional) determined?  
 
Commercial banks throughout West Africa including Mali would offer too high rates (12 – 15% is typical in this region) 
and they usually require shorter terms of maturity (5 –  7 years).  Mini -grid operators are new to the Region and commercial 
banks consider it too high risk to lend money to them. The prevailing high interest rate offered by commercial banks are 
one of the greatest barriers prohibiting private sector participant from investing in rural electrification projects because 
they cannot offer cost -reflective tariffs while as the same time having to bear high capital costs. The consequence is that 
the private sector operators would always resume to the need of subsidies, otherwise they will not be able to pay back 
the loan.  
 
We have never observed a single case where a commercial debt transaction took place in our subregion to implement a 
mini- grid system project. All of the observed debt to mini -grid projects have been made possible based on concessional 
terms through peculiar grant for projects that are considered innovative enough and energy efficient.  The cost of 
technology has not reach yet the lows where commercial debt alone would suffice to do mini- grid projects.  
 
Blending conces sional resources with commercial debt is detrimental a first stage to building the foundation of the market 
that would attract local and regional financial institutions. In this Mali project, it is anticipated that a positive shift i n 
paradigm will commenc e through:   
 
a)  Meeting the rapidly growing electricity access demand by renewable energy instead of continuous addition of 
fossil fuels generating units;  
b) Establishing a conducive regulation framework in order to attract private sector participants to come into the rural 
elecrification business;  and 
c) Establishing a sustainable rural electricity tarrif model that will make it financialy viable for private mini grid 
operators to self regenarate, renew and expand their operation, so as to build a further  momentum to shift the 
paradigm, which shall set up an example that can be easily and quickly be duplicated throughout the West Africa 
region and beyond.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 63 
 
 C 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
 
This is a greenfield rural electrification project with the aim to meet the growing demand for power from the non- electrified 
communities. Greening the current energy provision would require extensive measures and gigantic investments that are 
not available to the c ountry. However, it is anticipated that the successful implementation of this project will spur and 
foster further diffusion of renewable energy. It has been observed that in the past few years there has been continuous growth in fossil fuel based generati ng capacity. Therefore, it is of critical importance to meet future demand through 
renewable energy instead of continuously adding fossil fuel based power generation units.  
 
Geography and climate  
 
The Republic of Mali is a landlocked country in the Sahel belt of West Africa located between 11 ° and 25 ° North latitude. 
It covers an area of 1,246,814 km² of which 51% consists of desert land and 4% of cultivated land. This geographical 
situation, combined with the fact that Mali does not have fossil fuels on its territory, forces the Government to import all 
the fossil fuels it needs and makes it highly dependent on price volatility.  
 
The country has an intertropical climatic regime of Sudano- Sahelian character, with high temperatures (average between  
26 and 30 ° C), influenced by its continentality and is dominated by an alternation of dry season whose duration varies 
between 6 to 9 months of the south to north and a rainy season from 6 to 3 months.  
 
Rainfall is characterized by high inter -annual vari ation and poor spatial distribution. There is a steady decrease in rainfall 
from the South (1000 mm / yr) to the North (<200 mm / yr) and the duration of the rainy season (MEA, 2009a). While historical records show a rise in average temperatures of about 0.7 ° C since 1960, projections project a continuation and acceleration of this rise in average temperatures as well as a decrease in overall rainfall amounts (with extreme events -  
floods - more frequent).  
 
Socio -economic context  
 The population of Mali is  estimated at about 18,957,258 inhabitants in 2017. The population growth rate is estimated at 
3.4% per year with 62.5% of the population residing in rural areas. This population growth is a major concern for the future of the country, as it leads to an increase in needs to be met, which will inevitably lead to additional pressure on 
electricity production. The average population density is 15.2 inhabitants per square kilometer.  
 
The administrative division of Mali comprises ten (10) administrative regions and one urban district (Bamako). These are 
the regions of Kayes, Koulikoro, Sikasso, Segou, Mopti, Gao, Timbuktu, Kidal, Taoudenit and Menaka. The regions are 
subdivided into 49 circles and 703 communes (including 684 rural) with more than 12,000 villages and fractions.  
 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita was US $ 781 in 2016. Dominated by agriculture and the mining sector, the 
Malian economy recorded a GDP growth rate of 5.3% in 2017. The economic outlook remains  positive with projected real 
GDP growth rates of 5% for 2018 and 4.9% for 2019.  
 
Energy situation and state of play of the subsectors of electricity and renewable energies  
 
Energy balance of Mali  
 
Mali's energy situation is characterized by a biomass -domi nated balance sheet that accounts for 76% of primary energy, 
followed by 20% for hydrocarbon imports and 4% for electricity.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
Figure 1: Energy balance of Mali, 2014  
Source :  Malian Energy Information System, Direction Nationale de l’Energie (DNE), 2017  
 
Energy consumption in Mali is dominated by the residential sector which basically relies on biomass. Wood and charcoal 
are mainly used as cooking or heating fuels, a situation  which results in strong pressure on the country’s forest resources. 
In a country exposed to the harmful effects of climatic variations and where the degradation of land and natural resources is a real problem, fuelwood as a resource cannot adequately meet  the increasing energy needs. Nevertheless, since 
Malian households will not do away with the use of wood fuels in the short term, primary energy in Mali will continue to 
depend on biomass (particularly fuelwood).  
 
Apart from biomass, the sector is, therefore, characterized by a strong dependence on petroleum products whose 
importation is on a constant increase as a result of economic growth and the increasing demand of the population. Between 2000 and 2015, the quantity of imported hydrocarbons doubled from 0.5 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) 
to 1.05 Mtoe and maintained a net increase until 2016 when it reached 1.37 Mtoe.  
 
Mali imports 100 % of its consumption basically through road transport, representing a bout 26% of the country’s total 
imports, a situation which, as the hydrocarbon monitoring indicators show, consequently makes it highly sensitive to the 
trends of hydrocarbon prices on the international market as well as the stability of the neighbouring c ountries. The main 
countries from which petroleum products come to Mali (2016) are Benin (45%), Senegal (30%) and Togo (15%)1, followed 
by other countries like Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana or Mauritania.  
 
This situation exposes the economy in its entirety to the v olatility of petroleum prices and makes it vulnerable to foreign 
exchange reserve pressures, including in the energy sector.  
 
In fact, the cost of hydrocarbons required to run thermal plants accounts for a significant share of the total national impor t 
burden and is one of the factors responsible for the high cost of electricity. In spite of the fall in the pump prices of super  
petrol, diesel, and fuel oil 180 between 2014 and 2016, a slight increase was observed in 2017 before reaching FCFA 
692/l for super petrol, FCFA 603/l for diesel and FCFA 415/l for fuel oil 180. Kerosene, which was cheaper than super 
petrol and diesel in 2014 and 2015 (FCFA 570/l), reached FCFA 684/l in 2016.  
 
The electricity subsector  
 According to 2017 figures, the rate of access to electricity was estimated at 42% at the national level (19% in the rural 
areas and 94% in the urban areas), with an increase of about 4% per year (DNE, 2016). Electricity demand in Mali 
increased historicall y by 10% a year (an average of 7.8% a year between 2005 and 2015, due to the strong impact of the 
crisis period (2012)). 
 
 
The electricity sub- sector can be divided into four segments: the interconnected network of the Malian National Electricity 
Company ( EDM -SA), isolated EDM -SA centres, integrated electricity production of private producers (mining and 
manufacturing companies in particular) which can sell their potential production surplus to the network and rural 
                                                             
1 ONAP, 2017  
Biomass
78%Hydrocarbon
17%Electricity
5%


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 63 
 
 C 
electrification. The transmission and dis tribution network of EDM SA is made up of two components: (i) the interconnected 
network covering a number of urban centres including the capital, and (ii) isolated centres covered mainly by thermal 
plants operated by EDM- SA. 
 
On the interconnected network , electricity is produced by hydroelectric plants, particularly the Manantali dam (out of which 
104 MW of the total of 200 MW belong to Mali) and the Sélingué dam (46 MW), and thermal plants. In the current situation, 
the Manantali hydroelectric plant covers 26% of Mali’s demand, followed by imports from Cote d’Ivoire (baseload imports 
of 30 MW increased to 45 MW through a provisional amendment), following the commissioning of the 225 kV 
Ferkéssédougou- Sikasso line in 2012, and leased plants.    
 
 
According to EDM -SA data, energy security in Mali is suffering from a chronic gap characterized by:  
 
 at least 300 MW of electricity demand to be covered immediately or in the short term on the network;  
  about 200 MW of thermal power to be replaced by competitive sources of energy;  
  at least 500 MW in the long term for the connection or supply of big industrial extractive and food- processing 
units, etc.;  
 at least 150 MW to be rehabilitated on the network’s production capacity, and  
 a fast -expanding network to support the development of the import and/or export of electric energy.  
 
 
It is very unlikely that over the next ten years, the expected expansion of the national electricity network can ensure that 
a significant proportion of the low -income population living in isolated areas is connected to the network. This situation is 
expec ted to create an important market for off -network electrification schemes.   
 
Off-network, the distribution of electricity is mainly ensured by local energy service providers who operate in isolated rural 
areas. In 2015, the country had 160 isolated mini -networks. The production technologies used to this day basically include 
diesel -run units (in 2015, 96% of the electricity produced off -network was through diesel) as well as related transmission 
and distribution systems. The total installed capacity of the mini- networks is about 15 MW.  
 
It is important to note that the energy mix underwent a significant change with the contribution of hydroelectric power 
dropping from 80% in 2005 to 45% in 2015 and the contribution of thermal plants doubling to 41% over the  same period, 
a situation projected by the electricity recovery plan in 2014 (see figure).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Energy mix in the interconnected network of Mali, including imports.  
Source: Mali - Provisional Electricity Recovery Plan 2014  
 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Fossil Fuel 39.9 47 55.7 59.9 60.6 61.9
Hydropower 60 53 44.2 39.9 36.3 35.3010203040506070PART (%)Evolution of the share of fossil fuel and hydropower in 
the energy mix of the interconnected grid in Mali


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 63 
 
 C 
The tariffs within the mini -grids reflect the cost prices as well as the very high prices of the transportation of fuel to the 
hinterland; weighed against the purchasing power of many households, they prove to be inadequate.  
 
The rural electrification sub -sector  
 
 Rural electrification in Mali is characterized as follows:  
 
 about 70% of the Malian population live in the rural areas;  
 the rate of electrification in the rural areas was 19% in 2016 against less than 1% in 2004;  
 Mali has more than 10,000 rural towns;  
 at least 255 towns are currently being supplied with electricity by private operators with the support of Donors and Technical and Financial Partners;  
 the rural electrification systems developed by the operators are basically thermal;  
 in 2015, about 131 towns were connected to diesel units, 32 towns were connected to hybrid PV -Diesel systems, 
15 towns used biofuel units, 20 towns benefitted from the extension of the EDM- SA network, 43 towns were 
supplied by Multifunctional Platforms, 13 towns were supplied by solar kits and one town was supplied by a 
hydroelectric micro- plant;  
 a total installed power of about 23 MW, with nearly 2 MWc PV solar, and  
 operators enjoy subsidies from the Rural Electrification Fund managed by AMADER.  
 
It should be not ed that rural energy service providers operating mini -grids fueled by fossil fuel power plants are particularly 
affected by volatile oil prices, as well as exorbitant fuel transportation costs.  
 
The renewable energy subsector  
 With the exception of medium -scale and large- scale hydroelectric production, the production of electricity from renewable 
sources connected to the network was 8.7 MW in 2016 (EDM S.A), while the off -network installed renewable energy 
capacity consisting mainly of small -scale solar energy reached 15 MWc in 2015. These rural energy production projects 
show the interest of the rural population and private operators in electricity supply.   
 The current development of renewable energy in Mali is characterized b y a technological development of equipment 
which has significantly taken the concerns of Sahelian users into consideration as well as by an appreciable drop in the 
prices of equipment.  
 
Many PV projects are being developed particularly at the Kati (65 MWc ), Kita (50 MWc), Ségou (33 MWc), Sikasso (50 
MWc) and Koutiala (25 MWc) sites. Plans are afoot for others, especially Fana (50 MWc), SREP Mali project (20 MWc) and Sélingué (Greenwish – 40 MWc), and the construction of several other plants hooked onto to the interconnected 
network for an accumulated power of 260 MW.  
 
Solar PV is the subject of many applications:  
- photovoltaic lighting (domestic needs, lighting of health centres, literacy centres and public areas);  
- photovoltaic refrigeration used mainly in health centres to preserve pharmaceutical products;  
- broadcasting, telecommunications and radio communication;  
- solar pumping for irrigation and village water systems (water for domestic use) and grazing systems (watering 
places for animals), and  
- solar fields and hybrid systems for the decentralized production of electricity (mini -networks) or connected to the 
network.  
 
National Energy Policy  
 The sector is mainly governed by the National Energy Policy (NEP) adopted in 2006 and targeted at promoting the 
sustainable development of the country through the provision of affordable energy services in order to increase access 
to electricity and to promote socio- economic activities.  
 
The specific objectives of the NEP are as follows: i) meet energy needs in terms of quality, quantity and cost; ii) protect 
persons, goods and the environment from the risk of a shortfall on the part of energy providers; i ii) strengthen capacity in


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 63 
 
 C 
the area of policies, management, monitoring and control of the energy sector, and iv) consolidate the gains from 
international cooperation in the area of energy.  
 
The issue of renewable energy has been tackled in several regula tory enactments, particularly the NEP (2006) and the 
above- mentioned statement (2009). The most important policy document on this issue is the National Renewable Energy 
Development Strategy adopted in 2006 and with the objective of: i) promoting a vast use  of renewable energy 
technologies and equipment to increase the share of renewable energy in national electricity production (up to 10% in 
2015); ii) developing the biofuel sub- sector for various uses  (electricity production, transport, agricultural mechanization, 
etc.); iii) creating better conditions to make renewable energy services sustainable; and iv) looking for sustainable financing mechanisms suited to renewable energy.  
  
Policy Framework for Private Sector Engagement  
 
Generally speaking, the policy environment is relatively favourable for energy investments. It is characterised by the 
following policy tools: (i) the Rural Electrification Fund; (ii) the National Industrial Development Policy (whose overall objective is to ensure an orderly, rap id, sustainable and balanced industrial development of the country while generating 
employment); (iii) the Public Private Partnership Framework (in the form of a concession contract based on a BOOT)
2  
arrangement); (iv) the Investment Code (which is aimed at establishing a privileged customs and tax regime with a view to promoting investments); (v) the role of the Investment Promotion Council of Mali (API -Mali), offering a one- stop- shop 
for all procedures in setting up businesses, assisting investors and is suing permits in accordance with the Investment 
Code of Mali; and (vi) the directives of an Ordonnance
3 guaranteeing the free exercise of competition and organising the 
public power service sector (including, among other things, the role and capacities of various players in the power sector, 
the conditions governing the exercise of the public electricity service contracting authority, the conditions governing the 
delegation and operation of the public electricity service, tariff and accounting principles in the sector )4. 
 
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
 
 Apart from the strategies linked to the energy sector, the energy issue is taken into account in the commitments made 
by Mali to protect the environment and to combat climate change.  
 
Mali has signed the United Nations Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol as well as formulated its National Adaptation Programme of Action (PANA) on the harmful effects of climate change in 2007. The PANA consists 
of renewable energy developm ent projects, some of which have been partly implemented.  
 
Furthermore, in 2011, the Government of Mali formulated a national policy on climate change and a national climate change strategy (both of them factor RE into their thrusts of action).  
 At the CO P 21 held in Paris in December, 2015, Mali committed to contribute to the reduction in GHGs by up to 31% for 
the energy sector. The Government of Mali intends to gradually reduce the carbon intensity of the electricity network by 
increasing investments and  the use of renewable energy sources like photovoltaic solar (PV).   
 
Moreover, Mali is fully committed to the protection of the environment and the fight against climate warming. The 
Government of Mali demands the systematic consideration of the assessment and reduction of environmental impacts in 
the design, manufacturing and use of energy infrastructure and equipment.
   
 
 
The country's solar potential  and key constraints  
 
The solar potential (PV and CSP) of the whole of Africa was analyzed by IR ENA in 2014 (IRENA, 2014). According to 
this study, Mali is situated in a region with high solar potential and is considered as a country that is particularly conduc ive 
                                                             
2 Under the BOOT contract, a company or a consortium of companies’ finance, build, own and operate a new facility or a system, 
which is transferred back to the government after a predetermined period of time.  
3 Ordonnance n. 00- 019/P -RM du 15 mars 2000.   
4 In this regard, many forms of partnerships aimed at enhancing a conducive environment for private investors (under various forms 
of contracts, such as concession contracts, leasing and management contracts).


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 63 
 
 C 
to the development of solar technologies. The average solar radiation is estimated at 5 -7 kWh/m²/day with a daily 
sunshine duration of 7 to 10 hours. Thus, the production potential from solar PV is estimated at 7906 TWh/year (IRENA, 
2014).  
  
According to the categorization made in relation to solar resources (GHI for PV and DNI for CSP) (see table below), 
this potential is considered adequate.  
  
Categorization  Limited relevance  Adequate  Very adequate  Excellent  
PV (GHI in [kWh/m²/year])  <1000  1000 -1500  1500 -2500  2500 -3000  
CSP (DNI in [kWh/m²/year])  <1800  1800 -2000  2000 -2500  2500 -3000  
 
The following figures show at the continental level the potential regions for the development of solar PV and CSP 
indicating that Mali is located in a region with high solar potential and presents itself as a country particularly conducive 
to the development of solar technologies. (IRENA, 2014).  
 Moreover, malian solar radiation map (see figure 5) shows that solar radiation is more important in the northern part of 
the country than in the southern part.  
 
 
  
Figure 3: PV grading (based on GHI) ; from 
less to more adequate = yellow -orange- red 
(IRENA, 2014)  Figure 4: CSP grading (based on DNI) ; 
from less to more adequate = green-
yellow -orange- red (IRENA, 2014)  
 
Fig 5. Solar Radiation in Mali  
 
Despite the immense potential of the country, it represents only 3% of electricity production from renewable sources 
(excluding hydroelectric production). Its development remains slow and should reach only 10% of the energy mix by 2020 
(national policy obj ective). Indeed, the widespread use of renewable energy technologies encounter significant barriers 
from a economic and financial, institutional, regulatory, sociocultural and environmental point of view. Mobilizing related 
investment is necessary to see a transformation of the sector.  
 
Nonetheless, there are a number of major constraints to overcome for this purpose:


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 63 
 
 C 
• Economic and financial : Weak domestic financial institutions; high up -front cost of RE technology; inadequate financial 
incentives to attract the private sector; weak canalization of finance from international sources for larger -scale RE 
development.  
• Institutional : Coordination among proliferating agencies concerned with RE development; weak planning processes; 
incomplete framework for PPPs, in particular for utility scale independent power producers (IPPs).  
• Technical : Limited capacity of human resources in the sector; limited studies; impact assessments on RE for electricity 
generation do not yet create adequate conditi ons for a robust, standardized and programmatic approach.  
• Social : Inadequate provision of information and awareness of consumers on RE opportunities and challenges; poverty 
of Malian rural households impedes affordability, access and use of modern RE wit hout subsidy schemes.  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
 
1. Baseline Scenario  
 
1.1. Climate change and energy challenges  
 
1.1.1.  Vulnerability of the energy sector to climate change  
 
Climate change is one of the major challenges for the development of countries like Mali, which is ranked 175th out of 
187 countries on the Human Development Index (HDI), as a result of their low incomes, weakness of their human capital 
and the weakness of their economies which basically depend on natural res ources and climatic factors.  
 
It has been observed that since the advent of the periods of drought in 1970, Mali has been experiencing a more arid 
climate throughout the country characterized by a 20% overall decline in useful rain. This situation leads t o the worsening 
of the vulnerability of the main sectors like energy, particularly hydroelectric power which accounts for nearly 45% of 
cheap electricity supply by the national network from the Manantali dam (of which 104 MW out of a total capacity of 200 
MW belong to Mali) and the Sélingué dam (46 MW).  
 
With regard to energy production, one can find two hydroelectric plants in the River Niger basin – one at the Sélingué 
dam on the Sankarani and the other on a diversion of the river at Sotuba near Bamako. A t the first one, the average 
annual production was 226,8 GWh, while the second one recorded 35,6   GWh in 2007 (EDM- SA report, 2007). The 
energy produced by the two plants met some 30% of the country’s electric energy demand.  
 However, the rainfall situation, coupled with the technical constraints, affected the production of hydroelectric power by 
the said dams, where it was observed that there was a drop of more than 20% and 10% respectively over the last ten years.   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
1.1.2.  Projections and future impacts on the energy sector  
 
Climatic scenarios provided by the MAGICC and SCENGEN tools of the GIEC reckon a +3°C average increase in 
temperatures and a 22% decrease in rainfall throughout the country by 2100, with a risk of a reduction in water resource  
Figure 6: Change in hydropower production 
by the Sélingué dam (2007 -2016)


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 63 
 
 C 
recharge. Yet, it is acknowle dged that a 1% decline in flows will bring about a reduction in electric power production in 
the region of 1.3 million kWh.  
 
The consequence of this situation is poor access to affordable energy which limits the social opportunities of the poor segments of the population, particularly women and the youth in the rural areas, especially where the access rate is lower than 20%. Thus, energy is one of the sectors requiring an urgent roll -out of climate change adaptation measures in 
accordance with the National  Adaptation Action Plan (PANA) on climate change in Mali.  
 
1.2. Overview of Mali's GHG Emissions Profile d ue to the Energy Sector  
 The three national communications of Mali (1
st in 1995, 2nd in 2000 and 3rd at the formulation stage) all established that 
the energy sector is one of the biggest emitters of greenhouse gases (GHGs), having increased from 945 kT to 2,782 kT, 
i.e. an increase of more than 190% over the 17- year 1995- 2012 period. The basic scenario shows that GHG emissions 
will increase from 3,400 kTeq CO 2 in 2015 to 4,750 kTeq CO 2 in 2020, before reaching 9,269 kTeq CO 2 in 2030. This 
gives an average annual increase of 6.91% between 2015 and 2030.  
 
This situation is correlated with a major deployment of thermal plants over the last few years by both EDM- SA, the national 
company, and private operators for the electrification of the country’s isolated areas. Notwithstanding the high cost prices 
and the low profitability of this electrification option,  this situation is highly unlikely to improve in the next few years without 
a sustainable alternative due to the ever -growing demand of the population (3.6% a year), economic growth and social 
pressure. In fact, it appears that it is simple and quick to de ploy the thermal solution. Thus, to meet this demand, EDM-
SA, the national company, is investing more and more in medium -sized thermal plant projects (fuel oil plants) and is also 
supplying more than twenty isolated centres solely with plants operating on diesel. Furthermore, the huge consumers of the mining and industrial sector exclusively use thermal energy for their needs (200 MW), while rural electrification is 
basically provided by local suppliers who operate diesel -powered isolated mini -networks.  
 
Although the country’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) in the world is very low (0.06%), the government 
has agreed to participate in the collective ambition to attain the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (less than 2°C) by reducing GHG emissions in the energy sector by 31% and introduced 
an investment plan in this regard in order to attain its objectives.  
 
The National Environmental Protection Policy is being updated under the supervision of the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation. Achieving the political objectives related to environmental sustainability requires the prioritization of new 
energy investments for energy infrastructure that is environmentally friendly and resil ient to climate change.  
 
Constraints and challenges to the development of solar -based electrification in the context of the fight against climate 
change  
 
- At COP 21 held in Paris in December 2015, Mali committed to contributing to the 31% GHG reduction mitigation 
scenario for the energy sector and included it in its document on defined NDCs and then in the Investment Plan 
for implementation of the NDCs . Duri ng consultations with the various actors for drawing up the Plan, it was noted 
that a good number of actors lacked knowledge of the NDCs document. Thus, it was identified that there was a 
priority need for awareness on the NDCs  in each of the various areas, including the energy sector. Such an 
approach could enable the main players in the energy sector, particularly public institutions (National Energy 
Directorate -NED -, AMADER, AER -Mali), the private sector (investors and opera tors of existing rural 
electrification services) and the end users of basic energy services to work towards achieving the objectives set 
in terms of commitment by the country.  
 
- The high initial investment cost in PV plants is a major obstacle to private sector involvement in rural 
electrification, as private investors are called upon to mobilize resources from the local banking system, at a cost 
which is expensive for them. The second main obstacle concerns the fixing of an appropriate tariff that ensures 
the financial viability of the system, while taking into account the capacity to pay in rural areas. The extent to 
which cost and risk factors apply varies with the technology used and the geographical location, and project promoters expect some form of financial risk sharing to offset them. To date, this risk has been covered by 
external donors through the Rural Electrification Fund (F ER). The FE R has therefore succeeded in encouraging 
more than 60 energy supply companies to intervene in Mali. They are i nvolved in nearly 200 mini -grids. The initial


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 63 
 
 C 
investment subsidies granted by the F ER aim at making tariffs acceptable for consumers in rural areas and 
thereby guarantee financial profitability for private operators. Investment subsidies are limited to 70- 80% of the 
investment cost and are based on a results -based approach (determined by the number of consumers expected 
to be connected to the grid during the first two years, the average tariff and the investment cost for off -grid 
consumers). No subsidy is granted for electricity consumption. However, the Rural Electrification Fund (FER) is, 
in practice, a bank account managed by AMADER which was first created to manage direct grants or an onlending 
of concessional loans. This fund is still not a real financi al institution capable of borrowing, issuing guarantees  
and equity , setting up loans,  towards rural electrification companies (for a fixed or unlimited period). It goes 
without saying that this situation is not sustainable, due to the decrease in the financial resources available from 
external sources to continue providing such subsidies. The government is therefore considering strategic actions 
such as building capacity of the FE R to co- ordinate the mobil ization of the financial resources on the international 
market which are needed to finance investments by the agencies in charge of promoting the State's renewable energy programmes
.  
 
- Minigrid companies focus primarily on supply of power and often do not pay enough attention to demand 
stimulation. Too often, new customers have been slow to connect and only use a small amount of electricity, leading to lost revenue and insufficient volume to spread fixed cost. Productive- use appliances, like grain mills, 
carpentry, irrigation, and cold storage, are particularly important because they are often coincident with cheaper 
generation from solar and have higher consumption than residential loads. Commercial and productive use customers are thus critical for long- term viability of minigrids/microgrids -  as they have higher demand per 
connection, their loads are more coincident with solar generation, and they can provide immediate new income for the community to help afford the new electricity service. Furthermore, this is particularly important for rural areas where energy sources are needed in synergy with potentials  for productive energy uses and employment 
creation.  However, the upfront cost to connect or for purchasing electric appliances may be too high, requiring 
financing or subsidy whilst rural population in Mali faces several difficulties, including the lack of an appropriate financial service to support Productive Users of Energy (PUE) and back them up. Indeed, despite the significant demand for financial ser vices in rural areas, institutions offering financial services – such as banks, credit unions, 
microfinance institutions (MFI) or insurance companies –  are typically reluctant to serve rural areas. The key 
issue is often related to guarantee. Indeed, surve ys revealed that although some producers’ cooperatives are 
eligible to credit from financial institutions, they have trouble accessing credits due to issues of guarantee.  
 
The removal of these barriers, supported by this project, will help the country to strengthen the resilience of the energy sector and hence the resilience of local populations to the effects of climate change, while satisfying the growing need 
for electricity, and reduce GHG emissions related to the energy sector.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.   
 
1. Components of the project  
 
The main components of the project are: (i)  Capacity building of rural electrification institutions  and Technical Assistance; 
(ii) Detailed Engineering and Installation of 70 solar powered minigrids  (50 mini- grids at Tranche 1) to achieve access for 
31,000 households and businesses (2 8,378 at Tranche 1) ; and (iii) Support to Productive Use of Electricity  for solar based 
mini- grids . 
 
Component 1: Capacity building of rural electrification institutions  and Technical Assistance  
 
This component takes into account activities related to the establishment of an enabling environment for the promotion of rural electrification from solar photovoltaics. It focuses on capacity building for structures such as AMADER, AER, 
and the Rural Electrification Fund as well as actions to raise investor awareness and disseminate project activities and 
results.  
 
 
1.1. Training, raising awareness of stakeholders and dissemination of project activities/results


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 63 
 
 C 
The project will contribute, on the one hand, to raising awareness among stakeholders on the country's commitments 
through the NDCs in the field of energy and related implications, by:  
 
- organizing dissemination workshops on potential actions to be implemented in order to achieve the objectives of 
the CDN in the field of energy;  
- organizing specialized training sessions for designated executives of NED, AMADER and AER -Mali on climate 
change and issues related to the energy sector;  
- developing and disseminating public awareness material on climate change and CDN in the energy sector.  
 
These activities will be carried out with support from the Environment and Sustainable Development Agency (AEDD) 
which is in charge of the national policy on climate change drawn up in 2011 together with a strategy and an action plan.  
 
1.2. Communicati ng project results and lessons learned  
Communicat ion will be made towards  various stakeholders on project activities, results achieved and best 
practices/lessons learned from the project, for replication across the country and the West African sub- region.    
 
The expected results from this activity include particularly:  
 
• Develo ping a communication and raising awareness/promotion plan for national (and international) investors and 
production of materials (including videos) will be published on the experience/best practices and lessons learned 
from the project. These materials wil l be made available electronically and they will be widely disseminated 
throughout the region and in countries considering similar renewable energy systems for rural electrification. In addition, they will be posted on the project website;  
 
• Organizing information sessions with investors who are already active in the energy/renewable energy sector  in the 
country, local businessmen who wish to develop their activities to include energy for rural areas and, possibly, organize a roadshow to attract foreign investors in order to create consortia with local companies to provide rural 
areas with modern quality energy services.  
 
• Organiz ing mid-term and end- of-project workshops for institutions concerned ( DNE, AMADER, AER -Mali, FER ) to 
ensure monitoring and document the project experience. Training will be provided by international/local consultants 
for stakeholders on how to monitor, record and document the project experience.  
 
1.3. Capacity building of t he Rural Electrification Fund ( Fonds d’Electrification Rural - FER) 
  
This project will work to achieve this objective by supporting the setting up of technical assistance to develop the Rural Electrification Fund into a financial institution with its own legal status, through:  
 
(i) drafting of or ganisational and operational legal provisions as part of a reform of the FE R;  
(ii) recruitment of a dedicated staff; and  
(iii) capacity building of the F ER staff.  
 
 
1.4. Technical Assistance  on Regulatory Framework and on Procurement and Contracting of minigrid construction and 
O&M companies  
 
Technical assistance will further be provided for the tender process and selection of O&M companies that will operate 
the mini -grids. This will include the writing of standard cont ract for  15 years O&M and the procedures that set the relations 
between AMADER and O&M companies.  
 
A detailed implementation plan is provided on Annex 10.  
 
Component 2: Detailed Engineering and Installation of solar powered minigrids  
 
For each of the selected localities, this component includes specific engineering studies  including site


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 63 
 
 C 
identification/selection and E&S analysis , acquisition, installation and commissioning of the following equipment: (i) 50, 
80 and 150 kWp stand- alone solar power plant s with storage systems; (ii) low and medium voltage grids with their 
respective lengths of 8, 10 and 12 km; (iii) 14,189 prepaid meters; (iv) household in- door electrical wiring; (v) civil 
engineering works of buildings; and (vi) 10 stand- alone street lighting solar systems.    
 
The project will set up a certain amount of metering equipment and grid connection line, then in the implementation of 
the project a deployment will be made according to the demand thanks to the income from the sale of electricity.  The 
operators will charge an additional fee for households ’ connections  according to the national regulation and within the 
limits of predetermined fees agreed with the rural electrification regulator  (AMADER) .  
 
The equipment and their auxiliaries will be supplied with the essential spare parts and the specific tools for their 
maintenance as well as the required documentation.  
 AMADER is the entity which on behalf of Mali government will have the ownership of the assets. A concession agr eement 
for 15 years (renewable) will be awarded by AMADER to eligible operators. The financial eligibility criteria is the ability t o 
invest 20% of the total cost per minigrid. Detailed technical selection critera will be developed as part of the Technical  
Assistance in component 1.  
 2.1 Preparation of detailed engineering studies  
 This component includes activities such as site selection, engineering studies and  specific environmental and social 
analysis for each site.  
 
2.2. Supply installation and commissioning of equipment  
 The 14 localities in category 1 (population less than or equal to 2,000 inhabitants) will each be supplied by a 30 kWp 
photovoltaic solar power plant and a 5 km -long three- phase LV grid.  
 The 21 localities in category 2 (population between 2,000 and 4,000 inhabitants) will each be supplied by a 50 kWp 
photovoltaic solar power plant and a 8 km long three- phase LV grid.  
 
The 27 localities in category 3 (population between 4,000 and 7,000 inhabitants) will each be supplied b y an 80 kWp 
photovoltaic solar power plant and a 4.5 km -long three -phase LV grid.  
 The 8 localities in category 3 (population of 7,000 inhabitants or more) will each be supplied by a 150 kWp photovoltaic 
solar power plant and a 12 km -long three- phase LV gr id. 
 
 
The total installed power will be:  0,42 MW + 1,05 MW + 2,16 MW + 1,2 MW = 4,83 MW . 
 
For Tranche 1 the total installed power will be: 0,42 MW + 2,16 MW + 1,2 MW = 3.78 MW  
 
2.3. Implementation of Environmental and social measures   
 
This subcomponent takes into account the environmental and social actions  for the purpose of mitigating the negative 
impacts and risks of the project on the environment and the project area.  These include:  
 
(i) institutional strengthening measures (strengthening the environmental expertise of the AER, AMADER  and private 
operators); (ii) Technical studies, audits and procedures (environmental and social impact notices to be prepared; facilities  
maintenance manual) ; (iii) Training of the stakeholders involved in project implementation, particularly the Environmental 
and Social Safeguard Unit/AER,  Information and sensitization of communities and populations in the project area; (iv) 
Monitoring, supervision and evaluation of project activities.  
 
Component 3: Support to Productive Use of Electricity  
 
This component is in line with the need to improve the profitability of electrification in rural areas and encourage 
investment, through support for energy demand, particularly with regard to the "productive use of energy".


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
Indeed, by supporting the acquisitio n of equipment for productive use by rural populations, the project will contribute to 
increasing the use of energy for income- generating activities, which will stimulate the sale of electricity and economic 
development of the beneficiary localities.   
 
For this purpose, local financial institutions (microfinances) are wiling to put in place "equipment or investment credit" for 
productive users.  Types of energy equipment for productive use include: electric tools for carpentry, woodworking and 
small industry; sewing machines; welding machines; battery charging equipment; refrigeration and ice cube production; 
seed oil presses, grain mills, crop drying equipment and other equipment for value -added processing of local agricultural 
produce (honey, mango,  cashew nuts, etc.).  
 However, in order to succed in this operation, there is a need for risk guarantee in order to encourage banks and non -
bank financial institutions to provide financial services to productive energy users. This will also make it possibl e to control 
the interest rates of the loans granted to the populations to support the users of productive energy.  
 Surveys conducted in local communities showed that the terms for credit dedicated to equipment for productive use would be as follows:  
 
- loan amount between XOF 250,000 and 5 Million ( Euro 381 to 7622) estimated at XOF 500,000 (Euro 762) on 
average;  
- down payment requirements of 20 to 30% of the equipment cost;  
- Tenor of 6- 24 months, usually 12 months on average;  
- interest rates between 18 and 20% per year, with set -up costs;  
 This component aims at promot ing increased access to financial services for productive energy users in rural areas 
through setting up a financial guarantee fund toward financial institutions , for derisking purposes.  
 Upon BOAD’s experience, t his financial guarantee will be a loan proceed commit ed for covering part of the risk taken by 
the microfinance insitutions  (maximum 40% of receivables deemed irrecoverable). With hindsight, the following conditions 
are required:  
 
- when all avenues have been exhausted in recovering overdue credit in accordance with the institution's credit 
policy;  
- where the delay period exceeds 24 months, which is the legal period for downgrading credits as a loss.  
The loan proceeds will be exclusively used for the garantee itself  and will be effectively in place upon completion of 
minigrids. The resources will be managed by BOAD via FER . FER is part of government of Mali who is the borrower. No 
new legal entity will be created since FER is already existing.  The mechanism and the operationalisation of the garantee 
fund are covered in component 1 (Capacity building and Technical Assistance to the Rural Electrification Fund –  FER). 
Once FER has the capacity in place, it will use the proceeds to garantee micro loans given by the local microfinance 
institutions for productive use. The productive use micro loans will be given to productive use c onsumers in the areas 
where the minigrids will be installed.  
 
Microfinance Institutions which will be partners for this project will comply to Malian regulations fo microfinance instituti ons 
suc as:  
- approval given by the Ministry of Economy and Finance ( MEF)  
- losses must not exceed 5% of the institution's total loan portfolio;  
- interest rates are capped at 27%;  
- loans to a client may not exceed 10% of total portfolio;  
- 50% of the profits must be reserved and reinvested in the MFI;  
- 15% of the loan portfolio must remain on deposit  
- Annual financial reports and returns must be submitted to the Ministry of Economy and Finance and must indicate the 
following:  
o amount of deposits taken from customers ; 
o total loan portfolio;  
o number of customers;  
o Interest rate


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 63 
 
 C 
Mali is a member of the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO), and therefore its banking system is regulated by 
this regional monetary institution which has drawn up a set of regulations covering MFIs. A copy of the above reports will 
therefore be shared with BCEAO for registration under the decentralized financial systems.  
 
A partnership and performance agreement will be signed between the F ER and the eligible  MFIs. 
 
Eligibility of the LFIs will be proven through the following:  (i) approval given by the Ministry of Economy and Finance 
(MEF); (ii) number of years of experience, and (iii) effective and continuous implementation of activities in the field; (iv) a 
reassuring financial situation over the last three (03) years through the following indicators: (i) solvency (equity capital/total 
net assets is greater than or equal to 15%); (ii) portfolio quality (90- day overdue/portfolio outstanding less than 3%); and 
(iii) internal control quality.  
 
In the context of this project, concerning ALM/FT, eligible  LFIs will:  
 
- ensure that the funds financing the Project are not of illicit origin and in particular are not related to fraud against Mali 's 
financial interests, corruption, organized criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and  
 - forward to the Bank without delay any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in the 
company and in the Project;  
 - notify the Bank without delay if it has known at any time of any information indicating the illicit origin of all or part of the 
funds of the structure;  
 
- will not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on the lists established by the  
United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the European 
Union in application of its Common Positions and / or by the African Union as well as any other relative or complementary 
resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the fight  against the Laundering of Capital and the 
financing of terrorism.  
 
Under its due diligence, BOAD will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists. The Bank 
conducts also administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coer cion, collisions and inconvenient practices, and 
make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal investigations.  
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity ) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, production and 
marketing.  
 
Main entities involved in the project are:  
- The Government of Mali will be the borrower and will take the credit risk through a sovereign guarantee.  
- The Ministry of Energy  and Water  as the executing entity who delegates execution to t he Renewable Energy 
Agency  (Agence des Energies Renouvelables – AER) for component 2. (see Letter of the Ministry of energy 
dated 11 july 2018 in Annex)  
- BOAD will provide direct support (selection of consultants) to AER in execut ing component  1 (capacity building 
and technical assistance) , and the Rural Electrification Fund (FER) will execute component 3.  BOAD has 
conduct ed technical and financial capacity assessments of the entities involved in the project as per 
requirements of  the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) in line with BOAD’s policies and procedures.  It is 
BOAD’s reasonnable conclusion that the national entities involved therein are capable of car rying out the 
execution and operation of the project component activities  under BOAD’s assistance  and support.  
 
 
The Renewable Energies Agency (AER)  
The Renewable Energies Agency in Mali ( AER) is a Public Establishment of Scientific and Technological Character


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 63 
 
 C 
endowed with legal personality and financial autonomy (inherited from the National Center for Solar Energy and 
Renewable Energies (CNESOLER)). Its mission is to: i) assess and inventory the country's potential for renewable energy 
resources; ii) contribute to the definition of national renewable energy strategies; (iii) conduct research / development 
activities in the field of renewable energies; (iv) conduct studies and monitor the implementation of renewable energy 
programs and projects for the benefit of industry stakeholders; (v) contribute to the developm ent and capacity building of 
craftsmen, agents of State technical structures, local and regional authorities and private individuals, as well as those of 
renewable energy institutions in other countries; (vi) contribute to the information and awareness of promoters and users 
of renewable energy equipment; vii) perform testing, quality control and labeling of renewable energy equipment for the 
benefit of developers; viii) research and set up sustainable and adapted financing mechanisms for renewable energy 
projects and programs within a Public Private Partnership framework; (ix) to participate in international cooperation 
actions in the field of renewable energies.  
AER has a staff of 47 agents including 14 senior managers (05 researchers (including a Doctor, Research Director, a 
Director of Memory and 03 Research Assistants) 04 Energy Engineers, 02 Electrical Engineers, 01 Statistician- Planner 
Engineer, 01 Engineer in Industry and Mine and 01 administrative and financial manager.  (See AER’s oragnizational 
flowchart below )  
 
 
Figure 7: AER’s organizational flowchart  
Since its establishment, AER has conducted 7 solar based projects  with the support of various partners such as UNDP, 
Indian Government, Chinese cooperation, European Union, AfDB, etc.  A summarized list of the projects is presented 
below:   
PROJECT TITLE  INSTALLED 
CAPACITY  BUDGET  FUNDING 
SOURCE  PROJECT 
DURATION


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION 
IN RURAL AREAS THROUGH HYBRID TECHNOLOGIES   
147 kWp   
12 585 568 500 
XOF UNDP  
MALI Gov.   
2017- 2020  
SOLAR ENERGY VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT 
(PEVES III)  
  
1,287 MW p  
4.676.100.000 
XOF INDIAN Gov. 
MALI Gov. & 
BENIFICIARIES   
SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE PROMOTION OF 
RENEWABLE ENERGY IN MALI (PAPERM)   1. 272.000 
XOF AFDB   
 
SINO -MALIAN COOPERATION SOLAR ENERGY BASED 
PILOT PROJECT FOR KIRINA   
28, 520 kW p  
400 000 000 
XOF CHINESE 
COOPERATION   
2012-  2013 
RENEWABLE ENERGIES PROMOTION FOR WOMEN 
EMPOWERMENT (PENRAF)   1 598 000 000 
F XOF UNDP, MALI 
Gov.   
 
"ENHANCING THE LIVES OF CHILDREN AND THEIR 
FAMILIES THROUGH ACCESS TO MODERN, CLEAN AND 
AFFORDABLE ENERGY SERVICES IN 30 DEPRIVED 
COMMUNITIES IN THE KITA CIRCLE": PASER -K 
  
74,18 kW p  
1 725 157 000  
XOF  
 
EUREPEAN 
UNION,  PLAN 
ESPAGNE   
2015- 2018  
ACCESS TO MODERN ENERGY THROUGH 36,123 
PUBLIC LIGHTING PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR SYSTEMS IN 
311 VILLAGES AND CITIES IN MALI   
11,32 MW p  
36.000.000.00
0 XOF  
MALI GOVERNMENT   
 
West African Development Bank (BOAD)  
 
The West African Development Bank (BOAD), is a regional financial institution with a mandate to promote development 
in West Africa, and foster economic integration within the sub region. For over 40 years, BOAD acquired strong 
experience in financial resources mobilization and management from its member countries5 and partners, including AfDB,  
AFD, etc. and on international financial market.  
 
The Bank’s technical expertise and fiduciary capacity are deemed complied with international standards by several 
international funds, such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Adaptation 
Fund (AF) to which BOAD is accredited as project entity.  
 
BOAD has already financed solar based rural electrification projects in Senegal,  Niger and Togo over the last three years.  
 
BOAD has significant experience in the region using loans instruments with governernment to de- risk operations with a 
guarantee.  
 
As the implementing entity (the Accredited Entity) BOAD has a team of energy engineers, rural engineers, 
environmentalists and various experienced specialists to accompany the project in its implementation phases. Moreover, 
the Bank could also consider the recruitment of specialists to support the project teams if necessary.  
 
BOAD has relevant experience in energy sector through the management of a fund so- called “Energy Development 
Fund (FDE)” . Established in September 2009, the Fund aims to contribute to improved access to energy in the WAEMU 
member countries and promote the development of sustainable energy under concessional conditions in order to finance 
eligible projects. The Fund started its operations in the first quarter of 2010 and focuses on the following areas: emergency 
plans and investment projects, audits, studies, engineering and control of investment projects, capacity building and 
technical assistance, development and execution of business plans, reform of the legal and regulatory framework , 
accompaniment to the restructuring and consolidation of the energy sector. The initial allocation of the Fund is FCFA 250 
billion (~USD 125 million). As at 30 September 2016, 14 projects were financed in the form of loans involving a total 
amount of FCFA  229.7 billion (~USD 459 million).  
                                                             
5 Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
BOAD’s experience in Mali as for energy sector projects is as follows.  
• EDM -SA Interconnected Network Strengthening Project  
 
The project involves the construction of a national dispatching center in Bamako and a 107- km long 63- kV power line 
between the towns of Ségou and Niono, as well as the renewal and extension of the distribution network. from the city of 
Niono.  
 
With a total cost of M XOF 12,766 excluding taxes, the project is financed by BOAD and EDM- SA respectively  for MXOF 
11,000 and MXOF 1,766. The BOAD loan of MXOF 11,000 was granted by its Board of Directors in March 2008.  
 
• Interconnection project of the electricity networks of Mali and Ivory Coast 
 
The project involves the construction of a 225- kV electrical in terconnection line, covering a distance of 519 km, from 
Ferkessédougou in Ivory Coast to Ségou in Mali via Sikasso and Koutiala. The main objective of the project is to increase supply and strengthen the security of electricity supply in Mali.  
 
The total c ost before tax of the project is estimated at MXOF 74,177 and its financing plan is as follows: i) BOAD: MXOF 
12,500; (ii) EXIM BANK from India: MXOF 33,750; (iii) EBID: MXOF 13,500; iv) Ivorian State: 976 MFCFA; v) EDM- SA: 
MXOF 1,527; and (vi) Government of Malian: MXOF 11,894. It should be noted that in the context of its financing of its counterpart, the Malian Government obtained from Exim Bank of India, an additional f inancing of US $ 36 million.  
 
• Rehabilitation of Sélingué and Sotuba hydroelectric facilities Project  
 The purpose of the project is the rehabilitation of the Sélingué and Sotuba hydroelectric power stations, including the 
Sélingué energy evacuation stations and lines, as well as the connection to the interconnected network  of Kangaba and 
Ouéléssébougou to the interconnected EDM- SA network with the electrification of fifteen (15) localities. The overall 
objective of the project is to contribute to the regular supply of electric power at lower cost.  
 The total cost of the project is MXOF 28 441 and its financing plan is as follows: i) BOAD: MXOF 25 000 (88%); (ii) Mali 
Governement : MXOF 1,332 (5%); and iii) EDM SA: M XOF 2,109 (7%).  
 
BOAD will monitor the project, on the basis of the Borrower's quarterly reports and field supervision missions.  
 
An implementation team for this project  will be constituted within BOAD, and be in charge of the due diligence. It is an 
internal bank team set up to coordinate the preparation, design, financing and implementation as well as monitoring and 
evaluation aspect of the project. The same team will be responsible for the liaison with the GCF and the subsequent 
reporting.  The t eam at the bank will consist of financial analyst, environment social and gender specialist, renewable 
energy expert, monitoring and evaluation expert, climate change specialist, procurement specialist.  
 
The organizational flowchart and the flow of funds are presented below:


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
Figure 8: Organizational arrangement  
 
 
Figure 9: Global Flow of funds


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
Figure 10. Detailed Flow of funds  showing execution of payment and entities involved  
 
Organizational Arrangement for Component 3  
 
The proceeds will be managed by BOAD as implementing agency and the Rural Electrification Fund (FER) will be the 
executive institution.  
 
A guarantee agreement will be signed with local financial institutions (LFIs).  
 
A partnership and performance agreement will be signed between the FER and the eligible LFIs.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
 
Eligible 
LFIs   
Government/ME
F AER   
GCF   
BOAD  
Loan agreement   Trust 
agreement   
 
FER  
Guarantee 
Facility  Guarantee 
agreements   
 Beneficiaries  
Productive use 
credit line   
Figure 11: Organizational Chart


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 63 
 
 C 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
 
 According to EDM- SA data, energy security in Mali is suffering from a chronic gap characterized by:  
 
 at least 300 MW of electricity demand to be covered immediately or in the short term on the network;  
  about 200 MW of thermal power to be replaced by competitive sources of energy;  
  at least 500 MW in the long term for the connection or supply of big industrial extractive and food- processing 
units, etc.;  
 at least 150 MW to be rehabilitated on the network’s production capacity, and  
 a fast -expanding network to support the development of the import and/or export of electric energy.  
 
 
It is very unlikely that over the next ten years, the expected expansion of the national electricity network can ensure that 
a significant proportion of the low -income population living in isolated areas is connected to the network. This situation is 
expec ted to create an important market for off -network electrification schemes.   
 
Off-network, the distribution of electricity is mainly ensured by local energy service providers who operate in isolated rural 
areas. In 2015, the country had 160 isolated mini -networks. The production technologies used to this day basically include 
diesel -run units (in 2015, 96% of the electricity produced off -network was through diesel) as well as related transmission 
and distribution systems. The total installed capacity of the mini- networks is about 15 MW.  
 
 
 
Figure 12: power generation deficit in Mali  
Rural electrification in Mali is characterized as follows:  
 
 about 70% of the Malian population live in the rural areas;  
 the rate of electrification in the rural areas was 19% in 2016 against less than 1% in 2004;  
 Mali has more than 10,000 rural towns;  
 at least 255 towns are currently being supplied with electricity by private operators with the support of Donors and Technical and Financial Partners;  
 the rural electrification s ystems developed by the operators are basically thermal;  
 in 2015, about 131 towns were connected to diesel units, 32 towns were connected to hybrid PV -Diesel systems, 
15 towns used biofuel units, 20 towns benefitted from the extension of the EDM- SA network , 43 towns were 
supplied by Multifunctional Platforms, 13 towns were supplied by solar kits and one town was supplied by a 
hydroelectric micro- plant;  
 a total installed power of about 23 MW, with nearly 2 MWc PV solar  
. 
 
Among public sector actors involved in the energy sector , some national entities and technical services are also 
involved in the development of renewable energy:


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 63 
 
 C 
Énergie du Mali SA (EDM SA) , the national state -owned utility  
 
Agence Malienne pour le Développement de l’Énergie Domestique et de l’Électrification Rurale (AMADER) aims at 
increasing energy efficiency and at expanding access to electricity in rural and sub- urban areas. It is also responsible for 
implementing the Prog ramme Décennal d’Électrification Rurale (PRODER) through PPPs.  
 
Private local energy companies and local initiatives (i.e., communities and women associations), with support from 
AMADER, are the drivers of Mali’s rural energy access agenda. The Fonds pour l’Electrification Rurale has attracted 
almost 50 local energy service companies to the rural energy service delivery market in Mali. Most of them operate diesel -
based mini -grid systems.  
 Autonomous producers are consumers who generate electricity for their own needs, either to cope with EDM SA failures 
to provide them with sufficient power or because they are outside the grid. They use diesel -powered generators.  
 
The demand/supply project ion and the cost of production show that in Mali, the cost of electricity production is high and 
unsustainable.  
 
  
 
Figure 13: 
 Demand/Supply Projection and Cost of Production in 2015  
 
Power Tarif f  
 
General Tariff Principles  
 
Electricity is considered to be commercial commodity, and therefore no supply to a third party may be made free of 
charge. Accessing such service gives rise to subscribing to a contract, which must be approved by CREE.  
 Equal treatment is guaranteed to al l users with same consumption characteristics within the same Concession or among 
customers under the same lease.  
 
 
Tariff regulations  
 
a) principle:  Pricing freedom for authorisation and declarations (and regulatory tariff for concessions) in compliance 
with provisions of contracts signed with customers.  
 
b) Sales subject to tariff regulation:  
 024681012141618
012345678910
2015 2018 2021 2024 2027 2030
Euro cents / KWhTWh
On-network Production
On-network Demand
Production  Cost


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 63 
 
 C 
The sales of Concessions benefiting from an exclusivity or natural monopoly are subjected to tariff regulation by a 
Directive from the CREE.  
 
Regulated tariffs are price ceilings defined on the basis of the following principles:  
 
 They are based on budgeted costs and allow the operator to cover all expenses and charges justified by operational needs  
 
 They include an adequate rate of return that enables the Concessionaire to break even and get return on 
investment;  
 They include price adjustment coefficients for the main cost components, making it possible to offset the effect of changes in the main economic parameters over which the operator has no control;  
 They incorporate a downward adjustment term that forces the operator to increase productivity;  
 
 They are in line with the Government's energy policy and aim to stimulate efficiency in the use of electricity and 
optimise the use of generation, t ransmission and distribution capacities;  
 
 They shall be no discriminatory and transparent for same category of operator  
  Giving variations on characteristics of demand, regulated pricing scheme are defined by tariff quota periods and are 
reviewed by CREE directives.  
 
Within the scope of the EDM- SA concession, there are provisions for tariff equalisation.  
 Tariff schedule and revision   
 
The following tables show EDM- SA's low and medium voltage tariff and variations between 2009 and 2015  
 
Table : Tariffs between 2009 and 2015  
Tariff categories  2009 Tariff 2009 
without VAT  2015 Tariff without 
VAT 
social tariff (2-phase meters, 5 amps)    
Proportional price (CFA Francs /kWh)    
- Window 1: 0 –  50 kWh/month 59 59 
- Window 2: 51 –  100 kWh/month 91 105 
- Window 3: 101 –  200 kWh/month  94 120 
- Window 4: > 200 kWh/month  108 130 
   
Normal Tariff (2 -phase meters > 5 A and meters 4)    
Proportional price (CFA Francs /kWh)    
- Window 1: 0 –  200 kWh/month  106 109 
- Window 2: > 200 kWh/month  124 130


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 63 
 
 C 
Public Lighting Tariff    
For the first 120 hours of the subscribed voltage  107 114 
For more  74 79 
 
It should be noted that this EDM tariff does not apply to rural mini -grids that have another tariff  regime.   
Despite the low level of incomes in the area, households expressed their willingness to pay the monthly electricity service 
charge. This willingness to pay the monthly electricity service charge by households has also been confirmed by local 
authorities  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Regulation related to the electricity and rural electrification sector  
 
In Mali, AMADER is the only government regulatory authority in charge of rural electrification, setting of policies under 
the guidance of the Ministry of Energy.  
 
Operating Regimes for Electricity Facilities  
 The Government entrusts public power service to operators under either a Public Service Permit or a Concession 
Agreement, issued under the conditions provided for by Ordinance No. 019/P -RM of 15 March 2000.  
 Any person or entity wishing to carry out Power Production act ivities for third parties must first obtain either a Permit or a 
Concession, depending on the level of installed capacity envisaged.  
 
Other permits and authorizations are required as presented below. They will be obtained by the operators once 
selected via BOAD tender processes.  
 
Table 1: Permits and Issuing Authorities  
Permits and authorizations  Issuing authority  
− Community authorization  Local Authority (Town Hall ) 
− Construction permit  Ministry of Urban Planning and Housing  
− Environmental Permit  Ministry of the Environment, Sanitation and 
Sustainable Development  
− Preliminary permit of 6 months  AMADER  
− Agreement between AMADER 
and the Operator  AMADER  
− Authorization from the Minister of 
Energy for a period of 15 years  Minister in charge of Energy  
− Specifications for the operation 
and maintenance  AMADER  
  
Import of equipment will be exempted from taxes.  
 
Currency regime  
 
The currency regime is the XOF, which is locked against the EUR. The project funds will be provided in EUR.  
 
Privileges and Immunities  
 The GCF resources will enjoy an equal treatment with the BOAD resources in terms of privileges and immunities.  This 
includes especially exemption from taxation.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 63 
 
 C 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
 
Organization of the execution  
 
The project owner is the Government of Mali represented by the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources. The project 
will be executed by the Renewable Energy Agency (AER -Mali). In this regard, AER -Mali shall see to the programming, 
coordination, monitoring and supervision of all Project activities.  
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) shall be set up w ithin AER -Mali and managed by a senior manager  Project 
Coordinator, who must be an Electrical Engineer or other profile with experience. In addition to the coordinator, the project 
unit will include nine (09) other experts namely: (02 Executive Electrical Engineers or other executives, 02 Technicians, 
02 Senior Construction Technicians, 01 Procurement Specialist, an Environmentalist and an Administrative and Finance 
manager) as well as  support staff: 02 drivers, 01 S ecretary, 01 courier and one (01) responsible for monitoring- evaluation. 
The project team will be established by a decision of the Minister of Energy and Water Resources. The PMU Coordinator's CV must first receive a no objection notice from the BOAD.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: PMU Flow chart  
 
 
The PMU will coordinate the conduct of technical studies, the preparation of tender and consultation documents (in 
collaboration with the Consulting Engineer) as well as tender evaluation and procurement reports.  
 
The PMU will also be assisted by a consulting engineering firm for the monitoring and inspection of works. This office will 
provide a monthly progress report.  
 
The PMU staff could be reinforced through external r ecruitment. The project also provides for capacity building of the 
Unit through training.  
 
This component takes into account the "Control and supervision of work" aspects. The work control and supervision 
services will include: (i) the technical and admini strative follow -up of project execution; (ii) checking design notes and 
civil engineering reports and electromechanical equipment plans; (iii) the factory and on- site delivery of equipment, the 
validation of tests for commissioning and provisional acceptance of works; and (v) quality control of works and quantities 
implemented in accordance with Special and Technical Specifications.  
 
This sub -component includes (i) feasibility studies as well as environmental and social impact assessment already carried


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 63 
 
 C 
out; (ii) detailed technical engineering studies and environmental and social impact statements to be carried out for each 
locality; and (iii) the tender documents for construction works and the Request for Proposals for the control and 
supervision of construction works.   
Control and supervision of the works will include: (i) the technical and administrative follow -up of the execution of the 
works; (ii) verification of calculation notes and plans for civil engineering and electromechanical equipment; (iii) factory 
and on- site equipment approvals, trial validation for commissioning and temporary acceptance of work; and (v) the quality 
control of the works and quantities implemented in accordance with the Particular Technical Prescriptions Manual.  
 
The Bank will monitor the project from its headquarters, based on the Borrower's quarterly reports and field supervision 
mission’s reports. A technical and financial audit of the project will be carried out by a consultant who, in accordance with 
the project specifications, will inspect works carried out and the services provided by the inspection team, check the 
books and accounting records.  
 
Works will be carried out by companies. Work supervision and inspection as well as technical audit will be carried out by 
engineering firms. The technical and financial audit of the project will be conducted upon completion of works before final 
handing over. Services relating to raising awareness among the populations living in the project catchment zone will be conducted by local NGOs or associations with the support from the Local government.  
 Upon completion of works, a final report shall be prepared by the firm responsible for monitoring and control and submit 
to the Bank. The report shall provide detailed information on the technical progress of the project, its financial cost and 
the project execution timeline.  
 
Project management and operation  
 
AMADER is the regulator for rural electrification activities and will grant the concession agreement to the operators. There 
will be no legal agreement between AER and AMADER while AER will host the Project Management Unit (PMU).  
 
The private operators will be in charge of assets management and operation. They  will be selected on the basis of 
specifications defining the performance of the operation and preventive and curative maintenance, in accordance with 
the manufacturer's standards.  
 
The operation and maintenance of the installations are carried out by the concessionaires, the rural electrification project 
management entities, and / or the associative structures of the rural communities of the localities concerned, according 
to the regulatory and legislative framework of the project. country. The policy of choosing a private operator aims to bring 
professionalism, skills and resources in some localities electrified and not connected to the network interconnected.  
 The dealer maintenance policy is characterized by the execution of a systematic maintenance program (preventive 
maintenance) and repair and repair interventions (curative maintenance). Maintenance by the operator is based on 
manufacturer's maintenance manuals, maintenance schedules developed by the programming unit, and statistics of 
breakdowns and incidents.  
 
During the life of the contract, the operator must comply with a number of rules to ensure quality of service and customer 
satisfaction. In this context, he is responsible for the maintenance of the infrastructure entrusted in perfect working order , 
while ensuring regular  maintenance. It also renews parts at the end of its life.  
 The operator manages the maintenance and upkeep of the infrastructures, on a daily basis, relying on light teams, present in each of the villages. Thus, three (03) types of intervention are retain ed: 
 
• the daily maintenance is provided by a trained technician present in the locality through daily visits of the 
production facilities with information record (voltage, current, frequency, power, number of hours of operation, 
abnormal noise, leakage, etc.) and visual inspections of distribution lines;  
• systematic, conditional or corrective maintenance interventions are provided by the regional private operator; and  
• for breakdowns, overhauls or major repairs, the operator may call on the supplier if necessary.  
 Local authorities and national energy agencies control the quality of the facilities and service to ensure that the private 
operator manages the infrastructure.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 63 
 
 C 
 
A levy of EUR 0.02 will be collected from the private operators by the Rural Electrification Fund (FER).


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 63 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below  is used, please refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.  
 
COMPONENT / OUTPUT   
2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  
 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
COMPONENT: CAPACITY BUILDING OF RURAL ELECTRIFICATION INSTITUTIONS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE  
Activity  1.1 Training, raising awareness of stakeholders and dissemination of project activities/results  
Sub-activity 1.1.1 - organizing dissemination workshops on potential actions to be 
implemented in order to achieve the objectives of the NDC in the field of energy        x x x                                         
Sub-activity 1.1.2 - organizing specialized training sessions for designated 
executives of DNE, AMADER and AER -Mali          X x x x x x X                               
Sub-activity 1.1.3 -developing and disseminating public awareness material on 
climate change and NDC in the energy sector.             x                                     
Activity  1.2 Communicati ng project results and lessons learned  
Sub-activity 1.2.1: - Developing a communication and raising 
awareness/promotion plan for national (and international) investors and 
production of materials (including videos)          x x x x                                     
Sub-activity 1.2.2 - Organizing information sessions with investors who are 
already active in the energy/renewable energy sector     x x   x                          
Sub-activity 1.2.3 - organizing mid -term and end -of-project workshops for national 
institutions (DNE, AMADER, AER -Mali, FER) to ensure monitoring and document 
the project experience                    xx       xxx                         
Activity  1.3 Capacity building of the Rural Electrification Fund (Fonds d’Electrification Rural -FER)  
Sub-activity 1.3.1: - drafting of organisational and operational legal provisions as 
part of a reform of the FER      x x x x x                                       
Sub-activity 1.3.2 - TA for recruitment of a dedicated staff            x x x                                     
Sub-activity 1.3.3 - capacity building of the FER staff.                  x                                   
Activity  1.4 Providing Technical Assistance on procurement and contracting of mini -grid construction and O&M companies  
Sub-activity 1.4.1 - TA - writing of standard contract for 15 years O&M and the 
procedures that set the relations between AMADER and O&M companies         x x                                           
Sub-activity 1.4.2 - tender processes and selection of construction companies 
and O&M companies that will operate the mini -grids.          x x x x                                     
COMPONENT 2: DETAILED ENGINEERING AND INSTALLATION OF SOLAR POWERED MINIGRIDS  
Activity 2.1 Preparation of detailed Engineering Studies  
Sub-activity 2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering studies & Specific environmental 
and social analysis for each site      x x x x x x                                     
Activity  2.2: Supply , installation and commissioning of equipment              
Sub-activity 2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants construction and minigrid deployment                x x x x                               
Activity 2.3: Implementation of Environmental and social measures              
Sub-activity 2.3.1 - Project impact mitigation and improvement activities as per 
the ESMF                 x  x x  x                                
COMPONENT 3: SUPPORT to PRODUCTIVE USE OF ELECTRICITY  
Activity  3.1. Operationalisation of Financial guarantee facility                                                      
Sub-activity 3.1.1 - Implementation of  Financial guarantee activities                  x x x x x x x x  X X X x x X X X X X X X X X X x 
Project Management Audit and Reporting  
Recruitment of PMU staff    x                                                 
Project inception      x                                               
Annual Report          x       x       x       x       x    x    x    
Midterm report                              x                     
Project Completion Report                                      x               
Final Independant Report                                x


---
*Page 37*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 63 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Energy access and energy savings are key to the development of Mali and in the West Africa region. Given that the 
energy mix in the target region already heavily depends on fossil -fuel based electricity, further adding high -emission 
diesel generators to po wer SMEs is not an option from a climate perspective. Low -carbon energy production can be 
achieved by scaling up the use of renewable energy resources. GCF for this programme is critically important and it 
provides significant value- added above the busines s as usual situation. Funding from government and development 
partner institutions is not sufficient to meet the vast demand for clean energy access. As a matter of fact, it remains a 
major challenge throughout West Africa to meet the installing, operating and maintaining cost requirement, not to 
mention the equally important costs for training and capacity building for local stakeholders, despite the obvious social and environmental benefits of renewable energy solutions.  
 
 A key reason to seek GCF financ ing is to help Mali scale up investment in renewable energy. Without such an incentive, 
the country would continue to suffer from the slow pace of investment in the renewable sector. GCF financing is critical 
to allow the successful structuring of finance for this project so as to address some of the barriers as faced by the private 
sector investors, such as by promoting the establishment of a conducive regulatory framework to encourage private sector involvement in renewable energy investment in Mali.   The financing from GCF is expected to help reduce the 
risks of investment. Concessional financing from GCF can offset the high cost related to the barriers and risks as 
described in the project FSR.  
 
The Government of Mali has been struggling to mobilize the necessary financial resources. Without GCF financing, the 
government will have to borrow from financial institutions at market rates, which are still very high considering their 
capacities, but above all faced with the urgency of the problems to be solved. Hence the need for external support 
becomes more urgent if community resilience is to be achieved.  
 
Given the large investment needs in the sector, a significant volume of investments into the renewable energy markets 
is required.   Currently, only the G CF is able to provide such finance within the given timeframe. BOAD’s strategic 
objective is to increase its portfolio of investments in the renewable energy sectors, but so far this has been low because 
of the lack of alternative sources of public sector funding available. The involvement of the GCF is required as it will 
allow a combination of concessional lending and grant for technical assistance required to achieve the objectives of the 
project and the consequent paradigm shift in Mali.  
  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
 
The Renewable Energy Fund will be underpinned by a legal framework and an annual budget from Government  and 
will be a real financial institution able to borrow, issue guarantees, build loans, and equity in order to coordinate the 
mobilization on the international market, of the financial resources necessary to the financing of the investments by the agencies in charge of promoting the energy programs renewable resources . 
 
The projet will build capacity of the national actors (public, private and financing intitutions) engaged in rural electrific ation 
and renewable promotion. With enhanced understanding of the RE sectors and their profitability, MFIs are expected to 
continue providing finance to these businesses even without the project participation. It is expected that there will be a 
greater demand for financing energy demand projects and that M FIs will start usin g their own resources for climate 
lending.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 63 
 
 E 
In this section , the accredited entity  is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance 
of the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub- criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
 
As mentionned before, traditionally, the growing energy access demand has been met through fossil fuels. This project 
however provides a total shift in energy production by promoting the use of renewable energy instead of continuous 
addition of fossil fuel  based generation  
 The project will result in a real and visible paradigm shift inmali Rural electrification towards low -carbon sustainable 
development. The project directly addresses the second largest -emitting sector in the country – i.e. energy generation 
– and implements  actions specifically recommended in the Nationally Determined Contribution and the Second 
National Communication to the UNFCCC.  
 
The project is expected to result in direct emission reductions of 41 089  t CO 2 eq/year  by installing solar minigrrid in 
70 communities  of which 32 871 t CO 2 eq/year for 50 communities for Tranche 1.  
  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  41,089 t CO 2 eq (32,871 tCO 2 eq/year 
for Tranche 1)  
Lifetime  1,027, 227 t CO 2 eq (821,782 t CO 2 eq 
for Tranche 1)  
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  310,698 (283,777 for tranche 1) (50% 
women)  
Percentage 
(%)  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Examples include:  
• Expected increase in the number of households with access to low -emission energy : 31 000 
(28,778 for tranch 1)  
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
 
The m ethodology chosen is the AMS I.L.  
 (https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/documentation/meth_booklet.pdf#AMS_I_L ) as approved by UNFCCC CDM 
Executive Board for CDM project s. It is considered as the most suitable methodology with robust and conservative 
means to estimate the mitigation impact for this project in Mali, as it provides a solid method for the quantification of 
the emission reduction outcome and has been approved by a constituent body under the UNFCCC:


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 63 
 
 E 
- This methodology is applicable to electrification of a community achieved through the installation of renewable 
electricity generation systems that displace fossil fuel use, such as in fuel -based lighting systems,  stand- alone 
power generators, and fossil fuel based mini -grids.  
- This methodology is applicable to greenfield individual, renewable energy system projects or mini -grid 
activities.  
- This methodology is applicable in situations where consumers that were not connected to a national/regional 
grid prior to project implementation are supplied with electricity from the project activity. It is also applicable to 
situations where a fraction of consumers that are supplied with electricity from a fossil fuel based mini -grid 
prior to the implementation of the project are now supplied with electricity from the project activity.  
 
- At least 75 per cent (by number) of the consumers connected to the project renewable electricity generation system(s) shall be households  
 Baseline calculation  
 Two parameters are required to be known to determine the baseline:  
- The amount of renewable electricity utilized by the consumers served by the project renewable el ectricity 
generation systems;  
- The number of consumers supplied with renewable electricity by the project activity.  
 
Baseline emissions for the entire project activity are calculated as:  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑦𝑦=𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵55,𝑦𝑦+𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵250 ,𝑦𝑦+𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵250  𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 ,𝑦𝑦 Equation (1)  
Where:  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑦𝑦 = Baseline emissions in year  y (t CO 2) 
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵55,𝑦𝑦 = Aggregate baseline emissions for consumers that consumed equal to or 
less than 55 kWh of renewable electricity from project renewable electricity 
systems in year  y (t CO 2) 
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵250 ,𝑦𝑦 = Aggregate baseline emissions for consumers that consumed more than 55 
kWh but equal to or less than 250 kWh of renewable electricity from project 
renewable electricity systems in year  y (t CO 2) 
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵250  𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 ,𝑦𝑦 = Aggregate baseline emissions for consum ers that consumed more than 
250 kWh of renewable electricity from project renewable electricity 
systems in year  y (t CO 2) 
  
Emission reduction calculation: 
 Emission reductions (ER) = Baseline Emissions (BE) -  Project Emissions (PE)  
 
Since project activity uses solar energy, PE= zero, therefore (ER) = BE.  
 
Estimated Power Generation    
Communities Type 1  919800  kWh 
Communities Type 2  2299500  kWh 
Communities Type 3  4730400  kWh 
Communities Type 4  2628000  kWh 
Total yearly generation  10 577 700  kWh 
 10 578  MWh  
Estimated Power Distributed  8 991  MWh


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 63 
 
 E 
 
Therefore total emission reduction (ER) per year:  
 
Total households  31000  Energy 
(MWh)  Emission 
Factor  
Proportion of Households that consume less than 55 kWh a year  60% 5394,627  6,8 
Proportion of Households that consume less than 250 kWh a year  30% 2697,3135  1,3 
Proportion of productive use with consumtion above 250 kWh per year  10% 899,1045  1,0 
 
Emission Reduction = 41,089/year  
Lifetime of the sub- projects is 25 years  
Total emission reduction (ER) over the lifetime of the projects: 
41,089 tCO 2 eq X 25 years = 1,027,227tCO 2 eq 
For Tranche 1: ER = 32 ,871 tCO 2 eq/year , and 821, 782 tCO 2 eq for the entire lifetime of the project.  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Mali has over 74% of the population living off -grid and without modern energy access.  In the rural areas where this 
project targets, the proportion of the population without electricity access is 91%. The country has been making a 
calculated shift of attention to off -grid electrification strategies. In effect, numerous policies and regulat ions have been 
developed. Incentives such as customs rebates are in place. However, there has not been significant to- scale 
investments off -grid.  
 This GCF project seeks to remove these barriers: it has a dedicated component on institutional & technical c apacity 
building and Technical Assistance. It will support the revision/updating of the mandates of agencies and institutions 
actively involved in RE. Having had a legacy of not -so-successful off -grid interventions, this project has the ambition 
to demonst rate working models that factor pertinent factors. The learning sub- component will ensure best practices 
and lessons are well -documented and communicated effectively to stakeholders in the emerging sub- sector.  
 
The project will develop mini -grids that out number the existing installations and represent a significant ratio of the total 
Installed capacity of Mali. This way, the confidence in the community -run energy systems will rise and thereby 
permanently change the investment environment.  
 The project is founded on existing experiences from historic and ongoing projects and programmes. All stakeholders will be involved. It will therefore contribute sound and pragmatic additions and/or amendments to the existing regulatory 
framework and policies.  
The promotion of demand to increase productive uses of renewable energy will demonstrate the competiveness of 
isolated grids with respect to grid tariffs so as to influence the national tariff regime (for both on- grid and off -grid).  
 
A successful scale up of Mali’s rural electrification project combined with the greening of Mali’s rural energy mix will 
provide lessons to be learned and best practices for rural energy agencies in the sub- region in the framework of the 
African club of rural energy agencies. BOAD is committed to developing a case study replicable in the 8 member 
countries and across the WAEMU countries.  
 
In Mali, AMADER is the only government authority in charge of rural electrification regulation, setting of policies under 
the guidance of the Ministry of Energy.  
 
At present the government of Mali is in the process of revising the current regulatory framework


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 63 
 
 E 
 
The theory of change of the is described below , based on activities that support  enabling environment through 
strengthening policy regulation and national institutions involved in rural electrification, private sector engagement in 
clean energy thanks to affordable financ ing that makes solar investments attractive and viable. The project intervention 
will result in a  paradigm shift in terms of avoiding substantial GHG emissions  for the country . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Figure 15: Theor y of change


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 63 
 
 E 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
 
The project is creating a unique partnership consisting of multiple stakeholders (public, private and NFI) who will work 
together in a collective learning process. Transfer of expertise and skills is a core objective of this project (component 
1). It will mainly benefit local NFI, while potential clients active in promoting sustainable energy will also receive support. 
In this context, the following learning and know -how transfers and benefits will be achieved:  
On the NFI’s side, the project will enhance t heir understanding of evaluating RE investments and change the risk 
perceptions towards these new financing opportunities.  
The project will deliver trainings to public intitutions (AER, AMADER) staff on climate change issues and RE 
technologies development. 
Potential MSME clients will also benefit from technical support on how to structure climate business plans to make 
them bankable.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions th at are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
The project will contribute to creating an enabling environment for RE investments through targeted capacity building, 
awareness raising activities and connecting a diverse range of private sector stakeholders under component 1.  The 
technical assistance activities will achieve a framework in Mali that enables AMADER to unlock  private sector 
resources on rural electrification activities while also having their participation on O&M activities. This will shift from 
current paradigm where public and private are competing and pave the way for a PPP model.  
It will contribute to structuring the solar based rural electrification market through financial mechanism such as financial 
guarantee to remove the barrier of lack of a financial service adapted to support Productive Energy Users  and de- risk 
loans demands for rur al areas productive users of energy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national  / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climate- responsive planning and development.  
 
GCF financing is critical to allow the successful structuring of finance for this project so as t o address some of the 
barriers as faced by the pri vate sector investors, such as identying and establihing a conducive regulatory framework 
to encourage private sector involvement in renewable energy investment in Mali.   The financing from GCF is expected 
to help reduce the risks of investment. Concessional financing from GCF can offset the initial high cost related to the  
barriers and risks as described in the project FSR.  
 
The current regulatory framework allows concession agreements; however, this was never operationalized at scale. 
The standard O&M contracts will contribute to the regulatory environment by setting a fr amework that can be replicated 
and which operationalizes the regulation.  
 
This project will contribute to having a f ully functional rural  electrification agenc y in place and produces contracts and 
supervision reports in line with industry sta ndards.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 63 
 
 E 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The environmental and social benefits, including gender -sensitive development impacts  are as follows:  
Environmental cobenefits:  
- reduction of air pollution due to fossil fuel c onsumption and improvement of air quality  thanks to 
promotion of renewable energies;  
- reduction of greenhouse gas emissions;  
- reduction of pollution by waste oils at thermal power plants;  
Socio -economic and gender -sensitive development impacts  
- increased socio- economic activities,  
- Improvement of the health and hygiene conditions of local populations;  
- Improvement of the living conditions and comfort of local populations;  
- access to public lighting and improvement of security conditions;  
- increase in the duration of supply of electricity;  
- increase of the service and the access rate for the safety of peopl e and goods;  
- better conservation of pharmaceutical and food products;  
- improvement of the permanent drinking water supply of the populations;  
- lightening women's work,  
- improvement of household income levels and creation of income- generating activities;   
- improvement of the literacy rate;  
- development of the emergence of manufacturing and processing industrial units;  
- opportunity for local people to benefit from capacity building actions.  
- The focus on gender in ownership and management of the energy services centres will ensure inclusion 
of all gender and youth. So the improvement of livelihoods and other development benefits will be shared 
fairly.   
 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the l evel of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc).  
 
In Mali, most of the energy supplied comes from biomass (78%). It represents the largest source of energy for the majority of the population, while fossil fuels contribute 21% of the energy supply and 1% hydroelectricity (excluding 
electricity trade). All of these factors are vulnerable to climate and economic shocks. Due to the impacts of climate 
change, such as drought and decreasing rainfall, wood energy is suffering from increasing cutting, soil degradation, 
etc., and the hydroelectricity of the energy deficit, water for its operation. As for fossil fuels, their fluctuations strongly 
impact Mali's trade balance, which imports all its consumption. This situation of poverty is accentuated in rural areas 
which use mainly biomass.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 63 
 
 E 
Mali is particularly vulnerable to climate change. The most plausible scenarios foresee a rise in temperatures and a 
decrease in precipitation in all the localities of the country, with possibly serious repercussions on agriculture, forests, 
health, energy  and water, among others. According to the National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA) Mali, energy 
is considered one of the sectors requiring urgent adaptation measures to climate change. In terms of vulnerability, climate variability particularly affect s the hydroelectricity subsector. Under the climate scenario developed under the 
NAPA, a 1% drop in flow would result in a 1.3 million kWh reduction in electricity generation. In particular, the mitigation 
of the impacts of climate change on hydroelectric production and biomass production will be at the heart of any strategy 
for energy development and poverty reduction.  
 
The majority of the population of Mali (about 64%) lives in rural areas but the urban population is growing at a constant rate of 5% per year. This demographic growth is a major concern for the future of the country because it implies a 
sharp increase in basic needs, in particular energy. Mali's economy is dominated by the primary sector, which 
contributes to 36.5% of GDP and employs almost  85% of the working population. The electricity and water subsector 
contributes to 1.91% of GDP. Mali imports all of its fossil fuel needs, making it highly sensitive to price volatility.  
 The results of the Survey of Consumption, Praetorship and Welfare of the National Institute of Statistics of Mali reveal 
an incidence of poverty estimated at 11.1% in Bamako against 46.6% and 52 respectively, 8% in other cities and rural 
areas.  
 This level of poverty accentuated the vulnerability of rural communities through the following factors :  
 
- At the level of education, the literacy rate in relation to the 15- year poverty level in rural areas is 17.9% compared 
with 52.3% in Bamako and 44% in other cities;  
- at the health level, because of the costs deemed too high by the poor (74.9%), they are consulted by traditional 
healers or community health centres that do not have sufficient resources,  - at the level of access to energy, 92% of poor rural households use wood as a source of cooking and only 23.3% have 
access to electricity compared to 74% of poor households in Bamako.   
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
 
Economic co- benefits  
 
The project will create 600 permanent jobs when fully implemented and another 1,500 temporary jobs during the 
construction period. With the skills attained from the installation period, the temporary workers will be available for 
similar subsequent project s in the localities with the most need.  
 
Assuming each site would be the equivalent of a 20kVA diesel generator, an all RE system would avoid 21,000 litres 
of diesel annually. This translates to 1,470,000 litres annually. This would save the country upwar ds of EUR 13,41 
million annually. This would in turn improve the fiscal balance.  
 
Social co -benefits  
 
The absence of modern energy hinders community development; climate change complicates the situation. Poor 
lighting & indoor air pollution increases the prevalence of health complications including respiratory tract infections and 
heart complications (16,900 people die in Mali annually due to indoor air pollution, WHO, 2012), which dramatically 
reduce life expectancy and strain the national health budget.   
The introduction of modern energy in the rural communities will lead to various social benefits including:  
- better social services such as medical services and education  
- increased safety in communities following the introduction of street/public lightin g  
- better health of especially women and girls following improved indoor lighting and decreased air pollution; 
as well as reduced distances to cover in search of energy services and/or resources  
- better sanitation and increased availability of clean safe drinking water


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 63 
 
 E 
Increased access to and improved use of basic social services, such as education and health care 
(lighting/heating/cooling of schools and health centers through solar panels), and increased access to water in rural 
areas (through solar PV pumping systems). Solar home systems also prevent health issues related to indoor use of 
firewood and improve household safety by decreasing domestic accidents caused by  candles and kerosene lamps.  
 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
 
The GoM’s vision and targets have been formulated in key policy papers, namely: National Energy Policy (2006); 
National Strategy for the Development of Renewable Energies (2006); National Strategy for the Development of 
Biofuels (2006); and the National Energy Sector Policy Letter (2009- 2012).  
 
BOAD has a strict focus on ensuring that not only do countries own and lead all projects financed but also that the 
beneficiary community needs drive the choice of interventions. This project will take this approach ensuring that 
communities have full cont rol of the systems created while at the same time supporting the country to have a proper 
policy environment for this and similar projects in future to thrive.  
 
Mali’s NAMA aims at reduction of GHG emissions by 1,285,034 tCO2 per year through renewable energy production 
(e.g. with hydro, wind, biomass and solar PV). The UNFCCC lists of 19 priority projects in Mali contains 2 projects that 
are directly related to t his GCF project : Contribution to barrier removal for the promotion of the use of solar energy in 
Mali, and promotion of income- generating activities and development of mutual assistance.  
 Mali's National Adaptation Programme of Action, completed in 2007, identifies Agriculture and Health as the most 
vulnerable sectors, followed by Fisheries, Energy and Water Resources.  
 
Implementing these mitigation and adaptation activities are slower than desired because of various constraints include 
absence of capital  and weak institutional capacity and experience. However, the country has instituted the agencies 
and structures required for actualisation of these climate action plans/strategies.  
  
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities  with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Please refer to section C4 for information about the Executing Entity and Responsible Parties  
 
The West African Development Bank (BOAD) is the common development finance institution of the member countries 
of the West African Monetary Union (WAMU). It was established by an Agreement signed on 14 November 1973, and 
became operational in 1976. Member countries include Benin, Burkina, Côte d’Ivoire,  Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, 
Senegal, and Togo.  
 
BOAD is an international public institution whose purpose, as provided under Article 2 of its Articles of Association, is 
to promote the balanced development of its member countries and foster economic integration within West Africa by 
financing priority development projects


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 63 
 
 E 
The Bank’s financial support has made it possible not only to increase power generating capacities in the member 
countries, but also to erect more than 3,527 km of interconnection lines among them, and to reinforce as well power 
generation, transmission and distribution facilities on the interstate grids for a nominal power of over  1,350 MW.  
As at 30 September 2016, the aggregate amount of funding provided by the Bank i n the energy sector stood at XOF 
863.9 billion excluding the Energy Development Fund  
• BOAD provides financial assistance to WAEMU member countries to support their development efforts. Such 
assistance targets various areas, including the organization of workshops, conferences or seminars, the 
training of government officials and the implementation of social projects.  
• The Bank also grants interest rate subsidy for non- commercial public sector loans to member countries. Also, 
BOAD participates in various roundtable meetings with a view to financing national development programmes 
in the member countries.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs , civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
During project preparation, several project stakeholders were consulted on the basis of the potential impacts analyzed 
in order to gather their points of view. The consultations took place from 02 to 17 May 2018 in the regions of Sikasso, 
Segou, Koulikoro and Kayes. They mainly concerned local elected representatives, civil society a ctors and local 
populations. The methodological approach adopted is the participative approach: meeting information, exchange and discussion around the project. The exhaustive list of the villages consulted and persons met is in Appendix.  
 Key points discussed  
 To collect the population opinions, the following points were discussed after presentation of the project by the consultant.  
- Possible sites for the implementation of equipment;  
- Advantages of such a solar equipment project for them;  
- Special conc erns or possible fears for a successful project;  
- Experiences or have they heard about this kind of solar electrification projects;  
- Project benefits for village women and youth;  
- Training needs for equipment maintenance or other;  
- Suggestions and recommendations for the project.
 
 
Furthermore, the national regulator for rural electrification (AMADER) and the the Private operators’ organization were 
fully engaged. The 20% of investment cost as parallel financing demonstrates  strong support from the private sector  
for the proposed project . 
 
NDA was also engaged and provided no- objection letter (see appendix)  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment.  
 
Component 1 (capacity building) is not revenue- generating in any  meaningful sense.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 63 
 
 E 
Component 2 has revenu e-generation aspects . Therefore, d etailed financial and econom ic analyses have been 
conducted.  
 
The GCF support to component 3 (financial guarantee mechanism)  is designed to ensure that productive use for 
electricity is implemented and therefore there is e nhancement of the consumers ’ ability to pay when generating income 
with electricity, and as a consequence there is an enhancement of the  commercial viability of mini -grids , which as a 
consequence results in GCF investment being more sustainable  
 
The GCF grants will be augmented by considerable loans provided as co- finance by BOAD. Therefore, the project is 
proposing a package for investors consisting of a mix of grants, BOAD  loans .  
 
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co- financing ratio (total amount of co- financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment.  
 
Co-financing details are provided in Section B. 2.  
 
The co- financing ratio of the entire project is 3: 1. The private sector’s contribution to the investment for the assets  is 
20%.  If further investments in renewable energy as a result of creating an enabling environment through institutional 
capacity building and technical assistance are taken into account, then the co- financing ratio, including leveraged funds 
from pri vate investor s for another 10.000  off-grid rural communities will be  much higher.  
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS OF THE PROJECT  
 Methodology and assumptions  
 
 The criteria used is the cost price per kWh and the valuation is made on constant basis. The study covers a period of 
15 years of operation. It was considered a unique model for financial analysis, corresponding to the electrification of 
new localities by a system including a photovoltaic solar field and a low voltage mini grid. The met hodology used is the 
computation of expected cost of operating the mini photovoltaic power plants compared to the use of thermal production 
source of isolated plants of private operators in rural areas. Thus, a cost per kWh was calculated taking into account 
the cost of the project's power plants and mini grids over their entire life cycle (construction, operation, maintenance 
and renewal) in relation to the net quantity of power produced over the same period.  
Therefore, the financial projections of the model used were based on the following assumptions:  
 
- that the facilities start operating from 2021 and their technical lifetime is 30 years for the photovoltaic solar field and 
the mini -grids;  
 
- that battery and inverter life is 8 and 15 years, respectively;  
 
- that depending on the size of villages, four (04) types of solar power plants shall be considered: 30 kWp, 50 kWp, 
80 kWp and 150 kWp;  
 
- the various photovoltaic solar fields have a total power of 4 830 kWp;  
 
- total annual production is estima ted at 14,103,600 kWh;


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 63 
 
 E 
 
- that technical losses of production and distribution networks are estimated at 7.5% and 8%, respectively for 
photovoltaic fields and mini distribution grid;  
 
- that the price of electricity is EUR 0.24/kWh ( XOF156 FCFA/kWh ) to which will be added a levy of EUR 0.02 , leading 
to a tariff of  0.26 ( XOF 174/kWh) ; 
 
- that photovoltaic fields will run for 8 hours and batteries for 6 hours;  
 
- that the operating costs of photovoltaic fields and mini distribution grid are 10% of sales turnover;  
 
- that the maintenance cost of photovoltaic fields and mini distribution grid is estimated at 3.5% of the turnover of the 
power sold;  
 
- that the cost of facilities is XOF10.8528 billion for the hybrid solar systems (photovoltaic solar field + mini grids + 
connections + batteries + inverters + spare parts + training);  
 
- the average cost for the transmitting of power from isolated plants operated by private operators in rural Mali is 
about 350 CFA Francs/kWh;  
 
- that the periodic expenses for replacing defective equipment are estimated at XOF5.423 billion for batteries;  
 
- that the operating period of the project extends from 2021 to 2035 and the residual value of the investments amounts to XOF6.58 billion for  the photovoltaic solar fields and the mini -grids.  
 
 
Tariff per kWh  
 
The above assumptions show that the tariff will be EUR 0.26 (XOF 174 /kWh ) against an average (current) cost of 
XOF 235 /kWh for isolated groups (from private operators' generating park) supplying some villages far from the 
electricity grid.  
 Financial viability for operators  
 Based on these assumptions, and considering the private operators’ contribution being  20% of the assets value , the 
project IRR at an electricity price of XOF 156/kWh would be 18%.  
 
Economic analysis of the project  
 Methodology and assumptions  
 The criteria used for economic appraisal of the project is the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) determined according to 
the economic costs and benefits method. It has been retained that the economic costs are equal to 85% of the financial 
costs to take into account the transfers contained in the costs excluding taxes. The assumptions for computing the 
economic benefits are same as those set out in the project financial appraisal. However, for eco nomic analysis, the 
cost used is 85% of the total investment cost.  
 
Economic Rate of Return  
 
Based on the above assumptions, the project's economic rate  of return, presented in Annex Excel spread sheet , is


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 63 
 
 E 
16.61 %. 
 
Sensitivity tests  
 The sensitivity test of the project is based on assumptions of a 10% increase in investment costs, a 10% decrease in 
benefits and a one- year delay in project execution. The results are as follows:  
  
 Project  10% increase in 
investment costs  10% decrease in ben efits a one -year delay in 
project execution  
ERR  16.61 % 16.00% 15.82% 15.98% 
 
 
The appraisal shows that the ERR is appreciably high, which confirms the economic viability of the project. However, the AER -Mali will have to ensure that deadlines are 
respected when executing the project and the Consulting 
Engineer ing Firm  and companies are recruited on time in order to guarantee the beneficiary populations all the benefits 
thereof.  
 
Financial viability for operators  
The government is the borrower of GCF proceeds and will use the proceeds as  80% subsidies  to the mini -grids, through 
construction. Private sectors operators will be selected based on 20% equity contribution. The financial analysis gives a return of 18%  to the operators, based o n their 20% expected contribution.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
 
A solar photovoltaic (PV) micro -plant comprises four large parts; namely: i) the solar field; ii) the storage system; (iii) 
the regulatory system;  and iv) the conversion system.  
 Regarding the solar field, there are four (04) types of solar panels: flexible, amorphous, monocrystalline and poly -
crystalline.  
 
- Flexible solar panels: These panels are designed for so- called nomadic applications: to charge mobile devices, 
camp ing, hiking, boating. The average yield is about 9%;  
- The amorphous solar panels: These panels have the palm of the report quality / price;  they work very well even with 
a weak luminosity. The average yield is about 7%;  
- Monocrystalline solar panels: These panels are currently the most on the photovoltaic market, they are real generators 
of energy by any time. The aver age yield is between 18 and 21% ; 
 
- Polycrystalline solar panels: These panels are used when direct sunlight is guaranteed, they are generally used to 
create large photovoltaic plants. The average yield is about 15% to 18%.  
 The tender will look for crystalline panels.  
 
As far as storage is concerned, there are several types of batteries, the main ones being acid lead, nickel- cadmium 
and Silicuim batteries.
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 63 
 
 E 
  
(a) Total project financing  EUR 3 4.25 million  
(b) Requested GCF amount  EUR  25 .97 million   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  821,782 tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  EUR 41.7 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c)  EUR  31.6/ tCO 2eq 
 
By the end of the project, 224,776 MWh  will have been consumed, or 8 991 M Wh per year over the 
expected life of 25 years of equipment. This scenario does not include any allocation for additional mini -
grids that could be installed over the life of the project taking advantage of the momentum created by the 
project.  
 Thus, in the f ramework of the hypothesis of a strong interest aroused for the solar -based mini -grids for 
rural electrification in connection with the execution of the projects and taking into account the favorable environment for the investment that the project will hav e created, it is highly likely that more mini -grids of 
this type will be built during the 10- year period after the project, exceeding several times the number 
installed during the project implementation period. This is especially true given the donor's int erest in 
promoting scaling up in the event of successful results under this project.  
 
Thus, indirect emission reduction estimates after the project, based on the conservative scenario of the 
status quo and a causal factor of 80% considering 10,000 villages to be electrified in Mali, may be of the 
order of magnitude 
117 397 359 tonnes of CO 2 avoided.  In total, the project will have contributed to 118 424 
586 tonnes of CO 2 avoided.  
 
The project is considered to be highly cost -effective, providing 1  027 227 tCO2e q of emission reductions  
and 821,782  tCO 2eq for tranche 1 at a cost to the GCF of EUR  31.6/tCO2e q. This is considerably lower 
than the social cost of carbon estimated as approximately USD 40.  
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 63 
 
 E 
Component   Tranche 1  
Activity  Indicative cost  GCF funding  BOAD Co-financing  
 EUR EUR Financial 
instrument  EUR Financial 
instrument  
1. Capacity building of rural 
electrification institutions and 
Technical Assistance  Activity 1.1 Training, raising 
awareness of stakeholders 
and dissemination of project 
activities/results  164,645  164,645  
Grant    -  Activity 1.2 Communicating 
project results and lessons 
learned  164,645  164,645  
Activity 1.3 Capacity building 
of the Rural Electrification 
Fund (Fonds d’Electrification 
Rural -FER)  98,787  98,787  
Activity 1.4 Technical 
Assistance on regulatory 
framework and on 
Procurement and 
Contracting of minigrid 
construction and O&M 
companies  59,272  59,272  
2. Detailed Engineering and 
Installation of solar powered 
mini-grids  Activity 2.1 Preparation of 
detailed Engineering Studies  853,214  853,214  Grant    - 
Activity 2.2 Supply 
installation and 
commissioning of 
equipments  31,007,376  22,821,475  Loan  7,891,892  Loan  
Activity 2.3 Implementation 
of environmental and social 
measures  294,009  - - 294,009   
3. Support to Productive Use of 
Electricity  Activity 3.1 Financial 
guarantee  1,500,000  1,500,000  Loan    -  
Project Management Cost   404,269  306,575  Grant  97,694  Loan  
Indicative total cost   34,252,208  25,968,612    8,283,595    
 
The private sector will provide additional EUR 8.5 M at the whole project level and EUR 6.2 M for Tranche 1 as parallel financing, 
which corresponds to 20% of the investment for the installation of the minigrids.  
Actor  Amount  (EUR)  
GCF  25.9 M  
BOAD  8.3 M  
Private sector  
(Additional Parallel financing (20% of assets investment))  6.2 M  
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)   
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 63 
 
 F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Methodology and hypotheses   
  
The criterion used for the economic analysis of the project is the economic rate of return (ERR) determined according 
to the cost -benefit method. It has been assumed that the economic costs are equal to 85% of the financial costs to take 
into account the t ransfers contained in the pre- tax costs. The assumptions used to calculate the economic benefits are 
the same as those described in the financial analysis of the project. However, for the economic analysis, the cost is 
85% of the total cost of investments.   
Economic rate of return  
  
On the basis of the above assumptions, the economic rate of return of the project, presented in Annex 13, amounts to 16.61 %.  
 
Financial viability for operators  
The government is the borrower of GCF proceeds and will use the proceeds as 80% subsidies grant to the mini -grids, 
through construction. Private sectors operators will be selected based on 20% equity contribution. The financial analysis 
gives a return of 18% to the operators, based on their 20% expected contribution.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Component 2: Detailed Engineering and Installation of solar powered mini -grids  
For each of the localities selected, the acquisition, installation and commissioning of the following equipment: (i) 
autonomous solar power plants of 30, 50, 80 and 150 kWp power with storage systems; (ii) low and medium voltage 
networks of respective leng ths 5, 8, 10 and 12 km; (iii) 14,189 prepaid meters ; (iv) domestic electrical installations of 
households; (v) civil engineering of buildings; and (vi) 10 autonomous solar street lighting systems.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
The project is classified in Category B, according to the BOAD classification, as a project for installation and production 
of renewable energy . In practice, for projects with multiple sites and where the exact location of the sites is unknown,  
an ESMF is developped.  
 
Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts for each minigrid will be  determined during the project 
execution based on a screening process will be undertaken according to the guidelines provided in the ESMF . For such 
small scale minigrids, there is no need for a full y detailed ESIA, since the overall project is categorized medium risk (B).  
The sites of mini solar power plants will n ot affect protected areas and reserves because they will be located at the 
village level; and in general protected areas and reserves are far from  the villages.  Besides, t he project sites will be set 
up so as not to displace populations or destroy economic  assets.  The beneficiary communities will provide small sites 
in villages for small scale solar plants as their contribution to the project. There is no need for resettlement plan since 
there will be no resettlement. So PS5 will not be triggered. PS 7 does not appl y for there is no indigenous as defined 
by the World Bank Group’s policy, on which those of BOAD and GCF are based, in the project area. Furthermore, PS8 
does not apply too for activities related to such small isolated solar PV systems’ construction will not need great 
excavation and there will be no potential risk for cultural heritage degradation in beneficiaries’ communities.  
A simplified E&S analysis is sufficient as per BOAD ESS.  Required studies  (ESIA/analysis ) will be realized when 
specific site is identified before installation of the minigrids.  The ESIA documents for subprojects will be disclosed locally 
in the local administrative buildings (townhall, and local chief offices) .


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 63 
 
 F 
 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Gender Assessment and Action Plan  documents 
were prepared and are attached to this Funding Proposal and also published in both English and French under the 
links provided bellow as a Category B project:  
 
English:  
- Parent link to the document on BOAD web site:  
https://www.boad.org/en/environmental -and-social -assessments/  
- Direct link to the document on BOAD website:  
https://www.boad.org/wp- content/uploads/2016/10/ESMF_Report_Mali_EN.pdf   
French:  
- Parent link to the document on BOAD web site:  
https://www.boad.org/evaluations -environnementales -et-sociales/   
- Direct link to the document on BOAD website:  
https://www.boad.org/wp- content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport_CGES -PERS- Mali_FR2.pdf  
 
 A certification letter has been issued following the national validation of the ESMF which stands for the environmental 
permit. (Please see letter attached).  
 
Potential impacts  and risks  of the project  
 The major potential positive impacts of this type of project relate to i) the creation of jobs for the realization of the wor ks; 
(ii) improvement of land- use p lanning; (iii) development of rural entrepreneurship through access to electricity; (iv) 
improving the conditions of care in social structures (health centers, education, etc.); (v) improving the security of goods 
and people through public lighting; (vi) r eduction of greenhouse gas emissions per kWh produced; and (v) strengthening 
the resilience of populations to the adverse effects of climate change.  
 
Regarding gender aspects, access to electricity in rural areas will save time on domestic chores to which women are 
subjected, eg. thanks to the installation of electric mills, and electric water pumps. This time- saving can be devoted to 
the development of income- generating activities (IGAs) and the schooling of the girl, which will contribute to 
strengt hening women's empowerment and their participation in the country's development. In addition, the availability 
of electricity will improve the functioning of social services for women (eg ease of deliveries during the night), etc.  
 The main risks and poten tial negative impacts are related to the phase of the works: (A) on the biophysical environment, 
i) the deterioration of air quality and the pollution of soil and surface water; (ii) noise pollution caused by machinery 
traffic and site- level activities; ii i) the destruction of vegetation and wildlife habitats; and (iv) waste generation at 
worksites; (B) on the human environment; (i) the spread of STIs due to the arrival of foreigners in villages and 
unprotected sex; (ii) accidents during brushing, installat ion of equipment and drawing of power lines.  
 
During the operation phase of the project, there are risks of: i) accidents by electrocution of workers responsible for the 
maintenance of equipment and populations; (ii) fire related to the use of hydrocarbons  at the sites; and (iii) lack of  
management of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) from batteries and photovoltaic panels.  
 Mitigation measures for Project activities  
 
For the most part, the significant negative impacts can be greatly reduced with the application of (i) appropriate planning 
measures (good implementation and landscape integration of equipment); (ii) environmental and social clauses relating 
to safety, hygiene, the management of solid and liquid waste (batteries and used oils) during the construction and 
operation phases.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 63 
 
 F 
 
The coordination of the implementation of these measures will be the responsibility of the AER. To this end, under its 
Environmental and Soc ial Management System (ESMS), A ER will develop an appropriate policy, environmental and 
social guidelines, and will have an Environmental Specialist to lead the planning and environmental monitoring of 
projects. rural electrification. In the context of this project, the Environment Specialist will be resp onsible, among other 
things, for (i) support for the selection of sub- project sites in accordance with BOAD's land acquisition policy; (ii) the 
development of Terms of Reference (TORs) and the conduct of the consultant recruitment process for specific 
environmental assessments, as appropriate; (iii) monitoring the integration of the environmental and social clauses in 
the DAO, and the examination of the E & S aspects of the companies' offers; and (iv) coordinating the development of 
EHS manuals and organizi ng OSD training sessions in environmental monitoring and collaboration and monitoring the 
implementation of mitigation measures at the construction phase.  
 
As part of the environmental monitoring of the project, an agreement will be signed with the the Nat ional Directorate for 
National Directorate for Sanitation and Pollution Control (DNACPN) , and capacity building sessions will be organized 
for the different actors involved in the project.  
  
Gender considerations  
The project is linked to national and inter national framework documents and policies for the promotion of gender 
equality. the national gender policy and the SDGs provide for an important place for the implementation of projects in 
the field of energy and solar energy as a means of promoting gender  equality . as well, gender is mainstreamed in 
particular project context analysis, objectives and results definition, activities and indicators determination. In this case, 
women and men are part of the project implementation. In the impact analysis, women and men are equaly addressed 
and it shows that the project will have positive impacts for both women and men. Among the positive impact s, there 
are (i) the increase in socio- economic activi ties, the improvement of the health and hygiene conditions of local 
populations; (ii) the improvement of living conditions and the comfort of local populations; (iii) improving the permanent 
supply of drinking water to the population, (iv) the reduction of  women's labour, (v) the improvement of the literacy rate, 
etc. To alleviate potential  negative impacts, measures have been taken to benefit men and women. Above all, a gender 
action plan has been draft to higlight gender consideration in the project. The purpose of this gender action plan is to 
mitigate gender risks and constraints and to operationalize opportunities for women and men identified during the 
gender analysis. Base on a participative diagnostic, t he plan includes (i) gender -responsive actions that address and 
strengthen the voice and agency  of vulnerable women and men in climate action; (ii) gender performance indicators 
and sex -disaggregated targets that can be incorporated into a results framework; and (iii) presentation of gender -
responsive development impacts.  Consultations to date with stakeholders such as the EAR, AMADER, local authorities 
and beneficiaries have revealed the needs and priorities of men and women in the renewable energy sector, and the 
way in which whose project will respond to it. These elements are taken in consideration in priority as actions and 
presented in the gender analysis; and it is on this that actions have been proposed jointly with beneficiaries  in view of 
a greater relevance of these  actions proposed in this pl an. These actions are concretely related to (i) Stakeholders' 
Institutional and organizational governance capacity strengthening, (ii) Improving rural women accessibility to off -
grid/mini grid mode based on renewable energies (solar PV, wind), (iii) Suppor ting beneficiary communities, and (iv) 
Communication and capitalization on gender best practices and approaches in gender mainstreaming and scaling up.  
At the end of the project implementation, a capitalization study will show results, changes , impacts, good approaches  
and best pratic es in gender promoting in energy and solar domain.  The gender focal point of AMADER is chosen as 
the gender staff to be part of the implementing staff to ensure gender mainstreaming during the implementation, 
reporting, evaluation, and to take the lead on all the works. This gender staff will have the technical assistance of the 
AE gender Expert in this work.  
 
The gender action plan in annex gives more information on gender considerations in the project.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 63 
 
 F 
The provision of the BOAD loan will be made either by direct payment to the suppliers (BOAD / I procedure), according 
to the schedule of payment provided for in the contract and at the express request of the Borrower, or on 
reimbursement of the expenses made according to the BOAD / II procedure.  
 
Goods, and services financed from the GCF loans and the BOAD Loan will be acquired by:  
 
- limited consultation after expression of interest for sub- components "Training, awareness raising and dissemination 
of knowledge", "RMF capacity building" and the "Financial mechanism to support the rural electrification market", 
component  
 
- international call for tenders for the components "setting up an equipment control system", "supplies, installation 
and commissioning of equipment";  
 
- open consultation on a UEMOA scale of specialized design offices for the realization of the sub- components 
"control and inspection of works", "Technical and financial audit of the project;  
 - National call for tenders for the "Environmental and Social Measures" components and the "Procurement of 03 
vehicles" for the "Project Management" component;  
 
- direct agreement with AMADER for monitoring the implementation of the ESMP of the "Environmental and Social 
Measures" sub- component;  
 
Procurement
 
To ensure that financing is applied in ways that adequately secure the BOAD ’s mandate while maximizing development  
effectiveness, the Bank encourages and promotes sound, fair, transparent and well performing procurement systems.  
 
BOAD’s Guidelines for procurement of consultancy services financed by a loan or advance of funds  (2016);  and 
Guidelines for the award of works contracts, goods and services (other than consultancy services) (2016) will be applied 
to the project’s procurement . 
 
The bank will conduct an analysis of the procurement files and give its no objection.  
 
AML /FT Due diligence  
 
As part of the prevention and fight against money laundering, BOAD has developed a Financial Security Policy (2016). This internal document constitutes the general framework of the control system covering all of BOAD's activities relating 
to the prevention, surveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks.  
 
BOAD's Financial Security Policy is inspired by the international standards defined by the United Nations through its 
specialized structures, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) whose recommendations are issued by the Groupement d ' International Financial Action (FATF) and provisions of Directive 02/2015 / CM / 
UEMOA of 02 July 2015 on the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing in the Member States of the 
Economic and Monetary Union. West African currency ("WAEMU Directive").  
 
The policy r equires  to disclose information about its clients' transactions to the relevant authorities in cases where 
international rules and local law require regulated financial institutions to do so, including with respect to against money 
laundering.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 63 
 
 F 
Under its  due diligence, the Bank will assess  civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists. The Bank 
conducts also administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coercion, collisions and i nconvenient practices, and 
make  use of the relevant  national authorities for the necessary criminal investigations.  
 
The Bank integrates measures to combat illicit financial flows, the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing in the internal operations of the Bank Group.  
 In the context of this project, concerning ALM/FT, the concerned stakeholder will:  
 
- ensure that the funds financing the Project are not of illicit origin and in particular are not related to fraud against Mali 's 
financial interests, corruption, organized criminal activities , terrorism or drug trafficking; and  
 
- forward to the Bank without delay any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in 
the company and in the Project;  
 
- notify the Bank without delay if it has known at any time of any information indicating the illicit origin of all or part of 
the funds of the structure;  
 
- will not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on the lists established by the  
United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the 
European Union in application of its Common Positions and / or by the African Union as well as any other relative or 
complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof i n connection with the fight against the Laundering of 
Capital and the financing of terrorism.  
 
AUDIT 
Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of Projects. The 
Financial Agreement with Mali will requi re the submission of Audited Financial Statements to BOAD  within six months 
after each year -end. An independent external auditor  will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable to the 
Bank (not later than four months after effectiveness)  for the entire duration of the project. The Financial Statements will 
be audited in accordance with international auditing standards.  
 
BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, comments, and recommendations for improvements 
in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants  in the Financial Agreements. The 
cost of the audit will be met from project resources . 
 
BOAD  will ensure KYC standard due diligence process including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of 
sponsors is followed thoroughly .


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 63 
 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent t he 
project/programme objectives from being achieved.  Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
 
Construction risk: Failure in the installation of 
equipments of the mini -grid plants  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be mitigated by applying best practices in the selection process.  Indeed, t his risk is mitigated by the 
arrangements made for the choice of high- performance companies and the quality of the technical teams of the AER, 
supported by the Consulting Engineers' offices, which have proven references for the control and supervision of s imilar 
works.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Environmental and social risk (site- specific)  
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project has been developed and submitted . 
All sub -projects will be assessed according to the relevant BOAD policies, and an environmental and social action 
plan (ESAP) will be dev eloped during the implementation of the project. The project ESAP will be an integral part of 
the required agreement with the project developers. BOAD will apply its highest standards in the screening and G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
The main risks identified are related to the failure that could occur in the realization, project management and operation 
of equipment to be acquired under the project.  
 Risks in a project could be determined at a planning stage or during project implementation. However so, the 
foresee risks seems modest and could be managed through preventive measures and complementary BOAD 
programs such as  
1. Construction risk:  Failure in the installation of equipments of the mini -grid plants . This will be mitigated by 
applying best practices in the selection process.  
2. Environmental and social risk (site- specific) : This is mitigated as described in the ESS report.  
3. Operating and maintenance Risk : This will be mitigated by the choice of quality equipments at construction  
4. Regulatory Risk:  This is mitigated by implementation of component 1 Technical Assistance activities  
5. Currency exchange Risk : this is mitigated since by allowing 20% deposit in local currencies  
6. Country  security Risk


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 63 
 
 
 G 
managing of E&S related issues. The framework targe ts only small -scale projects and the sites will be multi -location, 
which will reduce the overall E&S risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Operating and maintenance Risk   
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The operation and maintenance of a solar based mini -grid systems is relatively simple as it consists of cleaning, 
regular inspections, minor repairs and measurements, data verification, reporting and site security. The Project 
benefits from a 1 5-year Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Agreement. A performance bond will be made available by 
the operator for failure of the plant to achieve performance guarantee.  Furthermore, t his risk will be mitigated by the 
choice of quality equipments at construction.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
 
Regulatory Risk   
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
This is mitigated by implementation of component 1 Technical Assistance activities.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Currency exchange Risk : 
Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Project financing will be in EUR. This risk is therefore mitigated given the stowage of the EUR to the XOF.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Country  security Risk  
 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 63 
 
 
 G 
The security situation which used to be fragile has improved. Despite a difficult security past, medium term 
macroeconomic prospects are good with overall growth forecast of 5% in 2017. This important factors can positively 
contribute to a consolidation of Mali political situation and secure stability in future. In fact it is expected that with the secure and wider access to clean energy services, economic activities will further emerge and the society feeling much 
safer.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that  have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management F ramework . 
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level6 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The project intends to contribute to the reduction of Mali’s chronic electricity deficit which will 
result in reducing energy -related CO2 emissions by introducing photovoltaics (PV). At the 
same time, it will enhance the access to clean energy in rural and remote households, 
specifically in the 70 villages targeted.  
In addition, the project will develop local capacities  to identify technical and financing options 
and to formulate the regulatory , financial and marketing instruments necessary to 
demonstrate the technical, economic, and financial viability of using the private sector as a 
vehicle to deliver basic electricity services.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation M1.0 
Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  
 
 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(t CO2eq) reduced 
or avoided as a 
result of the funding of Projects/programs  
(main indicator)  Annual CO2 
performance 
monitoring 
reporting and 
validation  
 0 821,782 
tCO2eq  
  821,782 
tCO2eq  CO2        emission 
reduction        was 
based on the most 
conservative calculations     and 
data              using 
international  
default values. CO2 emission 
reduction could be  
increased if local 
data will be 
available.  
                                                             
6 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-
_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef -7c87- 475f-809e -4ebf1acbb3f4


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
 
Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund 
funding (funding 
leverage factor)  
 Project 
management 
report  
  
0  
EUR 
5,98 M  
EUR 19,92 M We assume that 
private sector will  
participate in the 
project  
Cost per tCO2 eq 
decreased 
 
 Annua l    
CO2 
performance 
moni toring 
report ing  
and 
valida tion 0 EUR 
31.6/t 
CO2eq   EUR 
31.6/t 
CO2eq


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)  Final  
Project/program  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission  
power suppliers   
 6.2 Number 
of 
Households 
and 
individuals 
(males and  
females) with 
improved 
access to 
low- emission 
energy 
sources  Project 
management 
Report, 
household 
surveys, Malian  
Agency for the 
Development of 
Domestic Energy 
and Rural 
Electrification 
(AMADER)  report   0 At least 
283,777 
people directly 
benefit [of 
which  
50% are 
female]  At least 
283,777 
people 
directly 
benefit [of 
which  
50% are 
female]   Households 
are aware of 
the climate 
change; 
Households 
have the 
capacity to 
pay;  
households 
are sensitized 
about using 
clean energy  
6.3 MWs of 
low- 
emission 
energy 
capacity 
installed, 
generated 
and/or 
rehabilitated 
as a result of 
GCF support   Utility company 
(EDM) report; 
AMADER report  0 3,78 MWp  
 3,78 MWp  
Private 
enterprises are 
interested in 
investing in the 
sector  
M5.0 
Strengt hened 
policy     and 
regul atory 
framework, 
regulation of 
tarrifs  5.1 
Institutional  
and 
regul atory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for 
low e mission 
planning and 
devel opment 
and their 
effective 
implementati
on National 
Energy 
Stategy 
and policy 
documents, 
EDM and 
AMADER 
annual 
reports  National 
Energy Sector 
Policy 2006 
does not take 
into account 
regulation 
regarding 
climate 
change 
challenges  Reinforcement 
of existing 
2006 policy 
taking into 
account 
climate  
change issues  Climate 
change 
issues are 
addressed in 
all energy 
policies and 
enforced in 
projects 
implemented 
in Mali  Political 
willingness to 
implement 
policies and 
regulations


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
Project/program 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.   Strengthened 
Rural Energy 
Regul atory 
Agenc y  Functional 
rural 
electrification 
Agency with 
trained 
agents in 
legal matters (concession 
contracts), 
technical 
aspects (tariff 
methodology
), supervision of the sector 
(monitoring 
and 
evaluating 
the project)   AMADER report , 
project report.    Regulatory 
agency exist s 
but need 
capacity 
reinforcement   Legislation 
and  
regul ations to 
encourage 
clean energy 
use and  
facilitate 
private sector 
involment  in 
place  Fully 
functional 
rural 
electrification 
agenc y in 
place and 
produces 
contracts 
and 
supervision 
reports in 
line with 
industry 
standards  Investment 
targets are 
achieved, less 
turnover and 
higher 
retention rate 
of trained 
agents  
2.   Rural       
localities 
electrified with 
solar PV power 
plant  Number of 
Isolated solar 
PV installed  
Number of 
Localities  
benefiting 
from PV 
installations 
in the project 
site 
MW 
produced by 
installed 
solar plants  Household 
survey s,  
Installation project 
reports and end of 
Project execution  0 50 number of 
installed solar 
PV plants 
installed  
50 localit ies 
benefiting from 
power supply  
from project 
financed solar 
plants  
 3,78 MW 
clean energy 
generated by 
project 
financed solar 
plants  50 number of 
installed 
solar PV 
plants 
installed  
50 localit ies 
benefiting 
from power 
supply  from 
project 
financed 
solar plants  
 3,78 MW 
clean energy 
generated by 
project 
financed 
solar plants  Investm ent 
targets are 
achieved,  
Government 
willingness to 
electrifie rural 
localities with 
clean source 
energy  
 
3. Increased 
access to clean 
energy by 
hous eholds     
and for 
product ive use Number of 
households 
connec ted to 
the clean 
solar energy  
Proportion of connected 
households 
benefiting Household 
surveys 
Evaluation of development 
result, audit 
report, private 
sector structures 
reports  0 28,378  
households 
connected of 
which  
10% of 
connected 
households 
have access to 
financial 28,378  
households 
connected of 
which  
10% of 
connected 
households 
have access 
to financial Mali 
government 
willingness to 
reduce GHG 
emissions in 
the energy 
sector


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
due to 
access  to 
credit under  
financial 
mechanism 
(guarantee 
scheme)  for  
productive 
use of clean 
energy  mechanism 
(guarantee 
scheme)   mechanism 
(guarantee 
scheme)   
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1 Training, 
raising awareness 
of stakeholders 
and dissemination 
of project 
activities/results  1.1.1 - organizing dissemination 
workshops on potential actions to be implemented in order to 
achieve the objectives of the NDC 
in the field of energy  
1.1.2 - organizing specialized 
training sessions for designated executives of DNE, AMADER and AER-Mali 
1.1.3 -developing and 
disseminating public awareness 
material on climate change and 
NDC in the energy sector.  Consultanc y services   Consultancy services will be 
required to organize 
sensitization and information 
dissemination workshops and 
train target beneficiaries  
1.2 Communicati ng 
project results 
and lessons 
learned  1.2.1: - Developing a 
communication and raising 
awareness/promotion plan for 
national (and international) 
investors and production of 
materials (including videos)  
1.2.2 - Organizing information 
sessions wit h investors who are 
already active in the energy/renewable energy sector  
1.2.3 - organizing mid- term and 
end-of-project workshops for 
national institutions (DNE, AMADER, AER -Mali, FER) to 
ensure monitoring and document the project experience  Consultancy services  Consultancy services will be 
required to develop 
communication and awareness 
raising plan, produce related 
materials and organize 
sensitization sessions as  well 
as project  workshops with 
relevant stakeholders  and 
agencies   
1.3 Capacity 
building of the 
Rural 
Electrification 
Fund (Fonds 1.3.1: - Drafting of organisational 
and operational legal provisions as part of a reform of the FER  
1.3.2 - TA for recruitment of a 
dedicated staff  Consultancy services  Consultancy services will be 
required to build and train staff, 
draft organizational and 
ooperational legal provisions, 
etc


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
 
Most of mid -term data are not applicable to the project because if we refer to the timetable c.8. the project will be completed in the fourth 
year. Therefore, the key deliverables will be available at the end. However, there will be a mid- term evaluation that will allow to monitor 
the progress of the implementation. In the mi -term, other important activities will be implemented such as tender & selection of construction 
companies. But there will not be PV power plant installed yet.  
 
 
 d’Electrification 
Rural -FER)  1.3.3 - Capacity building of the 
FER staff  
1.4 Providing 
Technical 
Assistance on 
procurement  and 
contracting of 
mini- grid 
construction and 
O&M companies  1.4.1 - TA - writing of standard 
contract for 15 years O&M and 
the procedures that set the 
relations between AMADER and 
O&M companies   
1.4.2 - Tender processes and 
selection of construction 
companies and O&M companies 
that will operate the mini -grids.  Consultancy services  
PMU  Staff time  Consultancy services and staff 
time will be required to support 
the procurement and 
contracting construction and 
O&M companies   
2.1 Preparation of 
detailed 
Engineering 
Studies  2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering 
studies & Specific environmental 
and social analysis for each site  Consultancy services  Consultancy services will be 
required to support site 
section, preparation of 
engineeding and 
environmental studies and 
analysis for each site  
2.2: Supply , 
installation and 
commissioning of 
equipment  2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants 
construction and minigrid deployment  Consultancy services  
Goods  
Works  Consultancy services, 
equipment and construction 
works will be needed to install 
Solar Mini -grids  
2.3:  
Implementation of 
Environmental 
and social 
measures  2.3.1 - Project  impact mitigation 
and improvement activities as per 
the ESMF  Consultancy services  
PMU Staff  time Consulta ncy services and 
works  and PMU staff  will be 
needed to mitgat e and ensure 
compliance with ESMS 
standards  
3.1 
Operationalisation of Financial 
guarantee facility  3.1.1 - Implementation  of Financial 
guarantee activities   
staff time  Staff time  will be neede d 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Monitoring of the project  
As with all projects supported by BOAD, this intervention will be monitored by BOAD project management team as per 
the relevant internal policies and procedures. As the accredited executing agency, BOAD will be respons ible for 
supervising the monitoring activities, implementation conditions and reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to 
be defined by GCF and BOAD. The project progress will be monitored by the responsible of M&E of the Project 
Management Team based in Mali.  
 
The present project will comply with the BOAD appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision standards and procedures


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 63 
 
 
 H 
 involving all relevant teams (engineer, financial analyst, procurement expert, E&S specialist, climate finance specialist,  
financial management officer, and monitoring specialist). The implementation and monitoring of each stage of the project 
will be guided and managed by the BOAD project cycle management framework. The Division in charge of Climate finance will perform due 
diligence, implementation monitoring, risk monitoring and mitigation. For that purpose, the 
Division in charge of finance climate assisted by the Department in charge of Monitoring and Evaluation will be working 
closely with the project management team bas ed in Mali in order to monitor the progress of each component of the 
Project.  
 
Reporting  
Reporting of project management team based in Mali to BOAD will be in line with the standard loan agreement, and the 
BOAD will conduct a by -annual supervision.  
 
Report ing of the BOAD to GCF: The BOAD will comply with the relevant GCF policies in reporting and evaluation 
arrangements for this framework. The BOAD will provide the annual performance report (APR) to the GCF during the four-year implementation period. In addition, during the sub- loan lifetime, semi - annual activity report on the status of the 
GCF -financed individual sub- projects will be provided.  
 
In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA, inception report, mid- term and final evaluation reports, and 
financial information reports (semi -annually throughout the life of the loan) will be submitted.  
 
Evaluation  
The evaluation arrangements for this framework will comply with the related BOAD and GCF policies. A formative 
evaluation  will be carried out by the BOAD ’s project management team that is composed of (engineers, lawyers, project 
finance specialists, procurement experts, E&S specialists, climate finance officers, supervision and monitoring 
specialists). The final evaluation i s conducted 06 months after the reception of the project achievement report.  
 
After two to five years of closing, the project will undergo ex -post evaluation that is guided by internationally accepted 
principles for the evaluation of development assistanc e, in particular, the Organization for Economic Co- operation, and 
Development Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) evaluation guiding principles, and the good- practice standards.  
 
Budget  
The monitoring and evaluation budget, estimated at EUR 41 161, will be used to conduct monitoring and evaluation activities related to indicator collection and impact evaluation activities.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 63 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility S tudy 
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
 (If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation R eport  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 68*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 69*
---

Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Mali solar rural electrification project  
Accredited entity  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Specific  project  location or 
target countr y/ies of the 
programme , as the case 
may be  Mali ( Kayes, Koulikoro, Sikas so, Segou, Mopti and Tombouctou)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2019 -01-22 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Link to disclosure  English :  
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/ESMF_Report_Mali_EN.pdf  
Fr
ench : 
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport_CGES -PERS -Mali_FR2.pdf  
The Environmental and Social Management Framework ( ESMF) 
contains a preliminary characterization of environmental and 
social risks and impacts which is consistent with the 
requirements for category B project s.  
Other link(s)  English :  
https://www.boad.org/en/environmental -and-social -
assessments/  
Fr
ench : 
https://www.boad.org/evaluati ons-environnementales -et-
sociales/  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2019 -01-22 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and French  
Link to disclosure  English :  
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/ESMF_Report_Mali_EN.pdf  
Fr
ench : 
https://www.boad.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport_CGES -PERS -Mali_FR2.pdf  
The ESMF contains a preliminary ES MP which is consistent with 
the requirements of Category B projects.


---
*Page 70*
---

Other link(s)  English :  
https://www.boad.org/en/environmental -and-social -
assessments/  
 
French : 
https://www.boad.org/evaluations -environnementales -et-
sociales/  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)   
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  
Date  2019 -01-22 
Place  The documentation is published on BOAD website , and  made 
available in hard copies  at BOAD HQ in Togo, and also in Mali in  
locations  that are accessible for the affected people, especially  
BOAD Representative Office, Agence des Energies Renouvelables  
(AER -Mali ), Direction Nationale de l'Assainissement du Contrôle 
des Pollutions et des Nuisances (DNACPN -Mali) in Bamako and at 
regional level within Regional Directorate for environmental 
affairs ( Direction Régionale de l'Assainissement du Contrôle des 
Pollutions et des Nuisances -DRACPN)   
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
________


---
*Page 71*
---

G
CF/B.22/10/Add.04 
Page 71 
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP102  
Proposal name:  Mali solar rural electrification project  
Accredited entity:  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
Country/(ies) : Mali 
Project/programme size : Medium 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project proposes an innovative approach , 
public -private partnerships, to address the 
barriers for renewable -based , mini- grid 
investments in Mali. If successful, this could 
be duplicated across the whole country and 
many other  least developed countries  The productive use guarantee facility  for 
local microloans will be  established from 
sovereign loan proceeds, leading to a 
repayment obligation  by the country . While 
this model is more stringent for the country 
than a direct guarantee from GCF, the model  
is requested by the accredited entity and 
buil ds on its own experience in the region for 
similar schemes 
The project targets a least developed country , 
Mali, that is vulnerable to climate change and has one of the lowest rural electricity access 
rates in Africa  The private sector  will invest 20 % of their 
own equity and will have the operation and maintenance  rights and revenue collection 
rights over 15 -year  concessions while the 
ownership of the assets remain s with the 
government . This dual arrangement usually 
results in reduced quality of service towards 
the end of the concession arrangement s. The 
Government of Mali, through the regulatory 
agency , will need to be more vigilant on 
technical regula tion, especially towards the 
end of the concession agreements  
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement is 
a direct a ccess entity that has never accessed 
GCF project resources before despite  
abundant  expe rience in the renewable sector 
in the region  
The project unlocks private sector 
investment with a private sector project 
equity contribution (20%) while enhancing 
sustainability with operation and


---
*Page 72*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 72 
 
 
maintenance also being covered by private 
sector  operators  
Revenue collection on the mini -grids will 
take a levy to be paid to the Rural 
Electrification Fund  on each kilowatt hour 
delivered . The proceeds from this levy  will be 
used for other renewable energy mini -grids 
or refurbishments of the assets , which will 
remain under government ownership   
The end users tariff is ca pped at 174 African 
Financial Community (CFA)  francs per 
kilowatt hour  and remains within the 
communities’  ability to pay while country 
ownership is strongly demonstrated with 
capital expenditure financing being based on 
a sovereign debt   
2. The Board may  wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVI,  title d “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background   
3. Mali is a landlocked least developed country  (LDC)  in the Sahel belt of West Africa.  The 
rate of access to electricity in rural areas is  estimated at only 19  per cent . It is very unlikely that 
a significant proportion of the low -income population living in isolated areas will be connected 
to the national electricity network  in the next  decade . Even if they c ould be connected, about 80  
per cent  of Mali’s main grid power generation relies on fossil fuel while the majority of the rest  
is based on hydro , which is declining due to drying rivers. At the moment, 96  per cent  of the 
operational min i-grids in rural areas are diesel  based, thus highly dependent on imported fossil 
fuels and global price volatility. Despite the immense potential of solar resources in Mali, they  
represent only 3  per cent  of electricity production. Their  development remai ns slow due to 
various financial and technical barriers, among which is  the high upfront investment cost, 
inadequate financial incentives to attract the private sector, and weak institutional planning 
capacity.  
4. The main objective of this project is to promote rural electrification through isolated 
solar photovoltaic (PV) green mini -grid systems  as a low -carbon and resilient solution to the 
effects of climate change in the energy sector of Mali. This would be achi eved by strengthening 
the capacity of relevant public institutions engaged in rural electrification ; (ii) increasing the 
rural populations’ access to electricity in 70 communities (50 communities in tranche 1) 
through installation of isolated solar PV mini -grid systems; and (iii) a guarantee facility to 
promote increased access to financial services for productive energy users in rural areas.  
5. The full project cost is EUR 46.2  million, comprising  EUR 34  million as a loan and EUR 
1.6 million in grants reques ted from GCF. Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement ( BOAD ), 
the accredited entity ( AE), will also contribute EUR 10. 6 million in the form of loan. The AE has


---
*Page 73*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 73 
 
 
proposed a two-tranche approach to finance this project  to adapt the commitment authority  of 
GCF . For tranche 1, 50 out of the 70 identified localities would be financed to install the PV mini -
grid s, of which EUR 24.3 million would be a  loan and 1.6  million a grant from GCF. The impact of 
tranche 1 will be 80  per cent  of the full proj ect’s impact.  
6. The environmental and social risk of this project falls under category B of the GCF 
accreditation framework . An environmental and social management framework  has been 
published by the AE 30 days prior  to GCF Board consideration as required for category B 
projects.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis   
Component 1 : Capacity- building of rural electrification institutions and t echnical assistance ( total  
cost : EUR 0.4 million, GCF  cost : EUR 0.4 million)  
7. This component aims to create an  enabling environment for the promotion of rural 
electrification from solar PV with the chosen model  that is inclusive of the private sector for  
investment and operation and maintenance ( O&M ) while allowing the public sector  to provide 
an adequate subsidy to keep the tariffs affordable. It includes three activities:  (i) capacity -
building for relevant institutions including the Malian Agency for the Development of Household 
Energy and Rural Electrific ation (AMADER ), Agence des Energies Renouvelables ( AER ), and the 
Rural Electrification Fund; (ii)  raising investor awareness and disseminat ing project activities 
and results ; and (iii) providing technical assistance for the tender process  for the selection  of 
O&M companies that will operat e the mini -grids  and project implementation controls.  
8. The proposed activities are key to address ing weak institutional capacity and the 
implementation of this project. The full cost will be financed by a GCF grant of EUR 0.4 million.  
Component 2 : Detailed engineering and installation of 70 solar powered mini -grids  (50 mini -grids 
for tranche 1) (total  cost : EUR 43.9 million ( total tranche 1: EUR 31.9  million), GCF  cost : EUR 33.4  
million ( GCF contribution  to tranche 1: EUR 23.7  million )) 
9. This component will finance the installation of solar -based mini- grids ( power plants 
with battery storage and distribution infrastructure)  in 70 selected localities  (50 localities in 
tranche 1). The GCF concessional loan to the Government of Mali will  finance the installation of 
min i-grid system s, which will remain under  ownership of the Government of Mali while O&M 
contracts will be awarded to eligible private sector operators. With this model, the G overnment 
is subsidizing the infrastructure at construction to achieve tariff levels that  are within the rural 
areas ’ ability to pay.  The GCF loan to the Mali Government will be blend ed with the BOAD loan 
whose  proceeds are obtained by BOAD at market rate s. The level of  concessiona lity, which is 
applied by GCF , is mainly justified by the specific vulnerability situation of Mali as a n LDC , the 
use of a debt instrument instead of a grant, and the objectives of the project to keep  the 
electricity  tariff to affordable level s at EUR  0.26 per kilowatt hour ( kWh ), or 1 74 African 
Financial Community (CFA) francs (XAF) per kilowatt hour . 
10. The project is designed to be a public -led investment  due to the immature market for 
private sector involvement and the need to keep the level of affordability for  the end users. The 
financial analysis shows that at the targeted affordable tariff of 1 74 XAF, a subsidy of 80  per 
cent  is required to make a pos itive return , thus the requirement for a 20 per cent  contribution 
from the private sector . While  the Government keeps  the ownership of the built assets in the 
proposed model, concession agreement s to eligible private operators for operation and 
maintenance  will last 15 years and could be renewed in the event of satisfactory service. This 
model is deemed appropriate in the  specific case of Mali , where the electricity market requires a 
soft transition from purely public service to more involvement from the private sector  in the 
operations.


---
*Page 74*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 74 
 
 
11. Fifty out of the planned 70 localities would be covered in the first tranche,  achieving 
about 80  per cent of the impact. The carbon dioxide ( CO 2) abatement calculation used is a clean 
development mechanism  (CDM ) approach and  the assumptions on the percentage of users that 
will be on productive use, middle tranche or basic use are realistic.  
Component 3 : Support to productive use of electricity ( total  cost : EUR 1.5 million, GCF  cost : EUR 
1.5 million)  
12. A guarantee facility is proposed to address the issue of limited financial services for 
productive energy users in rural areas. The  productive users will usually have more  demands 
and their loads coincide  more with solar generation, hence they will serv e as immediate new 
income for mini -grid business es and will be critical for the long -term viability of mini- grids. 
However, productive -use appliances, like grain mills, irrigation and cold storage often come 
with high upfront cost. Surveys revealed that although some pro ducers ’ cooperatives are 
eligible for credit from financial institutions, they have trouble accessing credits due to the 
absence of adequate collateral. Financial service  providers  often request guarantees for lending 
to small institutions. This would be a ddressed by this project through setting up a financial 
guarantee mechanism that cover s part of the risk taken by the micro -finance institutions 
towards productive users, hence achieving greater sustainability for the GCF investment . 
13. The GCF concessional loan is requested to finance this facility. This means that this 
credit risk would be borne by the Government of Mali , a key detail that  shows the ownership 
and commitment of the government in developing this sector.  
Project Management Cost (total  cost:  EUR 0 .4 million, GCF  cost:  EUR 0.3 million ) 
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
14. The GCF investment is key to help ing Mali scale up investment in renewable energy, 
providing  successful  structuring of finance for this proje ct to address some of the barriers faced 
by private sector investors. Overall, the S ecretariat deems the anticipated performance of the 
project to be satisfactory in aligning with GCF investment criteria, especially in terms of the 
paradigm shift potential and cost effectiveness.  
3.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Medium /High  
15. The project is expected to result in direct emission s reduction of 41,089  tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq) annually (tranche 1  will result in reductions of  32,871  tCO 2 
per year), which works out  as 1,027,227  tCO 2eq in total over  the project’s lifetime. This is 
achieved through the switch  in energy demand from diesel generators , kerosene lamps, paraffin 
candles and other emitting sources  to solar mini -grid s in the selected communities. This figure 
does not take into account the potential of opening up the market of renewable energy mini -
grid s, which is vast in Mali.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                     Scale: High  
16.  The paradigm shift potential of this project is deemed high as it is an attempt to support 
a new model that includes both public and private efforts in  the mini- grid market in Mali. GCF 
financing is critical for allow ing the successful structuring of finan ce for this project while 
addressing some of the barriers faced by private sector investors. If successful, the relevant 
institutions, including the r enewable energy agency , AER , will be underpinned by an enabling 
environment that is equipped with  a streng thened capacity of national players, private sector 
awareness and interest in rural electrification and renewable energy  promotion. With the


---
*Page 75*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 75 
 
 
enhanced understanding of the renewable energy sector and potential profitability  for lending 
to rural electrificat ion operations , microfinance institution s are expected to continue providing 
finance to this sector. This is especially true in a country with vast mini -grid market potential 
such as Mali.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                            Scale: High  
17. By improving access to energy and microfinance, the localities will benefit from 
increased socio -economic activities, job creation, improvement of household income and 
creation of income -generating activities . The environmen tal benefits include reduction of air 
pollution , through the  replacement of diesel generators , and greenhouse gases. The project 
design also includes gender consideration s and makes efforts to provide equal access to GCF 
resources to all people, regardless  of gender , especially  in O&M, thus  ensuring gender 
mainstreaming in the energy development plans.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                           Scale: High  
18. Mali is an LDC country with a high poverty rate  and low electrification rate in rural 
areas , whi ch further exacerbates the climate vulnerability faced by the localities. Mali’s energy 
consumption is heavily dependent on the import ation  of fossil fuels, which is impacted by  price 
volatility . Even with its determination  to grow its  renewable energy sector , the Government has 
been struggling to mobilize the necessary financial resources. With a  high level of in debt edness  
and under  serious fiscal stress, the G overnment is not able  to borrow from financial institutions 
at market rates . GCF finance is cr itical for an attempt to develop  the country’s immature solar 
mini- grid and allow vulnerable communities to access affordable energy.  
3.5  Country ownership                          Scale: High  
19. With  the Ministry of Energy and Water as the executing entity  (EE)  and BOAD as the key 
partner, this integrated proposal is fully aligned with the national priorities and support s Mali’s 
goals detailed in its  national adaptation programme of action and nationally appropriate 
mitigation action , namely , reducing  greenhouse gas  emissions by 1,285,034 tCO 2eq per year 
through renewable energy production, and f isheries, energy and water resources as the most 
vulnerable sectors.  The proposed project also contr ibutes to several Sustainable Development 
Goals  (SDG),  espec ially  SDG 7 , affordable and clean energy, and SDG 11 , sustainable cities and 
communities. The country ownership is further eviden t in the strong commitment by the 
Government in this sector and in  their taking the full credit risk of the producers’ cooperat ives.  
20. BOAD, as a  direct access AE to GCF, has a wealth of experience working  in the energy 
sector in West African countries. The project design is a result of inputs from various 
stakeholders, including the concerned local elected representatives, civil society actors . local 
populations and the national designated authority . Finally,  almost the entire financing package 
is a loan to be repaid by the c ountry . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness     Scale: Medium/High  
21. A GCF high concessional loan with a sovereign guarantee is essential for ensuring 
financial adequacy and minimum concessionality. Operating costs will be covered  through 
revenue collection from power distribution  while the infrastructure will be financed t hrough 
the concessional loan and repaid by the Government of Mali. Given the G overnment’s ongoing 
economic and financial programme with the International Monetary Fund , Mali  is required to


---
*Page 76*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 76 
 
 
carefully  manage its debt and budget, and the country has requested  high concessionality to 
stay within these constraints. If lower concessionality were sought, the G overnment would not 
be able to take the loan, threatening  the viability of the project.  
22. The project demonstrates high cost effectiveness. The project has a cost of EUR 41.7  per 
tCO 2eq, which is lower than many global estimates of the social cost of carbon. The project also 
has an economic rate of return of 16.6 1 per cent, which a sensitivity analysis shows to be robust 
to variations in costs and benefits.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
23. Environmental and social risk category:  BOAD has assigned environmental and social 
risk category B to the project in accordance with the GCF environmental and soci al safeguards 
standards. The risk category is consistent with the BOAD environmental and social safeguards 
accreditation for carrying out funded activities that fall within the medium risk, including lower 
risk, category. The project’s impact is expected t o derive from the installation and operation of 
off-grid solar PV mini -grid systems. The sites for the mini- grid solar PV power plants will not be 
situated in or near protected areas and reserves since they will be located in villages and are not 
expected to have biodiversity concerns. The establishment of project sites will also avoid 
involuntary physical displacement of populations or negative impacts on economic activities. 
The environmental and/or social risks and impacts of the activities under the pro ject are 
predicted to have potentially limited adverse impacts, which are site- specific, largely reversible, 
and can be readily addressed through the implementation of generally accepted, good industry 
practices.  
24. Safeguard instrument and disclosure:  an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) has been prepared and submitted as the safeguards instrument for the 
project. The project will be implemented in multiple sites and the exact locations are as yet 
unknown. Once the scope and location of the  mini- grids are identified, a fit -for-purpose 
environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) in the form of a simplified environmental 
and social analysis will be conducted as per Mali’s national requirements, the BOAD 
environmental and social safeguard s requirement and GCF environmental and social safeguards 
standards. The site -specific ESIA documentation will be made available on the BOAD website, in 
various government offices, and in places that are accessible to the affected people, such as local 
adm inistrative buildings (e.g. the townhalls and local chief offices) in areas where the solar PV 
plants are situated. BOAD has disclosed the ESMF on its website in English and in French, at 
least 30 days in advance of the BOAD or GCF Board decision, whichever is earlier, to adhere to 
GCF disclosure requirements.   
25. Environmental and social risks and impacts and mitigation measures:  the project is 
expected to have positive impacts on socio -economic activities, an improvement on the health of 
the rural villagers , an increase in income sources and improvement of learning conditions for 
pupils. The project would also result in avoidance of traditional fossil fuel -based energy systems 
resulting in reduced greenhouse gas emissions and reduced cutting of timber for fu el-wood, 
among others.  
26. The main environmental and social impacts and risks of the project include those in 
relation to labour and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention, and 
community health, safety and security. No involuntary la nd acquisition and resettlement is 
expected since the project facilities will be installed in existing rights of way and in voluntarily 
provided small parcels of land (generally less than a hectare).  The project by design will also


---
*Page 77*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 77 
 
 
not be located in envir onmentally sensitive areas. Construction of the facilities will involve only 
minor excavation for installation of the solar PV plant and of the distribution lines.  
27. Construction related impacts on communities include potential generation of dust and 
nuisanc e noise. Workers may also be exposed to minor occupational safety hazards and risks 
that could result in injuries. These include physical impacts and hazards such as noise, vibration, 
electrical and eye hazards, working at heights, as well as potential che mical hazards as regards 
handling the battery and its components. Appropriate planning, safety training and use of personal protective equipment will greatly minimize, if not avoid, such potential risks and 
impacts.  
28. Risks and impacts during the operations phase include potential injury (electrocution or 
shock) to workers and the community as well as pollution caused by batteries and end -of-life 
solar PV panels. The project will largely mitigate these potential risks and impacts by: conducting appropriate occupational health and safety training of personnel; avoiding incidents 
and accidents; setting up limited public access and security protocol at the solar PV plants; 
raising public awareness in the community on safety of the solar PV plants; and the 
develop ment of an effective waste management plan for the battery and solar panels.  
29. No involuntary resettlement is expected to occur since beneficiary communities are 
expected to voluntarily provide the sites (of an area less than one hectare) in villages as a 
donation for the mini- grid solar PV power plant installation. Consultation with communities in 
selecting a consensual site free from disputes and conflicts will be undertaken and agreed upon and will exclude areas that would result in involuntary land acquis ition and resettlement. The 
project provides for the conduct of an inclusive stakeholder engagement, meaningful consultation and information disclosure for all members of the communities in an inclusive, 
culturally appropriate manner including vulnerable a nd marginalized groups and individuals.  
30. Institutional arrangements:  the project will comply with BOAD standards and 
procedures for appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision. It will conduct supervision 
monitoring and reporting on project activities a nd ensure the implementation of environmental 
measures in accordance with national requirements, as well as those of BOAD and of GCF.  
31. AER -Mali will carry out environmental and social screening, coordination and 
supervision at the national level of implementation and will ensure that the selected operators 
comply with environmental and social obligations. AER -Mali will coordinate with Agence 
Malienne de Développement de l’Energie Rurale (AMADER) and will forge an agreement as 
regards E&S matters. Project -level monitoring will be conducted by the E&S personnel of the 
solar PV plants. Additional monitoring and supervision of the project will be carried out by the Environmental and Social Safeguard Unit of AER -Mali while external monitoring will be 
provided by DRACPN and DNACPN. Institutional strengthening measures on environmental 
expertise of AER -Mali, AMADER and of private operators as well as in assisting in the conduct of 
environmental and social assessments and in the development of maintenance manuals, 
including those that relate to occupational health and safety will be carried out with support 
from the Environment and Sustainable Development Agency. An indicative training programme 
with the corresponding budget is included in the ESMF.  
32. Stakeholder engagement:  a participatory approach was implemented in the 
consultation with all stakeholders and partners involved in the project. The consultations 
provided a venue for the engagement and involvement of different actors and stakeholders in identifying the overall environmental and social impacts of project activities. Further 
stakeholder engagement at the site level will take place during the conduct of the environmental 
impact assessment. Such meetings will bring together the local authorities, residents, an d 
concerned organizations to identify the main issues and concerns and determine how these will 
be taken into account in conducting the assessment and in developing the management actions 
and plans.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 78 
 
 
33. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM):  the ESMF provides for a mechanism for 
complaint management and grievance settlement. At the plant level, a Complaint Management 
Unit will be set up and at the AER -Mali level, a Complaint Management Committee will be 
established. The mechanism also provides for procedures for filing and duration for resolution 
of concerns. Local communities and other interested stakeholders may likewise lodge their 
grievances with BOAD through its Compliance Division.  
4.2 Gender policy   
34. The proposal contains a gender assessment and the funding propos al therefore complies 
with the operational guidelines related to the GCF gender policy and action plan. The 
assessment recognizes women as the main users of energy in households for tasks such as 
cooking. Energy is mainly derived from biomass sources, and rural areas have less access to 
electricity than urban areas.  
35. Consultations conducted on the project by the AE identified the energy needs of women, 
some of which include access to a continuous supply of energy and the use of electrical 
equipment for inco me-generating activities. The project includes a component for supporting 
the productive use of electricity. This involves the provision of microfinance to access 
electricity -driven equipment to address some of the identified needs. It is encouraging to no te 
that the project will provide microfinance to local communities for the productive use of energy 
and to contribute to income -generating activities and capacity -building in business 
management. The AE is recommended to reduce loan requirements or interes t rates for women, 
if further assessments indicate that they have less access to credit and finance.  
36. The proposal also contains a gender action plan with activities aligned with the project’s 
components. Costs are also included in the gender action plan. The AE is advised to include its 
role in implementation of the gender action plan, in particular on monitoring and reporting. Key 
performance indicators have been included against each activity and some sex -disaggregated 
targets. Baseline information, whic h will be collected in the first quarter before the project 
commences implementation, will be used to update the gender analysis. It is advised that the AE 
should also use this information to rationalize sex -disaggregated targets in the gender action 
plan.  Furthermore, targets should be for both men and women to ensure that both benefit from 
the project.  
37. Targets are expected to be achieved by the estimated end date of the project. 
Additionally, the timelines for the implementation of activities in the gende r action plan are not 
mentioned. Whilst targets are expected to be achieved at the end of the project, some activity timelines are too stretched and can be achieved before the end of the project to allow for 
reporting on achievements as the project is impl emented.  
38. The proposal also contains a gender action plan with activities aligned with the project’s 
components. Costs are also included in the gender action plan. The AE is advised to include its 
role on the implementation of the gender action plan, in par ticular on monitoring and reporting. 
Key performance indicators have been included against each activity and some sex -
disaggregated targets. Baseline information, which will be collected in the first quarter before 
the project commences implementation, will be used to update the gender analysis. It is advised 
that the AE also us this information to rationalize sex -disaggregated targets in the gender action 
plan. Furthermore, targets should be for both men and women to ensure that the project 
benefits both.  
39. Targets are expected to be achieved by the estimated end date of the project. 
Additionally, the timelines for the implementation of activities in the gender action plan are not 
mentioned. Whilst targets are expected to be achieved at the end of the project , some activities’


---
*Page 79*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 79 
 
 
timelines are too stretched and can be achieve before the end of the project to allow for 
reporting on achievements as the project is implemented.  
4.3 Risks  
40. Overall proposal assessment ( medium risk):  
(a) The funding proposal is to increase the access to the electricity in 70 rural communities 
in Mali through installation of a solar -powered mini -grid with aggregated capacity 
estimated to 4.83  megawatts ( MW ). GCF is requested to provide a sovereign loan of E UR 
33.8 million and a grant of EUR  1.6 million. The AE is co -financing a loan of EUR  10.6 
million. The GCF loan will be blended with AE resources and used for installation of a 
mini- grid system at a lower interest rate. The G overnment of Mali is the borrow er and 
an owner of the assets. The concession agreements will be signed with the government 
and private sector operators for O&M;  
(b) Mali is an  LDC  and the key reason to seek GCF financing is to help the country to scale up 
investment in renewable energy. GCF financing is expected to help reduce the high cost 
related to the development of renewable energy projects ; and  
(c) The success of the project depends on the capacity of the AE and EE to select construction companies and O&M companies. In addition, the tariff (estimated around 
EUR  0.24/kWh) needs to be affordable to the user communities . The project includes 
the training and technical assistance for the tender and procurement process under 
component 1 and support for the productive use of electricity for communities’ 
affordability under component 3.  
41. AE/EE capability to execute the current programme ( medium risk):  
(a) BOAD, as a direct access AE, has been operating in the West African region for 40 years 
and has experience in financing solar -based rural electrification projects in Senegal, the 
Niger and Togo over the last three years. The AE has a team of engineers and specialists with relevant experti se for the implementation of the project and has been building a 
relevant track record in energy sector by managing an energy development fund . 
Although the AE doesn’t have  a track record of investment in mini- grid project s in Mali, 
the experience the AE h as gained from other countries in the region is expected to 
support the implementation of this project ; and  
(b) AER is the EE for this project. It will lead the construction (installation) of the mini -grids 
and carry out all associated procurement following BO AD procurement policies. It will 
also closely coordinate with AMADER, the government regulatory authority in charge of rural electrification. The EE has managed an average annual budget of USD 518,000.  
42. Programme -specific risks ( medium risk):  
(a) Construction and technical risk: the funding proposal  states that the risk of failure or 
delay in the installation of equipment of the mini -grid power plants can be mitigated by 
the engineering, procurement and construction ( EPC ) contract with fixed -price and 
timebound  conditions. In terms of the technical risk, the procurement of quality 
materials and using a proven technology will be critical. The funding proposal  indicates 
that these risks will be mitigated through a joint agreement between BOAD and an 
engineering fi rm in charge of implementing the project for the use of products that are 
compliant with a certain level of quality/certificate (e.g. Conformite EUR peenne).  The 
AE and EE are important  for overseeing  procedures and providing the technical 
assurance of the connections to the end users ;


---
*Page 80*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 80 
 
 
(b) O&M risk: AMADER will enter into a 15 -year concession agreement with private 
operators for the O&M. The private operators are expected to provide 20  per cent  equity 
contribution. The funding proposal  states th at the current regulatory framework allows 
concession agreements ; however, this was never operationalized at scale. A component 
of technical assistance in component 1 includes the writing of the standard concession 
agreement that will set the contractual r elations between AMADER and O&M operators ; 
(c) Use of transmission network: the project includes the construction of 124  kilometres  of 
electricity distribution network in addition to the installation of solar PV. The network 
may be used for the transmission of  non- renewable power generation along with the 
transmission of solar power. The funding proposal  states that AMADER, the regulatory 
authority , will ensure that the distribution is used for renewable energy sources ; 
(d) Credit risk and foreign exchange risk: th e loan to the G overnment will be provided and 
repaid in EUR . The funding proposal  states that the source of the repayment of the loan 
is the G overnment  treasury  and not from the cash flow to be generated from the project. 
Therefore, the G overnment will be partly exposed to currency fluctuation risk. Mali is an 
LDC ; however, the long tenor and concessional pricing of GCF financing and the 
preferred creditor status of the AE are expected to partially mitigate the credit risk ; 
(e) Tariff level s and ability to pay:  the funding proposal  mentions that a framework for the 
development of renewable energy , including setting up the feed -in tariffs and rural 
electricity tariff methodology , is not fully developed. The AE states that the G overnment 
is in the process of revising its regulatory framework. The tariff for the project will be 
around EUR 0.24/kWh and the end users will benefit from the concessionality of GCF 
through a lower electri city tariff. The funding proposal  indicates that there is a 
willingness to pay despite the low level of incomes in the project target area. However , a 
study on the affordability  of the suggested tariff is not provided ; and  
(f) Security concerns: the AE has identified security concerns as a risk due to the outbreaks 
of political violence. The funding proposal  states that Mali’s membership in  the West 
Africa Economic Monetary Union provides for relatively low exchange rates and transfer risk, and these can positi vely contribute to a consolidation of Mali’s political situation 
and secure stability in the future. An insurance cover (if available) can potentially 
minimize the loss of the equipment due to fragile security situation. The G overnment 
will play an importa nt role in  provid ing security support for the project.  
43. Project viability and concessionality  
(a) The viability of the project depends on the ability -to-pay of the end users and the 
possibility of attracting more private investment into the sector. Without GCF financing, 
the Government will have to take loans at market rates , which are costly considering it 
has a high fiscal deficit and has been struggling to mobilize the necessary financial 
resources. The AE and the G overnment  are requested to pass on GCF conce ssionality to 
end beneficiaries through a  reduced tariff.  
(b) The economic analysis is provided under the same assumptions for the financial analysis 
but with 85  per cent  of the financial costs,  considering  the transfers contained in the 
costs exclud e taxes. The analysis  provided  an internal rate of return  of 16.61  per cent . A 
sensitivity analysis has been carried out under different scenarios, a 10  per cent  
increase in investment costs, a 10  per cent  decrease in benefits and a one -year delay in 
project execution. The analysis shows the economic viability of the project resulting in  
an internal rate of return  of 16  per cent , 15.82  per cent  and 15.98  per cent , respectively.  
44. Compliance risk ( medium risk) : 
(a) This project presents an elevated level of money -laundering /terrorist financing 
(ML/TF) risk particularly in the context of component 3 in evaluation of private sector


---
*Page 81*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 81 
 
 
investors, microfinance institutions and end -user loan applications alike. In line with the 
AE anti -ML/TF due diligence and risk management  obligations , under the accreditation 
master agreement (AMA) , the AE is expected to ensure that GCF resources are robustly 
safeguarded against these risks. Accordingly, as per the funding proposal , the AE shall 
undertake ML/TF due diligence as a mandatory element of the funding eligibility criteria 
and take into account ML/TF and/or sanctions risk considerations throughout the 
project cycle. In addition, the funding proposal contains a description of the project -
specific measures proposed by the AE to evalu ate and effectively mitigate these risks as 
prescribed by its internal policies and procedures ; 
(b) A combination of the highlighted controls is expected to reduce the likelihood of ML/TF 
exposure ; and  
(c) Furthermore, compliance has conducted in-house enhanced due diligence on the key 
project stakeholders with satisfactory results.  
45. GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk):  
(a) In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result s area s and sing le proposal is not material.  
46. Conclusion:  
(a) It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  • GCF is requested to provide a sovereign 
loan to the Gov ernmen t of Mali  
• The concessionality of GCF financing is 
required to be passed on to the end 
beneficiaries  
• BOAD is t he accredited entity for the 
funding proposal and has preferred 
creditor status with the Gov ernmen t of 
Mali  Accredited entity /executing 
entity capability to implement 
this program me Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
47. The Ministry of Energy and Water will be the EE of the p roject . It has delegated 
execution of component 2 to the r enewable energy agency , AER. AER will manage the project 
and shall see to the programming, coordination, monitoring and supervision of all p roject 
activities.  
48. The AE, BOAD , has conducted technical and financial capacity assessments of the 
entities involved in the project as per the requirements of the AMA and in line with BOAD 
policies and procedures. BOAD deems the national entities involved  in the project to be capable 
of carrying out the execution and operation of the project component activities, under the  
assistance and support  of BOAD . 
49. A Project Management Unit shall be set up within AER -Mali and managed by a p roject 
coordinator , who sha ll be supported by nine  other experts. The Project Management Unit  will 
coordinate the conduct of technical studies, the preparation of tender and consultation 
documents, tender evaluations and procurement reports.  
50. The Government of Mali will be the borrow er and will take the credit risk through a 
sovereign guarantee. BOAD will monitor the progress implementation based on quarterly


---
*Page 82*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 82 
 
 
reports submitted by the b orrower , and field supervision mission’s reports. An implementation 
team for this project will be con stituted within BOAD and will be in charge of due diligence. It 
will coordinate the preparation, design, financing and implementation as well as the monitoring 
and evaluation aspect of the project.  
51. The project’s audits will be undertaken in accordance with  the BOAD guidelines for 
financial reporting and auditing of projects . An independent external auditor will be recruited 
based on t erms of reference acceptable to the b ank for the entire duration of the project. The 
financial statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing standards. The AE 
will also ensure a “know -your -customer” standard due diligence process , including anti -money -
laundering and other evaluations of sponsors , is followed thoroughly.  
52. The BOAD guidelines for procurement will be applied to the project’s procurement. The 
bank will conduct an analysis of the procurement files and provide  no objection.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
53. This project proposes to promote rural electrification through isolated solar PV  systems 
as a low -carbo n and resilience solution to the effects of climate change in the energy sector in 
Mali . The project aims to achieve this by: (i) strengthening the capacity of public institutions 
engaged in rural electrification to accelerate solar -powered electrification; and (ii) increasing 
the rural population's access to electricity in 70 communities through installation of isolated 
solar PV mini- grid systems for a to tal capacity of 4.83 MW. The project hopes to catalyse the 
development of an efficient solar market in Mali and help the country to meet its renewable 
energy and greenhouse gas reduction targets. The project will:  help avoid 41,089  tCO 2 per year, 
and 1,027 ,227  tCO 2 for the entire life of the equipment (25 years); benefit an estimated 310 ,698 
direct beneficiaries (50  per cent  of whom are women) at the project site; and help around 
31,000 new rural households to access solar -powered electricity. In its  first tranche , the project 
is expected to achieve 80  per cent  of the impact ( 821,782  tCO 2eq avoided ) and benefit 50 
localities.  
54. The logical framework (section H.1) conforms substantially to GCF  standards and 
requirements and has been cleared through Secretariat r eview .  
55. The implementation timetable ( section C.8) includes proper sequencing of proposed 
activities and broadly conforms with the Secretariat format.  
56. The funding proposal’s theory of change is considered adequate as is the monitoring and 
evaluation section , which clearly outlines the frequency of reporting and refers to the other 
reporting requirements to GCF as per the AMA,  for example,  annual perfor mance reporting, 
midterm and terminal evaluations , and  project completion reports.  
4.6 Legal  assessment  
57. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 3 April 2017 and became effective on 31 August 
2017.  
58. The AE has not provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal 
approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It  is recommended 
that, prior to submission of the funding proposal  to the Board:  (a) the AE  has obtained all its 
internal approvals; and (b) GCF  has received a certificate or legal opinion from the AE  in form 
and substance satisfactory to GCF  confirming tha t all final internal approvals by the AE  have 
been obtained , and that the AE  has the authority and capacity to implement the project.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
       GCF/B.22/10/Add.04  
Page 83 
 
 
59. The proposed project will be implemented in  Mali,  a country in which GCF is not granted  
privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not protected against 
litigation or expropriation in this country, whose  risks need to be further assessed.  The 
Secretariat submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the G overnment of Mali 
on 7 December 2015 and a meeting with the N ational Designated Authority  was held on 9 
October 2018 during the Global National Designated Authority  Conference. No response on the 
draft agreement has yet been received.  
60. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunit ies. 
61. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Delivery by the AE  to GCF  of a certificate or legal opinion within 120 days of the Board 
approval confirming that it has obtained all its internal approvals and that the AE  has 
the authority and capacity to implement the project;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in form  and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval or the date the AE  has 
provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all its internal approvals and has the capacity and authority to i mplement the project; and  
(c) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 84*
---

G
CF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 84 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP102 
Proposal name:  Mali Solar Rural Electrification Project  
Accredited entity:  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
Project/programme size:  Medium 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential  Scale:  High  
Brief Description of the programme concept,  goals and o bjectives  
1. In order to understand the rationale of the conclusions reached by the independent
Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP) in this review, the concept of the project proposed in this
submission will need to be summarize d as concisely as possible. The summary is presented a s
f
ollows:
(a) Mali's energy situation is characterized by a biomass -dominated balance sheet that
accounts for 7 6 per cent  of primary energy, followed by 20  per cent  for hydrocarbo n
imp
orts and 4  per cent  for electricity;
(b) Energy consumption in Mali is dominated by the residential sector , which basically
relies on biomass. Wood and charcoal are mainly used as cooking or heating fuels , a
s
ituation that results in strong pressure on the country’s forest resources;
(c) According to national statistics for 2017, national average for access to electricity wa s
4
2 per cent . This national average disguises  the fact that a sizeable portion of Malians
who live in the rural areas do not have access to electricity , the figure for this section of
society  being reported as 19 per cent in 2017;
(d) Improving acce ss to electricity in  rural areas in  Mali has been a key pillar of the
sustainable development goals of the country. Strategies that have  been employed i n
r
ecent past include:
(i) The gradual extension of the Malian grid to rural areas – the Malian grid is
owned and operated by the Malian National Electricity Company (EDM -SA);
(ii) Supply ing some rural consumers with electricity through  isolated EDM -SA off -
grid facilities ( isolated EDM -SA Centr es); and
(iii) Also supplying e lectricity through off-grid supply facilities operated by
contractors engaged by the Government of Mali under its rural electrification
program me;
(e) According to EDM -SA data, energy security in Mali suffer s from a chronic gap even o n
t
he national grid . Moreover, it has been concluded that it is very unlikely that over th e
n
ext ten years  that the expected expansion of the national electricity network will be
able to ensure that a significant proportion of the low -income population living in
isolated areas will be connected to the network. This situatio n is expected to create an
important market for off- network electrification schemes;


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 85 
 
 
(f) The supply of electricity to off -network consumers is mainly ensured by local energy 
service providers , which operate mini -grids in isolated rural areas. In 2015, the coun try 
had 160 isolated mini -networks. T o this day, t he production technologies used in  these 
mini- grids is basically diesel -run units (in 2015, 96  per cent  of the electricity produced 
off-network was through diesel);  
(g) The negative impact of high and perennially increasing fossil fuel price s, in this case 
diesel, which must be  imported into Mali, with its negative balance of payment impact, 
may not allow electricity access in  these rural areas to increase much beyond what it has 
been for some time. This calls for another strategy for rural energy access in this least 
developed country ( LDC ); 
(h) With the decreasing cost of delivery of electricity from solar power technologies (photovoltaic ( PV) and concentrated solar power (CSP)), locally sourced solar power 
project s are needed to achieve a significant increase in electricity access in the rural 
areas of Mali;  and 
(i) This current intervention is planned for consumers in rural Mali without access to the 
main grid , including those both currently served and not currently s erved by off-grid 
mini- grids.  
2. The main objective of this project is to promote rural electrification through isolated 
solar PV systems as a low -carbon and resilience solution to the effects of climate change in the 
energy sector in Mali. This project inter vention has been designed to achieve the following 
goals:  
(a) Strengthen the capacity of public institutions, such as Malian Agency for the 
Development of Household Energy and Rural Electrification ( AMADER ), the Agence des 
Energies Renouvelables ( AER ), and the Rural Electrification Fund  (FER ), which  are 
normally engaged in rural electrification to accelerate solar -powered electrification;  
(b) Increase the rural population's access to electricity in 70 communities through the 
installation of isolated solar PV  mini-grid systems for a total capacity of 4.83 megawatts 
(MW ); 
(c) Cataly se the development of an efficient solar market that will enable Mali to meet its 
renewable energy and greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction targets;  
(d) Provide a total shift in energy production by replacing fossil fuel additions with 
renewable energy solutions;  
(e) Contribute to the regulatory framework through capacity -building, demonstration s of 
technologies in areas where not available, putting in place an institutional framework 
for FER to strengthe n its capacity to further promote the deployment of renewable 
energy;  and 
(f) Catalyse the inclusion of the private sector in the programme through the 
incentiviz ation  of workable and long -term operation and maintenance ( O&M ) 
concessions for them for the mini -grids.  
3. The key issue s that characterize this project intervention in Mali can be summarized as 
follows:  
(a) A key United Nations Sustainable Development Goal in many nations of the w orld , Mali 
included, is the need to increase energy access. In Mali, a key ac cess goal is to improve 
the national average electricity access from the current 42  per cent  to a much higher 
level that will promote development. More importantly is the recognition that electricity 
access in rural Mali is abysmally low at 19 per cent ;


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 86 
 
 
(b) Efforts geared towards improving this figure in the rural areas of Mali include  the 
following :  
(i) Extending the EDM -SA national grid to rural areas;  
(ii) Building more EDM -SA mini -grids to serve rural areas without access to the 
main grid;  
(iii) Encouraging the involvement of more private sector entities, which  have 
operations in rural areas, build onsite generation facilities and supply excess 
power to rural con sumers; and  
(iv) Encouraging mini -grid facilities that are operated under contract with the 
Mali an Government to deliver electricity to consumers in rural area;  
(c) Many of the facilities (more than 90  per cent ) that supply electricity to rural consumers 
are power ed by fossil fuel s (mostly diesel) , with their high GHG emissions and negative 
impact on the  country’s balance of payment s, especially in a country like Mali where all 
the fossil fuel consumed is imported;  
(d) Key strategies that are incorporated  in the propos ed GCF/ West African Development 
Bank  (BOAD ) intervention include  the following :  
(i) The plan to utilize the very abundant solar irradiation in Mali for electricity 
generation, which will displace the status quo fossil -fuel-based generation in the 
current way power is generated to supply consumers in rural areas;  
(ii) The acceptance of the fact that rural electrification will continue to be funded 
from public resources and , as such , the Government of Mali will still be 
responsible for the way finance is accumulated  in this intervention;  
(iii) The Government of Mali intend s to use this project to incentivize the continued 
participation of rural energy service providers, wh ich in the status quo ante 
operat e the mini- grids fueled by fossil fuel power plants,  in the O&M of rural 
mini- grids that will be developed as part of this program me; 
(iv) A portion of the fund for this project will be targeted at developing (and where it already exists – strengthening) the productive use of electricity. A key reason for 
the fa ilure of rural electrification programmes is the inability of programme s to 
attract consumer interest and thus  develop consumer demand beyond the 
residential to small business and commercial users, who are referred to as productive users of power. In this project, a programme to incentivize the 
development of these productive users will be funded;  
(v) To this end , local financial institutions (microfinances) will be provided with 
funding to put in place credit facilities for productive users to purchase 
“equipm ent or investment credit ”. The types of energy equipment for productive 
use will include: electric tools for carpentry, woodworking and small industry; 
sewing machines; welding machines; battery charging equipment; refrigeration 
and ice cube production; se ed oil presses, grain mills, crop drying equipment and 
other equipment for the value -added processing of local agricultural produce 
(honey, mango, cashew nuts, etc.);  
(vi) By supporting the acquisition of equipment for productive use by rural 
populations, the p roject will contribute to increasing the use of energy for 
income -generating activities, which will stimulate the sale of electricity and 
economic development in  the beneficiary localities ;  
(vii) Another important component of the strategy will be the use of part of the fund (grant fund) to strengthen the enabling environment for the development of


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 87 
 
 
solar -powered mini -grids in rural areas (70 communities identified). The focus 
will include  the following :  
1. Strengthening the regulatory framework for renewable power 
development;  
2. Strengthening the policy environment, including tariff policy, power 
purchase agreement  development and negotiations etc.; and  
3. Building of local capacity in the technology and engineering of solar  
power systems that will be adopted . 
4. Greenfield mini -grid power facilities will be developed for each of the 70 rural 
communities already identified. Projects in these communities will be made  up of the following:  
(a) 14 localities in category 1 (population less than or equal to 2,000 inhabitants) will each 
be supplied by a 30 kilowatt  peak ( kWp ) PV solar power plant and a 5 km -long three -
phase low voltage ( LV) grid;  
(b) 21 localities in category 2 (population between 2,000  and 4,000 inhabitants) will each 
be supplied by a 50 kWp PV solar power plant and an  8 km -long three -phase LV grid;  
(c) 27 localities in category 3 (population between 4,000 and 7,000 inhabitants) will each 
be supplied by an 80 kWp PV  solar power plant and a 4.5 km -long three -phase LV grid; 
and 
(d) 8 localities in category 3 (population of 7,000 inhabitants or more) will each be supplied 
by a 150 kWp PV  solar power plant and a 12 km -long three -phase LV grid.  
5. The total installed capacity of solar power capacities t hat will be installed under this 
intervention has been estimated to be approximately  4.83 MW. A summary of the expected 
funding is presented as follows:  
(a) The total funding that will be provided by both GCF and BOAD is estimated to be about 
EUR  46.2 million;  
(b) This total fund will be contributed as follows:  
(i) GCF loan will be EUR 33.7 m illion as s enior debt; 
(ii) GCF will also provide a g rant of EUR 1.9 m illion;  and 
(iii) BOAD will provide a l oan of EUR 10.6 million as s enior debt; 
(c) At the request of GCF, the programme will be implemented in two tranches. Tranche 1 
will cover 50 communities and will be funded by a total of EUR 34.2 m illion, including 
PMC, and the expected GCF funding is EUR 25.9 m illion. BOAD will provide a co -
financi ng in loan for EUR 8.3 m illion. In addition,  it will submit a request for Tranche 2 
funding after the midterm evaluation, after which the balance EUR 12 million will be 
made available.   
6. The structure of the programme as proposed in this funding proposal ca n be 
summarized as follows:  
(a) Component 1: c apacity -building of r ural electrification institutions and t echnical 
assistance;  
(b) Component 2: d etailed engineering and i nstallation of solar -powered mini-grids;  and 
(c) Component 3: s upport  to the productive use of e lectricity . 
Climate impact potential of this p roject


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 88 
 
 
7.  The primary impact potential of this programme will be the reduction of GHG emissions 
through the displacement of fossil fuel electricity generation by the solar power facilities that 
will be imp lemented as a result of this programme . 
8. It has been estimated that the solar mini -grid that will be implemented in the four 
category 1 –4 communities will deliver a peak capacity for all categories total ling 4.83 MW of 
new solar power mini -grid, with a peak  generation of about 10.578 gigawatt hours ( GWh ) of 
clean electricity annually . 
9. Electricity ( peak) expected to be delivered by this project at each of the four  community 
categories1 can be summarized as follows:  
(a) Community type 1: 0.9198 GWh ; 
(b) Community type 2: 2.2995 GWh ; 
(c) Community type 3: 4.7304 GWh ; and  
(d)  Community type 4: 2.6280 GWh ;  
10. It has been estimated that the project will directly avoid GHG emissions amounting to 
about 41,089 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq) per year, equivalent to 1.02723 
MtCO 2eq over 25 years, that would have been emitted by the status quo fossil fuel system.  
11. The GHG emission s reduction methodology that was utilized in this calculation can be 
aptly summarized as follows:  
(a) Methodology AMS I.L as approved for CDM projects2 by the Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM) Executive Board  of the  the United Nations  Framework Convention on 
Climate Change ( UNFCCC )  has been used in the estimation of the GHG emission s 
reduction implications of this project;  
(b) This methodology is applicable to the electrification of a community achieved through 
the installation of renewab le electricity generation systems that displace fossil fuel use, 
such as in fuel -based lighting systems, stand -alone power generators and fossil fuel 
based mini- grids. This methodology is applicable to implementation of individual, 
renewable -energy system s  or mini- grid activities;  
(c) This methodology is applicable in situations where consumers that were not connected 
to a national/regional grid prior to project implementation are supplied with electricity 
from the project activity. It is also applicable to situations where a fraction of consumers 
that are supplied with electricity from a fossil- fuel-based mini- grid prior to the 
implementation of the project are now supplied with electricity from the project 
activity;  
(d) At least 75 per cent (by number) of the con sumers connected to the project ’s renewable 
electricity generation system(s) shall be members of households;  
(e) For each category of consumer, the emission factor s developed in the UNFCCC 
methodology has been utilized in this calculation;  and 
(f) In addition to t he GHG emission s reduction impact of the planned programme, the 
expected numbers of consumers to whom the programme will deliver clean electricity 
has been estimated at approximately  310,698 people. This number was arrived at by 
using the estimate of consu mers that will be connected to the mini -grids.  
12. Given these impacts, the independent TAP assessed the scale of the impact potential 
metrics of this programme  as “high”.  
                                                           
1 A description of the characteristics of a community category is presented in section 1(d ). 
2 Available at < https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/documentation/meth_booklet.pdf#AMS_I_L>.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 89 
 
 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential      Scale:  High  
General overview of p aradigm shift 
13. The projec ts that will be covered by this GCF/BOAD funding intervention will involve 
the development of off -grid solar power systems that will supply power to the 70 mini- grids. In 
terms of the technology that will be implemented, it can be argued that these technol ogies ( solar 
PV and CSP) are not new as they have been implemented successfully in many parts of the 
world. However, when one compare s this technology intervention with what has happened off 
the country’s national network, especially in existing community -based power mini- grids, the 
truth is that the adoption of solar technology has not happened at a rate that is consistent with 
the impr essive primary resources in the country. Barriers to  solar power technologies ’ deliver y 
of power to the main grid as well as off -grid networks in Mali in the status quo  ante are well 
documented in the f unding proposal and include: technical , financial , regulatory and policy 
issues. A key goal of the proposed project funding is not only to develop and implement the 
solar power facilities but also to reduce and , where possible, completely eliminate these 
barriers. For example, a key component of the proposed intervention is the utilization of 
concessional financing from GCF to deliver solar power facilities at the mini- grids already 
conceptualized to serve 70 rural communities. The concessional loan available from GCF is 
expected to render these projects finan cially feasible, and to deliver electricity to these 
consumers with minimal public subsidy. The success of this intervention may have sound paradigm shift potential in that it will demonstrate a workable strategy by which public financing can deliver rural  electrification projects. The metrics under which such paradigm shift 
potentials are enhanced by the proposed intervention are discussed in the following 
subsections.  
Potential for s caling up and replication  
14. As stated in the earlier section of this report , the solar power technologies that will be 
employed by this programme are well -developed internationally and ha ve been deployed in 
many countries in the past. Since the focus of the programme in this intervention is to put in 
place activities that will re duce or completely eliminate barriers that have  so far prevented the 
expanded deployment of these mini -grid technologies in Mali, it can be safely concluded that 
once these barriers are effectively mitigated by the programme, then the potential for scaling  up 
of the activities, and replicating the solar power projects in other regions of Mali and even in other countries in the f rancophone subregion to develop workable mini -grid projects will be 
enhanced. Lessons learn ed from the technical assistance that is utilized to enhance the 
technical, regulatory, policy and market capacities for s olar mini -grid development in Mali 
should be available if the decision to scale up or replicate the underlying projects is taken 
especially after  this intervention. It is exp ected that the effect of the concessional funding from 
GCF will not only be that the underlying solar powered mini -grids for rural communities can be 
feasibly implemented , but that local rural energy service providers, who will be given 
opportunities to ta ke on the O&M function responsibilities,  would have learn ed so much from 
the process to be able to replicate and scale up their O&M functions in other similar projects 
(rural min i-grids) that will be replicated in the country in the future. Replication of the 
successful project in other countries in the f rancophone subregion of West Africa will also 
provide lessons and best practices for rural energy agencies in the subregion under the 
framework of the CLUB -ER ( Club of African National Agencies and Structur es in charge of Rural 
Electrification) . BOAD , according to the submission reviewed by the independent TAP,  has 
stated its commitment to developing a case study replicable in the eight  francophone countries 
in Africa and across the West African Economic and Monetary Union ( WAEMU ) countries.  
Potential for k nowledge -sharing and l earning


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 90 
 
 
15. The potential for knowledge- sharing and learning in  this proposed GCF/BOAD funded 
rural solar power mini -grid will be enhanced by thoroughly targeted capacity -build ing, 
awareness raising activities and the connection of a diverse range of relevant sector 
stakeholders under component 1. The activities in c omponent 1 have  been designed to 
encompass the following knowledge -sharing and learning characteristics:  
(a) Multiple stakeholders ( public, private and microfinance institutions( MFIs )) will work 
together in a collective learning process;  
(b) The project will deliver training and knowledge to public institution (AER, AMADER) 
staff members on climate change issues and renewable  energy  technolog y development;  
(c) The productive use of the electricity component will transfer tremendous knowledge to 
the MFIs, whose knowledge will be enhanced on the evaluation of financing investments 
in energy equipment needed by rural artisans, who wi ll be able to elevate electricity 
demand in the new mini -grid areas. This will surely change the risk perceptions towards 
these new financing opportunities;  and 
(d) Potential micro, small and medium -sized enterprise ( MSME ) clients will also benefit 
from techni cal support on how to structure climate business plans to make them 
bankable.  
16. These activities will create a high potential for knowledge -sharing and learning.  
Contribution to the c reation of an e nabling environment  
17. The activities that will be carried out in this project will contribute to the creation of an 
enabling environment for the development of rural renewable energy  mini- grid infrastructure 
in Mali  as follows : 
(a) Rural electricity supply infrastructure is  usually financed by public funds, which more 
than often is usually a budget item. With the increasing scarcity of public funds, rural 
electricity supply has been  negatively impacted. The Government of Mali will be 
responsible for the debt that will be provided for this project and will take responsibility 
for servicing the debt. This will create an enabling environment for financing these infrastructures outside of bilateral and multilateral grants that was used in  the status 
quo ante;  
(b) The technical assistance activities will achieve a framework in Mali that will enable 
AMADER (the only government authority in charge of rural electrification regulation, 
setting of policies under the guidance of the Ministry of Energ y) to unlock private  sector 
resources for rural electrification activities while also including  their participation in  
O&M activities. This will cause a shift from the current paradigm , where the public and 
private sectors are competing , and pave the way for a public –private partnership  model;  
and 
(c) It will contribute to structuring the solar based rural electrification market through 
financial mechanism s such as financial guarantee to remove the barrier of a lack of a 
financial service adapted to support productive energy users and de -risk loan demands 
for rural area productive users of energy.  
18. The project will therefore contribute to the creation of an enabling environment for the 
development of solar -based mini- grid s in other parts of Mali and offer good l essons for the 
development of rural power projects in other f rancophone nations. This will enhance electricity 
access in Mali and the region. 
Contribution to r egulatory framework and p olicies


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 91 
 
 
19. GCF financing is critical to the successful structuring of finan ce for this project so as to 
address some of the barriers faced by private  sector investors. One of the key barriers that has 
been identified is the weak regulatory framework in place that has not encouraged private 
sector involvement in renewable energy investment, especially in the development of mini -grid 
infrastructure to serve rural consumers in Mali. The financing from GCF is expected to help to 
reduce the risks of investment for  these private entities. Concessi onal financing from GCF can 
offset the initial high cost related to the barriers and risks as described in the project  feasibility 
study report . Component 1 of the proposed project will focus on  building the capacity of 
national institutions such as AMADER , which will definitely assist in strengthening the legal, 
technical, policy and regulatory capacities of such institutions. It is expected that at the 
successful completion of this programme, the capacities of institutions such as AMADER and 
AER  will be s trengthened . The existing policy and regulatory environment allows for the 
participation of entities in the O&M of rural mini -grid facilities. However, because existing 
policies and regulatory framework s were weak, the activities of private sector entities were not 
at scale. It is expected that activities planned in this intervention through component 1 will 
build the capacities of these public institutions to be able to create regulatory framework and policies that will enable the development of rural sola r mini- grids at scale.  
20. The independent TAP therefore concluded that based on the expected performance of 
the proposed project as discussed above, the programme will deliver a paradigm shift that will 
ensure the successful development of the planned 70 sol ar mini- grids and also catalyse the 
replication of the ide a in other areas of Mali and other countries in the francophone subregion. 
This will catalyse a deep and accelerated departure from use of fossil fuel s to the delivery  of 
electricity to these rural communities through increased utilization of low -carbon solar power 
options (PV technologies). The independent TAP has therefore scored the paradigm shift metric 
as “high”.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential    Scale:  High  
21. The major development contribution of this project ’s efforts is expected to be the 
utilization of cleaner solar power technology at the rural mini -grid level in Mali through the 
enabling of a good financing, regulatory and project development environment in the country. 
The pro ject is expected to deliver environmental and soci o-economic co -benefits as well as 
gender -sensitive development impacts. These are summarized as follows:  
(a) Environmental co-benefits : 
(i) Reduction of air pollution due to fossil fuel consumption and improvement of air 
quality thanks to the promotion of renewable energies;  
(ii) Reduction of GHG emissions;  and 
(iii) Reduction of pollution by waste oils at thermal power plants;  and 
(b) Socio -economic and g ender -sensitive co-benefits : 
(i) Increased socio -economic activities;  
(ii) Improvemen t of the health and hygiene conditions of local populations;  
(iii) Improvement of the living conditions and comfort of local populations;  
(iv) Access to public lighting and improvement of security conditions;  
(v) Increase in the duration of the supply of electricity;  
(vi) Increase of the service and the access rate for the safety of people and goods;  
(vii) Better conservation of pharmaceutical and food products;


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 92 
 
 
(viii) Improvement of the permanent drinking water supply to  the populations;  
(ix) Better lighting for the work environment of  women;  
(x) Improvement of household income levels through the creation of income -
generating activities;  
(xi) Improvement of the literacy rate;  
(xii) Development of the emergence of manufacturing and processing industrial 
units;  
(xiii) Opportunity for local people to benefit from capacity -building actions;  and 
(xiv) The focus on gender in ownership and management of the energy services 
centr es will ensure the inclusion of all gender and youth. So  the improvement of 
livelihoods and other development benefits will be shared fairly.  
22. Based on these co -benefits that are expected to be generated by this intervention, the 
independent TAP concluded that the proposed programme has a “high” sustainable 
development potential.   
1.4 Needs of the recipient       Scale:  High  
23. The intervention will reduce the vulnerability of the country and beneficiary group . 
24. Mali is classified by the United Nations as an  LDC3 and according to the Notre Dame 
Global Adaptation Initiative  Country Index,4 it is among the most vulnerable countries to 
climate change. Key challenges faced by Malians that arise as direct and indirect consequences 
of climate change include low access to electricity, high cost of electricity and overdependence 
on imported fossil fuels for electricity generation (grid and off -grid). Low access of electricity 
has continued in the rural areas as power on mini -grid s comes mostly from imported fossil 
fuels. Only 1.8  per cent  of rural Mali’s populat ion has access to electricity. As such , the majority 
of rural inhabitants who do not have access to modern electricity utilize mostly fuelwood and 
other biomass products to meet their energy consumption needs. Climate change effects , such 
as drought and de creasing rainfall, have a negative impact on biomass productivity, thus 
extending the time spent by rural households in  fetch ing wood and other biomass products to 
meet energy needs. This will continue in the absence of this intervention, making normal liv ing 
very difficult in these rural areas of Mali. The inadequate availability of public funds to invest in 
energy infrastructure to meet the growing demand for  electricity in these rural areas will mean 
that Mali will continue to be vulnerable to these challenges. So , in the absence of this 
intervention, rural consumers will continue to face limited  access to electricity. Therefore, the 
proposed solar -powered mini -grid projects will address the needs of these consumers by 
improving their access to clean and reliable energy.  
Economic, social and i nstitutional needs  
25. The intervention will strengthen the economic development of Mali and especially that 
of the affected rural population in Mali . 
26. Although Mali , like most of the seven  other francophone countries in West Africa, ha s 
witnessed economic growth in recent years, which averaged more than 5  per cent  of gross 
domestic product  growth per annum, this impressive economic performance has not translated 
to reduction in poverty in the count ries. In Mali, more than half of the population still live below 
                                                           
3 United Nations, Committee for Development Policy, List of Least Developed Countries (as of December 2018). 
Available at: <www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp -content/uploads/sites/45/publication/ldc_list.pdf>.  
4 Available at <https://gain -new.crc.nd.edu/r anking>.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 93 
 
 
the national poverty line, with a significant proportion of the population living in the rural areas 
of Mali ( approximately  98 per cent ) still not hav ing access to modern energy , including 
electricity. It is recognized that poor access to electricity is one of the key barriers to better economic growth and social development in the rural areas of the country. Therefore, the 
improvement of access to electricity in both the rural and urban areas  of the country has long 
been recognized as a good development strategy in Mali. There is definitely a need for a sharp 
improvement in electricity access for  rural Mali ’s inhabitants and the current intervention not 
only fulfil s this need but it is also  doing so  through the use  of a low -carbon system. The good 
news is that Mali is well endowed with solar energy resources, and , as such , solar power offer s a 
credible alternative pathway to improved electricity access and hence a credible way of meeting the so cial and economic development needs in the country, especially in rural areas. For this to 
happen, the already identified barriers – financial, technology, regulatory and others – must be 
properly mitigated. The proposed project intervention will initiate a systemic mitigation of these key barriers and therefore contribute to unleashing a paradigm shift to a low -emission 
development pathway through the mobilization of climate finance at scale for the solar market. 
It will accelerate private sector involvement in the O&M of rural solar power based mini- grid 
(well above the level of  the status quo ante), which will enable market transformation and 
contribute to the economic and social needs of a large segment of the population residing in the 
rural areas of Mali. The funding structure of the proposed program me will also contribute to 
strengthening the institutional capacity required to back  up the development of mini -grids that 
will be essential for ramping up rural electrification in Mali.  
27. The intervention will strengthen the social development of Mali and especially that of 
the affected rural population . 
28. The absence of modern energy hinders community development; and climate change 
complicates the situation. Poor lighting and indoor air polluti on increases the prevalence of 
health complications,  including respiratory tract infections and heart complications (16,900 
people die in Mali annually due to indoor air pollution, WHO, 20125), which dramatically 
reduce s life expectancy and puts a strain on the national health budget.  
29. The introduction of modern energy in rural communities will lead to various social 
benefits , including  the following :  
(a) Better social services , such as medical services and education ; 
(b) Increased safety in communities following the introduction of street/public lighting ; 
(c) Better health especially of  women and girls following improved indoor lighting and 
decreased air pollution as well as reduced distances to cover in search of energy services and/or resources ; 
(d) Better san itation and increased availability of clean , safe drinking water ; 
(e) Increased access to and improved use of basic social services, such as education and 
healthcare (lighting/heating/cooling of schools and health centr es through solar 
panels) ;  
(f) Increased acce ss to water in rural areas (through solar PV pumping systems) ; and 
(g) Solar home systems will also prevent health issues related to the indoor use of firewood 
and improve household safety by decreasing domestic accidents caused by candles and kerosene lamps.  
30. The intervention will provide more robust alternative sources of financing of solar 
powered mini -grids in r ural Mali . 
                                                           
5 Funding proposal, page 38.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 94 
 
 
31. A key barrier to a low carbon path in these nations as an approach to improving energy 
access in these nations has been the lack of the funds (local equity, loans/debt – with medium to 
long maturity and lower interest rates) needed to implement these clean power projects. BOAD 
as an important regional financing institution has a strategic objective to increase its portfolio of 
investments in solar with a reasonable participation of private sector actors. This has not 
materialized as BOAD has been unable to mobilize adequate funds in the status quo ante period, at the level needed and at terms that will enhance the participation of the private sector in this 
endeavou r. The proposed project will create an enabling environment for a better 
understanding of how to mobilize support for public funding of mini -grid projects that are 
powered by renewable energy systems, especially given the dwi ndling public financing of the 
fossil fuel alternative. This path will also deliver GHG emission s reduction s as a result of the 
displacement of fossil fuel -based generation, thus contributing to the achievement of the 
nationally determied cotribution ( NDC ) of Mali.  
32. The intervention will strengthen institutions and implementation capacities in the 
targeted countries . 
33. Apart from the financial barrier discussed in the earlier section, weaknesses in 
institutional, regulatory, legal and policy framework s (e.g. tariff structure, policy on the 
concessional participation of private actors versus public utilities in the O&M of mini- grids in 
rural areas, etc.)  are known to be barriers to the implementation of solar power mini -grid 
facilities in Mali. The proposed GCF /BOAD programme grant funding, will provide technical 
assistance (TA) to relevant institutions in these countries so as to reduce or completely 
eliminate the negative impacts of regulatory and policy barriers. For example, as part of this grant funding, BO AD will carry out training and awareness -raising activities on the project for 
entities in Mali responsible for rural electrification policies and regulations. These entities will include NED , AMADER and AER -Mali. The rationale of component 1, which has been designed to 
address these institutional weaknesses and disseminate information to the public and other pertinent stakeholders in the country ia aimed at supporting the implementation of regulatory 
and policy regimes that provides clear and predictable r ules for solar mini -grid project 
development and replication Mali. The TA under this programme is expected to stimulate the 
environment and the need in Mali for a robust take off and the successful implementation of the 
current projects and replication of t he success in other  parts of Mali. This will partly be achieved 
through institutional strengthening that will be provided by the TA component of this 
intervention.  
34. Given the various country needs that will be satisfied by this GCF/BOAD intervention in 
the development of a sound rural mini -grid in Mali, the independent TAP has concluded that the 
country need of Mali and especially th at of rural electricity consumers c an be rated as “ high”. 
1.5 Country ownership       Scale:  High  
35. Country ownership of the proposed GCF/BOAD intervention is discussed in this review 
along the following submetrics . 
Alignment of the p roposed programme with n ational climate strategies  
36. Key documents where the national climate strategies of Mali have  been a rticulated in 
line with the goals of the proposed intervention are the i ntended nationally determined 
commitment (INDC) and the n ationally  appropriate mitigation action (NAMA). Both documents, 
which have been submitted as national documents to the UNFCCC Secretariat aim to reduc e 
GHG emissions. For example, the NAMA aims to  reduc e GHG emissions by 1,285,034 tCO 2 per 
year through renewable energy production (e.g. wit h hydro, wind, biomass and solar PV).  Mali’s 
INDC pointed to the need to implement solar power facilities to the grid and off -grid in these


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 95 
 
 
nations as a key strategy to national contribution to the international goal of global GHG 
emissions reductions. A r ecent UNFCCC publication6 listed 19 priority climate change projects 
that are likely to be pursued in Mali. This list include d the following projects that are directly 
related to this GCF/BOAD intervention:  
(a) Contribution to barrier removal for the promotion  of the use of solar energy in Mali ; and 
(b) Promotion of i ncome -generating activities and the development of mutual assistance.  
37. Measures spelt out in these documents, especially for the energy sector , included GHG 
emission s mitigation through the implementation of solar power systems , especially to the 
power grids and rural mini -grids , as a means of increasing access to electricity in both the rural 
and urban areas of Mali. Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed GCF/BOAD 
programme is aligned to the c ountry’s climate strategies.  
Capacities of a ccredited and executing entities to s uccessfully deliver this p rogramme  
38. BOAD will serve as both the accredited and executing entities for this project. Some of 
the relevant attributes of BOAD that points to the organization’s capacity to deliver on this 
programme are summarized as follows:  
(a) BOAD is the common development finance institution of the member countries of the 
WAEMU. It was established by an a greement signed on 14 November 1973 and  became 
operational in 1976. Member countries include Benin, Burkina Faso , Côte d’Ivoire, 
Guinea -Bissau, Mali, the Niger, Senegal and Togo;  
(b) BOAD is an international public institution the  purpose  of which, as provided under 
Article 2 of its Articles of Association, is to pr omote the balanced development of its 
member countries and foster economic integration within West Africa by financing priority development projects. Key examples of i nvestment projects that ha ve been 
funded through the support of BOAD in the f rancophone s ubregion of West Africa 
include  the following : 
(i) The bank’s financial support has made it possible not only to increase the power 
generating capacities in member countries, but also to erect more than 3,527 km 
of interconnection lines between  them, and in ad dition to reinforce power 
generation, transmission and distribution facilities on the interstate grids for a 
nominal power of over 1,350 MW ; 
(ii) As at 30 September 2016, the aggregate amount of funding provided by the b ank 
in the energy sector stood at 863.9 b illion African Financial Community  (CFA ) 
francs  (XAF) , excluding the Energy Development Fund : 
1. BOAD provides financial assistance to WAEMU member countries to 
support their development efforts. Such assistance targets various areas, 
including the organization of workshops, conferences or seminars, the 
training of government officials and the implementation of social 
projects ; and 
2. The bank also grants an interest rate subsidy for non -commercial public-
sector loans to member countries. Also, BOAD participates in various 
round -table meetings with a view to financing national development 
programmes in member countries; and  
                                                           
6 Funding proposal, page 39.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 96 
 
 
(iii) The discussion above points to the fact that BOAD, which is a GCF accredited 
entity , is fully prepared to serve as the executing entity for this proposed 
programme.  
Engagement with national designated authorities,  civil society organizations and other 
relevant stakeholders  
39. During project preparation, several project stakeholders were consulted,  and the 
potential impacts of the proj ect were discussed and jointly analy sed in order to gather their 
points of view. Key characteristics of these engagement s can be summarized as follows:  
(a) The consultations took place from 2 to 17 May 2018 in the regions of Sikasso, Segou, 
Koulikoro and Kayes ; 
(b) The consulted stakeholders include d: 
(i) Elected representatives in government;  
(ii) Civil society actors; and  
(iii) Selected members of the rural c ommunities ; 
(c) The methodological approach adopted is the participative approach, which covered 
meeting information , exchange and discussion around the project;  
(d) Discussions with these stakeholders focused on the projects as much as possible so as to 
obtain the views of these stakeholders on the project. Key issues discussed include d: 
(i) Possible sites for the implementation of equipment;  
(ii) Advantages of such a solar equipment project for them;  
(iii) Special concerns or possible fears for a successful project;  
(iv) Previous e xperiences or stories they have heard about this kind of solar 
electrification projects;  
(v) Project benefits for village women and youth;  
(vi) Training needs for equipment maintenance , among others ; and 
(vii) Suggestions and recommendations for the project ; 
(e) BOAD also engaged the national regulator for rural electrification (AMADER) and the 
private operators’ organi zation , the participation of which is crucial for the project ’s 
success as they are expected to contribute 20  per cent  of the investment cost as parallel 
financing as a condition for winning the O&M concession for the facility that will be 
built;  and 
(f) The engagement of the GCF NDA of Mali – Agence pour l’Environnement et le 
Développement Durable (AEDD) – also resulted in  the issu ing of a l etter of n o objection 
to the p roject.  
40. Given the discussion above, the independent TAP has concluded that the country 
own ership is very strong and as such the project’s country ownership has been ranked as 
“high”.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness      Scale:  High  
41. Efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed program me will be measured by how much  
GHGs are reduced , which itself depends upon how much  the intervention is able to release 
financing for the implementation of the solar -powered mini -grids  to deliver  power to the end


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 97 
 
 
users , will displace fossil -fuel-based power generation that is prevalent in the absence of this 
programme for the supply of power to the few rural consumers who had access to power . The 
economic and the financial soundness of the proposed programme are discussed below .  
Cost -effectiveness and e fficiency  
42. In the baseline, the Government of Mali u tilizes public funding to implement rural mini -
grids to serve the few consumers who have access in rural areas. This it does through its 
publicly owned power utility (AEM- Mali) and through grant funded (from bilateral and 
multilateral partners) mini -grid f acilities with private investors selected as concessionaires for 
the O&M of these facilities. The status quo ante strategy of expanding electricity access in rural 
Mali cannot be said to be successful as electricity access to the rural population in Mali i s still 
about 1.8  per cent . Also, the few facilities that were built were mostly fossil fuelled (mostly 
diesel) with high carbon emissions and an ineffective collaborative structure between public and private entities involved in this sector. Therefore, th e efficiency and effectiveness measure 
of this intervention will be measured by a combination of how effective the intervention is to 
dismantle the inhibitive barriers existing before the intervention and the financial efficiency of 
the funds mobilized as debt. The financial disbursement for the intervention can be described as 
following : 
(a) Component 1 (capacity -building) is not revenue -generating in any meaningful sense;  
(b) Component 2 has revenue -generation aspects. Therefore, detailed financial and 
economic a nalyses have been conducted;  and 
(c) Component 3 has GCF support in the form of a financial guarantee mechanism designed 
to ensure that productive use of  electricity is implemented and therefore the GCF 
investment is sustainable with the enhancement of the com mercial viability of mini -
grids. The GCF grants will be augmented by considerable loans provided as co -finance 
by BOAD.  
43. According to the information included in the funding proposal :  
(a) The economic rate of r eturn of the project has been estimated to be about 16.6  per cent ; 
(b) The financial viability of the private sector O&M concessionaires that  are expected to 
contribute 20  per cent  of the capital exchange of the micro -grid has an internal rate of 
return  of approximately  18 per cent ; and 
(c) Sensitivity analys es of these performance metrics were also carried out on: a 10  per cent  
increase in investment costs; a 10  per cent  decrease in benefits; and a one -year delay in 
project execution. The appraisal shows that the economic rate of return  is appreciably 
high, w hich confirms the economic viability of the project. However, AER -Mali will have 
to ensure that deadlines are respected when executing the project and the c onsulting 
engineering firm and companies are recruited on time in order to guarantee that the 
benefi ciary populations receive all the benefits thereof.   
Application  of best practices  
44. Equipment and technology will be selected from the best options available on the 
market. During the appraisal process of the projects to be funded under the programme, BOAD 
will support the application of the best available technologies by requiring projects to 
demonstrate that they use solar technologies that are:  
(a) Effective in addressing climate -related goals;  
(b) Market -tested, technically performing and commercially viable; and


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.22/ 10/Add. 04 
Page 98 
 
 
(c)  Contribute to market transformation in terms of demonstrating the viability and 
commercial application of new technologies.  
Key efficiency and e ffectiveness indicators  
45. These can be summarized as follows:  
(a) Total project financing = EUR  46.2 million , of which : 
(i) GCF loan = EUR  33.7 million ; 
(ii) GCF grant = EUR  1.9 million ; and 
(iii) BOAD loan = EUR 10.6 million . 
46. At the request of GCF, the intervention has been broken into two t ranches : 
(a) Tranche 1: t otal project financing = EUR 34.2 million, of which  
(i) GCF funding = EUR  25.9 M million ; 
(b) Expected lifetime (25 years) e missions = 1,027,227 tCO 2eq; and 
(c) Key efficiency and effectiveness metrics:  
(i) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (for total project financing – tranche 1) = E UR 
26/tCO 2eq; and 
(ii) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed for (GCF  financing – tranche 1)  = EUR 
12/tCO 2eq. 
47. Based on the discussions presented above ( para fraph  17 of this assessment ), the 
independent TAP concluded that the programme will deliver results that will be adjudged t o 
have a “high” e fficiency and e ffectiveness  measure .  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
48. This proposed pro ject meets GCF performance metrics at a high level for: impact; 
paradigm shift; sustainable development potential; need of the recipient; country ownership; 
and efficiency/effectiveness. As such, the independent TAP recommends the approval of this 
programme to the Board for funding.


---
*Page 99*
---

G
CF/B.2 2/10/Add. 04 
Page 99 
Response of the accredited entity to the Independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 102) 
Proposal name:  Mali solar rural electrification project  
Accredited entity:  Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
Impact potential  
No comment.  
Paradigm shift potential  
No comment.  
Sustainable development potential  
No comment.  
Needs of the recipient  
No comment.  
Country ownership  
No comment.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
No comment.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
No comment.


---
*Page 100*
---

REPUBLIC OF MALI  
One People -One Goal -One Faith 
----------------  
MINISTERY OF ENERGY AND WATER RESOURCES  
-----------------  
GENERAL SECRETARIAT  
-----------------  
National Agency  for Renewable Energy, Mali (AER- MALI)  
__________________________________________________________________________ 
M
ALI SOLAR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT  
GENDER MAINSTREAMING ACTION PLAN Gender documentation for FP102


---
*Page 101*
---

2 
 
  
 January  2019


---
*Page 102*
---

3 
 
  
 Table of Contents  
 
INTRODUCTION  ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
I. GENDER CONTEXT ANALYSIS OF THE PROJECT  ............................................................................... 4 
1. National Policy et institutions promoting women access to energy  ........................................... 4 
2. Women in energy challenges in rural Mali  .................................................................................. 5 
3. General gender issues analysis in Mali climate context  .............................................................. 6 
4. Gender challenges analysis in energy sector in implem enting communities  ............................. 7 
5. Project rationale  .......................................................................................................................... 8 
6. Relevance of the targeted project implementation localities  ..................................................... 8 
II. OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED OUTCOMES OF GENDER ACTION PLAN  ............................................. 9 
1. Energy needs of project implementation localities  .................................................................... 9 
2. General objective of gender action plan  ................................................................................... 10 
3. Specific objectives of gender action plan  .................................................................................. 10 
4. Expected outputs and outcomes  ............................................................................................... 10 
III. ACTIONS FOR A BETTER GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN THE PROJECT  ...................................... 11 
1. Component 1: Capacity building of rural electrification institutions and technical assistance  11 
2. Component 2: Detailed engineering and installation of solar powered minigrids  ................... 12 
3. Component 3: Support for productive use of electricity  .......................................................... 12 
4. Management audit and reporting  ............................................................................................. 13 
IV. GENDER MAINSTREAMING STRATEGY  ...................................................................................... 13 
1. Coordination of the strategy  ..................................................................................................... 14 
2. The management of the implementation  ................................................................................. 14 
3. Information and actors’ capacity building  ................................................................................. 14 
4. Assessment and capitalization of actions and good practices in gend er .................................. 14 
5. Gender mainstreaming M&E  ..................................................................................................... 14 
6. Reporting on Gender Outcomes  ............................................................................................... 15 
7. The sustainability of the project  ................................................................................................ 15 
V. GENDER MAINSTREAMING ACTION PLAN FRAMEWORK  ............................................................. 16 
CONCLUSION  ......................................................................................................................................... 19


---
*Page 103*
---

4 
 
  
 INTRODUCTION   
The gender action plan is based on both data collected in the project targeted regions and a literature 
review on gender and energy sector in Mali . The overall objective is to improve gender mainstreaming 
in the whole energy project, and to ensure its alignment with the national and international gender 
framework s (National gender policy , back  donors Gender policies , etc.). The plan  also presents a 
relevant gender context analysis, gender challenges and  opportunities identified  with the other 
stakeh older  to combat gender inequalities . This  gender action plan  formulation  is also based on two 
specific levers:  (i) the strong favourable  political will, and the (ii) gender mainstreaming principles  and 
guidance  presented in  the main stakeholder’s reference  documents (BOAD, GCF, State of Mali) . 
Indeed, gender issue s are actually  priorit ies and need to be taken into consideration in all areas of 
socio -economic developm ent including energy sector . The exercise of gender mainstreaming involve s 
ensuring that gender is integrated across all levels of the project cycle by defining of various activities 
to implement  (training, continuous gender -based analysis  and assessment , etc.). Gender -related 
activities and outcomes within the project to meet the challenges constitute a whole and coherent 
broad . They are grouped together as follows : (i) capacity -building of the various stakeholders, (ii) 
establishment of a Baseline of gender data, (iii) establishment  of a performance monitoring and 
evaluation system.  The purpose of this gender action plan is to operationalize the constraints and  
opportunities for women and men identified during the gender analysis towards  fully integrating them 
into the project design . The plan includes (i) gender -responsive actions that address and strengthen 
agency  of vulnerable women and men in climate action; (ii) g ender performance indicators and sex -
disaggregated targets that can be  incorporated into a results framework; and (iii) p resentation of 
gender -responsive development impacts. The  gender action plan is structured as follows:  
• Gender context analysis of the project,  
• Objectives and expected impacts of gender actions  
• Gender perfo rmance indicators;  
• Strategies for implementation of the plan  
• Logical frame for gender mainstreaming.  
I. GENDER CONTEXT  ANALYSIS  OF THE PROJECT  
1. National Policy  et institutions promoting women access to energy  
The country of Mali is an agro -sylvo -pastoral land  with about 15.8 million inhabitants  (51% are 
women ). 80% of the population live s in rural areas where t he national electrification rate in 2016 is 
19.39%  (39%  national, 86% in urban areas). The energy balance in total energy consumption in 20 16 
established 77% of biomass  use mostly by women , the  more vulnerable  group. So  the Government has 
adopted the National Gender Policy that includes an important component to improve women's access to appropriate technologies that are less costly  and less  wood energy  use. This national policy sets the 
country's vision and strategic directions in terms of priorities and strategic directions for strengthening 
gender equality and equity. So, all interventions and back donors at the national level must be aligned 
in order to optimise the resu lts and changes in this area.  This gender policy developed in 2011 defines 
the national vision of gender promotion as follows:  "A democratic society that guarantees the 
development of women and men through the full exercise of their fundamental equal right s, active and 
participatory citizenship and equitable access to resources, with a view to making Mali an emerging


---
*Page 104*
---

5 
 
  
 country strong in its growth and proud of its values of justice, peace, solidarity and social cohesion”.  Six 
(6) Strategic directions  are defined there and they are:   
1. Consolidation of democracy and the rule of law in Mali through equal access and full enjoyment 
of fundamental rights for women and men.  
2. Development of human capital (women and men) capable of meeting the challenges of the 
country's  socio -economic development, poverty reduction and integration of Africa ns and 
Africa in the global  village .  
3. Recognition of women's contribution to economic development through their integration into 
productive channels and equal access to employment oppo rtunities and factors of production.  
4. Making use of the potential of women and men in national development through equal 
participation in the decision -making process.  
5. Promotion, awareness -raising and communication for the entrenchment of egalitarian values 
and behaviours in Malian society while rallying the traditions of equality to the imperatives of 
modernity and openness to the world.   
6. Gender mainstreaming as a guid ing principle of good governance in public policies and reforms 
most conducive to change and in budgets, considering the context of deconcentration and 
decentralization.   
The below analysis indicates that this project is also consistent with this national action plan as well as 
the Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ). Stimulating women's access to energy effectively would 
help ensure that the country  achieves Sustainable Development Goals -  SDGs. Overall, equitable access 
to energy is a goal targeted by t he SDG Goal 7 aims to "ensure access for all to affordable, safe, 
renewable and modern energy".  
In this project , AER  has designated a Gender Focal Point , an actual  staff of Malian Agency for the 
Development of Domestic Energy and Rural Electrification (AMA DER). She will  ensure and follow 
gender action plan implementation and to ensure that gender dimension s are taken into account 
during the whole energy project  implementation , and  to ensure gender -energy aspects integration 
into the existing monitoring -evaluation mechanism .  
2. Women in energy challenges in rural Mali  
The country economy is mainly based on primary sector (agriculture, livestock, fish ing), which employs 
about  80% of the active population  and mainly women.  Poverty  is more pronounced for women in 
rural areas than in urban ones. Studies have sufficiently demonstrated that the day -to-day agenda of 
rural women is heavy and that prevents  them to develop income -gener ating. The ir daily agenda 
contains activitie s as varied as they are painful ( pounding cereal grains, loo king for firewood with 
rudimentary technologies ). Added to this is the family expenses they face, such as the cost of r enting 
the cart to collect wood . It is to these multiple problems of women  that the national energy policy and 
the national gender policy want to tackle, so that equal access to energy is a solution to create  
opportunities for women's entrepreneurship in rural areas.  To date, one of  the remarkable res ponses 
has been the concept of Units for the Transformation and Marketing of Local Products with use of 
Energy -Efficient Equipment operating with renewable energy sources.  This low access to energy 
(mainly for women) is a national challe nge and particularly for improving the quality of women life 
(lightening household work and increasing income). Other challenges are the r eduction of the rate of


---
*Page 105*
---

6 
 
  
 biomass  use in the energy balance ; the i ncrease of the rural and urban  electrification rate; the increase 
of the quota  of renewable energy in the production of electric power ; the improvement of  women's 
access to modern energy services and technologies or equipment including professional training for a 
best use of that equipment;  and the s ystematization of gender mainstreaming in all energy programs 
and projects.  
3. General gender issues  analysis in Mali climate context  
The climate issues determine the quality of men and women life, and globally the future of the planet. 
In this case , Mali is currently facing significant environmental problems such as desertification, floods , 
and rapid deforestation. Women are more victims of the adverse effects of climate change, but on the 
other, certain women's activities, such as the artisanal transformatio ns of agricultural products, the 
sale of wood and coalhave negative impacts on The environment. So, c oncrete measures should 
accompany the ongoing awareness -raising campaigns: development of collection pits for dyeing 
wastewater, development of soaps works hops, etc.  The national priority is to s trengthen efforts on 
the extension of appropriate technologies that are less costly and less energy -consuming for all men 
and women in rural areas . 
But, Mali is one of those countries where the energy paradox is great. There is more sunshine, but the 
peopl e have less access to energy. Analysis shows that  more than 10% of  households is run by a woman 
in rural area. And women have lower access to energy than men. T he energy balance reveals that 
biomass  (fuelwood and charcoal) accounts for about 80% of nationa l energy consumption, petroleum 
products 16%, electricity 3%, and energy Renewable 1%. Wood remains the main source of energy in 
rural. The strong use of firewood and charcoal as domestic fuel has significant negative impacts, the 
main ones being deforesta tion of about 400 000 ha per year, and the emission of greenhouse gases 
(15.45 MT of carbon dioxide ), the dependence on biomass and the increase in the workload of rural 
women because the collection of firewood is getting farther away from homes. Finally, pollution inside the house holds  has a negative impact on the health. So, the country energy policy has several 
strategies and action s, supported by multiple actors both state and non -state and back donors . It is 
expected that this present  project will improve the living conditions of households, in particular of 
women, such as the reduction  of domestic corvee related to  water and firewood, and cooking, and will 
allow to more save  time to carry out productive activities and  income opportuni ties. This project will 
also make a decisive contribution to the poverty reduction and sustainable development.  
The gender diagnosis has revealed that poverty is a global problem in Mali and more access to energy 
could be a solution. However, as it has bee n said, this access is actually more limited for women than 
men. The diagnosis has also shown  that women have more energy access needs because of the type 
of their activities. The weak level of efficient energy equipment reduces men and women potential and  
makes women more vulnerable socially and economically. Rural women generally have not enough 
information on opportunities of energy to modernize their income -generating activities. Concretely, it 
is necessary to provide solar energy equipment to women suc h as motor pumps for gardening, dryers 
for agro sylvo pastoral products transformation, solar fridge, slicer, grinder, etc. and provide more training to them for a best sufficient  et relevant use of these equipment . 
Considering that mainstreaming gender in to energy projects can increase the benefits of electrification 
for rural communities, the project proposes to contribute in reducing economic and social vulnerability


---
*Page 106*
---

7 
 
  
 of rural women through increased access to energy facilities and economic opportunities.  As precised 
in previous session, the interviews of beneficiaries reveal that p roductive activities requiring modern 
energy equipment are many and include all economic domain . 
Up to now, projects and programs have been developed with AMADER, and other loca l NGOs in Mali 
funded by the State or other donors (UN -Women, the World Bank, etc.) for a good recovery of 
renewable energies. Diagnosis revealed that to solve the specific problems of men and women, and 
meet the practical and strategic needs of women and youth, solar equipment must be provided. They 
also need to be trained for a best use equipment or technologies (component 2 and 3 in this project). 
The experiences generated interesting results against poverty in which women are more victims. The 
more prod uctive and less arduous to use energy equipment acquisition can significantly improve 
conditions, especially for women and young people in the implementing localities. Providing local 
communities with efficient technologies and equipment will enable them t o take better advantage of 
the abundant available natural resources, increase income from fruit trees, better transform, conserve, 
and sell livestock products. Based on these achievements and on the positive impacts of women's 
access to energy services, th e present plan will allow to expand the intervention area and develop 
business opportunities for women and young people. The activities of components 2 and 3 of the 
project will be reinforced by the activities proposed in axes 1, 2 and 3 in this actual gen der action plan.  
4. Gender challenges analysis in energy sector in implementing communities  
The weak economic power of women  and weak access to electricity , particularly in rural areas, has 
important consequences for their a ccess to factors of production , their economic empowerment,  etc. 
Rural women ’s capacities are severely constrained by low access to e nergy technologies and services 
and they use traditional biomass (wood, agricultural residues, animal excrement) for cooking food and 
small art isanal processing of products. They generally have little information on the opportunities 
offered by the use of energy sources to modernize their income -generating activities.  The reported 
access to energy difficulties  of women are many and include  the co st of energy  and equipment 
maintenance , the i nsufficient coverage of the public energy network in the villages , payment 
problems.  The new energy policy aims to increase production and diversify energy sources by 
promoting new and renewable energies in orde r to support economic activity and ensure access to 
electricity for the greatest number of people. The concrete results are to install solar kits mainly in 
households, schools and health centres , solar pumps for water pumping, off- grid lighting installations 
and mini -grid installations.  
Rural women and girls are especially affected and t he major gender challenges include (i) a dvocacy for 
a favourable institutional environment  ; (ii) m asculinity  perspective ( Men's awareness and involment 
for Women's Access to opportunity ) ; iii) w omen's access to project decision -making during 
implementation  ; iv) w omen's entrepreneurship capacity building (access to renewable energy 
technologies ) ; and v) taking discriminatory measures in favour of women to ensure equity in the 
equipment endowment  
So, to combat detrimental to economic and social emergence of women factors, joint initiatives have 
to be implemented in the renewable energy sector. It involves the pro vision to women of  various 
equipment, such as mills, freezers and dryers that operate with solar energy, and mixers and gas lamps. For most of these women, renewable energy is will be the appropriate  source of energy and economic


---
*Page 107*
---

8 
 
  
 empowerment. After trainin g, they will manage to use this equipment to develop income generated 
activities. for marketing purposes. Therefore, the project will have to provide for gender equality, bring 
innovative technologies to women, and strengthen their trade capacity. The proj ect will also provide 
capacity  strengthening  of rural women  to increase  women's  income  and decision -making  autonomy.  
5. Project rationale  
Climate change has a profound impact on our planet and its inhabitants. New climate records show 
alarming frequency with multiple climate impacts. For instance, we note the increase in the frequency 
and intensity of droughts or floods; the rise in extreme temperatures, with the drying up of our water bodies. These changes have major indirect impacts such as decrease in available agricultural or fish ery 
yields, increase in food prices and decrease in food self- sufficiency opportunities lead ing to food 
insecu rity, conflicts over land tenure rights due to  pres sure on land, water, wildlife and among others.  
However, it should be noted that in this project, access to land is not an important and decisive issue. 
As a result, the access problems mentioned above rep resent a general situation and not a specific issue 
of women's involvement in the project.  
Climate change impact s have more effects  on the poorest and most rural populations in Mali because 
of the very low rate of rural electrification (15% in rural villages against 55% in urban centres) . 77% 
(16.5 million inhabitants in 2013 ) of these rural population s reside  in rural areas.  78% of households' 
energy needs are therefore met by biomass resources (firewood and coal), which, in addition to 
creating health problems linked to indoor air pollution in rural areas, aggravate deforestation and soil 
degradation by releasing carbon stored in trees and soils.   
It is worth noting that research findings have estimated very significant environmental and social 
conse quences of the energy situation, namely: (i) deforestation of about 400,000 ha/year; (ii) the 
emission of 15.45 megatons  of carbon dioxide, representing 94.33% of Mali's total greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions in carbon equivalent; and (iii) decrease in the p urchasing power of the population i n 
the face of rising oil prices.  Women  and youth are particularly vulnerable and more exposed to th e 
risks of natural disasters  with low adaptation capacity to the effects of climate change.  
It is against this backdrop that Mali, through the "Green Energy Services for  Communities in Rural Mali" 
Project, is working to "electrify 300 localities in off- grid/mini -grid mode using autonomous renewable 
energy systems (solar PV, wind)".  
This project is in perfect cohere nce with the country's national orientations on gender promotion and 
is part of guideline 3 of National Gender P lan "Recognition of women's contribution to economic 
development through their integr ation into productive circuits  and equal access to employme nt 
opportun ities and factors of production " and will allow women and men to have equitable access to 
energy services in rural areas.  
6. Relevance of the targeted  project implementation  localities  
As in many parts of the country, the localities chosen for the  implementation of the project, women 
have a great need for energy services than men. For the moment, women's financial resources come 
mainly from the sale of wood and coal. They have diversified activities that require greater access to


---
*Page 108*
---

9 
 
  
 renewable energy in rural areas. The needs are the use of solar equipment, the less use of wood, solar 
fridges, solar dryers, solar equipment in the kitchen, gardening, culinary training, solar panels. This 
climate project integrates gender perspectives because it  integrates men and women resilience needs,  
allows women to abandon traditional activities (selling wood and coal) and allows them to improve their economic autonomy.  
The project implementation targeted areas  have potential for innovative women  activities.  Both 
women and men have  been involved in diagnostic  and they all expressed the problems, challenges, 
and needs presented in developing profitable economic activities due to lack or insufficiency of 
modern energy sources and appropriate and efficient proce ssing equipment. They were also involved 
in the definition of needs and priorities as part of the project. Localities will be easily accessible for 
interventions. This participatory approach is a factor favorable to their adhesion to the project . Local 
authorities (mayors, prefects, etc.) have undertaken to provide substantial support to women to 
facilitate the installation of equipment. The local operators of rural electrification intervening in the localities  expressed  a real will to collaborate with the local populations for the smooth running of the 
activities.  
 
 
 
 
II. OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED OUTCOMES OF GENDER ACTION PLAN  
1. Energy needs of project implementation localities  
The diagnostic study done  by the consultants  indicates that the specific energy needs of women are 
mainly related to the nature of their activities  in communities. The energy needs identified for women 
in localities can be summarized as follows:  
• the provision  of electricity  on a continuous  basis  and at an affordable  price.   
• the establishment  of modern  and efficient  infrastructures  and equipment  for processing and 
marketing  for the valorization  of local products  and the increase  of the income  of the 
populations;  
• the gardening equipment  mainly  using renewable  energy  for women;  
• the technical  supervision  of beneficiaries  in the use and the maintenance  of infrastructures  
and equipment;  
• women's  access  to markets  (sales  kiosks,  drop  off points,  motorbike , etc. for the transportation  
of products  in fairgrounds  etc.);  because  women  are heads  of household s 
For training , special attention must be paid to girls and women  to enable  them  to ensure the 
maintenance of energy equipment.


---
*Page 109*
---

10 
 
  
 2. General objective of gender action plan  
Equality between women and men is a condition for the effectiveness of public policies and the 
sustainable and equitable human development. This gender action plan is designed to contribute to 
better mainstream  gender in  the "Green Energy Services for Communities in Rural Mali" project, in 
particular the "Rural Electrification of localities in off- grid/mini- grid mode from autonomous 
renewable energy systems.   
3. Specific objectives of gender action plan  
This project aims to promote the productive use of energy by rural men and women and the reduction 
of time in domestic chores in order to contribute to the economic empowerment of rural women in a 
resilient energy system in c limate change.  The s pecific objectives  of the plan  are to: 
• Improve women, and youth  participation in decision -making and project implementation at all 
levels ; 
• Improve women participation of project benefits (access to equipment);  
• Enhance collaboration between stakeholders to ensure appropriation and sustainability of the project;  
• Improve women and youth as well as others’ access  to learning and training opportunities 
offered by the project;  
• Promote information and communication in mainstreaming gender throughout the process  
• Promote the acquisition of gender knowledge by project tea m members and other local 
stakeholders;  
• Encouraging the sharing of experiences, capitalisation and dissemination of good practices  
• Set up monitoring and evaluation system to follow results and change achieve ment;  
• Determine project indicators  to help result s and change measuring and follow up.  
 
4. Expected out puts and out comes   
The expected outcome at the end of the project is the increased access of rural men and women to economic opportunities and women's economic empowerment in the country with the development of adaptation and mitigation of climate change effects energy services  that preserve the environment 
and improve the economic situation of women . Specifically,  for gender mainstreaming in the project , 
these are:   
• Rural women have greater access  to adapted energy technology equipment;  
• Participation of women, youth and others in decision -making and implementation within the 
framework of the project has improved at all levels;  
• Participation of women of project benefits (access to equipment);  
• Collaboration between stakeholders for the appropriation and sustainability of project 
activities  is encouraged;  
• Access of women, young and others to learning and training opportunities offered by the 
project has improved;  
• Information and communication for mainstream ing gender throughout the project  have been  
promoted ;


---
*Page 110*
---

11 
 
  
 • The acquisition of gender knowledge by project team members and other local stakeholders 
is enhanced ; 
• Experience sharing, capitalisation and dissemination of good practices are enhanced ; 
• Monitoring and evaluation system for achieving the indicators has been set up.  
III. ACTION S FOR A BETTER GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN THE PROJECT  
The AER and AMADER provided additional information to the consultants on the gender analysis of the sector; this reassur es that the proposed interventions respond to the needs and priorities of men 
and women. Consultations to date with stakeholders such as the AE R, AMADER, local authorities and 
beneficiaries have revealed the needs and priorities of men and women in the ren ewable energy 
sector, and the way in which whose project will respond to it. T hese elements are taken in 
consideration in priority as actions and  presented in the gender analysis; and it is on this that actions 
have been proposed jointly with all the actor s in view of a greater relevance of the actions proposed 
in this plan.  
The orientation of the project's implementation strategy will be based on the achievements, lessons 
learned, and gender best practices. The aim of this plan is also to carry out additionnal concrete actions 
in terms of optimising gender -responsiveness in the new sustainable adaptation initiatives to climate 
change, through operational principles, linked to different Elements of governance.  Consequently , it is 
important t o note that most actions will not be budgeted in a specific way. it will be for the 
management team to ensure that planned activities respect the principles of gender mainstreaming as presented here in the gender action plan.  Indicators are defined (see th e logical framework below) 
are defined to serve as baseline for monitoring actions to strengthen the gender -taking in the project.  
The four  major strategic pill ars and actions for gender mainstreaming  in the project implementation 
are presented in below.   
1. Component 1: Capacity building of rural electrification institutions and technical 
assistance  
The output is to Strengthen Rural Energy Regulatory Agencies.  In fact, m any stakeholders will be  
involved in this project with different and complementary roles. Mainly, it is AER (the implementing 
organisation), the Gender Focal Point of AMADER (AMADER is the organisation responsible of rural 
Electrification), local NGOs and women civil society organizations such as cooperatives, BOAD the 
financial organisation who will provide funds and technical assistance and control of the 
implementation, Private sector, the GCF, the Government represented by the ministry and the 
direction of Energy, and the local administrative board, etc. Furthermore, the national regulator for 
rural electrification (AMADER) and the Private operators’ organization were fully engaged. Capacity 
building actions will be implement to enable all stakeholders to play their respective roles.  The project 
management team must opt to follow the principles in Gender mainstreaming. Thus, it is important to 
take gender into account in all actions . 
So, the management team  including gender staff  must have strong gender capacities . These principles 
must not only  apply to management bodies but also to stakeholders  for a better follow up . The 
following activities  will be carried out  : (i) Capacity building and raising awareness of AMADER, AER, 
the Rural Electrification Fund, DNE, etc . ; (ii) Train women to make optimal use of solar energy


---
*Page 111*
---

12 
 
  
 technologies ; (iii) Strengthen collaboration between actors for ownership and sustainability of 
equipment ; (iv) Carry out actions (awareness -raising actions) of communications on the project at 
com munity level ; (v) Advocate at the institutional level to strengthen gender mainstreaming in the 
national regulatory framework for solar energy ; (vi) Strengthen the participation of women and youth 
in decision making in the project at community level.  
2. Component 2: Detailed engineering and installation of solar powered minigrids  
The project main output is Rural localities electrified with solar PV power plant.  To improve the 
accessibility of women in the project and in line with above gender analysis, th e actions should be 
carried out at two levels and in line with the constraints and needs identified by men and women at the level of the analysis. in the renewable energy sector. It is about the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the definition of the equipment to be provided . Priority criteria should be based 
on gender and diversity analysis to ensure that the most marginalized benefits from the actions. these 
criteria must also be focused on the level of vulnerability, the economic empowerment of women. 
there is a need to ensure the participation of women, other vulnerable groups such as young people 
in decision -making and in the implementation of project actions at all levels. In fact, the gender 
diagnosis showed that women and men have differe nt needs and different levels of access to 
renewable energies, and also  different needs for equipment. in the context of the project, the actions 
to be carried out must take into account these gender -specific needs, these differences in the level of 
access  of men and women; in order to promote equality and gender equity.  
Among the actions to be implemented in this component to support the mainstreaming of gender , (i) 
Improve the accessibility of rural households to solar energy; (ii) Promote access to infor mation for 
men and women on the opportunities of the solar project; (iii) Advocate to reduce women's access to solar equipment.  
3. Component 3: Support for productive use of electricity  
The project main output is the Increased access to  clean energy by househ olds and for productive use, 
in particular, to set  up a Financial guarantee mechanism to compensate microfinance institutions . So 
the gender analysis has shown the relevance of the choice of localities of implementation of the 
project. The project will  aim to fight against poverty, to promote women and m en access to renewable 
energy services . This requires the realization of actions favouring the involvement, the mobilization 
and the adhesion of the communities, the actions of sensitization, and the concrete actions of creation 
of incomes as well for the men as for the women.   
Among the actions to be implemented in this component , ther e are (i) Improve access to financing for 
energy efficiency among small and medium -sized enterprises, including those run by women; (ii) 
Create and support income generating activities based on micro -credits; (iii) Train women for better 
use of solar equip ment; (iv) Women's capacity building in business management, including the 
processing and proper maintenance of accounting documents, as well as marketing techniques.  
These planned actions will improve the implementation, monitoring of gender mainstreaming  in the 
project. In the context of this project, the participation and involvement of all stakeholders (project 
staffs , communities and authorities) is necessary. Participation must be mainly at three levels  (project 
staff, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation) . At Project  implementation  level  the staff must


---
*Page 112*
---

13 
 
  
 be recruited and trained in order to have strong gender  operational capacities . At the implementation  
level, it is a matter of strengthening partnership with other stakeholders which would encourage the 
mobilization and participation of all to achieving the expected results.  Supporting beneficiary 
communities also means strengthening the level of communit y participation in the actions and 
benefits of development in an equitable way for men and women.  
4. Management audit and reporting  
Planned activities her  include: i)  Operationalize the mechanism for monitoring and evaluating actions 
and results of gender pr omotion in the project;  ii) Organize balance sheet and results monitoring and 
evaluation workshops;  (see logical framework), etc.  
As it has been noted in the component one, a t the p roject implementation level , communication is an 
important and essential ingredient. Accessibility to information implies the right to seek, obtain and communicate information on social  and environment  matters. The project must ensure that the 
stakeholders  involved are sufficiently informed about their rights but also about their duties in the 
project . Access to information implies the right to seek, obtain and communicate information on 
gender issues. The project must ensure that stakeholders are sufficiently informed of their rights , but 
also of obligations under the project
. Communication  aims at to make aware of the impact of the 
climate c hange on daily life of rural populations. It is also  to make aware of the opportunities for active 
participation in the development and implementation of appropriate technical and technological 
innovations to a dapt to the adverse effects of c limate change.  
At local communities -  beneficiaries - of the interventions women and men, including those from the 
most vulnerable groups, are  consulted. And their specific needs and priorities for change  are taken in 
consideration . They must participate equitably in the diagnosis, design, implementation, monitoring 
and sharing of benefits generated through project intervention. At this level, synergies will be 
developed with local authorities, technical services and other gender sensitive stakeholders to boost 
the benefits of community interventions. Cooperation with lo cal women's and other groups, such as 
young people and others, will be strengthened in order to encourage the participation of the whole 
community in the promotion, planning and implementation of the project. This level of involvement is 
a determining fact or in the level of ownership and sustainability of the project's actions and results by 
beneficiaries.  
IV. GENDER MAINSTREAMING STRATEGY  
The gender mainstreaming strategy is based on, (i) the willingness and adherence of project 
stakeholders to the principles of gender equality and equity in development actions, institutional and 
operational capacity building, Development of tools for monitoring the gender and capitalization 
actions. The institutional framework of the strategy comprises three levels,  namely the coordination 
of the Strategy, the management of implementation and the evaluation and capitalization of actions and good practices in gender.


---
*Page 113*
---

14 
 
  
 1. Coordination of the strategy  
The project team will assist in planning the operationalization of the gender- based strategy at all levels. 
It will also ensure that the results are achieved by the members with the support of the various national 
partners (making available to human and financial resources), and their capitalization in the processes.  
2. The management of the implementation  
In the operational phase, the piloting of the strategy will be carried out by  a staff which will take charge  
of the orientation, facilitation of capacity -building sessions, periodic follow -up and the M onitoring 
mechanism assessment and implementation of the strategy.  The implementation of project gender 
actions will be carried out by the project team, which shall benefit from stakeholders support to 
mainstream gender dimensions in line with the donor's gender strategies.  
3. Information and actors’ capacity building  
This involves providing specific access to informing the actors involved in the project implementation 
and strengthening their capacities in the domain  of gender at national and local level. Inf ormation and 
training on the themes of the project is an essential prerequisite for the success of implementation of this gender action plan . The project will use t echnical capacity building in advocacy and lobbying for 
gender equality as a gender mainstre aming  strategy.  Stakeholders that will have specific  roles  in the 
project are: AER, the Gender Focal Point of AMADER, local NGOs and women civil society organizations, 
BOAD, GCF, Private, Government , etc.  
4. Assessment and capitalization of actions and good practices in gender   
A monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be put in place and be active throughout the 
implementation process of the strategy in order to assess and measure progress made in terms of 
gender mainstreaming. A participatory approach  will be adopted to assess the progress of activities 
and the level of achievement of outcome . The monitoring and evaluation process will therefore involve 
stakeholders  directly concerned by gender mainstreaming at the project level. At the end of the 
intervention, a study of the capitalization of the actions and good practices in gender will make it 
possible to highlight the taking into account of the gender.  
5. Gender mainstreaming M&E   
The project staff is responsible for m easuring the outcomes and impacts of project activities on women 
and men’s resilience to climate change through gender  responsive M&E.  The objective is to assess the 
outcomes and impacts of interventions on women and men, support the equal participation of women and men in M&E acti vities and decision -making processes, and collect sex- disaggregated data to track 
gender impacts and benefits for women and men . To conduct gender -sensitive M&E, the foundation 
is a results framework (such as in the bellow table ) with gender -responsive ind icators and targets (sex -
disaggregated). The collection of sex -disaggregated data is essential for M&E and for reporting on 
gender outcomes so that lessons learned and best practices are captured and disseminated, and fed 
back into project design.


---
*Page 114*
---

15 
 
  
 Tools are proposed to measure how gender is mainstreamed during and after the project 
implementation. So the project staff will use these tools for that purpose.  
6. Reporting on Gender Outcomes  
Based on gender -responsive approaches and gender -sensitive data collection that is built into project 
design, implementation and M&E, reporting on gender outcomes is a component of all project 
reporting processes:  
• Include mechanisms to monitor and report on gender impacts in project design;  
• Document and disseminate gender -relevant best practices and lessons learned throughout the 
project cycle; and  
• Ensure that progress reports, implementation status reports, aide memoires, management 
information systems and completion reports present gender equality results and lessons 
learned.  
Reporting on gender outcomes should be robust enough to inform future project identification and development as a means of deepening and increasing development co -benefits between gender 
equality and climate action. An optimal result would be the growing capacity to influence national 
climate change plans and strategies so that they become more gender responsive.  
7. The sustainability of the project  
The sustainability of the project  will be ensured through the technical capacities  building for women 
and youth  to take over the repairs of obtained equipment . The se skills in maintenance and repair of 
energy equipment will help reduce the rate of failure in terms of equipment installed. The commitment 
of the authorities and the involvement of community leaders wil l help to ensure the continuation  of 
the activities.


---
*Page 115*
---

16 
 
  
 V. GENDER MAINSTREAMING ACTION PLAN FRAMEWORK  
COMPONENTS  PROJECT  OUTPUTS  ACTIVIT IES INDICAT ORS BASELINE 
2019  TARGET IN 
2023  TIMELINE  RESPONSI BLE BUDGET US 
D 
The implementation of the "Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)" will contribute in the long term to the off -grid/mini grid electrification of 70 villages, nearly 50% of which are women and men, using 
renewable energy systems (solar photovoltaic and wind) with the aim of moving towards low carbon solutions in the energy sector and reducing the sector's vulnerability to climate change, linked to fossil fuels.  
The intermediate and immediate results of the project will generate multiplier effects including: the improvement of in health of more than 50% of women, men, young pe ople and children by reducing greenhouse gases, the economic 
empowerment of nearly 50% women explained by the improvement of their purchasing power, access to new economic and environmental opportunities, the reduction of deforestation by about 400 000 ha/ year ; the reduction of 
emission carbon dioxide, representing 94.33% of Mali's total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in carbon equiv alent.  
GENDER OUT PUT:  
• The participation of women, youth and others in decision -making within the project at all levels is effective;  
• The accessibility of nearly 50% women, young people and others to the learning and training opportunities offered by the project is improved;  
• Information and communication to mainstream gender throughout the process is real  
• The acquisition of gender knowledge by project team members and other local actors is effective  
• Sharing of experiences, capitalisation and disseminat ion of good practices are encouraged;  
• The monitoring and evaluation system for achieving the indicators has been set up.  
 1 : Capacity building 
of rural electrification 
institutions and 
technical assistance   Strengthened Rural Energy 
Regulatory Agency   Capacity building and raising 
awareness of AMADER, AER, the 
Rural Electrification Fund, DNE , etc.   Number of organized 
sessions of Capacity Building  
 Number of structures 
formed   TBD 
 
 
 TBD  5 
  
 5  During the 
implementation of 
the project   Private sector 
operators  
 Project staff  
 Private providers  100 000  
 Train women to make optimal use of 
solar energy technologies   Number of people trained 
and% of women  
 
 Number of new income -
generating activities 
initiated by women   TBD 
 
 
 TBD  310 698 and 
50% of women  
 155 349   During the 
implementation of the project
  Private sector 
operators  
 Project staff  
  
 Strengthen collaboration between 
actors for ownership and 
sustainability of equipment   Number of actors involved  
 Number of women and men 
involved   TBD 
 
 TBD  05 
 
 15  During the 
implementation of the project
  Project staff  
  
 Carry out actions (awareness -raising 
actions) of communications on the project at community level   Number of people affected 
by the sensitization  
 Women's rate   TBD 
  
 TBD  310 698 and 
50% of women   
 155 349   During the 
implementation of the project
  Media  
 Project staff  
  
 Advocate at the institutional level to 
strengthen gender mainstreaming in 
the national regulatory framework 
for solar energy   Gender mainstreaming in 
policies  
 
 Measures taken in favor of women in the solar field   02 
 
 TBD  All public 
policies  
 
 At least 50%   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Private sector 
operators  
 Ministry of Energy


---
*Page 116*
---

17 
 
  
  Strengthen the participation of 
women and youth in decision making 
in the project at community level   Number of women members 
of decision -making bodies  
 Number of young members 
of decision -making bodies   TBD 
 
 
 TBD At least 2 in 
each decision board  
 At least 1 in each decision 
board   During the 
implementation of the project
  Project staff  
 Community leaders    
 2 : Detailed 
engineering and 
installation of solar 
powered minigrids   Rural       localities electrified 
with solar PV power plant : 
Acquisition, installation and 
commissioning of solar 
powered minigrids equipment 
; Implementation of 
Environment &Social 
measures   Improve the accessibility of rural 
households to solar energy   Number of Households with 
improved access to low - 
emission energy sources  
 Number of female lead 
Households with improved 
access to low - emission 
energy sources   TBD 
 
 
 TBD  44 385 
 
  50% (22  193)   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Private sector 
operators  
 46 000  
 Promote access to information for 
men and women on the opportunities of the solar project   Number of people affected 
by information actions  
 Women's rate   TBD 
  
 TBD  310 698  
  
 50% (55  349)   During the 
implementation of the project
  Private sector 
operators  
 Media  
  
 Advocate to reduce women's access 
to solar equipment   Number of beneficiaries 
with access to solar 
equipment  
 Women's rate   TBD 
 
 TBD  310 698  
 
 
 50% (55  349)   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Private sector 
operators  
 Project staff  
  
 3 : Support for 
productive use of electricity   Increased access to clean 
energy by households     and for productive use  : Setting up a 
Financial guarantee 
mechanism to compensate microfinance institutions   Improve access to financing for 
energy efficiency among small and medium -sized enterprises, including 
those run by women   Number of small and 
medium -sized enterprises, 
including women- led 
enterprises, receiving energy 
efficiency funding provided 
through the project   TBD  50 000   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Project staff  
 Micro- credit 
institutions  150 000  
 Create and support income 
generating activities based on micro -
credits   Part of households 
benefiting from financial 
mechanism (guarantee 
scheme) to access credit for 
productive use of clean 
energy  
 Additional jobs created for men and women in the solar 
field  
 Number of beneficiaries 
with access to credit  
 Women's rate   TBD 
 
 
 
 
 TBD 
 
 TBD 
 
 TBD  44 385 
 
 
 
 
 50 000 
 
 310 698 
 
 50%   During the 
implementation of the project
  Project staff  
 Micro- credit 
institutions   
 Train women for better use of solar 
equipment   Number of women trained   TBD  155 349   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Project staff  
 Private sector 
operators   
 Women's capacity building in 
business management, including the 
processing and proper maintenance  Number of women trained   TBD  155 349   During the 
implementation of 
the project   Project staff  
 Private providers


---
*Page 117*
---

18 
 
  
 of accounting documents, as well as 
marketing techniques  
 4 : Management 
audit and reporting   Ensure that gender is taken 
into account in the overall 
project reporting   Operationalize the mechanism for 
monitoring and evaluating actions 
and results of gender promotion in 
the project   Existence of a gender 
specialist in the project team   TBD  01  During the 
implementation of 
the project   Project staff  
 50 000  
 Organize balance sheet and results 
monitoring and evaluation 
workshops   Number of organized 
workshops   TBD  2  One at mid -term and 
one at the end   Project staff  
   
       TOTAL GLOBAL  346 000  
This plan is fixe d at an amount of three hundred and forty six thousand ( 346,000 ) US Dollars


---
*Page 118*
---

19 
Co
mments  of the above table  
It is important to specify that the target persons or group in charge of actions  defined  in this table are  
link to  the stakeholders  in the implementation of the mentioned activities.  
The project team is responsible to  follow up and monitor  the perfor mance  indicators progress during 
the project implementation phase. The project promoter should ensure that the first quarter of the 
year has been used by the project team to collect and complete the analysis of gender information and data on the project baseline. This collection of information will enable the updating of gender analysis 
during the implementation of the project. The project team will benefit from the support of other stakeholders involved to regularly inform SMART indicators formulated as part of the monitoring of gender equality and equity in the project. It's also important to have upon this framework a M&E 
system that will show exactly periods and frequency of data collection and gender analysis with the purpose to ensure a real gender consideration in the project.  
CONCLUSION  
From all the above, it is undeniably established  that taking gender issues into account in any 
development process constitutes Mali's response both to public policies and international commitments in a context of globalization, and even as a democratic requirement.  Finally, it is still 
useful to remind that this gender action plan is an integrated part of the project's operational framework and that the actions identified are aimed at improving gender mainstreaming in the project . 
It is therefo re appropriate for actors to be involved at all levels to ensure and ensure that the principles 
of equality and gender equity are respected.  
Annex : 3 R Gender analysis sheet  : This below matrix of analysis is relatively simple and allows to ask 
some essential questions about an intervention (before or during its realization) and to study an 
intervention according to gender relations. The first two lines correspond mainly to a collection of information specified by gender: the involvement of women and men in the intervention and the 
distribution of resources related to the intervention. The analysis begins by questioning both the 
causes and consequences of the representation of women and men and the distribution of resources 
between these two groups. Th e study of the causes and consequences encourages the designers of an 
intervention to measure objectively the taking into account of gender relations. If the consequences for the intervention are likely to have negative effects, it may be necessary to rethink the design of the 
intervention and to carry out this analysis again.  
Representation  •How many women and how many men benefit from the intervention?
•How many women and how many men participate in the intervention?
Resources  •How are the resources used an d/or made available through intervention between
men and women (money, time, etc.)?
•Analysis of cash flows by gender
•What are the direct and indirect gains of men and women in the intervention? How
do women and men use time ?
Achievements •What is the distribution of benefits between men and women?
•Are there inequalities in the distribution?
•What are the reasons of this distribution?
•What are the actions to be taken to restore equality?
Bibliography


---
*Page 119*
---

20 
Mi
nistère de l’énergie et de l’eau , direction nationale de l’énergie  : système d’information énergétique 
du mali SIE -Mali, Rapport 2014  
Rapport genre de l’AMADER pour l’année 2016 et programmation des activités 2017, 
AMADER  (avec le financement de la Banque Mond iale : Rapport final de l’é tude des besoins genre et 
énergie dans cinq (05) localités du projet de systèmes hybrides d’électrification rurale, juin 2017  
Rapport annuel d’activité genre du projet SHER de l’AMADER, notamment la sous composante 2B 
« Promotion de l’efficacité énergétique  à travers le développement de l’efficacité énergétique et 
l’autonomisation économique des femmes rurales  », Rapport 2017  
Document du Projet Energie pour autonomisation économique de la femme rurale dans un système énergétique résil ient au changement climatique  
Note conceptuelle pour un projet genre - Energie en vue de la réduction de l 'inégalité des sexes à 
l'accès à l'énergie et pour l'autonomisation économique des femmes rurales, AMADER, Juin 2015  
Intégrer  la dimension du genre dans les projets du secteur de l’énergie, Energy sector Managment 
Assistance Program, en collaboration avec la Banque Mondiale et l’Africa Renewable Energy Access Program (AFREA) Série des savoirs 014/13, Octobre 2013  
Ministère de l’Energie et de l’Eau, Direction Nationale de l’Energie, Programme de valorisation à grande échelle des énergies renouvelables dans les pays à faible revenu  : Energies Renouvelables au 
Mali, Réalisations, défis et opportunités  ; partenariat avec International Finance Corporation (IFC), 
BAD, et Banque Mondial  
Solaire Photovoltaïque au Mali: Dé ﬁs techniques et organisationnels du d éploiement de solutions 
solaires photovoltaï ques d ’accès à l ’énergie en milieu rural au Mali, Open ideas, 2011  
Department of Management Engineering Technical University of Denmark, Applications de production d’énergie éolienne et solaire au Mali: évaluation basée sur les cartes des ressources éoliennes et 
solaires du Mali, Décembre 2012,   
_____________________