=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180607114854+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/ModDate: D:20180607114953+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
1 – 4 July  2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  GCF/B.20/1 0/Add.04 
8 June 201 8 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP085 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Enhancing Climate Resilience o f
I
ndia’s Coastal Communities ”;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or
focal point(s);  and
c)Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Enhancing Climate Resilience of India’s Coastal Communities  
Country/Region:  India  
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Programme  
Date of Submission:  Initial submission 4 April 2017, 1st Resubmission 1 August 
2017, 2nd Resubmission 16 October 2017, 3rd Resubmission 3 
Novem ber 2017, 4th Resubmission 26 November 2017 ,  
5th Resubmission 29 November 2017, 6th Resubmission 1 4 
December 2017, 7th Resubmission 10 April 2018, 8th 
Resubmission 26  April 2018 , 9th Resubmission 24  May 2018


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please submit the  completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 105 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Enhancing climate resilience of India’s coastal communities  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     India  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Government of India  
A.1.5. Accredited entity United Nations Development Programme  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒ International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India  
 
Direct – Approx. 1,74 4,970 people (of whom 50% female) in 24 
target landscapes  
Indirect  – 10 million people in 24 target landscapes benefitting from 
improved shoreline protection in 12 coast al districts of Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha States  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☐ Adaptation  ☒ Cross -cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission  Initial submission 4 April 2017, 1st Resubmission 1 August 2017, 2nd 
Resubmission 16 October 2017,  3rd Resubmission 3 November  2017, 
4th Resubmission 26 November 2017,  5th Resubmission 28 
November 2017, 6th Resubmission 14  December 2017 , 7th 
Resubmission 10 April 2018, 8th Resubmission 26 April 2018, 9th 
Resubmission 24  May 2018  
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Srilata Kammila  
Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation  
Organization  United Nations  Development Programme  
Email address  srilata.kammila@undp.org   
Telephone number  +66 2 304 9100 ext. 5264  
Mailing address  United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand  
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 105 
 A 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☒ 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. The proposed project supports the Government of India to enhance the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities 
to climate change through ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) . The project combines GCF grant finance with 
significant leveraged co- finance to shift the paradigm towards a new approach integrating ecosystem -centred and 
community -based approaches t o adaptation into coastal management and planning by the public sector, the private 
sector and civil society.  This will be achieved through investing in ecological infrastructure to buffer against climate-
induced hazards, especially storm surges , supporting climate- resilient coastal livelihoods, and enhancing climate -risk 
informed cross -sectoral planning and governance of the coastal zone.  
2. The project objective is t o enhance the resilience of the lives and livelihoods of the most vulnerable popu lations, 
particularly women, in the coastal areas of India to climate change and extreme events, using an ecosystem -centred 
and community -based approach.  This will contribute to the GCF’s Fund Level Impacts of increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions, and improved resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services , as well as  reduced emissions from sustainable land use and forest / ecosystem management . 
In addition, the proposed project will contribute towards the achievement of climate priorities outlined in India’s National 
Action Plan on Climate Change (2008) , the State Action Plans , as well as commitments outlined in India’s Nationally 
Determined Contribution  (2015) . The project will be aligned with India’s emerging strategic investment priorities for 
GCF funding, which are currently being identified through a consultative process, reflecting the priorities in the 
aforementioned policies; and will als o be aligned with the work program of UNDP as an Accredited Entity of the GCF.  
3. GCF and other leveraged resources  will be used at national, state, and community levels to enhance capacities for 
ecosystem - and community -based approaches to climate change adaptation and enable climate policy and finance 
shifts to catalyse climate action in all of India’s coastal States and Union Ter ritories. Specific ecosystem -based 
adaptation and climate -adaptive livelihood interventions will be undertaken in the target states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra and Odisha, with pathways to replication and scale across all coastal states, and learning shared across 
the South Asian region. The project yields sustainable development benefits across coastal districts of the three target 
states, with more than  1,700,000 direct beneficiaries in the target landscapes whose households’ current livelihoods 
are af fected by climate change and will benefit from livelihoods activities through the project, and 10 million indirect 
beneficiaries  living in these landscapes , who will benefit from the mitigation of economic damages and losses 
associated with extreme weather  events, especial ly storm surges that can cause coastal flooding and erosion. The 
proposed investment demonstrates a high degree of economic efficiency, with an economic rate of return in excess 
of 20% for livelihood activities, of approximately 26% for paddy rice activities, and well above 30% in most coastal 
protection activities . The project was designed through extensive stakeholder consultations, including engagements 
with civil society role -players,  that influenced the development of the proposal. A  formal review of the funding proposal 
was undertaken by a Technical Working Group, including representatives of the MoEFCC and the three State 
Governments. Following revisions, a Project Appraisal Meeting was held in March 2017, including these implementi ng 
partners, technical experts and representatives of civil society, at which the final submission package, including all 
annexes, was approved, and arrangements were discussed for project implementation and operations and 
maintenance post -project. Followi ng the appraisal meeting, the NDA issued a letter of no objection . 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  4 April 2017  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD [ Date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF ]


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 105 
 A 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/01/2019  
End:  31/12/2024  
Project/programme lifespan  30 years1 
                                                             
1 This is the period  over which the carbon sequestration benefits of ecosystem restoration have been calculated.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 105 
 B 
  
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
4. The cost of implementing the project to enhance climate resilience of vulnerable target coastal communities is 
estimated at $130.27  million over the period 2019  to 2024. The GCF input of $43.42  million  will cover 33% of the 
costs, with the remaining 67 % coming from leveraged co- financing of $86.85  million.  A grant financing mechanism 
is sought to support the prioritized interventions of this project. The Government of India seeks grant funding for the 
proposed urgent ecosystem -based adaptation interventions that will enhance the public good and benefit vulnerable 
communities in the coastal zones of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. This large -scale project will advance 
climate change adaptation across India’s coastal zone, with major gains for resilience in the three target States  whose 
coastal populations are vulnerable to extreme events and slow onset climate impacts . Historically, the focus  in India, 
as in most countries, has been on engineering- based solutions  to climate challenges , such as building concrete 
structures to directly increase protection from waves and flooding. However, ecosystem -based solutions are 
increasingly being recognized worldwide2 as cost -effective approaches with additional co-benefits for enhancing 
climate -adaptive livelihoods.  
5. The project also establishes  pathways to scale for ecosystem -based adaptation across all of India’s 13 coastal states, 
islands and union territories , where coastal districts house 14.2% of India’s total population, according to India’s 
Nationally Determined Contribution. As stated in the NDC, the country has been identified as one of the most vulnerable to the impact of accelerated sea level rise , with  other climate hazards including more frequent and intense 
tropical cyclones and associated storm surges , as well as periodic droughts
3. The lives and livelihoods of coastal 
communities in the targeted states are being impacted by  climate change –  including slow-onset impacts of sea level 
rise, ocean warming and acidification, already observed changes in temperature and rainfall patterns , and extreme 
weather events such as intensified cyclones causing storm surges , with flooding an d erosion. Without the GCF 
project, baseline development investments will have decreasing success in delivering the expected development gains in the coastal zone because of current and future climate change impacts  that are compounding the underlying 
vulnerabilities . Other i nitiatives in coastal areas, both ongoing and completed, are either rooted in integrated coastal 
zone management (e.g. the World Bank -financed Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project) without explicitly 
focusing on climate risks, or address climate risks through an engineering approach favouring “hard” infrastructure 
as a buffer against storm surges and sea level rise (e.g. the ADB -funded Sustainable Coastal Protection and 
Management Investment Programme. Existing initiatives relying on hard, engineered solutions will fail to harness the potential of coastal ecosystems for adaptation –  firstly, to buffer extreme events and secondly, to provide sustainable 
alternatives to fishing and farming livelihoods threatened by climate change.  
6. The ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) interventions to be implemented through this project are in support of the 
public good, since whole coastal populations will benefit from shoreline protection. In addition, restoring coastal ecosystems will help support ne w livelihoods for poor fishing and farming communities threatened by slow onset 
climate impacts.  The GoI is currently investing in socio- economic development in the coastal states of India to 
address poverty and promote rural development. However, these investments are being undermined by the impacts of climate change, resulting in diminishing development gains (see Section C.2 of this Full Proposal and Section 4 of 
the Feasibility Study – Annex II). Through co- financing this project, government at national  level and in the three 
target states is making a commitment to integrating climate risk management into coastal development. Currently, however, the public sector lacks the knowledge and technical capacity to pursue an ecosystem -based approach to 
adaptati on, and to engage the private sector and civil society in these efforts. The GCF investment will enable this 
paradigm shift, embedding a new ecosystem - and community -based approach to coastal adaptation in the wa y India’s 
coast is managed. This transformat ional aim  is reflected in the GoI’s commitment to funding operations and 
maintenance on an ongoing basis post-project. Given that the proposed interventions do not lend themselves to 
financial reflows back to private sector investors, the GoI or the GCF, t here will not be large- scale generation of 
revenue or recovery of costs. Instead, the expected small -scale financial returns that will be generated from 
investments into livelihood diversification will  largely be experienced at the local (household and com munity) level, 
and will underpin the financial viability and sustainability of the climate -adaptive livelihoods  that will be promoted 
through the project . 
                                                             
2 See, for example,  Rao N.S. et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate 
change adaptation in Lami Town, Republic of the Fiji Islands. SPREP Technical Report. Apia, Samoa.  
3 Government of India (2015) India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution: Working Towards Climate Justice, p.23


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 105 
 B 
7. GCF resources are thus sought to invest in public goods that will result in a paradigm shift in coast al zone 
management in India. The proposed project will promote climate -adaptive livelihoods  for vulnerable coastal 
communities in the target states –  with an emphasis on women as beneficiaries –  as well as build adaptive capacity 
through restoration of ecosystems that buffer against the impacts of current and future climate change. GCF funds 
and co- finance will be used to address several barriers that constrain EbA and climate- resilient development 
initiatives in India’s coastal states. These barriers include: i) inadequate information on climate vulnerabilities for 
medium - to long- term local -level adaptation planning and investments; ii)  limited understanding of the potential for 
EbA to enhance adaptive capacity as well as limited technical capacity and financial resources for investment in 
planning and implementing EbA interventions; iii)  limited technical and financial capacity for communities to adopt 
climate -adaptive livelihood opportunities; iv) w eak linkages in climate -resilient  value chains for commodities 
underpinned by coastal ecosystem goods and services ; and v) limited institutional capacity for mainstreaming climate 
change into coastal zone planning, governance and finance (see further detail in Section C2).  
8. Without GCF resources  and leveraged co- finance, communities in the coastal zone of India will remain vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change on their lives and livelihoods. This will exacerbate exposure to climate change-
intensified extreme weather events  and worsen levels of poverty and food insecurity, undermining development 
efforts undertaken by the GoI and other development agencies. Without the intervention, households dependent on 
fishing or farming will remain vulnerable to slow onset impacts of climate change, particularly women, youth and socially marginalized groups (legally categorized as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and O ther Backward 
Classes) – will be specifically targeted, based on the detailed vulnerability assessment conducted in Activity 1.1 and 
applied at community level in Activity Extreme weather events are likely to prove particularly devastating for 
vulnerable c ommunity members such as the very poor, the elderly and people with disabilities, and slow -onset 
impacts like drought will have a disproportionate impact on women and marginalized  population groups , including 
those classified legally as Scheduled Castes, S cheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (see S ocial Inclusion 
Planning Framework , Appendix A to Annex VI (b) . To enhance the resilience of such vulnerable communities, project 
interventions are planned under the following interlinked outputs:  
• Output 1. Enhanced resilience of coastal and marine ecosystems and their services   
• Output 2. Climate- adaptive livelihoods for enhanced resilience of vulnerable coastal communities; and  
• Output 3. Strengthened governance and institutional framework for climate -resilient management of coastal areas.  
 
Co-financing  
 
9. Public sector co -finance committed for the project – a total of USD 86.85  million – is shown in the four co- finance 
letters  (Annex IV ) from the Governments of the three states of Andhra Pradesh  (USD 20m), Maharashtra (USD 
26.85m) and Odisha (USD 20m), as well as contributions by the GoI at the national level through the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (USD 20m). Table 1 below shows the co- finance to be commingled with 
the GCF funds in order to contribute to the project objective and to each of the project’s three outputs.  
 
10. This new and additional co- finance reflects the commitment of the Government of India to implement national policy 
priorities outlined in the NDC and National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), addressing climate risks in the coastal zone, as well as non- climate related drivers of ecosystem degradation. The GCF investment is a catalyst for 
new climate -risk informed investments by the three States, helping address their adaptation priorities and needs, as 
reflected in the State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs).  Through providing co- finance to the GCF 
investment, the national and three State Governments aim to ensure that their investments in ec osystem restoration, 
livelihood support and infrastructure planning are in line with adaptation policies and are climate- risk informed. 
Participation in the project will help to direct these investments to take climate risk into account, and address it thr ough 
ecosystem and community -centred approaches, so that development gains are not jeopardized. The GCF investment 
addresses the incremental costs of removing the barriers to EbA and climate-
risk informed coastal zone 
management .  
 
11. The largest portion of S tate co -finance will be used for activities contributing to the project’s first output, by undertaking 
conservation and restoration of ecosystems for climate change adaptation. For example, the Maharashtra Forest 
Department will use funds from the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
(CAMPA) – set aside to offset private sector impacts – to restore mangroves, corals and mudflats. In Odisha, co-
finance from the Adaptation Fund through development bank NABARD will be used for riverbank protection and creek 
renovation.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 105 
 B 
12. A second major portion of all three targeted states’ co -finance will be used to promote adaptive livelihoods 
opportuniti es, and development of  associated value chains, in support of the project’s second output . This will include 
the state Fisheries Departments’ funding through the Blue Revolution Scheme, and funding from 
Coastal  Zone Management Authorities, and various agricultural boards and schemes – particularly for aquaculture 
and for diversification into new climate -resilient crops. In Maharashtra, the Agriculture Department  will use funding 
for MSMEs to fund value addition operations in coastal villages, for example, honey bottling based on mangrove 
beekeeping.  In Odisha, co -finance will provide t echnical assistance for value addition to fishing and aquaculture 
products that benefit from coastal ecosystem restoration, including fish smoking units, fish value added products, and 
fishmeal plants . 
 
13. Another significant portion of national and state co- finance will support integration of EbA principles into planning for 
resilient infrastructure development, including co- finance from the Smart Cities4 and Clean India5 Missions to 
undertake planning for climate- resilient coastal infrastructure, such as was te and sewage management systems, 
taking into account sea level rise and other climate impacts.  National co- finance through the MoEFCC will enable the 
adoption of these approaches to climate- resilient infrastructure planning in other coastal States and Uni on Territories, 
through the application of tools like the Coastal Calculator, and training of engineers and planners.  
 
14. Included in national Government co- finance to the project over the period of 2018 –2024 will be staff time as in- kind 
contributions from relevant units under the MoEFCC, including the National Centre for S ustainable Coastal 
Management,  the Society of Integr ated Coastal Management  and the umbrella programme of the soon- to-be-
established National Coastal Mission. The MoEFCC will make available premises and facilities to host the national 
Project Management Unit, as will the three State Forest Departments for t he state Project Management Units.  
  
15. Co-financing from national and state governments will also be used to cover operations and maintenance (O&M), 
with the funding to be phased in during the project lifetime. Following the period of project implementation, public sector funding at state and district levels will continue to be used to maintain restored ecosystems and infrastructure 
associated with the livelihoods support (see O&M Plan in Annex XIII (b) for more details). Other interventions including 
the Decision- Support Tool (Activit y 1.1) and long- term monitoring framework for coastal adaptation, and the pan-
Indian Coastal Resilience Network  (Activity 3.1) will also be supported by government co- financing during the project 
implementation period, and will be enabled beyond the project through inclusion in State government budgets and 
duties of personnel.  
 
16. The four public sector co- financiers will be involved in the project steering committees at national and state levels 
and will report on their investm ents towards the project’s objectives. Private sector financing leveraged during the 
course of project implementation will be tracked through the steering structures,  including investment in businesses 
dependent on coastal  ecosystems, such as ecotourism; i nvestment in climate- resilient commercial infrastructure on 
the coast; and corporate social investment in coastal livelihoods. Loan finance is also expected to be leveraged for 
livelihoods activities, from local cooperative banks and regional rural banks under the license of government -owned 
commercial banks and state governments. All of these investments will be tracked by the National Project 
Management Unit and the State Project Steering Committees (see Section C.7) using an investment scorecard that captures a total $ figure per year that is reported in the project’s Progress Implementation Report.  
  Table 1: Financial Elements per project outputs
6 
 
Output  Activity  GCF funding 
amount (USD)  Co-financing 
funding 
amount 
(USD)  Amount (for 
entire project) 
(USD)  Amount (for 
entire project) 
(INR)* 
                                                             
4 Smart Cities Mission  is an urban renewal and retrofitting  program by the Government of India  through the Ministry of Urban 
Development  with a mission to develop 100 cities all over the country making them citizen friendly and sustainable – see 
smartcities.gov.in  
5 The Clean India Mission or Swachh Bharat Abhiyan is a campaign by the Government of India to clean the streets, roads and 
infrastructure of the country's 4,041 statutory cities and town –  see https://swachhbharat.mygov.in  
6 The Accredited Entity (AE) fee for the proposed project is US$2,170,930.30. The budget figures  presented in this proposal exclude the fee.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 105 
 B 
Output 1: Enhanced 
resilience of coastal 
and marine ecosystems and their services  Activity 1.1: Conducting 
vulnerability assessment of the coast to inform planning of ecosystem- and community -
based adaptation interventions  2,209,190  7,995,000  10,204,190  665,109,085  
Activity 1.2: Community -based 
conservation and restoration of coastal ecosystems for 
increasing ecosystem resilience  23,376,593  19,800,000  43,176,593   2,814,250,332  
 Output 1 Sub Total  25,585,783  27,795,000  53,380,783  3,479,359,416  
Output 2: Climate -
adaptive livelihoods for enhanced resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities  Activity 2.1: Building climate 
resilient livelihoods and 
enterprises through value chains and strengthened access to 
markets  3,585,403  13,726,140  17,311,543 1,128,366,373   
Activity 2.2: Improving capacities 
of local communities on ecosystem-based adaptation 
and climate-resilient livelihoods  9,195,345  23,043,860  32,239,205   2,101,351,351   
 Output 2 Sub Total  12,780 ,748 36,770 ,000 49,550 ,748 3,229,717,724  
Output 3: 
Strengthened 
coastal and marine governance and institutional 
framework  Activity 3.1: Network of 
institutions for enhanced climate 
resilience and integrated planning and governance in all 
coastal states  2,487,950  3,568,000  6,055,950   394,726, 788  
Activity 3.2: Integrating 
ecosystem-centric approaches 
to climate change adaptation into public and private sector policies, plans and budgets, and 
scaling up finance for EbA  - 10,927,000  10,927,000   712,221,860  
Activity 3.3: Knowledge 
management for coastal resilience 496,830  3,390,000  3,886,830   253,343,579  
Output 3 Sub Total  2,984,780  17,885,000  20,869,780  1,360,292,2 28 
Project Management Cost  2,067,296  4,400,000  6,467,296   421,538,353  
Total financing  43,418,606  86,850,000  130,268,606   8,490,907,721  
*UN exchange rate as of 1 April 2018: 1 US dollar = 65.18 Indian rupees.  
 
Please see Annex V for the budget breakdown by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, 
services, etc.) and disbursement schedule.  
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  130.269  million 
USD ($)


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 105 
 B 
(b) GCF 
financing 
to recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
  
   
43.419   
 
 
  
million 
USD ($)   (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
 
  
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality  that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  43.419  Million USD   
(c) Co -
financing 
to recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount   
Currency  
 Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Grant  
In-Kind 
Grant  
In-Kind 
Grant  
In-kind 
Grant  
In-kind 18.000  
2.000 
25.650 
1.200  
18.00 0 
2.000 
18.800 
1.200  million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  MoEFCC  
MoEFCC  
Maharashtra SG  
Maharashtra SG  
Andhra Pradesh SG  
Andhra Pradesh SG  
Odisha SG  
Odisha SG  n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a ( ) %  
( ) %  
( ) %  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: ……n/a…………………  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
(d) 
Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and 
AE (if 
applicable)  Not applicable  
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
17. n/a


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 105 
 C 
 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
 
Climate change risks and impacts on India’s coast  
 
18. The Indian coastline is expected to be amongst the regions most affected by climate change globally , negatively 
affecting the a pproximately 250 million people (14% of the country’s population or 3.5% of the global population) 
who live within 50  km of India’s coast . The Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea are both predicted to be subject to 
extreme climate variability under future climate scenarios. For example, changes  in monsoon rainfall patterns and 
drought frequency as a result of climate change are expected to impact negatively on water resources, agricultural 
output, livelihoods7, public health and the economy8,9. In addition, temperatures are expected to rise by b etween 
1.6–2.1°C compared to the 1970s10. Moreover, the frequency and intensity of cyclones and extreme weather events 
are projected to increase, particularly on the eastern coastline. India has already experienced the impacts of climate 
change in coastal areas, with an increasing frequency of days with extreme temperature, intense rainfall and tropical 
cyclones over the period 2009 –2014. Several c limate change impacts are exacerbating the degradation being 
caused by direct human influences such as urbanizat ion, overfishing and poorly planned coastal development. 
These climate impacts include ocean warming and acidification leading to coral bleaching, sea level rise reducing 
the area in which mangroves can thrive, and increasingly intense extreme events that damage coastal ecosystems.  
Ecosystem degradation, compounded by these climate impacts, has negative implications for coastal communities 
who are dependent on ecosystems for their livelihoods, and are at risk from periodic droughts, saline intrusion, 
coastal flooding causing loss of life and property, and saline intrusion of fields, rice paddies and groundwater 
supply11. 
 
19. Three target states –  Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha –  have been selected for undertaking on- the-ground 
activities focused on protecting and restoring coastal ecosystems and promoting livelihoods activities to enhance the 
resilience of coastal communities (see Section 2.7 of the Feasibility Study in Annex II) . These target states were 
selected by GoI based on: i) high vulnerabili ty to the impacts of climate change; and ii) representation of the range of 
India’s coastline, including both east and west coast areas. In addition, the selection of these three states enables GoI to implement ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change across a range of circumstances, in terms of: i) 
biophysical vulnerability to climate impacts; ii) coastal ecosystems (including mangroves, seagrass, saltmarshes, 
coral reefs and coastal lagoons); and iii) socio- economic vulnerability including per capita income level (including 
states with very low, low and medium per capita incomes).  Output 3 of the project will create platforms to scale up 
this work on restoration and livelihoods across India’s nine coastal states, two coastal Union Territories and two i sland 
territories and their 73 coastal districts.  
 20. The main types of climate change, occurring and expected, are summarized below, with further detail provided in 
Sections 2.7 and 2.8 of the Feasibility Study (Annex II).  
 
21. Temperature:  Climate change projections predict a 2ºC rise in average annual temperatures across South Asia by 
the mid- 21st century, exceeding 3ºC by the late- 21st century. These projections are made in comparison to the 20th 
century using an Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC) high emissions scenario12. An increase in 
global mean surface temperatures of 2ºC will make India’s monsoon highly unpredictable, while a 4ºC increase would result in an extremely wet monsoon (which currently has a chance of occurri ng only once in 100 years) 
occurring every 10 years by the end of the century
13. Although temperatures within India are predicted to increase 
across the country, this will vary from region to region. According to CMIP3 models, the south of India is projecte d 
                                                             
7 MoEFCC. 2015. India: First Biennial Update Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
8 Sharmila S et al. 2015. Future projection of Indian summer monsoon variability under climate change scenario: An assessment f rom CMIP5 climate 
models. Global and Planetary Change. 124: 62– 78. 
9 Mishra A & Liu SC. 2014. Changes in precipitation pattern and risk of drought over India in the context of global warming. Journal of Geophysical 
Research. 119: 7833– 7841  . 
10 Gangwar S. 2013. Space Technology and Obser vation in Climate Change: Indian Perspective. International Journal of Environmental Science: 
Development and Monitoring. 4: 74– 76. 
11 NDC.  
12 Climate & Development Knowledge Network. 2014. The IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report: What’s in it for South Asia?  
13 The World Bank. 2013. India: Climate Change Impacts. [Available online: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/06/19/india- climate-
change- impacts  ]


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 105 
 C 
to experience a temperature increase of up to 3ºC by 2100, while the north will experience changes of up to 4.5ºC 
by 210014.  
 
22. Rainfall:  Similarly, India is projected to experience an increase in precipitation. The CMIP3 model projections indicate 
an incr ease in overall rainfall of up to 20% or more in the western regions, while the rest of the country is predicted 
to experience an increase of between 5– 10%15. The pattern of rainfall is expected to change as well, with an increase 
in the variability and unpredictability of monsoon rainfall affecting agriculture. For instance, models predict that the 
number of rainy days along the east coastline is likely to decrease by 1 –5 days per year. However, the intensity of 
rainfall is expected to increase by between 1mm/day and 4mm/day. By the 2030s, rainfall is likely to increase by 
0.2–4.4% compared with 1970s levels16. The combination of increased total rainfall and decreased number of rainfall 
days is expected to result in less frequent but more intense rain events.  In coastal catchments already degraded by 
direct human pressures, this will mean more run- off and less available surface and groundwater.  
 
23. Sea level:  The effect of increased global temperatures will result in thermal expansion of seawater and the melting 
of glaciers. This will contribute to sea level rise, which is expected to proceed at a rate of up to 10 mm yr-1 during 
the 21st century under a high emissions scenario17. Given that India’s 7,500 km of coastline –  including islands –  is 
home to a third of the country’s population18, sea- level rise is likely to result in displacement of communities, losses 
of livelihoods and damage to economic infrastructure, as well as a reduction in area suitable for mangroves19. Sea -
level rise, combined with coastal erosion, will also contribute to growing saline intrusion into agricultural fields and aquifers
20. 
 
24. Extreme events: India has been adversely affected by natura l hazards and extreme weather events over the last 
decade. Heavy rainfall events have, for example, resulted in several flash floods in recent years. During 2015, a 
marked increase in high rainfall incidents resulted in localized flooding affecting more th an 1.8 million people and 
caused damages of over US$15 billion. It was estimated to be India’s costliest natural disaster and eighth (in terms 
of cost) on the global scale for 201521. Extreme weather events – e.g. storms, heat waves, cyclones and floods – 
are predicted to increase22 under future climate change scenarios23, resulting in considerable losses and damages, 
as well as loss of life 24. Coastal states are particularly vulnerable to an increase in extreme cyclone activity25 and 
coastal flooding. Extreme weather events will also increase damage to coastal infrastructure, with storm surges and a one metre rise in sea level expected to displace 7.1 million people in the coastal zone, leading to a loss of 
5,764 km
2 of land and 4,200 km of roads26. The North In dian Ocean basin experiences an average of five cyclones 
annually. A study examining cyclone activity in the area found an increasing trend in the length of the cyclone season 
and intensity of cyclones for the period 1979– 200827. The heavy winds generated b y cyclones assist in the formation 
of storm surges, which produce large variations in sea level around coastlines. Communities along the Eastern coast 
                                                             
14 UK Government Department of Energy and Climate Change, Met Office. 2011. Climate: Observations, projections and impacts: Indi a. Crown 
copyright, Exeter.  
15 Ibid. 
16 Indian Network of Climate Change Assessment (INCCA) of Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, MoEFCC  
17 Projected under all emissions scenarios to exceed that observed during the past three decades, with a rise of up to 98 cm in total (as compared to 
sea levels in the period 1986 –  2005) by 2100 under a high emissions scenario . See further CDKN 2014.  
18 Senapati S & Gupta V. 2014. Climate change and coastal ecosystem in India: Issues in perspectives. International Journal of E nvironmental 
Sciences 5(3): 530– 5435.  
19 Woodroffe CD & Grindrod J. 1991. Mangrove biogeography: the role of Quaternary environmental and sea- level change. Journal of Biogeography 
18:479– 492. 
20 Mall RK, Gupta A, Singh R, Singh RS & Rathore LS. 2005. Water resources and climate change: An Indian perspective. Current Sc ience 90:1610–
1626.  
21 Narasimhan TE. 2015. Chennai floods are world’s 8th most expensive natural disaster in 2015. Business Standard.  
22 Guhathakurta P, Sreejith OP & Menon PA. 2011. Impact of climate change on extreme rainfall events and flood risk in India . Journal of Earth System 
Science 120:359– 373. 
23 Lee J -WW, Hong S -Y, Chang E -C, Suh M -S & Kang H -S. 2014. Assessment of future climate change over East Asia due to the RCP scenarios 
downscaled by GRIMsRMP. Climate Dynamics 42:733– 747. 
24 Gupta V, Dobhal DP & Vaideswaran SC. 2013. August 2012 cloudburst and subsequent flash flood in the Asi  Ganga, a tributary of the Bhagirathi 
river, Garhwal Himalaya, India. Current Science 105:249– 253. 
25 Indian Network for Climate Change Assessment (INCCA). 2010. Climate Change and India: A 4x4 Assessment. A Sectoral and Region al Analysis 
for 2030s. INCCA Report #2 . 
26 Nicholls, R. and Mimura, N., “Regional issues raised by sea- level rise and their policy implications, Climate Research, Vol. 11:5 -18, 1998  
27 Deo AA & Ganer DW. 2013. Variability in Tropical Cyclone Activity Over Indian Seas in Changing Climate. Internati onal Journal of Science and 
Research 4:880– 886.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 105 
 C 
of India are particularly vulnerable to storm surges28. A summary of the impacts of cyclones and storms on  coastal 
areas in India is provided in the table below.  
 
Table 2. Extreme cyclone events in India in the period 2009– 201429 
 
Year  Details  
2009  Cyclone Alia: 149 fatalities; more than 10,000 stranded.  
2010  Cyclone Laila: winds of 120 km per hour in Andhra Pradesh region; more than 50 fatalities; US$117 
million in damages.  
2010  Cyclone Jal: rice crops destroyed; mudslides and flooding; 54 fatalities in Andhra Pradesh.  
2011  Cyclone Thane: ~50 fatalities.  
2012  Cyclone Nilam: heavy rainfall following north -east monsoon activity; more than 100 fatalities in Andhra 
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu; US$57 million in damages.  
2013  Cyclone Helen: heavy rainfall, floods, and strong gale -force winds; 39 fatalities; more than one million 
people evacuated; US$800 million in damages to infrastructure.  
2014  Cyclone Hudhud: 81 fatalities and $3.4 billion in damages.  
25. Climate change has also impacted on ecological functioning in the coastal zone of India30 with severe implications 
for economic sectors dependent on ecosystem goods and services  delivered by mangroves, seagrass beds, salt 
marshes, coral reefs, lagoons, estuaries and other important coastal and marine habitats.  For example, the fisheries 
sector  is adversely affected by changes in the distribution and abundance of fish species caused by climate change. 
This has knock -on effects for the market prices of fish, undermining food security and rural livelihoods. Changes in 
temperature and rainfall patt erns are also reducing agricultural productivity and thus farmer incomes, especially for 
rain-fed agriculture. In future, climate change is expected to result in decreased water availability across India, further 
threatening agricultural production31. Some of the main impacts of climate change on the coastal ecosystems and 
livelihoods in the coastal zone of India are summarized below. Further details can be found in Section 2.8 of the 
Feasibility Study (Annex II).  
26. These coastal habitats form part of complex social -ecological systems32 which underpin the food security and 
economic stability of India’s coastal communities.  For example, they provide shoreline protection against disasters 
(expected to be intensified by climate change), and form the basis for economic activities such as fishing, aquaculture and tourism. Coastal ecosystems also have a natural resilience and abi lity to act as buffers, for example, saltmarshes 
stabilize shorelines by protecting them against erosion by waves, and reduce floods by storing water
33; and vegetated 
sand dunes allow beaches to shift with tides and reform themselves. Where coastal ecosystems are degraded by 
direct human pressures, however, their ability to withstand more extreme events is compromised, and their 
functioning becomes increasingly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, as outlined below.  
27. Impacts on coastal mangroves : India has about 6,740 km2 of mangroves,34 including some of the largest mangrove 
forests in the world. Mangrove cover along India’s coastline has decreased by 50% in some areas, largely because 
of human pressures, including alteration of flow of freshwater from  upstream.35 Sea-level rise is predicted to result in 
further reductions, contributing directly to 10 –20% of future loss of mangrove cover. Mangroves are particularly 
susceptible to sea- level rise where they are sediment -starved or constrained on their landward margin36. Other 
important factors linked to mangrove degradation are changes in temperature, rainfall patterns, salinity and carbon 
                                                             
28 INCCA 2010.  
29 India’s First Biennial Update Report. 2015.  
30 India’s First Biennial Update Report. 2015.  
31 Based on the 2001 estimate of ~1,820 m3 per year decreasing to ~1,140 m3 per year by 2050. See further INCCA 2012.  
32 Walker, B. & Salt, D. 2006. Resilience Thinking: Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing World. Island Press: Washingt on DC.  
33 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/37si1_en.pdf  
34 Envis.nic.in  
35 Available at: http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/blue_pl anet/coasts/mangroves/mangrove_threats/   
36 Nicholls RJ, et al. 2007. Coastal systems and low -lying areas. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Parry ML, et al. Eds., Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 315- 356.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 105 
 C 
dioxide concentrations – all of which can negatively influence the timing of flowering and fruiting as well as the range 
of habitat s. Furthermore, the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events related to climate change 
will cause direct damage to mangroves across India, particularly where they are already degraded.  
28. Impacts on seagrass ecosystems : Seagrass ecosystem s in India are threatened by climate change impacts such as 
rising sea levels, ocean acidification, changes in salinity, storm surges and temperature increase. These result in 
increased growth of epiphytes, sediment anoxia and increased prevalence of diseases. The impacts of climate 
change will exacerbate the underlying stressors caused by direct human pressures –  such as pollution, disturbances 
and eutrophication. The combination of climate change and non- climate impacts are likely to lead to: i)  changes i n 
habitat distribution; and ii)  widespread die- off of seagrass ecosystems.  
29. Impacts on coral reefs : Climate change is compounding existing threats to coral reef ecosystems. Human pressures 
such as coastal development, over -fishing and diving are having detr imental effects on the health of coral reefs37;38. 
This is compounded by climate change causing rises in ocean temperatures that lead to coral bleaching39. For 
example, mass bleaching of coral reefs took place in the Lakshadweep Islands of India during the El  Niño event of 
201640. In addition, ocean acidification  significantly reduces the ability of reef -building corals to produce their 
skeletons.  Increased seawater temperatures are also likely to increase the incidence of diseases that will further 
degrade cor al reefs41.  
30. Impacts on salt marshes:  Salt marshes are affected by climate change impacts such as altered hydrological regimes 
caused by changing precipitation patterns42, changes in sediment loading caused by flooding events, and the physical 
effects of wav e energy during extreme weather events. These impacts result in degradation of salt marshes as their 
growth rates – and particularly recovery after storms –  are reduced. Such climate change impacts exacerbate human 
pressures such as aquacultural expansion,  pollution, drainage and introduction of invasive species to impair the 
ecological functioning of salt marshes.  
31. Impacts on coastal dunes : Dune ecosystems are particularly affected by increased intensity of extreme weather 
events – a component of climate change. Such extreme events cause erosion, flooding and direct damage of dunes 
through wave action and intense rainfall. Other climate change- related impacts such as sea- level rise and saltwater 
intrusion also destabilize dune systems.  Moreover, such impact s exacerbate anthropogenic pressures that are 
already contributing to alteration of dune systems along India’s coast. A leading cause of degradation of dune systems 
is the expansion of coastal development and urbanization. For example, wide and sandy beach es with extensive 
dunes are often disrupted by construction of coastal infrastructure such as tourism facilities and ports.  
32. Impacts on agriculture:  The agricultural sector is the biggest contributor to India’s gross domestic product. 70% of the 
population is dependent on agriculture for subsistence, income or work, and approximately 650 million people in the 
country are dependent on the monsoons for crop irrigation. The effects of unpredictable rains, dry spells, floods and 
intense rainfall events will consequently have significant implications for food production and rur al income. Climatic 
variability is also impacting on the agriculture sector and seasonal crops by inter alia: i)  decrease in winter rainfall 
negatively affecting winter crops –  known as Rabi crops43 – in the rain- fed areas; ii)  temperature fluctuations 
nega tively affecting Rabi crops; iii)  dryland areas receiving less than 550 mm of annual rainfall which results in 
farming not being viable; and iv)  a decline in soil fertility across many regions as a result of an increase in the use of 
fertilizers in respons e to lack of rain44. Agriculture is also negatively impacted by saltwater intrusion caused by human 
activities interacting with sea- level rise and cyclonic storm surges.   
33. With the sector plays a central role in the country’s food security and economic stability. Coastal ecosystems also 
play an important role in underpin ning rural livelihoods in India . Approximately 68% of India’s population is 
                                                             
37 Spalding M & Grenfell A. 1997 New estimates of global and regional coral reef areas. Coral Reefs 16(4): 225– 230. 
38 Cesar H & Burke L. 2003. The economics of worldwide coral reef degradation. Cesar Environmental Economics Consulting. ICRAN/W WF 23.  
39 Obura D. 2001. Can differential bleaching and mortality among coral species offer useful indicators for assessment and management of reefs under 
stress? Bulletin of Marine Science 69:421– 442. 
40 Available at: http://ncf- india.org/projects/coping- with-catastrophe [accessed on 7 October 2016].  
41Available at: https://news.mongabay.com/2016/05/indias -coral -reefs -experiencing- catastrophic -bleaching- heart -wrenching- scientist -says/  
[accessed on 4 October 2016].  
42 Burkett V & Kusler J. 2000. Climate change: Potential impacts and interactions in wetlands of the United States. Journal of A merican Water 
Resources Association 36(2):313– 320. 
43 Rabi crops include inter alia wheat, barley, oats  (cereals), chickpea/gram  (pulses), linseed and mustard (oilseeds). The Kharif crops include inter 
alia rice, maize, sorghum, pearl millet/bajra, finger millet/ragi  (cereals), arhar  (pulses), soyabean, groun dnut (oilseeds) and cotton.  
44 SAPCC. 2012.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 105 
 C 
categorized as rural45. India has experienced rapid rural -urban migration in recent decades, a trend that is exp ected 
to continue with its ongoing economic growth46. This includes migration from coastal fishing and farming villages 
impacted by climate change to urban areas, often to impoverished informal settlements and low -earning work in the 
informal sector.  
34. Impac ts on fisheries:  Climate change and climatic variability have been linked to considerable negative impacts on 
fisheries; such effects are predicted to increase in future, with a severe impact on the estimated 30% of coastal 
dwellers directly involved with fishing activities and aquaculture. For example, climate change is predicted to cause 
changes in the distribution of fishing grounds and the migratory habits of marine fishery resources47. Hatcheries will 
also be affected by temperature fluctuations, leading to reduction in hatchery outputs. Climate change can impact on 
the fisheries in both direct and indirect ways48. Direct effects include the increase in frequency and intensity of 
extreme climate events which affect fishing operations and infrastructure as well as the abundance and distribution 
of targeted species. Examples of indirect effects include inter alia changes in quality of aquatic habitat and the 
distribution and abundance of aquatic competitors, pr edators and diseases. Spawning fish are especially sensitive to 
temperature; thus water temperature changes may result in spawning occurring earlier, later or not at all. 
Furthermore, increases in water temperature affect the migration and subsequent harvesting of certain fish species 
because of shifts in fish abundance. Temperature increases are also combining with ocean acidification to degrade coral reefs, affecting their function as fish nurseries. These changes are resulting in reduced catch of several  species 
in India, affecting nutrition, livelihoods and jobs
49. 
 
India’s vision and policy response to climate change  
 
35. The GoI’s Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 –2017)50 has a focus on national development actions, with an emphasis on 
improved socio- economic conditions in rural areas. The priorities of the Five Year Plan include:  
 
• achieving rapid and sustainable economic growth, particularly in the agricultural and manufacturing sectors;  
• reducing poverty and generating new off -farm employment opportunities;  
• increasing education levels, with a focus on reducing the gender gap in education;  
• improving health and nutrition;  
• increasing investment in infrastructure, the area of irrigated agricultural land, provision of electricity and drinking 
water supply in rural areas;  
• improving environmental sustainability and reducing the GDP emission intensity; and  
• improving access to banking and welfare services.  
 
36. India’s National Action P lan on Climate Change (NAPCC) of 2008 identifies priority interventions for addressing 
climate change adaptation and mitigation, to be implemented through eight National Missions. Relevant missions 
are the Green India Mission, which aims to restore/refores t 6 million hectares of degraded forest lands; the National 
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture, which will support climate adaptation in agriculture through climate- resilient 
crops, weather insurance and improved agricultural practices; and the National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for 
Climate Change. Overall implementation of the NAPCC is coordinated through the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change ( MoEFCC ) and will be facilitated through appropriate mechanisms –  e.g. public -private 
partnerships and civil society actions – for effective delivery of each specific National Mission’s objective.  
37. Four new National Missions are in the process of being established under the NAPCC. One of these is the new 
National Coastal Mission, which will provi de the overarching policy and institutional framework for the GCF project. 
The project, in turn, will help to shape the direction of the new Mission to include ecosystem -centred and community -
based approaches to climate change adaptation in the coastal zon e. The National Coastal Mission’s objectives will 
                                                             
45 http://www.worldometers.info/world -population/india- population/  
46 Urban population increased from 28% to 31% from 2001 to 2011.  
47 CCAP. 2010– 2015.  
48 MSAAPC. 2014.  
49 Nambi A.A. & Bahinipati CS. 2013. Adaptation to climate change and livelihoods: An integrated Ciase study to assess the vulnerability and 
adaptation options of the fishing and farming communities of selected East coast st retch of Tamil Nadu, India. Asian Journal of Environment and 
Disaster Management 4:297.  
50 Planning Commission, Government of India. 2013. Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012/2017).


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 105 
 C 
include promoting vulnerability mapping, sustainable coastal development, resilient communities and settlements, 
environmental conservation and mitigation of GHG emissions.  
38. India’s Nationally Determined Co ntribution (NDC) in terms of the Paris Agreement through the UNFCCC outlines 
the country’s commitment to a low carbon emission pathway. It identifies priorities for clean energy, energy efficiency 
in various sectors of industry, non- fossil based electricit y generation, and a building sector based on energy 
conservation. The proposed project is aligned with one of the 8 main contributions outlined in the NDC: “To better 
adapt to climate change by enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vul nerable to climate 
change, particularly agriculture, water resources, the Himalayan region, coastal regions, health and disaster 
management”. The NDC includes a target for 2030 to reduce the emissions intensity of India’s GDP by 33- 35% from 
2005 levels and to create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO 2 equivalent through additional 
forest and tree cover by 2030. This ties in with a related commitment mentioned in the NDC to increase forest and 
tree cover “eventually” from 24 to 33% of  the country’s terrestrial area.  
39. Each of the target states have also identified priorities in their State Action Plans on Climate Change to address climate -related threats to coastal zones.  These plans are summarised below  (see Section 3.2 of the Feasibility 
Study in Annex II for further details on each state’s Plan).  
40. The Andhra Pradesh State Action Plan on Climate Change  identifies the following climate and non- climate related 
threats to the coastal zone: i)  increases in t he frequency and intensity of cyclones; ii)  loss of lives and infrastructure 
following cyclones, flooding, and other climatic events; iii)  coastal erosion; and iv)  marine pollution
51. The plan 
identifies a number of adaptation priorities for the state including: i) reducing the impact of climate change on 
household incomes, particularly in agriculture; ii) reducing the impact of climate change on forests, biodiversity and water resources; iii) protecting vulnerable populations against climate- induced disaste
rs; and iv) promoting 
environmental sustainability, including mitigation measures.  
41. The Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change  notes that low -lying coastal communities are 
particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts such as sea lev el rise. It outlines four priority areas for reducing the 
impacts of climate change on local communities, namely: i)  hydrology and water resources; ii)  agriculture and food 
production systems; iii)  coastal areas, marine ecosystems and biodiversity; and iv)  livelihoods.  
42. The Odisha Climate Change Action Plan  identifies a number of priorities for promoting adaptation to climate 
change, including inter alia : i) improving coastal protection measures; ii) promote best practices for climate- resilient 
agricultural production; iii) reducing the impact of climate change on aquaculture; iv) improving management of critical 
watersheds; and v) conserving and restoring mangrove ecosystems along the coast.  
Climate change impacts on targeted coastal states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Odisha  
 
Andhra Pradesh  
43. Andhra Pradesh is the eight largest state in India, covering 160,205 km2 with a population of 50 million people. It 
has the second longest state coastline in the country, stretching over 972 km. Approximately 40% of the state’s total population lives in the coastal zone
52, while 23% of the rural population and 18% of the urban population of the state 
live below the poverty line53. Andhra Pradesh has a tropical climate with moderate to subtropical weather, including 
extreme weather events such as cyclones, with associated storm surges and flooding that periodically damage 
farming and aquaculture operations. Humid to semi -humid conditions prevail in the coastal areas, which receive 
700– 1,500 mm of rain during the monsoon season (June to December). This rain underpins agriculture, which is 
the most important livelihood activity in Andhra Pradesh and covers ~41% of the surface area.  Besides the staple 
crop of rice, other important crops are chilli and sugarcane. Fisheries  and aquaculture are important livelihood 
activities, as Andhra Pradesh comprises 10% of the country’s fisheries and has the highest aquaculture production. 
In addition, the state is home to a number of industries, with large concentrations around the port  cities 
Visakhapatnam and Kakinada. These industries are set to further expand, as the state government promotes 
industrial development in various sectors to increase exports.  
 
44. A variety of ecosystems occur in Andhra Pradesh, including mangroves as well as deciduous and evergreen forests. 
There are also several notable wetlands along this coastline, such as Coringa, Krishna, Kolleru and Pulicat. 
Mangrove ecosystems are particularly important to the livelihoods of l ocal communities. For example, mangrove 
                                                             
51 State Action Plan on Climate Change for Andhra Pradesh  (SAPCC). 2012. Ministry of Environment and Forests.  
52 Ministry of Environment and Forest. 2010. Coastal Issues and Concerns.  
53www.aponline.gov.in/ Apportal/Downloads/Socio%20Economic%20Survey/Poverty,%20Employment%20and%20UnEmployment.pdf


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 105 
 C 
trees are used for firewood, as well as timber. There are a number of direct human causes of ecosystem degradation 
and loss, such as pollution, conversion of natural habitats to agriculture/aquaculture, inappropriate coastal 
development, and over -extraction of resources. The ~30% decline of mangrove cover recorded for the period 1987 –
2013 across Andhra Pradesh was driven by overharvesting of wood, conversion of mangrove habitat to prawn aquaculture and construction of infrastructure that directly damages mang
rove ecosystems and disrupts 
hydrology54. Industry, agriculture and i nfrastructure development, are causing environmental impacts such as water 
pollution, chemical run- off from intensive agriculture, and saltwater intrusion from groundwater extraction. Thes e 
anthropogenic pressures, and their impact on sensitive coastal livelihoods and ecosystems, will be compounded in many areas in future by the impacts of climate change, including sea level rise and increased coastal flooding and 
erosion from storm surges (see Section C.2 for more detail).  
 
45. The coastal region of Andhra Pradesh is prone to frequent storm surges and extreme weather events. For example, 
an analysis of the frequencies of cyclones on the east coast of India during 1891 –1990 showed that 262 cyclones 
occurred in this period, 92 of which were considered severe
55. As climate has changed, these severe cyclones have 
become common events, now occurring every two to three years. Of the 32 million people living in the coastal districts 
of Andhra Pradesh, approximately three million people are vulnerable to cyclones56. These  cyclones have resulted 
in government prioritising the need to address climate change in the state. Climate change also has slow onset  
impacts that affect  the agricultural and fishing sectors. For example, rice yields in Vizianagaram district  have 
decreased by 9% for each 1°C increase in the seasonal mean temperature57, confirming projections of crop 
simulation models58. The adverse impacts of climate change on Andhra Pradesh’s fishing s ector include ocean 
acidification that reduces fish populations59, increased erosion and rising sea temperatures. These impacts 
exacerbate non- climate threats such as marine pollution, resulting in “dead zones” off the state’s coast as well as 
changing spec ies compositions of catches, as tropical species migrate to cooler waters60. This has occurred in 
various mandals  of the Krishna district of Andhra Pradesh, putting fisher  folk under increasing economic pressure as 
they have to increase the depth at which they fish61,62. 
 46. Flooding is also a frequent occurrence in Andhra Pradesh. Natural and artificial banks of rivers such as Godavari and 
Krishna are capable of carrying flood discharges –  with the exception of their delta areas, which do flood on occasion. 
However, improper upkeep of drainage systems and mismanagement of discharges from dams are often factors 
contributing to flooding, and are likely to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition to flooding, Andhra Pradesh has historically been prone to drought conditions. Indeed, the State of Andhra Pradesh is more prone to droughts 
than any other state in India apart from Rajasthan and Karnataka
63. The extreme heat that often accompanies 
droughts is also negatively affecting rural communities in Andhra Prades h. For example, in 2003 –  between May and 
June – heat wave conditions claimed more than 3,000 lives. The Andhra Pradesh government have identified that 
the severity of cyclones and storm surges is expected to increase because of climate change64. 
 
Maharasht ra 
47. Maharashtra covers 307,700 km2 and has a population of 112 million people, 17% of which live below the poverty 
line. Rainfall in Maharashtra varies – from Konkan Division in the West with highest average rainfall at ~2578.2 mm 
per year, to Aurangabad division in central Maharashtra which receives only ~708.8 mm. Agriculture is the main 
livelihood for most of Maharashtra’ s population, mostly rain- fed, supporting ~61% of the state’s population. The main 
crops cultivated in Maharashtra include i) rice; ii) wheat; iii) pulses; iv) groundnuts; v) soybeans; vi) cotton; vii) 
sugarcane ; viii) vegetables; and ix) fruits. A series of droughts has recently severely impacted on rain -fed agriculture 
                                                             
54 The New Indian Express. 24 February 2014. Mangroves Depleting Due to Rampant Urbanisation.  
55 GoAP. 2010. State Disaster Management Plan.  
56 GoAP. Revenue (Disaster Management II) Department.  
57 Personal communication. State Focal Point, Andhra Pradesh.  
58 Kropff MJ, Centeno G, Bachelet D, Lee MH, Mohan Dass S, Horie T, De Feng S, Singh S.& Penning de Vries  FWT. 1993. Predicting the impact of 
CO2 and temperature on rice production. IRRI Seminar Series on Climate Change and Rice. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, 
Philippines.  
59 EPRTI 2012. State Action Plan on Climate change for Andhra Pradesh. Survey No. 91/4, Gachibowli, Hyderabad.  
60 EPRTI 2012. State Action Plan on Climate change for Andhra Pradesh. Survey No. 91/4, Gachibowli, Hyderabad  
61 Salagrama V. 2012. Climate Change and Fisheries: Perspectives from Small -Scale Fishing Communities in India on Measures to Protect Life and 
Livelihood. International Collective in Support of Fishworkers (ICSF).  
62 EPRTI 2012. State Action Plan on Climate change for Andhra Pradesh. Survey No. 91/4, Gachibowli, Hyderabad.  
63 Drought in Andhra Pradesh: Long term impacts and adaptation strategies, South Asia Environment and Social Development Departm ent, World 
Bank, September 2005  
64 State Action Plan of Climate Changes for Andhra Pradesh (SAPCC). 2012.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 105 
 C 
in more than 20,000 villages resulting in declining agricultural output and adverse effects on the rural economy. By 
contrast, the weather pattern in the west of Maharashtra means that comm unities experience higher rainfall that 
leads to flash floods and landslides. Climate change is expected to further increase variability of rainfall patterns 
along the Maharashtra coastal plain, with more intense rainfall events causing more frequent flooding and reduced 
groundwater infiltration, and longer dry spells affecting planting seasons. Fishing is also an important livelihood 
activity for coastal populations in the state, with Maharashtra contributing approximately one third of India’s marine 
fishe ries production. Coastal villages within 100 m of the high tide line are at risk to climate change impacts such as 
sea-level rise and flooding from storm surges (see more detail in Section C.2).  
 
48. There are also highly urbanized areas in the state, including the greater metropolitan area of Mumbai situated on 
the coast. Maharashtra is one of the most developed states in India, contributing 13% to the country’s industrial 
output. Around the urban areas, important industries such as petroleum refineries, production of chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, IT and financial services are the main economic activities. Such industrialization is set to expand with coastal areas near ports expected to experience the greatest levels of industrial intensification. 
However, this industrialization is having negative impacts on the state’s ecosystems and rural livelihoods, including 
displacement of fishing and farming communities as well as pollution from i ndustrial activity, municipal wastewater 
and solid waste carried to the coast by rivers . Other environmental threats include over -abstraction of groundwater 
which leads to intrusion of sea- water into coastal aquifers, and the presence of oil refineries that can result in oil 
spills. The impacts of pollution, over -abstraction of water and inappropriate development in the sensitive coastal 
zone are likely to be compounded in future by climate change impacts, especially sea level rise (see Section C.2).  
 
49. Analyses of monthly extreme rainfall in Maharashtra have shown trends of increasing frequency of extreme rainfall 
events
65. For example, Mumbai had massive floods in July 2005 where over 900 people perished and over US$ 67 
million of damage to property was reported66. This state is also prone to frequent cyclones. In November 2009, 
Cyclone Phyan brought strong winds, unseasonal heavy rainfall and tidal surges, resulting in the loss of four lives and causing damage to property in the coastal districts of Ratnagiri, Raigad, Sindhudurg, Thane and Palghar in 
Maharashtra
67. These extreme weather events are predicted to increase in frequency and intensity under future 
climate change. A mean temperature increase of 1.0– 1.5 °C by 2030, 1.8– 2.1 °C by 2050 and 2.1– 3.0 °C  by 2070 is 
also predicted for the state (under the National Climate Centre, Indian Meteorological Department’s 2m model 
projections). Similarly, rainfall is predicted to increase across the state under future climate change. The projected increase is esti mated to be between 69 and 110 mm over the course of a year. However, this increase will not be 
consistent throughout the seasons. The summer monsoon is predicted to increase in rainfall, while winter rainfall is 
predicted to show a net decline
68. An additi onal effect of climate change that poses a threat to Maharashtra is sea 
level rise. The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) conducted an analysis to assess the historical sea level rise 
anomaly over the Maharashtra and Mumbai coast. A preliminary analysi s using the tidal observational record 
available online at PSMSL 13 over the Mumbai region showed a high inter -annual variability from the 19th century 
and also an increasing trend over the region. An increase of 0.8 mm per year was observed. Taking into consideration 
the Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA) corrections of - 0.43mm per year, the net sea level rise trend for Mumbai coast 
is 1.2 mm per year, which is consistent with the value given in MoEFCC’s INCCA report69. Maharashtra has also 
experienced sever e and successive years of drought in 1970– 1974 and 2000– 200470, the latter using more of the 
state’s budget than its planned expenditure on agricultural and rural development for the period 2002– 200771. 
 
Odisha  
50. Odisha is the ninth largest state in India, covering 155,820 km2 with a population of 43.7 million people. 
Approximately 32.6% of the state’s population lives below the poverty line, particularly in rural areas72. The high 
rural poverty rate and seasonal unemployment have resulted in large- scale seas onal migration of rural populations. 
A large part of the population lives in the nine coastal districts of the state. Agricultural production comprises 22% 
of Odisha’s domestic product, with more than 50% of farmers practicing subsistence farming. The main crops 
cultivated are rice, sugarcane and maize. Fishing is also an important economic activity in both the inland and coastal 
                                                             
65 Jamir et al. 2008.  
66 Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change (MSAAPCC). 2014.  
67 http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/cyclone- phyan- kills-four-in-maharashtra/article46758.ece    
68 GoI, 2007  
69 MoEF, 2010 
70 Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change (MSAAPCC). 2014.  
71 World Bank Report No. 43946 -IN. 2008. Climate Change Impacts in Drought and Flood Affected Areas: Case Studies in India.  
72 http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/ odisha/Odisha- 2nd-in-Poverty -Ratio/2014/07/10/article2323603.ece


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 105 
 C 
waters. Aquaculture is practiced in inter alia  ponds, estuaries, lagoons, canals and lakes. However, fish production 
from rain -fed aquaculture systems has been decreasing because of erratic rainfall, while marine fishers have also 
registered declining catches due to stock depletion and are adopting unsustainable fishing practices to increase 
their catch. Weather patterns along the c oast include frequent cyclonic activity with high waves and winds causing 
damage to coastal infrastructure which is likely to be further exacerbated due to climate change.  
51. There are several important coastal wetlands located in Odisha including Chilika and Gahirmatha.  The Odisha 
coastline also hosts highly diverse mangrove systems, particularly in the deltas of the Mahanadi, Brahmani and 
Baitarani rivers. However, the goods and services provided by these ecosystems are being negatively impacted by devel opment pressures. Industrial development –  such as production of steel, chemicals and fertilizers –  is 
expanding in coastal areas of Odisha. The Special Economic Region between Paradip and Gopalpur is attracting investments in petrochemicals, steel product ion and manufacturing, with further development being anticipated with 
the expansion of port facilities. These industrial activities –  as well as run- off from agricultural lands and wastewater 
discharge from factories – are causing water pollution that thr eatens community livelihoods such as farming and 
fishing. Odisha’s coastline is also impacted by beach mining and other industries. Coastal pollution and erosion caused by inappropriately sited infrastructure is causing degradation of coastal ecosystems including mangroves 
and seagrasses. These anthropogenic impacts are likely to be compounded by climate impacts in future, including 
more frequent, larger storm surges caused by intensified cyclonic activity (see Section C.2 for more detail).   
52. Climate projections for the state of Odisha indicate a change in rainfall frequency and intensity, which will negatively impact agriculture and other coastal livelihood activities. The state is prone to extreme weather events, such as frequent droughts, fl oods and cyclones. For example, in 1999, a super -cyclone impacted the entire coast of Odisha 
causing huge loss of life and damage to property. In 2013, Cyclone Phailin caused devastation across the state, with 
Ganjam district suffering damages to property and infrastructure of more than Rs3,000 crore
73. Furthermore, heavy 
rainfall and floods have been experienced 88 times in the last 20 years74. Climate change will exacerbate the current 
trends floods and droughts by increasing their frequency and intensity. The current predicted climate change effects 
for Odisha include inter alia : i) a high variability of rainfall, leaving people with two peak periods of food shortage; ii) 
drought and dry spells every two years in western Odisha, with a major drought every 5 to 6 years; iii) flash floods 
during the rainy season; iv) heat waves in summer; and v) intense coastal flooding and cyclones. These climate 
change effects could have serious negative impacts in Odisha. For example, paddy fields in the coastal areas are 
prone to frequent erosion, salinization and inundation. Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier 
and flood- prone areas will be subject to more flooding75. With almost 60% of land devoted to rain- fed agriculture in 
Odisha, these climati c changes will have significant impacts on the livelihoods and food security of local communities. 
Other problems such as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate variability. Being water 
dependent, the fisheries sector in Odis ha will be impacted by climate change. The livelihoods of the fishermen will 
also be affected, not only because of sea level rise and climate mediated hazards, but also due to erratic rainfall that affects the open reservoirs and ponds/tanks. Furthermore, climate change has the potential to aggravate vector -
borne, water -borne and food- borne diseases.  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective against Baseline  
 
Baseline investment and efforts  
 
53. The GoI  is currently investing in socio- economic development in the coastal states of India to address poverty and 
promote rural development. However, these investments are being undermined by the impacts of climate change, 
resulting in diminishing development ga ins. Economic and social development efforts are guided by the  Planning 
Commission, to be phased out after 2017,  and replaced by the National Institute for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), 
with the emphasis on a bottom -up approach. The Commission’s Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012– 2017) recognizes  
that national development actions need to focus on bringing macro- economic imbalances under control and 
speeding up delivery of infrastructure projects, whilst improving rural socio- economic conditions and promoting 
private investment. In July 2016, Government announced plans to bring about a 'blue revolution' over the next five 
years, which will involve investment  (largely private sector)  of US$ 58.79 billion76 in developing eight major ports, 
establishing 27 industrial clusters on the coast, and developing rail and road connectivity with ports.  This includes 
the Sagarmala Program – the Ministry of Shipping’s flagship port -led development initiative to bring down logistics 
                                                             
73 Available at: http://www.desdemonadespair.net/2013/10/cyclone- phailin- impact -spreads.html   [Accessed on 26 January 2017]  
74 Orissa Climate Change Action Plan 2010- 2015. Government of Orissa.  
75 Odisha Climate Change Action Plan (OCCAP). 2010.  
76  http://www.ibef.org/industry/ports -india- shipping.aspx


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 105 
 C 
cost and boost investment, exports and jobs – involving investment of US$ 10.29 billion77 in 12 major ports in the 
next five years. This will be accompanied by continued expansion of Special Economic Zones (SEZ) as duty free 
enclaves to strengthen export -led development and accelerate economic growth, w ith 206 SEZs currently 
operational, and over 200 more applications approved.78 
 
54. In line with the Twelfth Five -Year Plan, baseline investments by governmental – and non- governmental – agencies 
in the three target states are addressing underlying development challenges. These baseline investments relate to inter alia : i) conservation of ecosystems; ii) industrial development; iii) socio- economic growth; and iv) agricultural 
intensification. National and state governments are currently making substantial investments in coastal areas, 
applying Integrated Coastal Zone Management approaches to new agricultural, industrial and export zone 
development, to ensure that trade- offs between economic  development and environmental impact are balanced 
appropriately . The GoI is also investing in rura l livelihoods security, with US$ 5.5 billion allocated in 2015- 16 to the 
Mahatma Ghandi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. Such initiatives focus on strengthening the 
natural resource base of the rural economy, but w ithout an explicit focus on climate change resilience. The 
government is also investing in reforestation, working through the Green India Mission to expand India’s forest cover 
from 24 to 33%. A total area of 6,747 km
2 has been afforested, with just over $ 1 billion spent in States through the 
State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) funds to offset private sector 
impacts. The focus has been largely on monocrop plantations for mitigation benefits, however. Greening strategies 
do not currently emphasize the role of biodiverse forests and other natural ecosystems in adapting to climate change 
through buffering extreme events and providing resilient livelihoods. A case in point is that India’s existing mangrove 
management s trategy involves a combination of conservation through legislative policy, community awareness and 
sustainable use of forest resources through cooperative management79, but does not systematically tackle climate 
change adaptation and mitigation.  
 
55. The baseline scenario is thus that India is committed to climate change adaptation at a policy level, and is seeking 
now to put these policies into action at scale. The public and private sectors are m aking significant  investments in 
coastal development –  in industry, agriculture, conservation, afforestation and rural livelihoods, but these are not yet 
systematically addressing climate risks.  Without the project intervention, these investments are likely to have 
decreasing success in delivering expected dev elopment gains, because of current and future climate change impacts 
compounding  underlying vulnerabilities . The natural ecosystems of India’s coastal zone will continue to be 
undervalued and will be increasingly degraded and lost, sacrificing their signif icant contribution to reducing climate 
risk by buffering disasters and supporting livelihoods. Coastal communities will remain vulnerable to loss of life and 
damage to property through flooding, erosion and saline intrusion, expected to intensify as storm surges and sea 
level rise worsen. Poor coastal communities reliant on small -scale fishing and farming will remain vulnerable to 
impacts of temperature rise and increasingly erratic monsoons on their livelihoods. The infrastructural investments 
being made t o promote development will also remain vulnerable to climate change impacts, loss and damage.  
 
Adaptation alternative and key barriers to achieving it  
 56. The adaptation alternative is that the climate resilience of India’s coastal communities is secured through harnessing 
the power of India’s ecological infrastructure for climate change adaptation.  In this alternative scenario, investment 
in the coastal zone will become more climate- risk inf ormed, using ecosystem - and community -based approaches to 
adapt  to climate change impacts. T he natural ecosystems of India’s coastal zone will be protected and restored, and 
their contribution to buffering climate shocks and stresses and supporting diversified livelihoods will be fully recognized and utilized. This will be achieved through interv entions in target landscapes in the three states of Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha to i) protect and restore ecosystems such as mangroves and seagrass, and the 
services they provide, especially buffering storm surges, and ii) help communities adopt  climate -adaptive livelihoods 
and value chains. GCF resources and co- finance will also be used to iii) mainstream EbA principles into coastal 
planning and governance, enabling intersectoral coordination for addressing climate risk across all of India’s coastal states.  
 
57. The use of “ecological infrastructure” in the form of natural ecosystems to buffer against climate change risks, for 
example, to dissipate wave energy and reduce  the intensity of storm surges , has been well documented . The 
                                                             
77 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=138881  
78 http://www.sezindia.nic.in/writereaddata/pdf/factsheet.pdf   
79 Ghosh S, Bakshi M, Bhattacharyya S, Nath B & Chaudhuri P. 2015. A Review of Threats  and Vulnerabilities to Mangrove Habitats: With Special 
Emphasis on East Coast of India. Journal of Earth Science and Climate Change. 6: 270.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 105 
 C 
Feasibility Study ( Annex II, Section 6.2) summarizes the evidence that f unctional ecosystems protect coasts from 
storm surges and sea- level rise, ameliorate shoreline erosion, regulate coastal water quality, form critical habitats for 
marine species, and provide food and liv elihood security to coastal communities. This includes a growing literature 
from South Asia and worldwide that shows the power of ecological infrastructure to buffer extreme events. For 
example, during the 1999 cyclone in Odisha, damage caused to property in areas without significant mangrove 
ecosystems was estimated to be US$ 154 per household as compared to US$ 33 for households that were protected 
by mangroves80. This protection was also evident in the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami where coastal vegetatio n 
acted as a natural barrier and significantly reduced the physical impacts of coastal surges. Mangroves and 
saltmarshes contribute towards elevating the sea floor by trapping sediment suspended in seawater. Mangroves have 
average sediment accretion rates of 5.5 mm per year and average sea floor elevation rates of 1.87 mm per year81, 
while saltmarshes have even higher rates -  average sediment accretion rates of 6.73 mm per year and average 
elevation rates of 3. 76 mm  per year82. This seafloor elevation can hel p buffer coastal areas against sea- level rise. 
Comparisons of storm event and sea- level rise scenarios in areas with and without habitats have shown that coastal 
habitats reduce the proportion of people and property exposed to these climate change impacts83 by approximately 
50%. The potential for coastal ecosystems to support climate -adaptive livelihoods  is also well documented – see 
Section 7.6 in the Feasibility Study (Annex II).  
 
58. The proposed project will address a number of barriers that currently exist that constrain the achievement of this  
adaptation vision are as follows:  
 Barrier 1: Inadequate information on climate vulnerabilities for local -level adaptation planning for the coastal zones  
59. To date, several assessments have been undertaken on the impacts of climate change in India’s coastal zones. 
Examples of these are: i) an assessment of climate change impacts on four key sectors –  agriculture, forests, human 
health and water – in India’s f our main regions, including the coastal region
84; and ii) a coastal vulnerability map 
detailing the risk posed by factors such as coastal erosion and changes in sea level85. However, such studies 
generally focus on bio- physical factors related to exposure to  climate change risks and impacts. There is still 
insufficient information on the sensitivity, socio- economic vulnerability and adaptive capacity of coastal communities 
in the face of climate change. This means that policy - and decision- makers at all level s tend to not have access to 
up-to-date holistic information on climate risks and vulnerabilities. In particular, many decision- makers and local 
communities do not have access to data from comprehensive assessments of climate change vulnerability that 
include information on: i) exposure to current and future climate change risks; ii) potential for ecological restoration 
and EbA measures; and iii) socio- economic vulnerabilities including sensitivity and adaptive capacity of local 
communities. Without detailed and comprehensive spatial data on vulnerability in India’s coastal zone, decision-
making for climate- resilient planning by national ministries, state- level departments and local communities will remain 
sub-optimal in the face of current and future climat e change impacts.  
 Barrier 2: Limited knowledge of and support for the role of EbA in enhancing adaptive capacity  
60. At present, there is limited understanding of the benefits of coastal ecosystems in reducing negative impacts of 
climate change. EbA  has been established as an effective and cos t-effective practice
86,87,88 for adapting to climate 
change in coastal areas89, but there is limited transfer and uptake of such knowledge by relevant institutions. 
Technical information on EbA as an adaptation opti on is not readily available to technical staff and decision- makers 
in India’s national ministries, state -level departments, NGOs and CBOs, particularly operational guidelines for EbA 
in the context of planning for climate change in sectors such as roads/tr ansport infrastructure, agriculture, rural 
development and disaster risk reduction. Coastal adaptation thus remains largely focussed on “hard” engineering 
                                                             
80 2012, Bahinipati and Sahu, Asian Journal of Environment and Disaster Management, Vol 4. No 2  
81 Duarte CM, Losada IJ, Hendriks IE, Mazarrasa I & Marba N. 2013. The role of coastal plant communities for climate change mitigation 
and adaptation. Nature Climate Change 3:961– 968 
82 Shepard CC, Crain CM & Beck MW. 2011. The protective role of coastal marshes: a systematic review and meta- analysis. PLoS ONE  
6:e27374. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027374  
83 Arkema, K.K, et al Coastal Habitats Shield People and Property from Sea Level Rise and Storms, Nature Climate Change 3, 913- 918 (2013).  
84 Indian Network for Climate Change Assessment. 2010. Climate Change and India: A 4x4 Assessment. A Sectoral and Regional Analy sis for 2030s.  
85 Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services. 2012. Coastal Vulnerability Atlas of India.  
86 UNEP -WCMC. 2 006. In the front line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem services from mangroves and coral reefs . UNEP -WCMC, 
Cambridge, UK.  
87 Jones, H.P., D. G. Hole & E. S. Zavaleta. 2012. Harnessing nature to help people adapt to climate change. Nature Climate C hange 2: 504- 509. 
88 Rao N.S. et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate change adaptation in Lami Town, 
Republic of the Fiji Islands. SPREP Technical Report. Apia, Samoa.  
89 For example, mangroves dis sipate wave energy and reduce flooding during extreme weather events.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 105 
 C 
solutions such as seawalls, dykes and groynes and fails to consider the full suite of adaptation opti ons, including 
“soft” ecosystem -centric options. “Hard” measures have greater construction and maintenance costs than “soft” 
measures, and often have detrimental effects on the natural environment, for example, the impact of groynes on 
sedimentation and their frequent long- term effect of actually exacerbating coastal erosion.   
 
61. Coastal communities have similar limitations regarding their knowledge and awareness of EbA. Traditional livelihood 
practices which are considered sustainable are becoming more marginal as climate change impacts erode the 
natural resource base upon which these livelihoods depend. Without knowledge on EbA, local communities will remain unable to adopt livelihood practices that are resilient to the current and fut ure impacts of climate change. If 
communities remain unaware of the potential environmental, socio- economic and adaptation benefits afforded by 
functional coastal ecosystems such as mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds and saltmarshes, there will be littl e 
incentive for them to protect and restore these ecosystems. At a deeper level, this lack of understanding throughout society is driven by the fact that the value of goods and services from coastal ecosystems is not reflected in markets or prices, and is often not even quantified –  so coastal ecosystems are gradually over -utilised and degraded, 
experiencing the “tragedy of the commons”.  
 
62. Overall, the economic and financial case for implementing EbA  in coastal ecosystems has not been adequately 
made in India. This is in part because of limited proof -of-concept concerning the ecological, social and economic 
value of coastal ecosystems, particularly in the light of climate change adaptation needs. This  has resulted in minimal 
support for investments by either the public or private sectors into large- scale EbA interventions, despite the multiple 
benefits of such interventions, including: i) climate regulation; ii) sediment and nutrient retention; iii) water purification; iv) coastal hazard protection; v) support to fisheries and aquaculture, and vi) tourism and recreation. An 
understanding of the value of ecological infrastructure on the coast, and the cost of allowing it to degrade, is required 
in order to unlock innovative financing mechanisms and catalyse future investments into EbA. As a result of the 
limited knowledge and understanding of the value of coastal ecosystems for climate change adaptation, their protection, restoration and maintenance remai ns under -
reflected in policies and investment decisions by 
government at various levels and by the private sector.  
 Barrier 3: Limited technical and financial capacity for communities to adopt climate- adaptive livelihood opportunities  
63. Local communities in India’s coastal areas are presently vulnerable to the impacts of climate change on their 
economic activities and livelihoods , particularly farming and fishing. There is limited community -level awareness and 
knowledge of current and predicted impacts of cl imate change on livelihood activities, as well as the potential for 
adopting climate- resilient practices to reduce the vulnerability of livelihoods to climate change impacts, and for 
undertaking new livelihood activities to spread household risk. In partic ular, communities have little knowledge of 
the potential for diversifying livelihood options that are underpinned by the conservation and restoration of coastal 
ecosystems through an EbA approach. For example, crab farming and oyster cultivation have the p otential to 
supplement harvesting wild populations of these organisms. Howev er, these and other aquaculture  systems depend 
on healthy, resilient, well-functioning ecosystems to support their productivity. Without knowledge and awareness 
of the strong linkages between ecosystem conservation and adaptive and sustainable livelihood options, coastal 
communities remain unable to take advantage of such synergies to expand such activities on a sustainable basis. 
In addition to livelihoods based on intertidal ecosy stems, c oastal communities may also adapt existing livelihoods 
to climate impacts, for example through adopting the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) techniques.  
 64. However, t here are a number of barriers to communities expanding or undertaking new livel ihoods. Communities 
lack technical assistance and support to business planning needed to switch to adaptive  activities, and although 
there is government support for livelihoods in poor communities, e.g. through sewing co- operatives, there is no 
systematic attempt to promote livelihoods that are climate -adaptive. Despite the wide penetration of micro-
finance,  and growing presence of local cooperative banks and regional rural banks under license  of government -
owned commercial banks and state governments, many  small- scale community organizations  along India’s coast 
(self-help groups, producer organizations , fisher associations) lack the necessary credit record and collateral to 
access bigger loans for climate -adaptive livelihoods . Climate -risk and ecosystem services and valuation is also 
poorly understood by the financing intermediaries, hindering access to finance to support a switch to climate -
adaptive livelihoods .  
 Barrier 4: Weak linkages in climate -resilient value chains for commodities underpinned by ecosystem goods and services


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 105 
 C 
65. The adoption of sustainable and climate -adaptive livelihood activities is also hindered by weak linkages in value 
chains for commodities that are underpinned by coastal ecosystem goods and services. Without such value chains, 
coastal livelihoods will not be sustained over time, as climate risks evolve. In particular, there is insufficient access 
as yet to potential markets for many of these commodities, reducing the economic viability and uptake of div ersified, 
climate -adaptive livelihoods. Crabs, for example, are sold at modest prices on local markets, rather than reaching 
urban coastal or even export markets where they could fetch a significantly higher price –  because of limitations in 
cold chain and  transport, and absence of deals with buyers. In addition, there are few opportunities for value addition 
– such as processing and packaging fish into consumer -ready products  – closer to the source of commodities. 
Markets are mostly local and, despite the prevalence of middlemen, there are untapped opportunities to facilitate 
deals with buyers in larger towns and cities and even export markets for diversified, climate- resilient value -chains. 
(also affected by lack of storage, refrigeration, and processing to create higher value products for these markets). 
There is a need for support in analysing climate- resilient value chains, identifying market opportunities, developing 
business plans, promotion market linkages, and accessing finance for livelihood and value- chain development . This 
kind of technical assistance and business development support , necessary now in order to switch to and sustain 
adaptive livelihoods, is largely missing in the rural areas of India’s coast , especially for poor communities and 
women.  
 Barrier 5: Limited institutional capacity for mainstreaming climate change into coastal zone planning, governance and 
finance  
66. Coastal management and planning in India is governed by legislative instruments that are largely sectoral in their 
approach, and are focused on regulatory functions . This means that there is little cross -sectoral coordination of 
planning and implementation of measures for climate change adaptation within the coastal zone. In particular, there 
is insufficient coordination of climate change adaptation and climate- resilient planning at the landscape -level, 
through institutions that are able to represent the various adaptation priorities of multiple stakeholders – including 
government, local communities and the private sector.  This results in: i)  coastal development occurring in areas 
where it is vulnerable to climate impacts; ii) coastal development replacing valuable ecological infrastructure; and consequently iii) greater costs of losses and damages caused by current and future climate change impacts. 
Available knowledge of climate change risks and vulnerabilities of coastal communities and ecosystems is thus not 
factored into planning and decision- making processes within national, state - and district -
level government 
institutions, or in affected economic sectors. For example, at a national level, EbA is not widely recogniz ed as a 
potential benefit of reforestation through the CAMPA fund, and at state level, EbA is not usually considered as a 
complementary measure to protect roads, urban areas and port infrastructure from climate change risks likes 
extreme weather events and severe coastal erosion. Indeed, the potential for EbA as an adaptation measure is not 
widely taught or advocated as a means for adapting to climate change and therefore has limited uptake, support and financing. Consequently, development planning along the coast of India does not take climate risks into account 
in a sy stematic and integrated manner. There is little consideration of the potential for co- management – i.e. 
cooperative management agreements between government, communities and CBOs/NGOs –  
of coastal 
ecosystems, and the implementation of EbA approaches to protect infrastructure and maximi ze ecosystem -based 
livelihoods. Coastal interventions for climate change adaptation thus largely rely on “top- down” and “hard” 
infrastructural and engineering approaches, without adequate consideration of blended approaches that integrate 
“soft” approaches such as EbA into design considerations, and involve communities in long- term co- management.  
 
Project objective, outcomes, and impacts  
 
67. The key objective  of the proposed project is to support the Government of India to enhance the resilience of the 
lives and livelihoods of rural populations –  particularly women and other vulnerable population groups –  in the coastal 
areas of India to climate change and extreme events. The focus of the project is on enhancing the climate 
resilience of India’s coastal communities through an ecosystem -based, community -centred approach to 
adaptation . The proposed project will address the barriers described above, in order to enable planning and 
implementation of ecosystem - and community -based adaptation measures to promote climate- resilient development 
in India’s coastal zone.   
 68. 
Important baseline investments are being made through national and state public expenditure, and through donor -
funded initiatives. Many initiatives  focus on climate change adaptation but fail to harness the power of natural 
ecosystems, or  narrowly  focus on biodiversity conservation, but do not consider climate risks.  A few have begun to 
use ecosystem -based approaches as part of a suite of adaptation strategies. T he proposed project draws lessons


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 105 
 C 
from and builds on baseline efforts related to addressing climate change, including the following (further detail 
provided in Section 4 of Feasibility Study in Annex II):  
69. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (World Bank, GoI, 2010 –2017, US$ 286 million)90 focuses 
on: i) building national capacity for implementation of a comprehensive coastal management approach across India 
and; ii) piloting the integrated coastal zone management approach in the states of Gujarat, Odisha and West 
Bengal. The project supports capacity building for effective coastal zone management at the national level and a Phase II will replicate the approach in a new set of states including Andhra Pradesh.  One of the components of 
ICZM project is to map Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs) along the coast and include their conservation as part of ICZM planning. The GCF project will take this mapping work done in Odisha to the logical next step of restor ing 
degraded ecosystems to support adaptation to climate change. This model will then be applied more widely through the National Coastal Mission which will work along the whole coastline of India to prioritize restoration of degraded 
ESAs by superimposing ESAs map over the vulnerability map and select areas that would have the maximum 
impact in terms of vulnerability mitigation and enhancing coastal protection, using the existing InVEST model which 
facilitates this approach by calculating vulnerability ‘wi th’ and ‘without’ natural habitat.  
70. The project Conservation and Management of Coastal Resources as a Potential Adaptation Strategy for Sea 
Level Rise (NABARD, 2015– 2019, US$ 689,264)
91 is applying an ecosystem -based approach to adaptation, and 
will be an im portant source of learning. Funded through the Adaptation Fund, the project focuses on overcoming 
the consequences of: i) s alinisation and other impacts on the coastal area caused by sea level rise; and ii) seawater 
inundation caused by an increase in cycl onic storms and storm surges. The project aims to achieve this by 
implementing appropriate adaptation strategies such as restoration of degraded mangroves and demonstrations of 
Integrated Mangrove Fishery Farming System (IMFFS).  
71. The project Mainstreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Conservation into Production Sectors in 
Sindhudurg Coast in Maharashtra (UNDP, MoEFCC , 2011 –2016, US$ 3,438,294)92 was funded through the 
Global Environment Facility and focused on: i) a c ross-sectoral planning framework that mainstreams biodiversity 
conservation considerations; ii) enhanced capacity of sector institutions for implementing biodiversity -friendly 
fisheries and ecotourism management plans; and iii) sustainable community liveli hoods and natural resource 
management. The project also generated awareness among local communities on the importance of biodiversity 
conservation amidst the threat of unsustainable fishing practices and increasing pollution from fishing and other maritime  vessels. These challenges were addressed through partnerships with relevant sectors to improve 
livelihoods of coastal communities by implementing: i) sustainable fishing practices; ii) sustainable agriculture and 
horticulture; iii) value addition to fishery operations; and iv) eco- tourism – such as adventure sports, dolphin viewing 
and scuba diving.  
72. The project Mainstreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Conservation into Production Sectors in the 
East Godavari River Estuarine Ecosystem (EGREE), Andhra P radesh (UNDP, MoEFCC , 2011– 2018, 
US$ 6,023,636)
93 is funded through the Global Environment Facility and focuses on mainstreaming biodiversity 
conservation into the production sectors of the EGREE through: i) cross -sectoral planning; ii) enhanced capacity 
of sector institutions to implement biodiversity -friendly sector plans; iii) improved community livelihoods and 
sustainable natural resource use. The goal of the project is to mainstream biodiversity conservation into production 
activities currently underway  in 80,000 ha of the EGREE.  
73. In addition, following relevant c urrent and planned initiatives  have been considered in the design of the proposed 
project:  
74. The Sustainable Coastal Protection and Management Investment Programme, begun in 2010,  is being 
implemented by the Maharashtra Maritime Board and the Asian Development Bank, aiming to manage coastal 
ecosystems and reduce the loss of property in Karnataka and Maharashtra. This includes innovative interventions 
for coastal protection, and improved shor eline management planning. Phase II (2016– 2019) is currently in 
development, and is expected to address coastal erosion along selected Karnataka beaches, and will include 
                                                             
90 http://projects.worldbank.org/P097985/integrated- coastal -zone- management?lang=en&tab=financial   
91 https://www.adaptation- fund.org/project/building- adaptive- capacities -of-small -inland- fishers -for-climate -resilience- and-livelihood- security -madhya-
pradesh- 2/    
92 http://www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/operations/projects/environment_and_energy/mainstreaming- coastal -and-marine- biodiversity -into-
production- se.html   
93 
http://www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/operations/projects/environment_and_energy/mainstreaming_coastalandmarinebiodiversity intoproduc
tionsectorsi.html


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 105 
 C 
addressing immediate coastal protection needs, capacity building and institutional de velopment, modelling and 
other analytical work, and analyses of sand deficits of selected beaches.  
75. Mangroves for the Future (MFF) is an initiative that promotes investment into coastal ecosystem conservation for 
sustainable development in 10 member countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Pakistan, 
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam). MFF is co- chaired by the IUCN and UNDP, and is currently in its 
third phase (2014- 2018), with additional funding from the Swedish Internati onal Development Cooperation Agency 
(Sida), focusing on building the resilience of ecosystem -dependent coastal communities to natural disasters and 
climate change related impacts.  
76. The GoI-World Bank -Govt of Odisha : National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project,  Odisha where constructing 
cyclone shelters, and cyclone shelter management committees are being formed to support preparedness, 
response and relief measures. Discussions will be held between the steering committees of this project and the GCF project to s eek synergies in work in coastal districts where both projects operate. This may include using 
shelters could be used for joint awareness -raising meetings on climate change impacts and trainings on climate-
adaptive livelihoods and early warnings systems. T he Forestry Department will ensure that the management 
committees support collection and monitoring of data for the GCF project where relevant, including the impact of 
cyclonic activity on ecosystem restoration and new climate- adaptive livelihoods. The project District/Landscape -
Level Coordination Committees will liaise with this and other relevant related initiatives by government and donors 
in the districts that are preparing disaster management plans covering preparedness, response, rehabilitation and 
recovery, including financial recovery for any extreme weather events
. 
77. Ground water recharge and Solar Micro Irrigation to ensure food security and enhance resilience in 
vulnerable tribal areas of Odisha is a project proposal that has been submitted to the GCF (planned for 2017 –
2021) through NABARD. The project is enhancing groundwater recharge in community ponds through the 
construction of a Ground Water Recharge System in the state of Odisha, aiming to i mprove the water table in rural 
areas through the adoption of recharge systems in existing village ponds and tanks, and implement the use of solar pumps for irrigation as part of a climate- resilient, crop- planting strategy.  
78. Bay of Bengal Large Marine Ecos ystem (BOBLME) Project is a multi- country collaboration between 
Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, seeking to improve the lives 
of coastal populations by improving the regional management of the Bay of Bengal environment and its fisheries. 
The BOBLME Strategic Action Programme (SAP) is a policy document that address issues relating to fisheries 
management, environmental and socio- economic issues. The latest version of the SAP was signed by member 
countries in March 2015. The BOBLME Project is finalising the Project Information Form (PIF) for a 2nd phase – the 
SAP Implementation Project –  for submission to the GEF and implementing partners.  
79. However, a number of gaps exist in past and ongoing initiatives that  will continue, under a business -as-usual (BAU) 
scenario, to hinder climate- resilient and sustainable development in India. There has been little integration of EbA 
measures into BAU investments for biodiversity, conservation, and sustainable development. Cli mate change 
impacts and the potential for EbA are not considered in baseline investments because of limited downscaled climate 
data, inadequate technical capacity for planning of EbA, and undervaluation of both coastal ecosystem goods and 
services and the potential of EbA to build the adaptive capacity of local communities.  A number of past and on-
going baseline investments have not fully achieved their objectives also because of limited inter -sectoral planning, 
particularly with regards to climate change adaptation.   
80. While  there have been a number of baseline investments into community -based natural resource management for 
livelihoods, there has been little consideration of climate change impacts upon these investments and the livelihoods themselves. Such investments are likely to be unsustainable in the long term, as they will be undermined 
by climate change.  Other baseline investments are addressing human pressures on ecosystems in the coastal 
zone of India by  undertaking desiltation of rivers, dredging of lakes, contouring of agricultural fields, terracing of hill 
slopes and restoration of degraded ecosystems. These investments are also potentially jeopardized by climate 
change impacts. For example, intense rainfall events can result in: i) rapid resiltat ion of rivers and lakes; ii) severe 
erosion on contoured agricultural land; iii) damage to terrace infrastructure; and iv) washing away of newly planted 
seedlings. There is a need to integrate climate risk management, and the role of natural ecosystems, into all such 
baseline initiatives.  
81. The proposed project will shift away from this business -as-usual (BAU) scenario to transform coastal management 
and adaptation by harnessing the power of India’s ecological infrastructure for coastal resilience. GCF invest ment 
and GOI co -finance will enable best practice  in restoring ecosystems, improving livelihoods and strengtheni ng


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 105 
 C 
adaptive coastal governance, creating  pathways to scale up effective ecosystem and community -based adaptation, 
with additional mitigation benefits . The project investment will be complemented by new and additional co- finance 
by national Government and the Governments  of the three target States . It will also crowd in financing from private 
sector, financial institutions, donors, and local com munities in coastal restoration efforts. This will involve building 
partnerships for using forest compensation funds, promoting complementary engineered solutions for shoreline 
protection, efforts to enhance the resilience of coastal property and infrastructure, climate -adaptive livelihood 
support, as well as vulnerability mapping and community -based early warning systems.  
82. Through the GCF intervention, supported by significant co- finance from the public sector, the natural ecosystems 
of India’s coastal zone will be protected and restored, and their contribution to buffering climate shocks and stresses 
and supporting diversified livelihoods will be fully recognized and utilized . This new community -based and 
ecosystem -centric approach to adaptation will be achieved through: i) protecting and restoring ecosystems such 
as mangroves and seagrass, to ensure the flow of ecosystem  services they provide; ii) helping communities 
enhance their adaptive capacity through livelihoods strengthening; and iii) mainstreaming ecosystem -based 
adaptation into coastal management by public and private sector actors nationwide. These measures are detailed 
below.  
83. Firstly, GCF resources  and co- finance will be invested in ecosystem -based adaptation measures that will restore 
ecosystems , providing critical goods and services to enhance the resilience of coastal communities to climate 
change impacts  and enhance carbon sequestration. The National Coastal Mission will provide a framework for  
work  in all coastal states on incorporat ing ecosys tem considerations into vulnerability assessment and establishing  
a system with a decision- support tool to guide planning, decision- making and monitoring of adaptation measures. 
Based on these assessments, ecosystem -based adaptation measures will be implem ented in the three target states 
of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. These measures will focus on mangroves, seagrasses, coral reefs, salt marshes and coastal watersheds. Restoration and conservation of these coastal ecosystems will improve the 
delivery of critical ecosystem goods and services that will buffer local communities against the current and predicted 
impacts of climate change (e.g. sea- level rise, cyclones, storm surges) as well as underpin the sustainability of 
coastal livelihoods (e.g. f isheries, aquaculture). P rotected and restored coastal ecosystems will also contribute to 
climate change mitigation, since coastal ecosystems (particularly mangroves and seagrasses) have been demonstrated to capture and store significant amounts of carbon –  known as “blue carbon”.  
84. Secondly, GCF resources and co- finance will support climate -adaptive livelihoods  to enhance the adaptive 
capacities of coastal communities in the target states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. Vulnerable 
fishing and farming household will receive support on new climate -adaptive liveli hoods , and co-finance will support 
value chain development , in order to cope with the current and predicted effects of climate change. This will be 
done i) through adapt ing current farming practices by switching to new crops and new methods to deal with cl imate 
impacts on agroecosystems ; and ii) through promoting new  adaptive livelihood opportunities , based on the coastal 
ecosystems being restored to buffer climate impacts . Capacities of  communities and sub- national government 
institutions will be strengthened so that they can continue beyond the project to adapt economic activities  in line 
with evolving climate risks over time. Particular attention will be paid to the needs of women, youth and socially 
marginalized groups.  
85. Thirdly, frameworks will be strengthened for landscape- level coastal and marine governance at the national and 
sub-national levels. Institutional strengthening will focus on establishing a network  of institutions that are 
capacitated to undertake integrated planning for climate resilience in coastal landscapes, with a focus on ecosystem -based and community -
centric adaptation measures. Climate change considerations will be 
mainstreamed into relevant  policies, plans and regulations for coastal governance and management, and 
opportunities sought for new financial mechanisms that enable such measures to be scaled up. GOI co -finance will 
also build the capacities of local communities, government official s and other relevant stakeholders to integrate 
ecosystem -based approaches to climate change adaptation into planning, policy -making and inv estment decisions 
at all levels,  including planning for climate risk -informed coastal infrastructure.   
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
86. The proposed project will combine GCF resources with co- financing from GoI ( public expenditure allocations and 
investments ) to enhance the resilience of coastal communities throughout India. The project will lead to the 
achievement of the following key results : 
• Output 1. Enhanced resilience of coastal and marine ecosystems and their services;


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 105 
 C 
• Output 2. Climate -adaptive livelihoods for enhanced resilience of vulnerable coastal communities; and  
• Output 3. Strengthened governance and institutional framework for climate- resilient management of coastal areas . 
 
87. The work in Outputs 1 and 3 will be carried out both at national level and across all of India’s 13 coastal States and Union Territories. In Output s 1 and 2, specific ecosystem -based adaptation and climate -adaptive livelihood 
interventions will be undertaken in the three target states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. These target 
states were identified through a country -driven, consultative and multi -criteria approach that assessed climate change 
vulnerability  (CCV), climate change exposure (CCE) and the presence/extent of coastal ecosystems. Within these 
states, a total of 2 4 target  landscapes were selected for investments in ecosystem restoration and climate -adaptive 
livelihoods , through a country -driven, consultative and multi -criteria approach (for further details, see Section 7.2 of 
the Feasibility Study in Annex II). The landscapes are typically clusters of villages within an area defined by socio-
geographical features, e.g. a coastal lake basin with surrounding farmlands. The average size of a landscape is 66,108 hectares (see table of sites as Annex 5 to the Feasibility Study  – 24 of the 34 listed landscapes were selected). 
Communi ties in these la ndscapes practic e largely a combination of fishing and farming, and are directly dependent 
on surrounding natural ecosystems for their livelihoods. Wherever possible, the landscapes include the catchment 
area supplying freshwater to farmlands and estuaries , facilitating a “ridge to reef” approach to planning ecosystem -
based adaptation measures across the landscape. The locations of the 2 4 target  landscapes are shown on the maps 
of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha in Annex IX.  
 88. Global datasets were used in conjunction with data from national - and state government to identify underlying 
baseline development challenges as well as expected vulnerabilities to the effects of climate change. Prioritization  of 
sites was based on vulnerability and exposure to climate change impacts, as well as the presence and extent of 
relevant coastal ecosystems. For each state, districts were ranked and assessed according to these selection criteria. 
In particular, districts within each state were selected based on the vulnerabilities of local communities and their livelihoods to climate change impacts. The populations of these districts are largely rural, and depend primarily on 
agriculture and fisheries for their livelihoods. These livelihoods are par ticularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change because: i) increased climate variability, rising temperatures, and increasing frequency/intensity of droughts 
and floods are reducing agricultural productivity; ii) storm surges are damaging agricultur al land and property through 
erosion, coastal floods and saline intrusion; and iii) climate change effects on ocean temperatures and acidity resulting in migration and reduction in fish populations and damage to breeding grounds.  
 
89. A preliminary livelihood assessment was undertaken and a portfolio of livelihoods options was developed,
 based  on 
community consultations, past experiences and best practices for rural development in specific areas . The 
assessment  took into account current livelihoods practiced in the targeted states, climatic suitability for new activities, 
and potential markets for products, as well as the projected impacts of climate change in these areas (see detail on this process in the Feasibility Study Section 7.5). See also A
nnex III an d a report developed by the National Institute 
of Ocean Technology as an input to the project devel opment process.94 Support to climate -adaptive livelihoods  will 
be targeted specifically at households experiencing the impacts mentioned above, to reduce thei r vulnerability and 
enhance their adaptive capacity. In addition, the project will target very poor households and those belonging to 
marginalized groups, and select interventions will benefit women, youth, elderly and disabled people, all of whom are 
additionally vulnerable. A description of the parameters and the results of the district prioritisation is presented in 
Section 7 of the Feasibility Study –  Annex II.  Gender and social assessment was conducted w ith various stakeholders 
in the selected sites to understand the specific challenges and opportunities facing women and socio- economically 
marginalized groupings, especially tribal communities. The assessment explored the existing livelihood opportunities of vulnerable groups; their coping strategies during climate- intensified disasters, access to and control over 
productive resources; participation in the decision- making process at the societal and household levels; access to 
services, inputs, technology, and markets for sustainable livelihoods. The findings of the assessments were 
incorporated in the feasibility study to increase the outreach of the programme to these particularly vulnerable 
communities; gender and social assessment i s presented in the Annex XIII (c ) - Gender Assessment and Action Plan. 
 
 
 
Output 1: Enhanced resilience of coastal and marine ecosystems and their services  
 
                                                             
94 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management Project Directorate & National Institute of Ocean Technology. 2016. An 
Integrated Approach to Assess the Biophysical Vulnerability  of Coastal Areas (Andhra Pradesh, Odisha And Maharashtra) – A 
Feasibility Study


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 105 
 C 
90. Activities undertaken under this output will generate a range of adaptation and sustainable development benefits 
through the conservation, restoration and maintenance of coastal and marine ecosystems to enhance their resilience. 
At a national scale and in all the coastal states, a long -term system will be established for undertaking vulnerability 
assessment of the coast, for  undertaking restoration of coastal ecosystems, and for systematic monitoring of the 
results, including for carbon sequestration. In the 24 target landscapes in the three states, communities will 
collaborate closely with the Forestry Department in a co- management approach, both as recipients of work 
opportunities in restoration efforts, and as ongoing partners in maintaining the resource in a healthy condition – 
managing harvesting of timber on non- timber forest products, controlling pollution and helping t o prevent illegal 
activities.  
 
91. Protocols and guidelines will be established, and restoration efforts undertaken, including i) mangrove restoration 
through hydrological rehabilitation, e.g. restoring free tidal flow by constructing main and branch canals and opening 
access to tidal source; ii) mangrove restoration through planting of seedlings/saplings; iii) restoration of catchments through afforestation to prevent erosion and sedimentation of coastal ecosystems; iv) rehabilitation of seagrass beds and sal tmarshes through hydrological rehabilitation; v) artificial regeneration of coral reefs through structure 
placement; vi) hydrological rehabilitation of coastal lagoons, e.g. dredging/breaching river mouths; vii) restoration of dune vegetation; and viii) es tablishment of shelter belts using a variety of suitable tree species. The operations and 
maintenance plan for this restoration of ecological infrastructure is  outlined in Annex XIII  (b). 
 Activity 1.1. Conducting vulnerability assessment of the coast to inform planning of ecosystem - and community -
based adaptation interventions  
 
92. Although vulnerability to climate change along India’s coast has been studied and described, there is a need for fine -
scale mapping of climate vulnerabilities in each coastal district to underpin local -level planning for effective adaptation 
interventions.  This will also pave the way for future GOI projects through India’s GCF Direct Access Entities. 
Information that is currently available largely focuses on bio- physical exposure to climate change risks and impacts, 
without fine- scale data on sensitivity and adaptive capacity of coastal communities, including ecological and socio-
economic climate vulnerabilities (see Section C.2 for more details). A physical vulnerability map detailing exposure 
to climate change impacts has been developed for the coast of India. The Ministry of Earth Sciences’ Indian National 
Centre for Ocean Information Services has developed a Coastal Vulnerability Index (CVI) using seven parameters 
(shoreline change, sea level change, coastal slope, significant wave height, tidal range, co astal regional elevation 
and geomorphology). In addition, MoEFCC has prepared shoreline change maps and identified ecologically sensitive 
areas for India’s. However, these existing initiatives only detail biophysical exposure to climate change risks.  
 
93. During the first few months of project implementation, information and analysis from existing studies –  including the 
CVI and the Feasibility Study – will be complemented by a fine- scale assessment of the climate vulnerabilities of 
India’s coast, focusing on aspects that are not currently included in the available studies. In particular, it will integrate 
measures of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity to calculate a comprehensive vulnerability index for the entire 
coastline. This fine- scale assessment  will serve two purposes, namely to: i) establish a methodology and baseline 
dataset for long- term monitoring and tracking of climate vulnerability along India’s coast; and ii) inform community -
centric and localized planning of ecosystem restoration (see A ctivity 1.2) and climate -adaptive livelihoods  (see 
Activities 2.1 and 2.2) under this GCF project. Undertaking this assessment along the entire coast, supported by co-
finance from the MoEFCC, will also facilitate undertaking of similar EbA interventions in  other states.  
 
94. The two main components to this assessment will be:  
• Ecosystem extent and integrity . The assessment will include detailed analyses of the presence and condition of 
coastal ecosystems that provide critical goods and services that buffer agai nst the expected effects of climate change, 
e.g. mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds and saltmarshes. The assessment will map the historic and present extent of these ecosystems, and identify drivers of ecosystem degradation. Based on this, a map of rest oration potential will 
be developed, with specific reference to areas where ecosystem restoration/rehabilitation using an EbA approach 
can reduce the impacts of climate change on local communities.  
• Socio -economic factors. In addition to bio- physical exposure to climate change impacts, the vulnerability of local 
communities will be determined by their sensitivity95 to specific impacts as well as their adaptive capacity96 for coping 
                                                             
95 Sensitivity is a factor of inter alia communities’ dependence on their environment for livelihood s and other needs, their capacity for decision- making 
and other socio- economic factors including inequality, gender biases and traditions.  
96 Adaptive capacity is determined by the resources that communities are able to mobilise, e.g. social networks, finan cial means, knowledge, access 
to technology.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 105 
 C 
with climate change. The fine -scale assessment will include parameters for measuring both sensitivity and adaptive 
capacity, such as climate change awareness, income, gender, sources of livelihood, level of food and water security, 
access to technology and level of education.  
 95. The outputs of this process will include a system for  producing a periodic detailed climate vulnerability map for the 
entire coastal zone of India, identifying areas of high vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. This first iteration of this map, and its GIS layers, will be housed within the National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM), an autonomous centre of the MoEFCC, which will take responsibility for updating the map on a regular basis, beyond the lifetime of the GCF project, guided by the vision of the National. . The vulnerabilit y assessment and 
map will be scientifically robust, based on existing methodologies derived from the IPCC and other best practices, and tailored to the national socio- economic, climate and environmental contexts.  
 
96. The assessment will form the basis for a decision support tool that will be dynamic, enabling continuous updating as new climate and other information becomes available. This decision support tool will be applied to improve the state of knowledge on vulner ability to climate change in all of India’s coastal districts, providing information on site- specific, 
local-level priorities for EbA interventions , and concerns of the specific vulnerable groups.  National and state 
governments as well as NGOs and local communities will have access to the decision support tool, supporting them to design and implement site- specific, local -level adaptation measures that are ecosystem -based and community -
centric , and addressing vulnerability of most marginalized groups.  
 
97. To es tablish this vulnerability assessment system, the following steps will be undertaken:  
• Supporting coastal research and management  institutions to add ecosystem -related parameters to methodologies 
for guiding vulnerability assessment and national - and state- level planning and decision- making on adaptation and 
management measures to address climate change.  
• Applying the enhanced/revised methodology to establish a system for periodic  detailed assessment  of vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity along the entire coastline of  India, using the analysis to inform planning of restoration 
and livelihoods  activities for climate change adaptation.  
• Developing a Decision- Support Tool for adaptation planning at state and national levels that integrates district -level 
data with site- /district -level assessments to provide decision- makers with dynamic information that is regularly 
updated using data from census, ecological surveys and other sources.  
• Creating an online platform and associated app to facilitate access to information in the Decision- Support Tool for 
decision -makers, communities, NGOs/CBOs and other relevant stakeholders, as well as to allow t hem to upload 
data for tracking changes in ecological and socio- economic vulnerability to climate change in coastal areas.  
• Producing a national series of restoration guidelines based on the information used for the Decision Support Tool –  
one booklet /pdf per ecosystem type, drawing on site- level experience.  
 
 
Activity 1.2: Community -based conservation and restoration of coastal ecosystems for increasing ecosystem 
resilience  
 
98. In this activity, conservation, restoration and management of coastal ecosystems will be carried out, using both GCF 
funding and co- finance from national and all three State governments, in 24 target landscapes in 12 coastal districts 
(see locations on maps of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha States in Annex IX). In addition to c onservation 
and better management of coastal ecosystems, this will involve the restoration of 10,575 hectares of mangroves, 700 
hectares of saltmarshes, 85 hectares of seagrass beds, 35 hectares of coral reefs and 3550 hectares of coastal 
watersheds (see A nnex II Feasibility Study Section 7.4 for costs per hectare). These figures are based on the number 
of hectares of these ecosystems in the target landscapes with potential for restoration –  see the table of target 
landscape sizes and hectares of ecosystem types in Annex 5 to the Feasibility Study (Annex II to this proposal  – 24 
of 34 landscapes selected). These interventions are necessary for two reasons –  firstly to respond and adapt to 
negative impacts of climate change on coastal ecosystems, e.g. ocean warming and acidification causing coral 
bleaching, or sea- level rise and storm surges causing saline intrusion that disturbs the hydrological balance in 
estuaries. Secondly, the coastal ecosystems are themselves important as buffers protecting human lives and livelihoods from damage by extreme events, and as the basis for coastal communities’ livelihoods.  In response to 
iTAP review, an additional assessment has been done of the return on investment on restoration of coral and 
seagrass systems, given the hig h cost of the proposed restoration, and a justification provided for the approach and 
why it has been chosen above other alternatives (see Annex XIII  n).


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 105 
 C 
99. The coastal ecosystems prevailing in the project’s target states include mangroves, coral reefs, salt marshes, 
seagrass beds and coastal/dune vegetation, linked together into wider catchment areas that form an interactive and 
integrated large coastal system “from ridge to reef”, in which the physical presence of each ecosystem helps to 
support the others. The presence of a coral reef, for example, provides protection from excessive wave action, 
allowing a seagrass ecosystem to develop in the back lagoon and a mangrove at the landward edge. In turn, 
mangroves and seagrass ecosystems trap sediments, thereby i mproving water quality and clarity in the immediate 
subtidal zone, providing suitable conditions for coral reefs to thrive, and nurseries for fish species. In combating the 
impacts of climate change, these ecosystems contribute in different ways to the protection of coastal livelihoods and limit damage to ecological as well as built infrastructure. For example, mangroves provide protection from storm 
surges caused by cyclones
97 and saltmarshes trap sediment, raising the level of the seabed and helping to com bat 
the combined effect of storm surges and sea level rise.98 
 
100. Investments in ecological infrastructure to build climate resilience will be overseen by the Forest Department at state 
level, with a key role by the State Coastal Zone Management Authorities currently being established to ensure 
coordinated implementation of Coastal Zone Regulations. The field activities will be implemented by the respective 
line departments at state, district and sub- district levels, NGOs and CBOs under the overall guidance and supervision 
of the state and district level coordination mechanism as above. At the village level, Village Organizations (federations of Self -Help Groups) and Eco Development Committees will be involved in project implementation through the 
establishment of co- management structures involving government and CBOs/ NGOs. Restoration work will be 
undertaken by Eco Development Committees within protected areas, and Van Samrakshan Samitis  outside PAs (e.g. 
on state- owned Revenue lands), and these organizations will pay community participants for work carried out. Co-
management of natural resources –  which has been implemented across India for the past 30 years and the project 
will build on  this tradition.  Site restoration protocols  will be discussed for each site between the Forestry Department 
and community structures to clarify community roles in co-management and arrangements on sustainable harvesting. 
This process  will be coordinated and monitored across the project by the Natural Resource Management Officer in 
the national PMU and by the Ecological and Adaptation Specialists in the State PMUs. In the target landscapes the development, implementation and monitoring of site protocols will  be undertaken by the NGOs contracted by the 
Forestry Department, working with community co- management structures and the Ecological and Adaptation 
Specialists.  
101. The protocols will feed into Target Landscape Integrated Management Plans (TLIMPs) that will b e developed for 
each of the 24 target landscapes. These will meet the requirements of the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification (2011) for Integrated Management Plans in Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCAs). Where appropriate, these 
Plans will includ e Biodiversity Conservation Action Plans (which will ensure that in areas of critical habitat, no project 
activities will be implemented unless the requirements of paragraph 17 of IFC Performance Standard 6 can be met). In some cases, the initial phases of  restoration work will necessitate the exclusion of community members from areas 
where they previously had access, for example to harvesting resources. Such restrictions will be explained and 
awareness raised on the medium and long- term benefits, and where possible, alternative sites will be provided for 
compensatory access to resources (see Annex VI (b) for further details). In some cases, the initial phases of 
restoration work will necessitate the exclusion of community members from areas where they previ ously had access, 
for example to harvesting resources. Such restrictions will be explained and awareness raised on the medium and 
long-term benefits, and where possible, alternative sites will be provided for compensatory access to resources  (see 
Annex VI (b) for further details) . 
102. Conservation and restoration of coastal ecosystems will, in this project, be achieved through the following general practices: i ) severely degraded ecosystems will be restored; ii) slightly to moderately degraded ecosystems will be 
managed to allow for natural regeneration; iii) where potential exists, new ecosystem areas that provide protection 
against climate change impacts will be created; and iv) existing functional ecosystems will be protected and maintained.  More details on specific restoration interventions in particular ecosystem types are outlined in Section 
F.2 of this proposal, based on the detailed methodological recomm endations contained in Section 7.4 of the 
Feasibility Study (Annex II). This Activity will involve:  
• Supporting participatory planning in target landscapes of site- specific EbA measures for conservation and 
restoration of six ecosystem types (see Annex II F easibility Study Section 7.4), based on the analysis of 
vulnerability to climate change impacts and adaptive capacity undertaken through Activity 1.1.  
                                                             
97 Duarte, C.M, et al, The Role of Coastal Plant Communities for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation, Nature Climate Change 3, 961- 968 (2013)  
98 Shepard CC, Crain CM & Beck MW. 2011. The protective role of coastal marshes: a systematic review and meta- analysis. PLoS ONE  
6:e27374. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027374


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 105 
 C 
• Developing detailed, ecosystem - and site -specific protocols and guidelines – based on global and national  best 
practices – for restoration of the various ecosystem types (mangroves, saltmarshes, coral reefs, seagrass beds, 
dune vegetation, etc.) using an EbA approach.  
• Establishing co -management structures in target landscapes to foster community support for and participation in 
conservation and restoration activities, including pollution management to minimize  impact on ecosystems . 
• Undertaking ecosystem conservation, restoration and management (including pollution control) activities –  based 
on the EbA protocols and through the co- management structures –  in the project sites in the three states.  
• Developing and implementing community -based/participatory monitoring and maintenance programmes through 
the co- management structures to maintain restored ecosystems and capture lessons learned and best practices 
from the project sites . 
• Training and supporting communities in 24 target landscapes –  with a focus on local youth as well as 
NGOs/CBOs – to use the coastal adaptation Decision- Support Tool to track the restoratio n and conservation of 
coastal ecosystems in 3 target states, including extent of restored ecosystems and carbon sequestered.  
• Producing a video in each of the three target States on the restoration and conservation work of the multi -
stakeholder partnerships  in the target landscapes  
 
Output 2: Climate -adaptive livelihoods for enhanced resilience of vulnerable coastal communities  
 
103. GCF funding and co- finance will be used to support vulnerable communities , whose current fishing and farming 
livelihoods will be increasingly negatively affected by climate change,  to adapt their liveli hoods to climate change in 
the 2 4 target landscapes in the three states (see Feasibility Study in Annex II for detailed outline of the sites and 
their selection based upon criteria of  socio -economic vulnerability to climate change impacts, bio- physical exposure 
to such impacts, and the presence of coastal habitats and intertidal ecosystems). The output will help enhance adaptive capacity, including capacity to adapt existing livelihood  activities and diversify to climate- resilient options, 
and to do business planning and access finance for scaling up harvesting, agri -and aquaculture operations. This will 
also include developing value chains to ensure uptake and the long- term sustainabil ity of these adaptive livelihoods , 
including support on business planning, access to finance, certification and labelling of eco- products, and access to 
markets.  
104. A study was undertaken on a suite of climate -adaptive livelihood activities, including unders tanding their value chains 
and assessing market potential for their products, in order to ensure adoption and the long- term sustainability of 
these livelihoods  alongside evolving climate risks . These activities were outlined in several community consultations, 
and feedback was incorporated into the design of the activities (see record of stakeholder consultations in Annex XIII(d)). The work on livelihood options is detailed in Section 7.6 of the Feasibility Study (Annex II). This initial 
identific ation of suitable livelihoods options and viable value- chains (based on the sub- assessment of the Feasibility 
Study) has been further developed to provide a suite of suitable activities for each target landscape, building on a detailed assessment of community vulnerabilities  (see Annex XIII (i) “ Restoration of Livelihoods and Activities per 
Landscape” ). Technical assistance will be provided to livelihood activities in two categories: Category A l ivelihoods 
based on coastal ecosystems restored to buffer clim ate impacts, and establishing value chains to sustain these 
livelihoods alongside evolving climate impacts; and Category B livelihoods that adapt current farming practices to 
deal with climate impacts on agro- ecosy stems. These are detailed in Table 3 below:  
Table 3: Climate-adaptive livelihoods  
Category 
of Climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods  Households 
vulnerable to climate 
change targeted  Climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  and value 
chains activities to be 
supported  Rationale: how these 
livelihoods link to the 
overall EbA Strategy  How these livelihoods and 
value chains are adaptive


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 105 
 C 
Category 
A  
Livelihoods 
are based on coastal ecosystems restored to buffer 
climate 
impacts  These opportunities are 
targeted at fishing 
households whose current livelihoods are threatened by climate change impacts on fisheries and aquaculture (including ocean warming and acidification)  1. Aquaculture  
GCF funding and co -
finance:  Crab farming, 
mussel farming, oyster farming, crab 
hatcheries,  ornamental 
fisheries, s eaweed 
farming  
Co-finance  only: 
Duck-fish farming  These livelihoods take 
place in creeks and ponds 
in the intertidal zone and benefit from EbA  measures 
to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems such as mangroves, seagrasses and saltmarshes (being undertaken also to buffer coastal communities and assets against storm surges)  Households whose livelihoods 
are largely dependent on fishing activitie s, which are 
being impacted negatively by climate change, are able to diversify into aquaculture, ecotourism and other activities that are adaptive because 
they:  
a) Enable diversification 
away from reliance of all 
household members on 
near-shore fishing  
b) Utilize conserved and 
restored ecosystems that 
are also providing buffers 
against storm surges  
c) Utilize conserved and 
restored ecosystems 
whose nursery function 
for fish and shellfish is 
enhanced  
d) Provide powerful co-benefits in sustaining 
community livelihoods in 
the face of evolving 
climate risks, strengthening the case 
for conserving and 
restoring these 
ecosystems  
e) Expanding value chains 
for the products of 
climate -resilient 
aquaculture and 
agriculture helps ensure 
the sustainability of these 
operations beyond the 
project lifetime  
f) Adding value to climate -
resilient aquaculture and 
fishing products 
strengthens the case for 
restoring the ecosystems 
on which these 
operations depend  
g) Expanding value chains 
for these products 
creates diversified livelihoods opportuniti es, 
taking pressure off natural and agricultural 
ecosystems, which have 
a finite ecological carrying 
capacity  
 2. Processing of 
aquaculture products  
Co-finance  only: 
MSMEs for value-
added fish products, 
fishmeal plants, fish 
and shellfish / bivalve processing units  Support is provided to the 
entire value chain of the livelihood in order to ensure its sustainability. Technical assistance is provided for value addition to fishing and aquaculture products that benefit from EbA measures to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems. This 
value addition forms a 
critical part of the strategy to sustain these livelihoods over time, alongside 
evolving climate risks.  
3. Coastal ecotourism  
Co-finance  only: 
Scuba diving, tour guiding  These livelihoods take 
place close to the intertidal zone and benefit from the scenic beauty derived from EbA measures to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems, especially coral reefs in the case of scuba diving  
4. Coastal non -timber 
forest products  
Co-finance  only: 
Mangrove beekeeping for honey production  This livelihood takes place 
in and near mangroves, which benefit from EbA  
measures. In addition to year-round nectar and 
water, the stability of mangroves provides protection from storms intensified by climate change
99  
                                                             
99 http://mangroveactionproject.org/wp- content/uploads/2013/08/MAP -Mangrove -Apiculture- Info.pdf


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 105 
 C 
 
Activity 2.1. Building climate- adaptive livelihoods  and enterprises through value chains and strengthened 
access to markets  
105. In this activity, the results of the vulnerabi lity assessment in each of the 2 4 target landscapes will be combined with 
the suite of options identified in the livelihoods assessment and value chain analysis, to select specific livelihoods, 
beneficiary groups, participating community organizat ions and locations. Beneficiaries will become involved 
through a range of organizations at community level – including Gram Panchayats (local self -governance 
institutions), S elf-Help Groups, Village Organizations (federations of Self -Help Groups), Fishermen Cooperative 
Societies, Farmer Producer Organizations, Eco Development Committees, Van Samrakshan Samitis and Joint 
Forest Management Committees. Selection of organizations for involvement will be guided by the 
District/Landscape- Level Coordination Committees and carried out  by the NGOs responsible for climate- adaptive 
livelihoods training and technical support, whose contractual services will be procured by the State Forestry 
Departments. Detailed criteria and methodologies for selection, including specific criteria for the engagement of 
Scheduled Tribes, will be discussed at the project inception workshop and included in the terms of reference for 
the NGOs’ contracts. The NGOs will be assisted by  the Socio Economic and Livelihoods Specialists, who w ill be 
supporting the work of Output 2 in the target landscapes in two coastal districts each.  
106. The coordination of livelihoods activities to meet the overall project beneficiaries totals will be undertaken by the 
National Project Coordi nator, in cooperation with the three  State Project Managers . The Livelihoods Specialists will Category 
B 
Livelihoods 
are 
adapted to 
specific 
climate 
change 
impacts on 
agro-
ecosystems  These opportunities  are 
targeted at households 
whose agricultural livelihoods are threatened by climate impacts (including temperature increase and more erratic monsoons) helping to adapt through more climate -resilient 
practices . 5. Climate -smart 
intensification  
GCF funding and co -
finance:  System of 
Rice Intensification (SRI) for paddy farming  
 This livelihood  - the System 
of Rice Intensification, and more water -efficient crops 
such as aromatic plants , 
form part of a strategy to promote climate-resilient agro-ecosystems – 
managing soil and water 
resources better to withstand erratic monsoons  
with longer dry spells  Households whose farming 
activities are being negatively impacted by climate change impac ts are able to adopt 
adaptive practices, including switching from traditional paddy rice to the System of Rice Intensification, as well as cultivating new water -efficient 
crops. These new methods are adaptive because:  
a) New crops like aromatic 
and medicinal plants 
require little irrigation  
b) SRI uses less water 
overall than traditional 
inundated paddy rice 
farming, and is more drought -resistant  
c) SRI achieves yields consistently at least 40% 
higher than traditional farming despite climate 
stressors  
d) SRI planting patterns and 
deeper roots mean 
greater resistance to rain 
and wind damage from storms  
e) SRI has mitigation co-benefits as it reduces  the 
methane gas emissions 
from the paddy fields, and increases sequestration 
through higher grain and 
straw yield and more root 
biomass.100 6. Climate -adapted 
crops  
Co-finance  only:  
- Cultivation of aromatic 
and medicinal plants, 
mushroom cultivation  These livelihoods form part 
of a strategy to promote climate -resilient agro-
ecosystems through 
changing cropping patterns 
– cultivating new crops that 
use less water  and/or can 
tolerate increased 
temperatures  
                                                             
100 http://sri .ciifad.cornell.edu/conferences/IRC2014/booth/SRI_climate_smart_rice_production_%20handout_2014.pdf


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 105 
 C 
play a facilitation role throughout the project, supporting the development of value chains around the selected 
livelihoods, helping to determine and facilitate opportuniti es for processing  of climate- adaptive aquaculture and 
agriculture products , as well as packaging, storage and refrigeration, and linkages for transport and market access. 
Where appropriate, this will also include support to establish certification schemes for “eco” products, and to access 
loan finance. GCF resources will not be used to provide such loans, but to provide technical support in accessing 
loans. NGOs will be contracted by the Forestry Department to provide technical support to community groups 
undertaking processing of the products of climate- adaptive aquaculture and agriculture, and to provide training to 
extension officer and community mobilizers involved in co- financed schemes. For assets in the villages created to 
undertake processing of the products of climate- adaptive aquaculture and agriculture, community structures such 
as self help groups will be encouraged to take out state- subsidized insurance on the assets created, against 
disasters such as flooding, storm damage or fire. Support in ac cessing such insurance products will be provided 
through this work, which will include:  
• Undertaking participatory, user -centric livelihoods planning in target landscapes –  evaluating climate -adaptive 
livelihood options based on vulnerability assessment and preliminary livelihoods assessment, and producing 
value -chain development strategies   
• Providing technical support to community groups to set up the adaptive livelihoods and add value to the products of climate -adaptive aquaculture
101 
• Providing training for extension officers and community mobilizers on ensuring that planned livelihoods and 
value addition activities are climate -risk informed 
• Supporting the development of value chains for climate- adaptive livelihoods, facilitating backward linkages for 
input s upply, and forward linkages for processing, packaging, storage, refrigeration, transport and market 
access  
• Providing technical assistance to community groups to set up certification schemes for “eco” products, and to 
develop bankable business plans to access loan finance for expansion, during or post -project.  
Activity 2.2. Improving capacities of local communities for community -based adaptation an d climate- adaptive 
livelihoods  
107. In parallel with Activity 2.1, vulnerable fishing and farming households and comm unity groupings in the target 
landscapes will benefit from capacity development opportunities. This will include general capacity building around understanding the impacts of climate change on ecosystem functioning and livelihoods based on natural resources, 
and specific skills development opportunities. Skills development training will be carried out by NGOS contracted 
by the Forestry Department, and will cover a range of climate- adaptive livelihoods in aquaculture, ecotourism and 
non-timber forest product s, as well as climate -smart intensification and climate- adapted crops (see Table 3 above 
for details of the livelihoods options and how they are climate adaptive) , with technology transfer through 
demonstration projects . The district -level Livelihoods Faci litators will also provide support to ensure that women, 
youth and marginalized groups are participating fully in livelihoods activities and decision- making processes, and 
will help facilitate learning and sharing between communities. State- wide awareness campaigns will also be 
supported, ensuring broad public support for the importance of ecosystem restoration to buffer extreme events and as the basis for sustainable livelihoods in coastal communities. This work will involve:  
• Conducting multimedia public education and awareness campaigns across the three states on climate change 
and its impacts, and the need to conserve and restore ecosystems to underpin livelihoods and buffer extreme 
events  
• Undertaking village- level capacity building on climate change and EbA in target landscapes in light of evolving 
climate risks -  involving women’s  groups, self -help groups, producer and fisher organizations, CBOs, NGOs 
and Panchayat Raj institutions, with focus on women, youth, and marginalized groups  
• Delivering training courses for climate- adaptive aquaculture
102, ecotourism103 and non-timber forest 
products104, as well as climate- smart intensification105 and climate- adapted crops106 through relevant 
community -based organizations (e.g. self help groups) and local self -governance institutions (e.g. Gram 
Panchayats)  
• Facilitating sharing of lessons between targe t landscapes on effective techniques for climate- adaptive 
livelihoods, including through exchange visits between communities, with focus on women, youth, and 
marginalized groups.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 105 
 C 
Output 3: Strengthened governance and institutional framework for climate -resilient management of coastal 
areas  
 
108. This output provides pathways to replication and scale by extending the approaches to ecosystem restoration carried 
out in Output 1 and approaches to climate -adaptive livelihood support carried out in Output 2, across all of India’s 
13 coastal States and Union Territories, and also shares knowledge on coastal resilience with countries in the wider 
South Asian region. This includes integrating adaptation into public and private sec tor policies, plans and budgets 
(Activity 3.2)  in all coastal states through a network of institutions (Activity 3.1), and undertaking targeted valuation 
and cost -benefit analyses, to motivate for new investments in EbA as well as knowledge sharing on the evidence 
base for such investments  (Activity 3.3).  
 
Activity 3.1: Network of institutions for enhanced climate resilience and integrated planning and governance in 
all coastal states  
 
109. The new National Coastal Mission (anticipated in 2018) will harness national Government co- finance to provide a 
framework for coordination amongst institutions responsible for coastal and marine governance in all 13 coastal 
States and Union Territories, and the State Forestry Departments will promote intersect oral coordination in the 2 4 
target landscapes. At present, institutional capacity for integration of climate change considerations into local - and 
state -level economic and sectoral planning and decision -making is inadequate to fully address the impacts of climate 
change. MoEFCC co -finance will  enhance linkages between existing institutions, in order to strengthen institutional 
arrangements and facilitate dialogue and collaboration on coastal climate resilience. This will involve the integration 
of climate change adaptation into policies, plans and budgets (see Activity 3.2) as well as sharing of knowledge and 
information on climate change adaptation using EbA approaches (see Activity 3.3).  
 110. In the target landscapes and/or the districts into which they fall, mult i-stakeholder coordination structures
107 – 
comprising representatives from relevant state- level ministries108, district -level government109, NGOs and 
academic/research institutions –  will be established to promote dialogue and coordination concerning climate -
resilient planning in coastal areas. Existing interdepartmental platforms will be used in the 13 coastal states/territories to facilitate incorporation of ecosystem - and community -based adaptation approaches. A pan-
Indian Coastal Resilience Network  will also be established to share knowledge. These institutions will then be 
responsible for ensuring coordination and collaboration between relevant stakeholders including government 
institutions, development partners, donor agencies, local communities, CBOs/NGOs and the private sector. 
Interventions to develop and support this network of institutions will include:  
• Establishing multi- stakeholder coordination structures in target landscapes in the three states to provide a 
platform for dialogue on and coor dination of climate- resilient development planning and co- management of 
coastal ecosystems.  
• Using existing interdepartmental platforms in 13 coastal states – particularly State Action Plans for CC and 
CZM Authorities –  to facilitate integration of EbA appr oaches into relevant policy and legislation, and to share 
lessons learned and best practices from target landscapes and states.  
• Establishing a pan- Indian Coastal Resilience Network of organizations, tertiary institutions, coordination 
platforms and coastal  districts – to promote knowledge exchanges on integration of climate change adaptation 
into coastal development planning, with a focus on EbA.  
• Supporting the proposed National Coastal Mission in integrating climate change adaptation – and particularly 
EbA – into its programme of work.  
 
Activity 3.2: Integrating ecosystem -centric approaches to climate change adaptation into public and private 
sector policies, plans and budgets, and scaling up finance for EbA  
 
                                                             
101 Processing of climate -adaptive aquaculture products: for example fish drying, production of value- added prawn products  
102 Aquaculture: including crab farming, mussel farming, oyster farming, crab hatcheries, ornamental fisheries, integrated duck -fish 
farming, seaweed farming, integrated multitrophic aquaculture  
103 Coastal ecotourism: including scuba diving, tour guiding  
104 Coas tal NTFPs: including m angrove beekeeping for honey production 
105 Climate -smart intensification: including System of Rice Intensification (S RI) for paddy farming  
106 Climate -adapted crops: including Cultivation of aromatic and medicinal plants, mushroom c ultivation  
107 Similar to the Chilika Development Authority.  
108 E.g. forests, environment tourism, revenue.  
109 E.g. district collectors.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 105 
 C 
111. Climate change adaptation using ecosystem -based,  community -centric approaches is not adequately 
mainstreamed into policy, planning and regulatory frameworks for coastal governance, nor are there currently 
sufficient sources of funding for scaling it up across India. The proposed project will support improved dialogue for 
mainstreaming and integration of climate change adaptation into existing policies and plans, particularly for local - 
and state- level spatial and development planning.  At national level this will include work through the new National 
Coastal Mission to integrate climate risk management and EbA principles into national policies and schemes, 
including the CAMPA afforestation fund and Smart Cities Mission. At state level, interdepartmental platforms in all 
coastal states will be used to facilitate scenario planning and policy dialogues, and hold public and private sector 
dialogues. The aim of this process will be to ensure that land use planning undertaken at state and district level, 
integrates climate risk management, such that natural habitats with potential to buffer extreme weather events and provide a basis for climate- adaptive livelihoods are preserved or restored wherever possible, and that the footprint 
of new urban and industrial infrastructure is directed into ar eas of land that are already transformed.  
112. This activity will also enhance capacities for undertaking climate- resilient planning in urban areas along the coast, 
using a Coastal Calculator Tool to support climate- resilient design of coastal infrastructure.  Government currently 
has a Smart Cities Mission under the Ministry of Urban Development  (and linked to the Mission on Sustainable 
Habitat) , which focuses on citizen- friendly and environmentally sustainable cities, but does not systematically 
address climate change risks. The project will work in the four coastal Smart Cities in the three target States (Kalyan 
in Maharashtra; Kakinada and Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh; and Bhubaneswar in Odisha) to develop climate 
change adaptation plans that harness ecolog ical infrastructure to combat  sea-level rise and intensified storm surges, 
promoting safety of lives, livelihoods and property, and smooth functioning of drainage, irrigation and drinking water systems. This  work will include:  
• Supporting the new National C oastal Mission to integrate climate risk management and EbA principles into 
national policies and schemes, including CAMPA afforestation fund and Smart Cities Mission  
• Facilitating biennial intersectoral dialogues under  the National Coastal Mission -  engagi ng public and private 
sector role- players on coastal adaptation as a risk management strategy, incl. fisheries, agriculture, tourism, 
ports and shipping, oil and gas  
• Equipping the interdepartmental CZM platforms in 13 coastal states to use scenario plannin g for business as 
usual vs ecosystem -based adaptation in the coastal zone  
• Developing ecosystem -based adaptation plans for four coastal Smart Cities (Kalyan in Maharashtra; Kakinada 
and Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh; and Bhubaneswar in Odisha)  
• Working through state- level interdepartmental platforms to provide coastal town planners and engineers with 
training on the Coastal Calculator tool, using EbA for shoreline protection and climate- resilient infrastructure 
 Activity 3.3: Knowledge management for coastal resilience  
 
113. A major focus of this activity will be the transfer and replication of lessons and best practices – between target 
landscapes, between coastal states, and between coastal countries in the South As ian sub- region. Lessons learned 
from the project’s EbA investments w ill be generated through rigorous, frequent and long- term monitoring. 
Investment in knowledge management through this activity, co- financed through the MoEFCC, will enable sharing 
of infor mation on global best practices, facilitating the gathering and sharing of lessons learned and evidence 
gathered during the project, and underpinning the integration of climate change adaptation into policy - and decision-
making (see Activity 3.2).  
 114. The monitoring of EbA investments will be guided by scientists, but conducted wherever feasible by community members. The long- term data sets created will be used for adaptive management of project interventions through 
the duration of the project and to inform future EbA investments in the coastal zone of India. The full socio- economic 
and ecological benefits of EbA investments are often maximized  a decade or more after the time of intensive 
ecosystem restoration. For this reason, the long- term data sets from the project will be archived within Indian 
research institutions and the long- term monitoring of the GCF project’s investments will also be institutionalized . 
Similarly, detailed, long- term Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Plans will be developed for all ecological and 
physical infrastructure constructed by the project. Government funding for O&M will include: i) financing of ongoing 
restoratio n, conservation and management of those ecosystems restored by the project; and for maintaining the 
mechanisms and tools established by the project (e.g. the Decision- Support Tool, the network of governance 
institutions and Pan- Indian Resilience Network).


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 105 
 C 
115. National level co -finance during the project through the MoEFCC will facilitate the embedding the coordination and 
operation of these mechanisms and structures in budgets and mandates beyond the life of the project. These plans 
will also include  long-term funding commitments for enhancing the ecological infrastructure and maintaining the 
physical infrastructure associated with livelihoods interventions. The condition of ecological infrastructure will be 
maintained by protecting the ecosystems, minimizing  human pressures and promoting natural ecological processes 
that facilitate recovery of ecosystems from a degraded state. Physical infrastructure will be maintained by ensuring 
that regular inspections take place and that required repair work is undertaken timeously. The monitoring of all the 
project’s restoration investments will include at a minimum: plant survivorship, plant vigour, rate of growth, 
soil/sediment chemistry (where applicable) and water chemistry. Where feasible, monitoring of the following will be 
included: stream flow, sedimentation, erosion, groundwater volume, wave energy, size of storm surges, supply of non-timber forest products and supply of timber.  
 116. Lessons learnt from the restoration of coastal ecosystems, improved livelihoods and strengthened local governance practices will also be shared through the various platforms and coordination structures strengthened in Activity 3.1 , 
ensuring coverage of wom en and other vulnerable groups’ experiences.  Partnerships with academic institutions 
through the state- level platforms will support the generation of new research findings and publications, and new 
curricula will be developed for relevant learning institutions. Knowledge products will be generated to build and 
strengthen awareness about  the effectiveness of ecosystem - and community -based adaptation. This will be used 
to inform the integration of ecosystem -centric approaches to climate change adaptat ion into sector policies, plans 
and budgets (see Activity 3.2). Moreover, an enabling environment will be created to foster exchange of knowledge 
and ideas for innovative and sustainable solutions to climate change impacts. Successful case studies and less ons 
learned from similar initiatives in India and other countries will be documented and disseminated widely, and 
knowledge exchange visits arranged within and beyond India.  
 
117.   Knowledge management will take place through the following means:  
 
• Supporting the National Coastal Mission to establish a system for collating data and information on global best 
practices, lessons learned, evidence from the field and scientific knowledge on ecosystem - and community -
based approaches to adaptation in the coastal zone of India.  
• Establishing a series of annual workshops under the auspices of the pan- Indian Coastal Resilience Network, 
involving tertiary institutions, research organizations and relevant NGOs to share research findings related to 
coastal EbA  
• Developing and piloting a training course or curricula on EbA, for delivery through administrative training and 
other relevant institutes at national and state levels, incorporating project experience and lessons especially on community -based adaptation.  
• Working through  the Pan- India Coastal Resilience Network to develop and disseminate knowledge products at 
national, regional and international levels and to share experience and learning.  
• Developing nation- wide knowledge products translated into local languages for use in the community -level 
training courses for village self -help groups and CBOs, and women’s capacity development programmes.  
• Undertaking exposure and exchange visits for national -, state - and district -level government officials and 
community leaders to prom ote knowledge sharing on cross -sectoral coastal governance, climate change 
adaptation and EbA.  
• Creating a knowledge exchange platform involving South Asia’s five coastal countries for dialogue and sharing 
learning on ecosystem -and community -based adaptation to climate change in the coastal zone, building on 
existing forums.  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
118. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change ( MoEFCC ), Government of India will be the Implementing 
Partner for the project, and will be responsible for activities at national level and for coordinating the upscaling of 
project activities in the other 10 coastal states. The state governments of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha, 
as Responsible Parties, will carry out state- level activities in these three states through an agreement with the 
MoEFCC .


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 105 
 C 
119. In the Central Government, MoEFCC  is responsible for planning, promotion, co -ordination and overseeing th e 
implementation of India's environmental and forestry policies and programmes. This ministry is the nodal ministry 
for all matters relating to climate change and coordinates implementation of the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (2008). The MoEFCC  also hosts the National Adaptation Fund, which provides resources to the state 
governments for adaptation actions, and serves as the nodal agency in the country for the UN agencies and 
programmes pertaining to environment and climate change.  
 
120. MoEFCC  also has extensive experience in executing donor -funded projects. It is the executing partner of the GEF -
funded projects “Conservation of Coastal and Marine Biodiversity in East Godavari River Estuarine Ecosystem” 
(total financing: US$ 24 million) and “Ma instreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Conservation into Production 
sectors in Sindhudurg Coast in Maharashtra” (total financing: US$ 15 million). MoEFCC  is also administering the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority initi ative (total budget: US$ 5 billion across 
all states), to promote: i) conservation and restoration of forests; ii) infrastructure development; iii) wildlife 
conservation; and iv) training of forest departments. In addition, the portfolio of initiatives and development projects 
managed by MoEFCC  also includes investments into pollution abatement and watershed management through the 
National River Conservation Directorate (total expenditure of US$ 244 million through six initiatives).  
 121. As the Implementing Par tner using UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, MoEFCC  will provide support for 
project management as well in- kind contributions to project implementation through its technical and administrative 
staff and systems at the national level. This will include operations and management support from MoEFCC  staff, 
as well as funding officials’ travel for the project, housing the dedicated National Project Management Unit , and 
facilitating project meetings . The Joint Secretary : CRZ  of MoEFCC  will be the functional executive  in the national 
project steering committee.  
 
122. The National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) and the Society of Integrated Coastal 
Management (SICOM) are autonomous centres of the MoEFCC, and will both be represented on the national project 
steering committee, along with relevant national Ministries. The NCSCM helps implement the Coastal Regulation 
Zone Notification 2011, and developed national guidelines for Integrated Coastal Zone Management. It has a key 
role in the national Coastal Mission under the NAPCC (2008), and has conducted relevant research studies on 
shoreline change assessment, and mapping ecologically sensitive areas. SICOM hosts a project management unit 
for implementing Phase II of the World Bank -assisted Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) project. The 
national project management unit of the GCF/GOI project will be hosted separately in the MoEFCC under the Joint 
Secretary: Coastal Regulation Zone.  
 
123. The targeted coastal states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha have prepared State Action Plans on 
Climate Change, in which building climate resilience of coastal areas is a significant component. As co- sponsors 
of the project, the three State Governments and their Forestry Departments have made a commitment to co-
financing the project, aiming to bring about the incorporation of new ecosystem -based adaptation approaches into 
ongoing development planning, to enhance their efforts in implementing the SAPCCs. These national and state 
partners will be vital to all operational matters, as outlined in the section on Implementing Arrangements.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
124. Through Activity 2.1, the project will support local communities and CBOs such as self -help groups, producer 
organizations and fisher associations –  with a focus on women and other vulnerable population groups –  to 
undertake sustainable and climate -adaptiv e livelihood options, particularly those based on ecosystem goods and 
services, through support for value- chain development, business planning and access to finance. Specific products 
and services supported by the project will include climate- smart agricul tural practices, sustainable fisheries and 
aquaculture, for diversifying and climate- proofing livelihoods. A financial analysis has been conducted for each of 
these livelihood opportunities, to assess their financial soundness and their expected financial rate of return (see 
Annex III).  
 
125. Value addition to the products of these coastal livelihoods forms a critical part of the strategy to sustain them over 
time, alongside evolving climate risks. Critical linkages are currently missing between farmers and mar kets, resulting 
in fragmented agricultural value chains; and untapped opportunities exist for adding value through processing of


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 105 
 C 
agricultural and aquacultural products, as well as producing products with an intrinsically higher value110. There is a 
large scope in India for the growth of the value- added agricultural products market sector, given the presence of 
both the necessary supply of diverse raw agricultural products and significant consumer demand. Crop 
diversification can open new value chains for comm unities and broaden their reach to national and international 
markets. Value chains for fisheries and aquaculture products include: i) production/supply chains; ii) distribution, 
transportation and logistics; and iii) marketing products to the final consum er111,112. Forward value chain linkages 
such as seafood processing/storage and the development of value- added products increase income for communities 
and individual farmers. Value- added fisheries products include processed fish, crustacean and bivalve products 
which generate more value through the export –  as opposed to domestic –  market113.  
 
126. Lack of access to resources to prolong the life of produce and/or enable sale in markets at a distance, such as drying 
or freezing facilities is a challenge for mos t fishermen and aquaculture farmers114. The establishment of smoking 
and drying facilities as well as refrigeration/freezing facilities under Activity 2.1 will facilitate the creation and 
distribution of value- added products. Backwards value chain linkages i nclude the production of fishing nets and boat 
building, as well as the productio n of crab feed. Further market mapping and analysis of value chains will also be 
conducted as part of participatory livelihoods planning in target landscapes and villages.  
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
127. There are no applicable licenses  for the implementation of the project. No foreign exchange regulations are involved, 
as no import of machinery/equipment is required. In addition, there are no tax implications applicable to ecosystem 
restoration or coastal governance and planning. The pr oject will promote livelihoods activities that will generate small 
amounts of revenue, but promotion of MSMEs through the project is likely to result in enterprises generating less 
than the threshold for tax exemptions for small business units (annual tur nover of up to Rs 2 crore or US$ 300,000) 
in terms of the Income Tax Act.  
 128. For any activities related to procurement of services through UNDP, taxes are exempted by refund . Section 7 of the 
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations provides inter alia that the United Nations and 
its subsidiary agencies are exempt from all direct taxes (except charges for utilities services) as well as from customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of articles imported or exported for official use. If the services are 
procured directly by GoI implementing partners, then national and state legislation will apply, including payment of 
taxes such as VAT according to the national or state rates, as applicable.  
 
129. There are no specific insurance policies relevant for the project activities. In terms of the Environment Protection 
Act, any activities being financed through the project , or in parallel with it, that are obliged to conduct an 
Environmental Impact Assessment will do so, including activities in Special  Export Zones, ports, harbours, building 
and construction projects, (enumerated in Schedule of EIA notification, 2006) as well as all ecosystem restoration 
and other work.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
130. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the Special 
Agreement concerning Technical Assistance between UN organizations and the Government of India (signed by 
both Parties on 14 February  1952)  and the Agreement between UN Special Fund and the GOI concerning 
Assistance from the Special Fund ( signed on 20 October 1959), and according to policies and procedures outlined 
in the UNDP POPP (see : https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=245&Menu=BusinessUnit ). 
131. The national executing entity -  also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology -  is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, including the NIM Guidelines.   These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social 
safeguards, and other performance standards. In legal terms,  this is ensured through the national government’s 
signature of the Special Agreement concerning Technical Assistance between UN organizations and the 
Government of India  (signed by both Parties on 14 Feb ruary  1952)  and the Agreement between UN Special Fund 
                                                             
110 Kumar S & Sharma A. 2016. Agricultural value chains in India: prospects and challenges. CUTS International discussion paper.  
111 NS/Oxfam, 2005.  
112 De Silva 2011.  
113 http://mpeda.gov.in/MPEDA/different_products.php#  
114 Ibid.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 105 
 C 
and the GOI concerning Assistance f rom the Special Fund ( signed on 20 October 1959), together with a UNDP 
project document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds.   The (national) 
Implementing Partner  for this project is the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF CC), 
which is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project 
interventions, achieving projec t outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP  resources.  The MoEF CC is also the 
National Designated Authority of the Green Climate Fund and all the national level coordination mechanisms will be under the aegis of the ministry.  
Contracts and flow of funds  
132. Under the National Implementation Modality, guided by the Special Agreement concerning Technical Assistance 
between UN organizations and the GOI (signed by both Parties on 14 February  1952) and the Agreement between 
UN Special Fund and the GOI concerning Assistance from the Special Fund (signed on 20 October 1959), and in 
terms of the Project Document to be signed between UNDP and GOI (Subsidiary Agreement under the FAA), UNDP  
will adv ance cash funds on a quarterly basis to the MoEFCC as EE. The major agreements to be entered into are 
those between the MoEFCC and:  
• the Environment, Forests, Science and Technology Department in the State of Andhra Pradesh  
• the Revenue and Forest Department in the state of Maharashtra  
• the Forest and Environment  Department in the state of Odisha.  
 
As the AE, UNDP will disburse funding (received from the GCF according to the FAA disbursement schedule), to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), as the Executing Entity, for the purposes of 
undertaking the project. The MoEFCC will conclude agreements with the three State Forest Departments, and these 
Letters of Agreement (LOAs) will be attached to the Project Document. In terms of these LOAs, the State Forest 
Departments will be made Responsible Parties  (RPs) , responsible for delivering particular projects outputs as set out 
in detailed terms of reference attached to the agreements .   
Flow of Funds  
 
 
Roles and responsibilities  
133. UNDP provides a three- tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the National Project Steering Committee by 
carrying out objective and indep endent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate 
project management milestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project Management function; the National Project Steering Committee cannot delegate any of its quality assurance 
responsibilities to the National Project Coordinator .  The project assurance role is covered by the accredited entity 
fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF -spec ific oversight


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 105 
 C 
and quality assurance services including: (i) Day -to-day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of project completion, 
(iii) Oversight of project reporting.  
134. The MoEFCC , as the lead ministry on climate change in India, both houses the NDA for the GCF and forms the 
Executing Entity for the project. Day-to-day execution of the project  will be under the Joint Secretary for Coastal  
Regulation Zone,  whilst overall coordination with other GCF projects and climate change initiatives will be 
under taken by the Joint Secretary for Climate Change, who is also the NDA for the GCF. It is proposed that the NDA 
will sit on the National Project Steering Committee (see below) in an advisory capacity.  
 
Figure 1: Project governance structure  
 
 
135. National Project Steering Committee (NPSC): The MoEFCC  will convene the National Project Steering 
Committee (NPSC), which will be constituted and chaired by the Joint Secretary: Coastal Regulation Zone, who 
will assume the role of member secretary of the NPSC, and will be the National Project Director. The st eering 
committee will also include UNDP, and will convene at least twice annually, to review and contribute to the annual 
work plans of the project states as well as discuss and approve national level project activities. The NPSC will also 
be a platform for sharing learning and good practices across all the Indian coastal states, union territories and 
islands.  
 
136. Coordination between line ministries on the project implementation be achieved through having the relevant ministries represented on the NPSC. It is  proposed that this will include the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare, Minist ry of Earth Sciences , Ministry of Finance , Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises , Ministry 
of Rural Development , Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Ministry of 
Tourism , Ministry of Tribal Affairs, and the Ministry of Urban Development
. All the coastal states of India will be 
represented in the NPSC, including members of the Coastal Zone Management Authorities. The NPSC will also 
National Project Management 
Unit: 
National Project Coordinator  
Knowledge Management Specialist  
M&E Expert  
Finance and Admin Officer  
NATIONAL PROJECT STEERING COMMITTE  
Senior Beneficiary:  
MoEFCC  
 
Senior Supplier:  
 
UNDP  
Project 
Assurance:  
 UNDP  
Responsible Parties  
MoEFCC  
Environment, Forests, 
Science and Technology 
Department (Andhra Pradesh)  
Revenue and Forest 
Department (Maharashtra)  
Forest and Environment 
Department (Odisha ) 
 
Project Support:  
 
- Technical Advisory Group 
- Committee on Coastal Governance 
Andhra Pradesh  
State Project Steering Committee  
State Project Management Unit  
District/Landscape- Level 
Coordination Committee  
Landscape- Level Project 
Management Unit  
Maharashtra  
State Project Steering Committee  
State Project Management Unit  
District/Landscape- Level 
Coordination Committee  
Landscape- Level Project 
Management Unit  
Odisha  
State Project Steering Committee  
State Project Management Unit  
District/Landscape- Level 
Coordination Committee  
Landscape- Level Project 
Management Unit  
National Project Director: 
Joint Secretary: Coastal 
Zone Regulation  
NRM Specialist  
Communications Specialist


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 105 
 C 
include represe ntation from relevant coastal institutes and organizations  such as the National Centre for 
Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) and the Society of Integrated Coastal Management (SICOM). The 
focal points for the State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC)  for the coastal states would also be represented 
in the NPSC. In addition, the committee will also include representatives of the private sector  and relevant NGOs.  
 
137. National Project Management Unit (NPMU): The NPSC will be supported by the National Project Management 
Unit (NPMU), who will be responsible for day to day coordination of relevant components of the project at the 
national level and will work in close coordination with the three project states of  Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Odisha. The NPMU will be headed by a National Project Coordinator,  who will be supported by a Knowledge 
Management Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation Expert, a Finance Officer and an Administration Officer, as well 
as sp ecialists in Natural Resource Management and Communications.  
 138. Technical Advisory Group (TAG): A Technical Advisory Group (TAG) will be established comprising subject 
matter experts who will provide their expertise and guidance for achieving the project obj ectives, as required. The 
TAG will be chaired by the Joint Secretary: Coastal Regulation Zone at MoEFCC  and will be hosted at the NPMU. 
The successful implementation of this project will require strong technical leadership and high levels of coordination due to its multi -sectoral nature. The TAG will help to steer this process, and will meet on a quarterly basis, or as 
and when required.  
 139. Committee on Coastal Governance: A Committee on Coastal Governance will be established, with its secretariat 
hosted at the NPMU and chaired by the Joint Secretary: Coastal Regulation Zone at MoEFCC . This committee will 
be comprised of governance experts and will convene at least once a year, or as needed, to provide guidance and 
technical support related to decisions on coastal governance. The CCG will also foster South- South partnerships 
by providing a knowledge exchange pl atform in Output 3.3 for engagement with other countries in the region that 
share common concerns on coastal climate change vulnerabilities and impacts. The CCG will be represented in the NPSC.  
 140. The three target project states will enter into agreements wi th MoEFCC  as Responsible Parties (in UNDP 
terminology) to assist in successfully delivering project outcomes, and will be directly accountable to MoEFCC  as 
outlined in the terms of their agreement. Each of the states  will have its decentralized implementation arrangements 
to support execution of state- level activities:  
 
141. Andhra Pradesh: The Project will be implemented by the Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 
Department in the state of Andhra Pradesh  through its executive units, particularly primarily the Andhra Pradesh 
Coastal Zone Management Authority (AP CZMA). The Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 
Department  will be a Responsible Party in terms of an agreement between the national Ministry of En vironment, 
Forest and Climate Change and the Environment, Forests, Science and Technology Department, Andhra Pradesh.  
 
142. Maharashtra: The Project will be implemented by the Revenue and Forest Department in the state of 
Maharashtra through the Mangrove and Ma rine Biodiversity Conservation Foundation of Maharashtra, 
(established under the Revenue and Forest Department –  vide Government Resolution No. S -30/2015/CR 219/F -
3 dated 23rd September 2015). The Revenue and Forest Department will be a Responsible Party in terms of an 
agreement between the national Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Revenue and Forest 
Department, Maharashtra.  
 
143. Odisha: The Project will be implemented by the Forest and  Environment Department in the state of 
Odisha.  The Forest and Environment Department will be a Responsible Party in terms of an agreement between 
the national  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate C hange and the Forest and Environment Department, 
Odisha.  
 
144. Each of the three states will have the following basic structures for project execution:  
 
145. State Project Steering Committee (SPSC): A State Project Steering Committee (SPSC) will be set up with 
representation from all important state departments/agencies to direct and oversee project implementation and 
management at the state level , as well as representatives of UNDP in the states . Other members will include 
representatives of the relevant State Departments, Agencies, and other stakeholders including private sector / 
industries, NGOs nominated by the State Government, and representatives of UNDP and MOEFCC . The SAPCC


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 105 
 C 
focal point in  the state would also be a member of the SPSC. The SPSC shall meet at least twice in a year to review 
the progress of project implementation in the state and take appropriate decisions for the smooth implementation 
of the project within the state.   
146. State Project Management Unit (SPMU): The SPSC will be supported by the State Project Management Unit 
(SPMU), which will be responsible for coordinating the project at the state level. The SPMU will be overseen by the 
State Project Director (SPD) who will be the Principal Secretary (Forest) or their representative. The SPD will be 
responsible for overall implementation of the project at the state level, including adherence to the AWP and achievement of planned results as outlined in the Project Document, and for the use of project funds through effective management and well established project review and oversight mechanisms. The SPD also will i) ensure 
coordination with UNDP, MoEFCC , various departments and agencies; ii) provide guidance to the project team; iii)  
review reports and iv) look after other administrative and financial arrangements related to the project. The SPD 
will be supported by the State Project Manager whose responsibilities shall include: i) coordinating project 
implementation with all stakehol ders, State Government and central government agencies and UNDP -GCF; ii) 
organizing the project evaluations; iii) ensuring that there is adequate documentation by all implementing partners 
at all stages and in collating this documentation into reports; and iv) facilitating the publication of project outputs.  
Each SPMU will inc lude state project manager, administration cum  finance officers, as well as specialists in 
communications and monitoring and evaluation.  
147. District/Landscape- Level  Coordination Committee (DLCC/LLCC): At the district level, there will be a 
district/landscape level coordination committee (DLCC/LLCC), which will be chaired by the respective District Collectors (DC) or a senior level officer, such as the Chief Conservat or of Forests. The Divisional Forest Officer will 
coordinate the district level project activities. Members of the DLCC/LLCC will include all relevant departments, 
agencies, and representatives of all village level committees as well as the community mobil isers/village facilitators. 
The DLCC/LLCCs will also be linked to the SPSCs and the NPSC through representation at the national and state 
PSCs. The DLCC/LLCC will be responsible for district level planning, implementation, monitoring and coordination. 
In addition, this committee will endeavour to ensure adequate coordination with the various production sectors at 
the district level.  
148. Landscape- Level Project Management Unit (LLPMU): At the district level, the LLPSC will be supported by a 
District Project Management Unit (DPMU), which will be adequately staffed by persons of relevant expertise who will provide technical leadership for project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and adaptive management. This will include a livelihood specialist, an ecosystem and climate change adaptation expert, a communication and 
outreach specialist, and a financial -cum-administrative assistant for performing the day -to-day administrative and 
financial functions of the PMU. Additional specialists who will be based in the districts and work in the target 
landscapes will include District Project Coordinators, Socio Economic and Livelihood Specialists, Ecological and 
Adaptation Specialists, and fiel d associates/UNVs.  
149. The field activities will be implemented by the respective line departments at state, district and sub- district levels, 
with the involvement of NGOs and CBOs under the overall guidance and supervision of the state and district level 
coordination mechanism as above. At the village level, Village Organizations (federations of Self -Help Groups) and 
Eco Development Committees will be involved in project implementation, especially for ecosystem restoration and 
other direct interventions. Villa ge facilitators or community mobilisers will be responsible for coordinating these 
activities at the village level.  
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
150. The timetable attached as Annex X shows when the Activities under each Output will commence and end, including activities financed with both GCF funding and co- finance. It also shows the sequencing of activities, for example, 
how detailed vulnerability assessment with communities in the target landscapes feeds into participatory planning  
of restoration and livelihoods activities on the ground in the landscapes. A period of 6 years was considered by the 
Government of India to be an appropriate time period for a specific project intervention, designed to unlock barriers 
so that further EbA work can continue beyond the project period. The results of specific restoration interventions 
through project Activity 1.2 will be monitored and tracked, both within and beyond the project lifetime, and data 
generated will be used to adaptively manage all  restoration interventions. After 6 years of such management, it is 
envisaged that the operations and maintenance of all restored sites will be relatively routine and will no longer 
require technical inputs/guidance as previously received through the GCF p
roject structures. Key project 
interventions also focus on climate- adaptive livelihoods, ensuring that the capacities of vulnerable populations are 
built up, alongside value -chains to enable enterprise and market development. The proposed project duration is


---
*Page 45*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 105 
 C 
thus necessary to invest in capacities across the beneficiaries as well as the government institutions; monitor, track, 
and adapt investments during implementation; and generate the knowledge related to EbA planning, best practices, 
and lessons learned to sustain the impacts post -project as well as enable pathways to scale and replication.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 105 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
151. GCF resources are sought to invest into the incremental costs of climate change adaptation and bring about a 
paradigm shift in coastal zone management in India.  The coastal areas of India are undergoing rapid economic 
development owing to industrial expansion and urbanisation. At the same time, large proportions of the population of India’s coastal states remain rural and dependent on agriculture, aquaculture and fisheries for their livelihoods. 
The GoI is promoting economic and social development at national and local scales with a focus on improving rural socio- economic conditions. Baseline investments into underlying development challenges are thus 
concentrated on ecosystem conservation, industrial development, socio-
economic growth and agricultural 
intensification. Substantial investments are being made at the state level in coastal development, including using 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management approaches to b alance economic development and environmental impacts. 
Such initiatives strengthen the natural resource base of the rural economy, but do not include systematic 
consideration of climate resilience.  Without additional funding for adaptation, baseline inves tments into socio -
economic development in coastal areas of India will be unable to deliver development gains because of underlying 
vulnerabilities exacerbated by climate change and such investments will be undermined. Therefore, GCF 
investment is critical to enabling the paradigm shift envisioned in the following three ways:  
152. Addressing the information, technical, financial, and institutional barriers to investments into EbA: Key 
barriers impeding adequate consideration of climate change impacts and EbA potential in baseline investments 
include: i) inadequate information on climate vulnerabilities for local -level adaptation planning; ii) limited knowledge 
of and technical capacity concerning the role of EbA in enhancing adaptive capacity; iii) limited technic al and 
financial capacity for communities to adopt climate -adaptive livelihood opportunities; iv) w eak linkages in clim ate-
resilient value chains for commodities underpinned by ecosystem goods and services; and v) l imited institutional 
capacity for mainstreaming climate change into coastal zone planning, governance and finance.  Moreover, 
adaptation measures largely generate public goods, creating little incentive for private investment in such 
measures. T he GoI and the private sector in India require support in systematically addressing these barriers, in 
order to address vulnerabilities in the three target states and climate- proof development. Removing barriers will 
also enable scaling up of ecosystem and community -based approaches and unlock new inv estment into climate 
change adaptation at scale in the coastal areas.  
153. Crowding in public and private sector financing and mobilizing community -level investments for EbA:  
GCF resources will catalyze  government investments in EbA  to build the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities through co- financing towards ecosystem restoration, resilient livelihoods and value- chain support. 
This includes commitments of staff and resources support for implementation of project activities,  operations and 
maintenance, and sustained impact post -project. The overall budget for this project includes  committed co-
financing of a total of US $ 86.85 million from the Governments of the three states and the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change. The unlocking of additional funds for large- scale EbA will be catalyzed in a number 
of ways, including: i) quantifying economic benefits of EbA to reduce uncertainty, thereby de- risking the investment 
for potential investors; ii) changing policies  and regulations to create an enabling environment for EbA investors; 
and iii) building the technical and financial skills of government officials and private sector operators to design and 
manage EbA investments. This will be complemented by mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into private 
and public sector policies and plans (see Activity 3.2) to promote sustained investment into coastal adaptation 
measures beyond the project life- span and outside of the project’s targeted landscapes. An example is  the 
enormous potential of the US$ 5 billion CAMPA, the industrial offsets fund for reforestation, to be applied to scaling 
up EbA. Private sector investment in the coastal zone will be enabled through the project’s work on removing 
barriers to understandi ng the value of coastal ecosystems, and planning for their sustainable usage. Private sector 
investors will be crowded in to develop enterprises based on restored ecosystems, such as ecotourism facilities 
in the form of lodges and boat trips, as well as enterprises based on climate -adaptive livelihoods , such as oyster 
rafts or crab farming, and value addition facilities, e.g. processing fish into consumer -ready products . Coastal 
developments will be influenced to address climate risk through dialogues with sectors such as  financial services, 
oil and gas, ports and shipping, power generation and energy, tourism, commercial fishing and agriculture, as well 
as agri -processing industries. GCF resources will also support communities to develop climate -adaptive 
livelihoods , which will, over time, leverage loan finance for expansion of activities. For example, vulnerable 
community members will be supported through technical support, access to finance and value chain development.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 105 
 
 
 D 
This will include support to develop bankable, financially viable business plans for micro -enterprises based on 
climate -adaptive livelihoods  (see Activity 2.1) that would attract microcredit/bank loans. GCF resources will not be 
used to provide such loans, but to provide technical support in accessing loans.  
154. Reaching the most vulnerable:  Communities in coastal India are particularly vulnerable to climate change 
impacts, particularly in rural areas where the main livelihoods are agriculture and fishing. These include the 
impacts of ocean warming and acidification on fish nurseries and fish stocks, the impact of erratic monsoons and temperature increases on farming, and the impact of increased cyclonic activity damaging houses and fields in 
the immediate coastal zone. Under a business -as-usual sc enario, such communities will continue to have 
inadequate technical and financial capacity to adapt their livelihoods to the impacts of climate change, and will be at risk of falling back into poverty or being forced to migrate to urban areas. GCF resources will be used to address 
these vulnerabilities through focusing on communities whose current livelihoods are most at risk to climate change. The project activities will target fisher folk  experiencing declining catches and farmers who are experiencing 
decreasing yields and crop failures as a result of climate change. These communities’ climate resilience will be 
strengthened through adapting current practices to climate change effects (e.g. promotion of the System for Rice 
Intensification) , developing new livelihoods based on restored and better managed coastal ecosystems,  and 
strengthening value chains for commodities derived from these ecosystems , with support from co- financing from 
the t hree state governments . This will result in increased income generation, enabling beneficiaries to make 
investments into adaptation and other socio- economic outcomes at the household level. Interventions will focus 
in particular on women, the youth, and members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes , as these population groups lack resources and are often particularly vulnerable to climate change.  
155. In the absence of the GCF project, coastal communities will remain vulnerable to loss  of life, and damage to 
property, as climate impacts like cyclonic activity and sea- level rise worsen. In addition, poor coastal communities 
reliant on small -scale fishing and farming will remain vulnerable to impacts of temperature rise , saline intrusion 
from sea level rise, a nd increasingly erratic monsoons. The infrastructural investments currently being made to 
promote development will also remain vulnerable to climate change impacts, loss and damage. In this scenario, 
where local communities and their adaptive capacity are not placed at the centre of adaptation efforts, and coastal 
ecosystems continue to be lost or degraded by both climate change impacts and direct human causes, the 
potential of ecological infrastructure to buffer disasters and support resilient livelihoods will remain under -utilised 
and eventually be lost.  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
156. The proposed project was designed through consultation with government agencies, NGOs/CBOs and local communities. These consultations were used to identify adaptation priorities and interventions that will be 
implemented through engagement with local communities and government officials in the target states as well as 
at the national level. The project is centered  on community participation and engagement with CBOs – such as 
self-help groups, producer organizations and fisher associations –  to foster owners hip and empowerment of local 
communities for implementation of project interventions. This will promote the integration of climate- smart 
practices into traditional livelihoods, facilitating adoption of such practices in the long term. Targeted capacity 
building and training will inform planning, design, and implementation of adaptation measures based on the local 
socio -economic and environmental contexts, taking into account the various and differentiated vulnerabilities of 
men, women, the youth, the elderl y and marginalized groups. EbA interventions will restore ecosystem functioning, 
thereby strengthening the role of natural ecosystems in buffering against current and future climate change impacts as well as enhancing climate -adaptive livelihoods . 
157. Particip atory approaches and co -management for investments into ecosystems . Sustainability will be 
enhanced through the co- management structures that will be created in the 24 target landscapes and the 12 
coastal districts into which they fall (see maps in Annex IX). Project activities will adopt a fully participatory approach that will ensure engagement of local communities in the project. This process began during the 
formulation of the Concept Note and Funding Proposal for this project, during which coastal communities and local 
CBOs (including women’s groups) were consulted on climate vulnerabilities and adaptation priorities, and also on a suite of climate- adaptive livelihood options. During project implementation, this process will continue, with 
communities being engaged in planning to ensure that their priorities are taken i nto account during initial phases


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 105 
 
 
 D 
of the project (see Activities 1.1 and 2.1), as well as in implementation and monitoring of project achievements. 
For example, co- management structures will be established with local communities on ecosystem restoration and 
management to promote community ownership and responsibility for restored areas (see Activity 1.2). This will 
contribute to long- term sustainability of project interventions. Similarly, these communities will be involved in 
monitoring the success of ecos ystem restoration through participatory monitoring systems (see Activity 1.2.5). 
This will further serve to promote community engagement in project activities, particularly after the project 
implementation period. Such approaches have proven successful in ecosystem restoration and livelihood 
development initiatives such as the UNDP/GEF -funded project “Mainstreaming coastal and marine biodiversity 
conservation into production centres in the Sindhudurg Coast, Maharashtra”. . 
158. Post -project operations and mainten ance . Operations and maintenance will be necessary for restoration efforts 
in ecological infrastructure, and for “soft” infrastructure supporting livelihoods activities. Co- finance from the three 
target State governments will be used to phase in O&M plans during the project implementation, with gradual 
phasing out of GCF financing and phasing in of government expenditure towards the end of the project (see O&M 
Plan in Annex XIII (b)). Ongoing conservation and management of coastal ecosystems post -project wil l be 
undertaken by relevant state- level government institutions, including the Environment, Forests, Science and 
Technology Department  in Andhra Pradesh, the Revenue and Forest Department in Maharashtra and the Forest 
and Environment  Department in Odisha, and including community contributions in- kind through the co-
management approach outlined above.  Ongoing maintenance of livelihoods -related infrastructure in the villages 
will be undertaken through District governments in the coastal districts of the targe t states. Relevant national -level 
government institutions will have ownership of mechanisms put in place by the project such as the Decision-
Support Tool, and network of institutions for climate- resilient governance and knowledge management. This 
ownership will be ensured through public sector co- finance of these activities during the project period, maximising 
the likelihood of continued operation beyond the project implementation period.  
159. Capacity building of local communities, government institutions and  CBOs . Capacity building will promote 
the adoption of climate- resilient, integrated solutions for coastal management using landscape- scale approaches 
(see Output 2). The proposed project will promote mainstreaming of climate change concerns into institutional 
planning and coordination within government institutions to foster cross -sectoral and comprehensive approaches 
to climate change adaptation (see Output 3). Project activities will build institutional and technical capacities of 
government officials, local communities, NGOs/CBOs and private sector institutions to plan and implement 
measures for climate change adaptation, and will work to embed these into public sector budgets and officials’ 
key performance areas following the project’s end (see Outputs 2 and 3). Strong engagement with government 
agencies, relevant institutions and local communities in planning and implementation will ensure that project 
interventions are responsive to the needs and priorities of the targeted beneficiaries as well as ensur ing that the 
relevant technical, institutional and financial capacities are built to support ongoing climate change adaptation 
after the project’s implementation period.  
160. Integrating EbA into coastal planning and governance . Sustainability will be promoted by integrating 
ecosystem - and community -based approaches to managing the coastal zone for effective climate change 
adaptation into local - and state- level planning and governance (see Outputs 2 and 3). Learning and knowledge 
management platforms will also ensure that the new approach to adaptation is continued (see Activity 3.3). Given 
substantial co- financing by the state governments, their ownership of the project will ensure that adequate financial 
resources are made available to maintain restored ecosyst ems. Past experience in India has shown that once 
initial barriers are overcome through project investments, sustainability is usually ensured through establishment of effective institutions that are aligned with the national and state priorities, as witnessed with the Gulf of Mannar 
Trust in Tamil Nadu which was sustained after the closure in 2012 of the UNDP -managed GEF -financed project 
implemented through the Tamil Nadu State government on “Conservation and Sustainable Use of the Gulf of 
Mannar Biosphere Reserve’s Coastal Biodiversity”. Similarly, the implementation arrangements envisaged under 
the project in the form of a coordination mechanism and cross -sectoral institutions will ensure the sustainability 
even after the project is completed. To ensure s ocial inclusion and equity, project activities that focus on local 
communities will be founded on extensive stakeholder participation, and the involvement of women will be actively 
promoted (see Activity 2.2).


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 105 
 
 
 D 
161. Climate -resilient and sustainable community livelihoods . The project will have sustained impact through the 
creation of livelihoods opportunities, including co -financed value- addition, market linkages, and access to finance 
(see Activity  2.1). This will follow a participatory approach, to ensure that livelihood support is focused on the most 
vulnerable populations –  particularly fishers and farmers –  while being socially inclusive by targeting women, the 
youth, and members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes who have historically been excluded from such participation. 
Promotion of climate -adaptive livelihoods  will include inter alia: i) skills development to build knowledge and 
capacity on such livelihoods; ii)  business planning for climate -adaptive livelihood options; and iii) value- addition 
for increased revenue generation. This support will enhance the financial viability of such climate -adaptive 
livelihoods , resulting in sustainability and greater access to finance in the long- term. In particular, the support for 
business plan development as well as the financial and socio- economic benefits will incentiviz e beneficiaries to 
sustain such livelihoods, while also promoting replication and upscaling.  
162. Incentivi zation of private sector investments into coastal adaptation .  No GCF funding will flow to the private 
sector through the project, but it is anticipated that the project will leverage private sector investment in coastal 
EbA through capacity building and awareness raising work that engages private sector actors. Leveraging of 
investment by the private sector will be promoted through the project in various ways. Firstly, the many coastal 
developments by private actors have potential for inclusion of EbA principles within design and this will be 
facilitated through dial ogues and application of the Coastal Calculator tool. Secondly, there is potential for private 
sector actors to provide financing in the form of investment into small enterprises based on restored ecosystems 
(e.g. ecotourism) as well as enterprises based on climate -adaptive livelihoods  (e.g. bivalve aquaculture, crab 
farming) or co-financed value addition (e.g. fish products). Thirdly, many corporations in coastal areas of India 
have Corporate Social Investment programmes that are used to support community development initiatives. GCF 
funding will be used to catalyse and leverage private sector co- financing during the project period, through capacity 
building and awareness raising on the potential for: i) investing in coastal EbA  to reduce damages and losses to 
coastal development infrastructure from climate change impacts; ii) the long- term sustainability, viability and 
profitability of climate -adaptive livelihood activities; and iii) the potential for Corporate Social Investment s to 
provide environmental and socio- economic benefits. This will facilitate the investment by private sector role-
players into project activities both during and after project implementation, as well as replication and upscaling into other areas. Smaller private sector institutions such as micro- finance institutions will also receive capacity 
building and sensitization  on the potential for supporting viable, bankable enterprise development. This will 
leverage loan finance for climate -adaptive livelihood activities, supporting ongoing implementation and upscaling 
beyond the project lifespan.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 105 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
163. This project will contribute to the GCF’s Paradigm shift objective of  “Increased climate -resilient sustainable 
development” by integrating climate change adaptation – particularly ecosystem restoration and climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  – into coastal management and planning. GCF resources –  combined with government co- financing 
– will be used to restore coastal ecosystems through EbA approaches, promote diversified, sustainable and 
climate -adaptive livelihood options for local communities, and strengthen coastal governance for climate change 
adaptation. These interventions will provide direct benefits to 1,744,970 people in households in the 24 target 
landscapes in Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha States (see maps in Annex IX), and indirect benefits 
to 10 million people in these landscapes  – from reduced risk exposure through enhanced integration of climate 
change considerations into coastal governance and planning.  The theory of change of the project is shown in 
the diagram below:  
 
 
 
164. The adaptation impact of the proposed project for India ’s coastal communities is significant. These communities 
are vulnerable to impacts of climate change, particularly: i) damage to infrastructure and economic from sea-
level rise and more intense storm surges; ii) loss of lives from coastal flooding as a res ult of intensified cyclonic 
activity; and iii) declines in the productivity of fisheries, agriculture and aquaculture through ocean warming and 
acidification, and changing temperature and rainfall patterns. The main adaptation impacts will be achieved 
through work in the three target states on Activity 1.2 (restoration) and Activities 2.1 and 2.2 (livelihoods), 
supported by technical assistance and capacity building through the other activities. Activity 1.2 will conserve, restore and manage coastal ecosyst ems to provide natural buffers to minimize the damage mentioned in i) above, 
and prevent the loss mentioned in ii) above. Output 2 will support climate-
adaptive livelihoods targeted 
specifically at households experiencing the impacts mentioned in iii) abov e, to reduce their vulnerability and 
enhance their adaptive capacity.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 105 
 
 E 
165. Maintenance of functional coastal ecosystems – such as mangroves, seagrass beds, forested watersheds, 
dunes and coral reefs –  is a cost -effective means of buffering the impacts of climate change, while also 
supporting a range of coastal livelihoods underpi nned by ecosystem goods and services crucial for the wellbeing 
of local communities. The disaster buffering potential of intact natural systems on the Indian coast is highly 
significant. For example, mangroves ecosystems were critical in protecting lives d uring the Odisha super -cyclone 
of 1999. It was estimated that 211 deaths were averted owing to the presence of mangroves, against a predicted 
603 deaths if there were no mangroves. Moreover, ecosystem services that support coastal livelihoods are 
estimated to be worth more than US$1.6 billion each year globally from mangroves alone. Arkema et al.  (2013) 
highlights the role of coastal habitats in mitigating damage to coastal communities and assets by using the 
InVEST model to compute an exposure index ‘with’  and ‘without’ coastal ecosystems, showing that intact natural 
habitats reduce by approximately 50% the proportion of people and property along the US coastline that are 
most exposed to storms and sea- level rise115. This has been supported in other internati onal literature, see for 
example Spalding et al. (2014)116 and Shepard et al. (2011)117. A growing literature documents the role of 
mangroves in disaster mitigation –  see a summary by Unnikrishnan, S. et al. (2012)118. Mangrove conservation 
is shown as an appropriate adaptation option to reduce climate risk in India by Bahinipati et al. (2012)119. Das 
(2007)120 demonstrates the role played by mangroves in mitigating the impacts of the super cyclone which struck 
the Odisha coast in 1999, showing that in Kendrapada Dis trict: 
• Mangroves were able to significantly lower house damage within 10km of the coast.  
• The number of deaths would have been 54% higher if there had been no mangroves.  
• If mangroves had remained intact at 1950 level, 92% of the deaths could have been avoided.  
166. The adaptation impact of the proposed project for India’s coastal communities is significant. These communities 
are vulnerable to impacts of climate change, particularly: i ) damage to infrastructure and economic from sea-
level rise and more intense storm surges; ii) loss of lives from coastal flooding as a result of intensified cyclonic 
activity; and iii) declines in the productivity of fisheries, agriculture and aquaculture  through ocean warming and 
acidification, and changing temperature and rainfall patterns. The main adaptation impacts will be achieved through work in the three target states on Activity 1.2 (restoration) and Activities 2.1 and 2.2 (livelihoods), 
supported by technical assistance and capacity building through the other activities. Activity 1.2 will conserve, 
restore and manage coastal ecosystems to provide natural buffers to minimize the damage mentioned in i) 
above, and prevent the loss mentioned in ii) above. Output 2 will support climate- adaptive livelihoods targeted 
specifically at households experiencing the impacts mentioned in iii) above, to reduce their vulnerability and 
enhance their adaptive capacity.  
167. Maintenance of functional coastal ecosystems – such as mangroves, seagrass beds, forested watersheds, 
dunes and coral reefs –  is a cost -effective means of buffering the impacts of climate change, while also 
supporting a range of coastal livelihoods underpinned by ecosystem goods and services crucial f or the well  being  
of local communities. The disaster buffering potential of intact natural systems on the Indian coast is highly 
significant. For example, mangroves ecosystems were critical in protecting lives during the Odisha super -cyclone 
of 1999. It was estimated that 211 deaths were averted owing to the presence of mangroves, against a predicted 603 deaths if there were no mangroves. Moreover, ecosystem services that support coastal livelihoods are 
estimated to be worth more than US$1.6 billion each year globally from mangroves alone. Arkema et al.  (2013) 
highlights the role of coastal habitats in mitigating damage to coastal communities and assets by using the 
InVEST model to compute an exposure index ‘with’ and ‘without’ coastal ecosystems, showing that intact natural 
habitats reduce by approximately 50% the proportion of people and property along the US coastline that are 
most exposed to storms and sea- level rise
121. This has been supported in other international literature, see for 
example Spalding et al. (2014)122 and Shepard et al. (2011)123. A growing literature documents the role of 
mangroves in disaster mitigation –  see a summary by Unnikrishnan, S. et al. (2012)124. Mangrove conservation 
is shown as an appropriate adaptation option to reduce climate ris k in India by Bahinipati et al. (2012)125. Das 
(2007)126 demonstrates the role played by mangroves in mitigating the impacts of the super cyclone which struck 
the Odisha coast in 1999, showing that in Kendrapada District:  
• Mangroves were able to significantly l ower house damage within 10km of the coast.  
• The number of deaths would have been 54% higher if there had been no mangroves.  
• If mangroves had remained intact at 1950 level, 92% of the deaths could have been avoided.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 105 
 
 E 
168. The project is expected to result in “ Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks” 
through reducing the exposure of 10 million people (direct and indirect beneficiaries) in the targeted landscapes 
(Outcome Indicator A7.0). The project will also contribute to two GCF Fu nd-Level Impacts for adaptation. It will 
support “increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions” 
through the promotion of climate- resilient, sustainable and diversified livelihoods for 11,744,970 peopl e in 24 
target landscapes in 12 coastal districts of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha States (Fund- Level Impact 
A1.0) . In addition, the project will promote “improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services” through 
restoration and conservati on of 14,945 ha of various coastal ecosystems (Fund- Level Impact A4.0) . Finally, the 
project will promote improved governance of and a strengthened institutional framework for climate- resilient 
development planning through the strengthening of the Coastal Mission and the establishment of a Pan- Indian 
Coastal Network for improved coordination and sharing of lessons learned on climate change adaptation.  
169. Although this project has adaptation benefits at the core, t he project is also expected to contribute to the GCF 
paradigm shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways . In relation to the core Mitigation impact 
indicator  “Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided”, the project involves 
restoration of 14,945 hectares of coastal ecosystem s that will result in capturing and storing significant amounts 
of carbon, which would be released into the atmosphere if these ecosystems were to be severely degraded or 
lost. Through the project interventions, a total of 122,766 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) are 
expected to be sequestered in restored ecosystems per year, with 3,682,980 t CO 2 eq sequestered over a  30-
year period.  This makes a contribution towards India’s commitment (as detailed in the country’s Nationally 
Determined Contribution) to achieve 33% of the national land area under forest cover through sustainable forest 
management and afforestation/reforestation initiatives127. 
 
170. Mitigation benefits will be achieved through reduced emissions from protecting and restoring natural ecosystems. 
The levels of “blue carbon” sequestered in intertidal ecosystems , as well as terrestrial carbon in watersheds in 
the target landscapes , will be maintained in areas that are protected, and will be enhanced, over time, in areas 
that are restored. These levels will be calculated on an annual basis, and reported on through the project’s 
monitoring  and evaluation system . The anticipated impacts and methodology are elaborated upon in Section 7.5 
of the Feasibility Study (Annex II) in relation to the areas of mangroves, saltmarshes and seagrass beds to be 
restored, protected and maintained.  
 
171. Globally, blue carbon ecosystems  are known to be significant CO 2 sinks (see Feasibility Study) with average 
carbon sequestration rates of:  
• Mangroves – 829 g CO 2 m-2 yr-1 (or 226 g C m-2 yr-1); 
                                                             
115 Arkema , K.K., et al, “Coastal habitats shield people and property from sea- level rise and storms”, Nature Climatic Change 3, 913-
918 (2013)  
116 Spalding, M.G. et al ., “The Role of Ecosystems in coastal protection: Adapting to climate change and coastal hazards”, Ocean 
and Coastal Management , March, 2014 
117 Shepard CC, et al.  (2011) The Protective Role of Coastal Marshes: A Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. PLoS ONE 6(11): 
e27374. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027374   
118 Unnikrishnan, S. et al.,  “The Role of Mangroves in Disaster Mitigation: A Review”, International Journal of Environment and 
Sustainable Development , 11(2): 164 – 179, September (2012)  
119 Bahinipati, C.S. and Sahu, N.C., “Mangrove Conservation as Sustainable Adaptation to Cyclonic Risk in Kendrapada District of 
Odisha”, India, Asian Journal of Environment and Disaster Management, Vol.4, No.2 (2012), 183- 202. 
120 Saudamini Das, Storm Protection by Mangroves in Orissa: An Analysis of the 1999 Super Cyclone  
(SANDEE Working Papers, ISSN 1893- 1891; 2007-  WP 25)  
121 Arkema, K.K., et al, “Coastal habitats shield people and property from sea- level rise and storms”, Nature Climatic Change 3, 913-
918 (2013)  
122 Spalding, M.G. et al ., “The Role of Ecosystems in coastal protection: Adapting to climate change and coastal hazards”, Ocean 
and Coastal Management , March, 2014 
123 Shepard CC, et al.  (2011) The Protective Role of Coastal Marshes: A Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. PLoS ONE 6(11): 
e27374. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027374 
124 Unnikrishnan, S. et al.,  “The Role of Mangroves in Disaster Mitigation: A Review”, International Journal of Environment and 
Sustainable Development , 11(2): 164 – 179, September (2012)  
125 Bahinipati, C.S. and Sahu, N.C., “Mangrove Conservation as Sustainable Adaptation to Cyclonic Risk in Kendrapada District of 
Odisha”, India, Asian Journal of Environment and Disaster Management, Vol.4, No.2 (2012), 183- 202. 
126 Saudamini Das, Storm Protection by Mangroves in Orissa: An Analysis of the 1999 Super Cyclone  
(SANDEE Working Papers, ISSN 1893- 1891; 2007-  WP 25)  
127 2015, Government of India, India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution: Working Towards Climate Justice


---
*Page 53*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 105 
 
 E 
• Seagrass – 506 g CO 2 m-2 y-1 (or 138 g C m-2 yr-1); and  
• Salt marshes –  884 g CO 2 m-2 yr-1 (or 245 g C m-2 yr-1). 
  
172. Conservation, restoration and effective management of blue carbon ecosystems will maintain existing and 
provide additional carbon sinks along the Indian coast and will effectively contribute to the reduction of 
greenhouse gas  emissions from the country. Using Odisha as an example: restoration of 20% of this state’s 
existing mangroves and adding an extra 10% cover would increase the carbon sequestration capacity by 
~320,000 tonnes CO 2 yr-1. Similarly, restoration of 20% of the state’s exi sting seagrass cover plus the creation 
of an additional 20% area as well as restoration of 10% of its salt marsh ecosystems would increase the carbon 
sequestration capacity by~120,000 tonnes CO 2 y-1 and ~4,000 tonnes CO 2 yr-1 respectively.  
 
173. The expected long- term sequestration of blue carbon sequestration as a result of the project are thus estimated 
as shown in the table below. India’s NDC shows that the country has been successful in improving carbon stocks 
in its forest by about 5%, from 6,621.5 million tons in 2005 to 6,941 million tonnes in 2013, and the additional 
benefits from blue carbon can enhance future sequestration as shown in the table below.  
174. In addition, terrestrial reforestation activities to be conducted through the project w ill also contribute to the GCF 
Result of “Avoided emissions through forestry and other land use”. This will be achieved in two ways: i) i) planting, 
enrichment planting and replanting of dune and other coastal vegetation as shelter belts and to reduce eros ion, 
and for harvesting for livelihoods, and ii) reforestation of catchments to improve hydrological functioning 
e.g. Improving supply of freshwater to coastal lagoons and estuaries. Reforestation of catchments can be 
expected to sequester up to 8.8 tonnes  CO 2 per ha per year128, depen ding on the type of vegetation, with 3,550 
hectares of watersheds that will be revegetated (8 tonnes used below) . 
175.  
Ecosystem 
type Extent 
(ha) Annual sequestration rate 
(t CO 2 per ha per annum)  Total annual sequestration 
(t CO 2 per annum)  Total sequestered 
over 30  years (t CO 2) 
Mangrove  10,575  8.3 87,772.5  2,633,175  
Seagrass  85 5.1 433.5  13,005  
Saltmarsh  700 8.8 6,160  184,800  
Watershed  3,550  8 28,400  852,000 
Total    122,766  3,682,980  
176.  The expected impacts of the project are:  
 
• 14,945 hectares of coastal ecosystems protected and restored to buffer against the current and future impacts of 
climate variability and climate change –  including 10,575 hectares of mangroves, 700 hectares of saltmarshes, 85 
hectares of seagrass beds, 35 hectares of coral reefs and 3,550 ha of coastal watersheds, (Output 1);  
• 122,766 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) sequestered in restored ecosystems per year, with  
3,682,980 t CO 2 eq sequestered over a 30-year period (Output 1);  
• 1,744,970 people – of whom 50% are female –  benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate- resilient 
livelihood options, predominantly based on conservation and restoration of ecological infrastructure (Output 2); 
and 
• improved capacity of coastal management institutions for planning and implementing climate change adaptation 
measures – including integrating climate resilience into livelihoods support and infrastructure planning, and 
protecting and restoring ecological infrastructure (Output 3).  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or 
avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  122,766 tons CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  3,682,980 tons CO 2 eq 
                                                             
128 Kishwan, J., Pandey, R. & Dadhwal, V.K. 2009. India’s Forest and Tree Cover: Contribution as a Carbon Sink. Technical Paper, Indian 
Council of Forestry Research And Education.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 105 
 
 E 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated 
by gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population, disaggregated by 
gender (adaptation only)  Total   1,744,970 direct ben eficiaries (50% 
female, and 12% from female- headed 
households) whose households are 
participating in new climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  
 10,000,000 indirect beneficiaries (50% 
female, and 12% from female- headed 
households) benefitting from integration of 
EbA into coastal governance 
Percent
age (%)  5.8% (proportion of total population  of coastal 
districts  represented by the 10 million living in 
target landscapes, of whom 50% are female)  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  • Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
177. The number of indirect beneficiaries was calculated based on the population that will benefit from planning and 
implementing climate change adaptation measures in the coastal districts of the three target states of Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha States. These adaptation measures include  protection and restoration of 
coastal ecosystems , with resultant benefits in reducing the risk of loss of life and damage to property through 
coastal flooding, storm damage, erosion and saline intrusion.  
 
178. The number of direct beneficiaries is the number of people in the target landscapes whose households will be 
involved in livelihoods activities through the project . The target landscapes were identified through a country -
drive n process that combined participatory consultations with representatives of government institutions and 
local communities, along with information from national and global datasets. The locations of the 2 4 target  
landscapes are shown on the maps of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha in Annex IX, and the 
landscapes are listed below:  
Name of state  District  Target landscape  
Andhra Pradesh  
 
 Nellore  1. Pulicat Lake, 2. Nelapattu  Bird Sanctuary and surrounding 
communities  
Krishna  3. Krishna Wildlife Sanctuary, 4. Bantumilli Wetlands  
East Godavari  5. Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary and surrounding communities  
Srikakulam  6. Telineelapuram, 7. Sompeta  
Maharashtra  Sindhudurg  8. Devgad, 9. Malvan, 10. Vengurla  
Ratnagiri  11. Dapoli, 12. Guhagar, 13. Rajapur,  
Raigad  14. Panvel, 15. Uran  
Palghar  16. Dahanu, 17. Palghar,  
Odisha  Ganjam  18. Chilika -Ganjam, 19. Bahuda  
Puri 20. Chilika -Puri, 21. Mahanadi Mouth, 22. Devi Mouth  
Baleshwar  23. Talasari


---
*Page 55*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 105 
 
 E 
Kendrapara  24. Bhitarkanika  
 
179. The target landscapes are shown in three state maps in Annex IX , and described in the information table in 
Annex 5 of Feasibility Study  – 24 of these 34 landscapes were selected. The target landscapes  were identified 
through a multi -criteria approach that assessed climate change vulnerability  (CCV), climate change 
exposure (CCE) and the presence/extent of coastal ecosystems. Once the sites had been prioritised, census 
data were used to determine the number of people who would benefit from the ecosystem restoration 
interventions undertaken under Output 1 of the project. These interventions will reduce the vulnerability of coastal 
communities and their economic assets and livelihoods to climate change by buffering the impacts of storm 
surges and sea level rise.  
 
180. Furthermore, an assessment was made of the number of people within the 10 million indirect beneficiaries in the 
target landscapes who will be targeted for direct support on climate- resilient and diversified livelihood 
opportunities under Output 2. The three target states were divided into a total of eight sub- regions, based on 
their environmental and socio -economic conditions. Within each of these sub- regions, analyses were undertaken 
on the potential for the various climate -adaptive livelihood options to build adaptive capacities, within the local 
context of the specific sub- region. This resulted in a list of appropriate livelihoods to be supported in each sub -
region. Once these had been identified, analyses of markets in each sub- region were undertaken to ensure that 
the market had capacity to absorb the produce of the livelihoods activities without being flooded. These market 
analyses, population figures and an understanding of the characteristics of each sub- region were used to 
calculate the number of households to benefit from each of the livelihood support activities within each of the 
sub-regions. T his yielded a total of 1,744,970 direct beneficiaries of the livelihood support activities of the project 
– including participants in these activities and the members of their households  (calculated as approximately 4 
other individuals per household) . 
 
181. Following further analysis, 16 of the 20 livelihoods  included in the preliminary analysis were deemed to be 
climate -adaptive and were selected for support –  7 of these with GCF resources  and co- finance and a further 9 
with Government co-finance alone. The climate -adaptive livelihood options fall in two categories: Category A  
livelihoods based on coastal ecosystems restored to buffer climate impacts, aimed at vulnerable fishing 
households, and Category B  livelihoods adapted to specific climate change impacts on agro- ecosystems, aimed 
at vulnerable farming households.  The table in Section C.3 above shows these livelihoods in groups –  climate -
adaptive aquaculture129, ecotourism130 and non-timber forest products131, as well as climate- smart 
intensification132 and climate- adapted crops133, and processing of the products of climate -adaptive 
aquaculture134. The rationale is provided in the table for how each group of livelihoods is climate- adaptive and 
how it  links to the project’s overall EbA strategy.  
 
182. The project is expected to target approximately 348,994 participants in 16 core  livelihood activities , with co -
finance and GCF resources helping establish new livelihoods and adapt others, over a period of six  years. The 
number of beneficiaries for livelihood activities was arrived at by factoring in the population of the intervention site, identifying the gap between demand and supply of services and taking a conservative estimate based on 
data sourced from government databases, reports, and previous projects. In cases where no direct data is available to determine the number of beneficiaries, estimates are taken based on discussions with the experts 
and teams at the field. A brief rationale for number of benef iciaries for each livelihood covered in the preliminary 
assessment (see Feasibility Study  Section 7.5 for more detail) is mentioned below:  
 
• For climate -smart SRI for paddy, t he number of beneficiaries was arrived at by m aking a conservative 
assumption that  10% of the total paddy farmers in the region would be willing to switch to SRI technique s under 
                                                             
129 Aquaculture: including crab farming, mussel farming, oyster farming, crab hatcheries, ornamental fisheri es, integrated duck -fish 
farming, seaweed farming, integrated multitrophic aquaculture  
130 Coastal ecotourism: including scuba diving, tour guiding  
131 Coastal NTFPs: including m angrove beekeeping for honey production 
132 Climate -smart intensification: including System of Rice Intensification (S RI) for paddy farming  
133 Climate -adapted crops: including Cultivation of aromatic and medicinal plants, mushroom cultivation  
134 Processing of climate -adaptive aquaculture products: for example fish smoking, production of val ue-added mussel products


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 105 
 
 E 
the project. Figures of total number of paddy farmers were calculated by using data on total rice cultivated in 
the region and average landholding size per far mer. 
• For c rab farming, the number of  beneficiaries was arrived at through discussions  with field teams and experts 
who estimate that a sustainable crab farming unit can service at least 1, 500 beneficiaries per unit.   
• For mussel f arming, the number of beneficiaries was arrived at by m aking a conservative assumption that 
0.8% of the potential beneficiaries would be willing to take up mussel farming. The potential beneficiaries 
number was derived from the number of active fishermen families in each region.  The value is arrived at 
considering the percentage of mussel to fish production in 2008 was 0.2%.  
• For oyster farming, t he number of beneficiaries was arrived at by m aking a similarly conservative assumption 
that 0.8% of the potential beneficiaries would be wi lling to take up oyster farming, which follows similar 
production trends to mussel f arming.   
• For crab hatcheries, t he number of beneficiaries to be involved in crab hatcheries was calculated based on the 
number of hatcheries needed to supply the crab farming units, and the number of people required to work in a 
hatchery , using the crab farming project in Maharashtra for reference.  
• For ornamental fisheries, the number of beneficiaries  was arrived at by m aking a conservative assumption that 
1.35% of the potential beneficiaries would be willing to take up the ornamental fish farming. The potential 
beneficiaries number was derived from the number of active fishermen families in each region. The number  
was also based on input from the experts and resources available for the project, including l imitations imposed 
by sustainable harvesting rates.  
• For integrated du ck-fish f arming, the number of beneficiaries was arrived at by m aking a conservative 
assumption that approximately 30% of the total area to be covered can be successfully used for integrated 
duck fish f arming. The potential area data was sourced from NABARD documents.   
• For seaweed f arming, the  number of beneficiaries was arrived at by m aking a conservative assumption that 
1.69% of the potential benefic iaries would be willing to take up the seaweed farming. The potential beneficiaries 
number was derived from the number of active fishermen families in each region, and based on input from the experts and resources available for the project.  
• For honey production, t he number of beneficiaries was calculated by identifying the gap in existing demand 
and production of honey, and using data on potential  quantity of honey produced per unit. The information on 
quantity of honey produced per unit was sourced from ex isting projects.   
• For scuba diving , the total number of beneficiaries was based on calculating the total number of tourists arriving 
for leisure and number of tourists s erviced by a single instructor, and only areas with tourism infrastructure and 
potential dive sites were considered.  
• For tour guiding, the total number of beneficiaries was based on calculating the total number of visitors arriving 
for tourism and assumption s on the number of tourists to be serviced on walking tours of the area by a single 
guide.  
• For mushroom c ultivation , the number of beneficiaries was calculated by identifying the gap in existing demand 
and production of mushroom s, and using data on possible quantity of mushroom s produced per unit, sourced 
from existing projects.   
• For arom atic and medicinal plants , the number of beneficiaries  was taken in proportion to the total area under 
cultivation in each region. The data on total area under cultivation in each region was sourced from NABARD documents.  
• For fish value a dded MSMEs the number of beneficiaries were taken as number of persons employed in each 
unit. The total number of units were estimated in proportion to the monthly consumption of fish in rural regions. 
The data on total area under cultivation in each region was sourc ed from the Central Institute of Fishery 
Technology.  
• For fishmeal plants, t he total number of beneficiaries was calculated by assuming 30 persons requirement  for 
a fishmeal plant. The number of fishmeal plant s planned was one per region considering the al most equal 
number of people employed in fishing in the region.   
• For fishmeal p rocessing, t he number of beneficiaries was calculated by identifying the gap in existing demand 
and production of fish, and using the assumption that 1% of the fish goes for proc essing. This gave the number


---
*Page 57*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 105 
 
 E 
of possible units and further  conservative estimate was made  to arrive at the number of units that can be set  
up in the regions.  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
183. The proposed project supports the Government of India to enhance the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities to climate change. The project combines GCF grant finance with significant leveraged co- finance 
to shift the paradigm towards a new approach integrating ecosystem -centred and community -based approaches 
to adaptation into coastal managem ent and planning by the public sector, the private sector and civil society.  
 
184. India is making important inv estments in coastal development – in industry, agriculture, conservation, 
afforestation and rural livelihoods, but these are not yet systematically addressing climate risks.  Without the 
project intervention, these investments are likely to have decreasing success in delivering expected development 
gains, because of underlying vulnerabilities compounded by current and future climate change impacts. T he 
natural ecosystems of India’s coastal zone will continue to be undervalued and will be increasingly degraded 
and lost, sacrificing their significant contribution to reducing climate risk by buffering disasters and supporting livelihoods. Coastal communiti es will remain vulnerable to loss of life and damage to property through flooding, 
erosion and saline intrusion, expected to intensify as storm surges and sea level rise worsen. Poor coastal communities reliant on small -scale fishing and farming will remai n vulnerable to impacts of temperature rise and 
increasingly erratic monsoons on their livelihoods. The infrastructural investments being made to promote 
development will also remain vulnerable to climate change impacts, loss and damage.  
 
185. Through the GCF i ntervention, supported by co- finance from the public sector reflecting Government’s 
commitment to adaptation policy priorities (outlined in the NDC and NAPCC), investment in the coastal zone will 
become more climate- risk informed, using ecosystem - and comm unity -based approaches to adapting to climate 
change impacts. T he natural ecosystems of India’s coastal zone will be protected and restored, and their 
contribution to buffering climate shocks and stresses and supporting diversified livelihoods will be full y 
recognized and utilized . This will be achieved through interventions in target landscapes in the three states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha to i) protect and restore ecosystems such as mangroves and 
seagrass, and the services they provide, es pecially buffering storm surges, and ii) help communities adopt 
climate -adaptive livelihoods and value chains. Government  co-finance will also be used to iii) mainstream EbA 
principles into coastal planning and governance, enabling intersectoral  coordination for addressing climate risk 
across all of India’s coastal states.  
 
186. The barriers to achieving this paradigm shif t are shown in the diagram above at para 160, outlining the theory of 
change of the project.  
 
187. Government co- finance will be used to create pathways for replication and scale as described below. Given that 
the combined length of the three target states’ coastlines (i.e. 2,374 km)135 represents 31.5% of the total coastline 
length of India, there is potential to multiply the effects of the project by 200%, using the pathways to scale 
outlined below:  
• The project enables scale- up through capacity development of key public and private sec tor role- players, 
developing sufficient institutional and technical capacity to jointly: i) assess the costs and benefits of large-
scale interventions that  enhance supplies of ecosystem goods/services and thereby promote a diverse array 
of coastal livelihoods; ii) facilitate detailed planning at the local level to demarcate precisely where specific 
ecosystem restoration and livelihood activities should be implemented to maximise adaptation benefits; iii) 
commit to allocating funds for large- scale implementation of such interventions within national and local 
government budget lines within all coastal districts of India; iv) oversee the effective implementation as well as 
long-term maintenance of the ecological infrastructure and rural livelihoods developed; and v) adapt the 
                                                             
135 Length of Andhra Pradesh coastline -  ~974 km , length of Andhra Pradesh coastline -  ~840 km , length of Andhra Pradesh 
coastline - ~560 km


---
*Page 58*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 105 
 
 E 
interventions over the course of several decades, as the precise effects of climate change at a landscape -
scale become evident, and as methods for restoring ecosystems to maximise adaptation benefits become 
more refined.  
• GCF resources and co -finance will be used to establish a long-term system for periodic  detailed assessment  of 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity along the entire coastline of  India  (Activity 1.1) , support ing the identification 
of all areas where restoration of coastal ecosystems using an EbA approach can be implemented. For example, within the three targeted states, there is potential for restoration of a further ~7,000 ha of mangrove ecosystems
136. The vulnerabili ty assessment will identify all such ecosystems acros s the entire coastline of 
India, and be repeated periodically to track progress.  The implementation of restoration interventions  in the 
three targeted states (Activity 1.2) will build technical capacities and facilitate the adoption of similar efforts 
across all other states of India. T he EbA Decision- Support Tool will enable identification of specific sites  for 
such implementation of EbA nation- wide, and will be applied by the relevant Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities in each of the 13 coastal states .  
• Support for climate -adaptive livelihoods  (Activities  2.1 and 2.2) will also be replicable across all coastal states 
of India. A total of 1,744,970 people will benefit from these activities within the targeted states. The 
development of market linkages, capacity building for diversification of livelihoods and facilitation of access to finance has the potential for upscaling into other coastal states. This will be achieved through the establishment 
of a Pan- Indian Coastal Resilience Network that will support knowledge exchange on lessons learned and 
best practices across the country, facilitating the adoption of project approaches across other coastal s tates. 
In addition, the dissemination of knowledge products on coastal adaptation and exposure/exchange visits for 
government officials will enhance understanding and technical capacity for promotion of climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  across all coastal states.  
• Replication is facilitated by the project through changes in the enabling environment within which district, state 
and national governments work.  The new National Coastal Mission will provide a framework to integrate 
climate risk management and EbA  principles into national policies and schemes, including the CAMPA 
afforestation fund and Smart Cities Mission. In the three states, climate change adaptation and EbA will be 
integrated more effectively into cross -sectoral spatial and development planning at the district and state levels. 
This approach will be replicated and scaled up in all the other coastal states, commencing during the project lifetime through the establishment of interdepartmental platforms in the 13 coastal states, and a Pan-Indian 
Coastal Resilience Network, and sustained long- term through the National Coastal Mission.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
188. Capacity building of local communities, government officials, the private sector and other stakeholders will 
improve knowledge and awareness on the benefits of adopting EbA approaches to build climate resilience. 
Transfer of lessons learned and best practi ce on coastal resilience and EbA will also promote replication and 
upscaling of such interventions across the coastline of India. A knowledge exchange platform involving officials 
and communities from other South Asian coastal countries will enable dialogu e, sharing, and learning on 
ecosystem -and community -based adaptation across the region. Using a range of knowledge products and 
channels for dissemination will ensure that the widest possible reach is achieved, i.e. promoting access to such 
knowledge for d iverse stakeholders such as local communities, various levels of government, private sector 
agents and other development partners.  
 
                                                             
136 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management Project Directorate & National Institute of Ocean Technology. 2016. An 
Integrated Approach to Assess the Biophysical Vulnerability  of Coastal Areas (Andhra Pradesh, Odisha And Maharashtra) –  A 
Feasibility Study.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 105 
 
 E 
189. The project will facilitate improved knowledge generation, creation and sharing for collective and adaptive  
learning on climate change adaptation in coastal areas for local communities, government officials and other 
stakeholders. In particular, it will generate substantive knowledge on the importance of ecological infrastructure in addressing climate- induced r isks in coastal areas of India, as well as on undertaking collaborative, participatory 
and cross -sectoral p lanning for climate change. Government c o-finance under  the National Coastal Mission will  
be used to set up a system for collating data and informati on on global best practices, lessons learned, evidence 
from the field and scientific knowledge on coastal governance, climate change adaptation, EbA and livelihood 
diversification in the coastal zone of India. This will involve developing a number of knowl edge products and 
knowledge management mechanisms, outlined below.  
 
• Knowledge products translated into local languages for nation- wide use in community -level training for village 
self-help groups and CBOs, and women’s capacity development programmes, suppo rting knowledge 
exchange visits between communities.  
• A decision- support tool with associated online platform and app used to facilitate access to information and 
knowledge for decision- makers, communities and infor med stakeholders.  
• Detailed ecosystem - and site-specific protocols and guidelines – based on scientific best practices and 
regularly updated – used to inform restoration and adaptive management of various ecosystem types.  
• A Coastal Calculator tool applied with relevant government and private sector  actors to design shoreline 
protection and other climate- resilient infrastructure.  
• A Pan -Indian Coastal Resilience Network of institutions to promote knowledge exchanges on integration of 
climate change adaptation into coastal development planning.  
• Trainin g courses or curricula on EbA, for delivery through administrative training and other relevant institutes 
at national and state levels.  
• Academic partnerships for experimental learning on building climate resilience for publication in peer -
reviewed scientif ic literature.  
• Exposure and exchange visits for national -, state - and district -level government officials to promote 
knowledge sharing on cross -sectoral coastal governance, climate change adaptation and EbA.  
 
190. These knowledge products and platforms will complement training and capacity building of local communities – 
including CBOs such as self -help and women’s groups – as well as representatives of the public and private 
sectors to evaluate climate risks and design adaptation measures tailored to the local conditions. Knowledge 
generation and learning will focus on ecosystem - and community -based approaches to climate change, as well 
as institutional capacities for undertaking landscape- scale and cross -sectoral a pproaches to adaptation planning. 
The nodal point of the project’s knowledge generation and learning activities will be the Pan- India Coastal 
Resilience Network (to be established under this project) to facilitate nation- wide learning on coastal adaptation. 
In addition, administrative training institutions at the national and state levels will integrate lessons from the 
project in training courses on EbA for civil servants and government officials.  
 
191. Sharing of lessons learned and best practices will also be  supported through the continuous monitoring and 
evaluation of the project. The M&E plan (Section H.2) will include provision for generation of lessons learned 
and best practices (reports, publications, and other communication and knowledge products for various media) 
to not only support adaptive project management but also to inform learning across national - and sub- national 
levels within India as well as regionally across other coastal South Asian states.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
192. The project enables sustained participation of the public sector, private sector and civil society. Project 
interventions will mobilize ownership from all these sectors, and catalyze  commitments to sustaining the projects 
impacts in the long term. The project invests strongly in technical assistance and developing stakeholders’ 
capacities for sustained impacts. The strategy for each sector is outlined below:  
193. Public sector: Planning an d implementation of coastal adaptation measures will be coordinated through a 
network of institutions that govern c oastal management and planning, guided by the National Coastal Mission. 
Interdepartmental platforms will be established in the 13 coastal states, using existing platforms wherever 
possible – particularly State Action Plans for CC and CZM Authorities. These will facilitate integration of EbA


---
*Page 60*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 105 
 
 E 
approaches into relevant policy, legislation and budgetary processes, and share lessons learned and best 
practices from target landscapes and states. Two examples of opportunities to mainstream climate change 
adaptation into national and state levels policy are: i) the Smart Cities Mission which addresses citizen- centric 
and sustainable development but not ex plicitly climate risk management, and ii) the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) which funds reforestation but does not yet have as a key 
goal the adaptation benefits of restoring ecosystems.  
194. Private sector:  Private s ector role- players will be involved in the project in three distinct capacities, namely: i) 
as coastal developers and landholders who can build EBA principles into new developments or management of 
coastal lands; ii) as potential investors in businesses ba sed on restored ecosystems (e.g. ecotourism, 
mari/aquaculture, agri -processing and value- added industries in the coastal zone); and iii) as potential financiers 
of livelihood and capacity development activities through their Corporate Social Investment programmes (the 
latter to be leveraged during  project implementation). GOI co -finance  will be used to f acilitate  a series of biennial 
intersectoral  dialogues under the auspices of  the National Coastal Mission – engaging both public and private 
sector role-players on coastal adaptatio n as a risk management strategy.  This will involve sectors such as  
financial services, oil and gas, ports and shipping, power generation and energy, tourism, fishing and agriculture, 
as well as agri -processing industries . Through this p latform for dial ogue, the Coastal Mission will mainstream 
climate change adaptation principles into coastal zone development and management of coastal landholdings , 
leveraging private sector finance for  restoration efforts where appropriate, and designing coastal infrastructure 
with an optimal mix of engineered and ecosystem -based solutions.  
195. Local level:  GCF resources and co- finance will be invested in improved technical and institutional capacity of 
Panchayati  Raj institutions at district and sub- district level, as well as community organisations, on planning and 
implementing coastal adaptation measures, enhancing cross -sectoral coordination among relevant 
stakeholders. The project builds on existing experiences of community participation for ecological restoration 
and livelihood development in coastal areas of India, and will strengthen a range of CBOs (e.g. self -help and 
women’s groups) on climate -adaptive livelihood and enterprise development. Ongoing partici pation of various 
stakeholders will be ensured through training and capacity building of community organisations and government 
officials on: i) planning and implementing EbA measures for maintaining ecological infrastructure; ii) supporting 
and expanding climate -adaptive livelihoods  and enterprises; and iii) integrating climate change considerations 
into coastal planning and governance.  
196. The paradigm shift facilitated by the project is predicated on adoption of an integrated and cross -sectoral 
approach to climate change adaptation with a specific focus on ecosystem - and community -based adaptation. 
This will strengthen the enabling environment for such an approach at the national and sub- national levels 
through both vertical and horizontal coordination of ad aptation planning.  
• Horizontal coordination. The platforms established in Output 3 under the National Coastal Mission will  
ensure cross -sectoral adaptation planning through inter -linked planning processes and project 
implementation arrangements to build long- term institutional capacities for climate change adaptation.  
o Coordination platforms in all coastal states will build capacities of state- level government institutions 
to integrate climate change adaptation – and specifically EbA approaches – into development planning 
and governance in coastal areas.  
o A Pan -Indian Coastal Resilience Network will promote knowledge management on design, planning 
and implementation of adaptation in coastal areas amongst key stakeholders.  
o Multi -stakeholder coordination structures will be established and strengthened in targeted landscapes 
to improve dialogue on and coordination of climate- resilie nt development planning.  
• Vertical coordination: The project promotes interlinkages between local -, district -, state - and national -
level planning for adaptation that also supports implementation of national -level plans and strategies. 
Successful initiatives  in the 2 4 target  landscapes will be discussed in state- level project coordination 
structures, to assess how best to replicate such initiatives state- wide, through local and state government 
structures at various levels. In particular, the various interdepartmental platfor ms in the 13 coastal states 
of India , guided by National Coastal Mission,  will be used to support the integration of ecosystem - and


---
*Page 61*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 105 
 
 E 
community -based measures into specific policies and plans as well as into budgetary processes for 
comprehensive and integrat ed coastal adaptation planning and governance.  
Innovation  and Market Development  
197. The project’s adoption of integrated, cross -sectoral, ecosystem - and community -based approaches to climate 
change adaptation is innovative in the context of coastal governance in India. It has the potential to transform 
current approaches that are largely restricted to single sectors and focus on planning and implementation of hard 
infrastructure for coastal protection. In this way, the project is promoting a shift away from conventional, siloed 
planning processes within government agencies towards collaborative and cross -sectoral coordination between 
such agencies to develop integrated solutions that include ecological and community considerations at the 
landscape level. Critic al aspects of the project’s innovative approach are described below.  
• The focus on market development for value -added products  of aquaculture, agriculture and other 
climate -adaptive livelihoods , ensuring that livelihoods interventions are sustainable 
• The potential for ecological infrastructure  to buffer climate change impacts and support local livelihoods 
is recognized as central to provision of adaptation benefits.  
• The focus on community -based approaches to building climate resilience through enhanced 
livelihoods and community -level planning for climate change adaptation will build adaptive capacities and 
reduce climate vulnerability.  
• Adoption of a landscape- scale approach to planning and implementing adaptation interventions  will 
achieve greater benefits than the current approach of undertaking planning within the scope of 
administrative sub- divisions.  
198. This project will also support the development of the technical knowledge base on adopting ecosystem -based 
approaches to climate change adaptation at the l andscape scale. This will include the application of innovative 
tools and methodologies such as:  
• A decision- support tool to provide decision- makers and planners with enhanced information and knowledge 
for climate -resilient coastal management.  
• A Coastal Cal culator tool for design of shoreline protection and other climate- resilient infrastructure 
measures.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
 
 
 199. The Government of India is strongly committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development , in line with its 
India’s national development goals and its “sab ka saath, sab ka vikas”  or “development with all, and for all,” 
policy initiatives for inclusive development. NITI Aayog , the Government of India’s premi er think tank, has been 
entrusted with the task of coordinating the SDGs, and has adopted a government -wide approach to sustainable 
development, emphasi zing the interconnected nature of the SDGs across economic, social and environmental 
pillars, with the M inistry of Statistics and Programme Implementation leading discussions for developing national. 
State governments are key to India’s progress on the SDG Agenda as they are best placed to ‘put people first’ 
and to ensure that ‘no one is left behind’. Many of the Government’s flagship programmes such as Swachh 
Bharat, Make in India, Skill India, and Digital India are at the core of the SDGs. State and local governments play 
a pivotal role in many of these programmes. The role of local governments is equally i mportant; 15 of the 17 
SDGs directly relate to activities undertaken by local governments in the country.  
200. The project contributes towards the achievement of the SDGs as follows:  
• No Poverty (Goal 1) . The project will promote the adoption of diversified, sustainable and climate -adaptive 
livelihood opportunities amongst local communities in India’s coastal areas, with a particular focus on poor 
communities, and marginalised and disadvantaged groups.  
• Gender Equality (Goal 5) . The project has a specific focus on the climate vulnerabilities of women. Many of 
the livelihood activities target women as primary beneficiaries of project support to address the 
disproportionate impact of climate change on them.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 105 
 
 E 
• Sustainable Cities and Communities (Goal 11) . The project supports improved planning of urban areas as 
well as local communities to address the impacts of climate change on their sustainability.  
• Climate Action (Goal 13) . The primary, overarching focus of the project is on taking action on climate change 
adaptation at scale and amongst those most vulnerable to it.  
• Life below Water (Goal 14) . The project will improve conservation and management of marine resources 
and biodiversity such as coral reefs and fish populations.  
• Life on Land  (Goal 15) . The project will support the restoration and management of ecosystems such as 
mangroves and forested watersheds that will provide adaptation benefits as well as additional 
environmental co- benefits such as biodiversity conservation.  
The project is also aligned with various priorities of India’s NDC, including:  
• 1.3 Developing Climate Resilient Urban Centers . The project includes activities on enhancing capacities 
for climate- resilient planning for towns and villages to reduce the impacts of climate- induced risks such as 
storm surges and sea- level rise.  
• 1.6 Planned Afforestation. The project has a strong focus on restoration of degraded ecosystems, including 
watershed afforestation and mangrove restoration.  
• 2.1 Agriculture. The project will support climate- resilient agricultural practices to sustain agricultural 
production under current and future climate change conditions and support community livelihoods and 
income generation.  
• 2.4 Coastal Regions and Islands . The primary focus of the project is on enhancing coastal governance for 
planning and implementing adaptation interventions that will build climate resilience at scale across the 
country’s coastal areas.  
• 2.5 Disaster Management . The project will support EbA activities that will buffer against the impacts of 
climate -induced disasters such as storm surges and cyclones.  
• 2.6 Protecting Biodiversity and Himalayan Ecosystem. Project activities include large- scale restoration of 
degraded ecosystems, which will resul t in improved conservation of critical biodiversity.  
• 2.7 Rural Livelihoods Security . The project has a strong focus on enhancing the climate resilience of rural 
livelihoods in India’s coastal areas.  
• 2.8 Adaptation Actions under State Action Plans on Climat e Change. The project interventions are 
predicated upon the guidance and recommendations of the various state action plans on climate change.  
• 2.9 Knowledge Management and Capacity Building. The project includes a number of activities focused 
on building technical and institutional capacities at various levels for enhanced action on climate change. 
In addition, the project will support the development of a number of knowledge products and knowledge 
exchange mechanisms on climate change adaptation.  
201. Finally, t he GCF /GOI  project will support the integration of ecosystem -centric approaches to climate change 
adaptation into public and private sector policies. Ecosystem -based and community -centric approaches to 
adaptation are currently not adequately mainstreamed i nto policy, planning and regulatory frameworks for 
coastal governance, nor are there sufficient sources of funding for scaling it up. The project will support 
mainstreaming and integration of climate change adaptation into existing policies and plans for l ocal- and state -
level planning as well as plans for key economic sectors such as oil and gas industries, port and shipping, power 
generation and energy, tourism, ecosystem management, fishing and agriculture. Integration of climate change 
concerns and the potential for EbA to promote climate resilience in coastal areas into policies, plans and 
strategies will increase institutional capacity for reducing climate change risks in vulnerable coastal areas.  
202. Relevant policies, strategies and plans will be reviewed and revisions proposed to integrate climate change 
considerations in a more systematic approach. These relevant policies, strategies and plans at a national -level 
will include inter alia:  i) Nationa l Conservation Strategy and Policy Statement on Environment and Development 
(1992); ii) National Forest Policy (1988); iii) Policy Statement on Abatement of Pollution (1992); iv)  National 
Environmental Policy (2006); and iv) National Action Plan on Climate Change (2008). At a state- level, the 
relevant policies, strategies and plans will include inter alia: i) State Action Plan of Climate Changes for Andhra 
Pradesh (2012); ii) Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change (2014); and iii) Odisha  Climate


---
*Page 63*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 105 
 
 E 
Change Action Plan (2010). In particular, the importance of ecosystem restoration and climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  as effective means of building adaptive capacity will be mainstreamed into coastal governance. 
Climate change adaptation and EbA  will be integrated more effectively into spatial and development planning at 
the district and state levels. Furthermore, gaps and challenges related to climate change adaptation within 
existing plans for economic sectors in coastal areas will be identified and addressed. A landscape- based 
approach – with inclusion of multiple stakeholders –  will be adopted to promote cross -sectoral planning for 
climate change adaptation.  
  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Economic C o-benefits  
203. The economic benefits from this project include: i ) creation of short -term work opportunities in ecosystem 
restoration, and long- term job opportunities in maintenance of ecological infrastructure; ii) support for adaptation 
of activities like rice growing that are threatened by climate impacts, to enhance yields, nutritional status and 
incomes even in the face of such impacts; and iii) the creation of new livelihoods and small business 
opportunities that result in increased and diversified household incomes. Benefits will also accrue to the total 
populatio n of 10 million people in 24 target landscapes in the coastal zone in the three states, where GCF and 
co-financed investments will be made in maintaining or restoring ecological infrastructure, and also in developing 
ecosystem -compatible climate- resilient built infrastructure. These investments will result in shoreline protection 
and avoidance of damage to property and land, allowing communities to avoid the concomitant costs of 
reconstruction, and loss of income from interruption of economic activities.  
204. Socially and economically disadvantaged coastal communities in India are highly vulnerable to climate change 
impacts and currently have limited adaptive capacity. Increases in income and diversification of livelihood activities will contribute to strengthene d climate resilience of these coastal communities. The project aims to 
provide sustainable livelihood and income generation opportunities to 1,744,970 household members in the 24 
target landscapes in the 12 coastal districts in the three target states . These include l ivelihoods based on coastal 
ecosystems restored to buffer climate impacts, and livelihoods that adapt current farming practices to deal with climate impacts on agro- ecosystems, as well as value addition opportunities associated with both these 
categories of activities. These are detailed in Table 3 below. Skills t raining and opportunities to become involved 
in new livelihoods will be designed to include women, youth and marginalized groups. Livelihoods interventions 
will significantly improve the socio -economic status and empowerment of the coastal communities and pave the 
way for a better human development index in the highly vulnerable coastal districts of India.  
205. An example of economic benefits through livelihoods work in one of the projects on which this proposal builds, 
comes from the Sindhudurg project. By adopting the system of rice intensification in coastal Sindhudurg, 2,500 
farmers have reduced their cost of cultivation by 1 5-25%, while simultaneously leading to reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions by 60% and water use by 40%. In the East Godavari project, it has been observed 
that effective enforcement of seasonal fishing ban for 60 days in a year has led to an increased fi sh catch and 
subsequently increases in income levels of 20%.  
Social C o-benefits  
206. Social benefits of project activities, especially livelihoods and restoration, will include nutrition, safety and 
security, empowerment, social cohesion, and a sense of owner ship. Whole coastal communities will benefit from 
project activities, including farming communities on coastal plains who are vulnerable to climate change impacts 
on agriculture, and fishing families vulnerable to climate impacts on fisheries and aquaculture. As a result of their 
strong dependence on fishing and farming and a limited ability to access new livelihoods in order to deal with external stresses, coastal communities are vulnerable to climate change impacts exacerbated by ecosystem 
degradation. Wi thin these communities, women, children and the elderly are amongst the most vulnerable to 
disaster impacts, including both slow onset disasters such as droughts, and extreme events like flooding from 
coastal storm surges. In addition, in India, there are a number of extremely vulnerable and marginalized social


---
*Page 64*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 105 
 
 E 
groups such as dalits or irulas, classified as Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes. By providing technical 
assistance for livelihoods opportunities that includes all of these groups, and enhancing access to finance and 
markets, social capital will be built. By establishing co- management structures for ongoing maintenance of 
ecosystems, and by training the next generation on monitoring and evaluation, where the evaluators themselves have a stake in the results of the interventions, the project will build adaptive capacity for the long- term. An 
example will be the work in Output 1.3 where youth from a range of social backgrounds will be trained to monitor 
coastal ecosystem health, including monitoring of carbon sequestration in maintained and restored coastal 
ecosystems.  
Environmental C o-benefits  
207. India’s mangrove cover137 is approximately 4,628 km2, of which the area covered in the states under the project 
is as follows: i) Maharashtra –  222 km2; ii) Andhra Pradesh –  352 km2; and iii) Odisha –  213 km2. The project will 
ensure protection and conservation of the existing mangrove cover, as well as an increase in the mangrove 
cover by 10,575 hectares over the project duration of six years. It will also ensure protection and conservation 
of other important ecosystems such as sea grass beds, salt marshes, coral reefs and coastal lagoons and estuaries. A ridge to reef approach will be taken to ensure that upstream impacts on coastal ecosystems are addressed, e.g. reforestation of catchments to avoid erosion and siltation of river mouths. The project will ensure 
conservation of several important coastal and marine biodiversity areas (ICMBAs) and highly sensitive areas 
(HSZ) as identified by the Wildlife Institute of India and National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management 
(NCSCM). Through the ecosystems -based interventions of the project, important wildlife species will be 
protected including turtles, saltwater crocodiles, marine fishes, marine mammals and m igratory birds, and those 
included in the IUCN Red List of threatened species.  
208. The project will also provide considerable mitigation co- benefits through activities that sequester carbon. 
Restoration of degraded blue carbon ecosystems (e.g. mangroves, seagr ass meadows) and creation of “new” 
ecosystems, through revegetation of degraded catchments and establishment of shelter belts, will provide additional carbon sinks along the Indian coast. The estimated total amount of CO
2 to be sequestered over a 30-
year period as a result of these project activities exceeds 3.6 million ton nes (see Section E1.1). The project will 
thus contribute to India’s emission reduction efforts in terms of its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) targets.  
Gender -Sensitive D evelopment I mpact  
209. Women involved in agriculture and fishing are largely confined to basic production and selling of these goods, but have considerable potential for skills enhancement to participate in value addition as well as diversification to other income- generating activities (e.g. in the tourism sector). This diversification of livelihoods will increase 
their resilience to change. The interventions of this project have been designed to address these issues by: i) supporting participation of women in climate -resilient planning and decision- making; and ii) providing specific 
opportunities for women to build the climate resilience of their livelihood practices  and their empowerment . 
210. Specific opportunities have been created for women to improve and diversify their livelihoods in a manner that will promote their resilience to climate change. Diversified and climate -adaptive livelihood activities have been 
selected that will specifically  target women, with the aim of increasing their potential for generating income 
despite current and future climate change impacts (see Activities  2.1 and 2.2). For example, livelihoods such as 
mussel and oyster aquaculture, mangrove crab farming, cultivati on of mushrooms and medicinal plants, and fish 
value -addition activities all have the potential to selectively benefit women. Such activities are culturally 
acceptable for women to participate in, while at the same time offering considerable potential for generation of significant increases in income.  Empowering women by providing them with economic opportunities will have 
other co- benefits such as improvement in their social status, as well as potentially improved access to health 
and education services for their families. This in turn could enhance resilience to extreme weather events and natural disasters. The East Godavari project has demonstrated that the income of approximately 500 women 
beneficiaries has increased during the project period. In Sindhudurg, mussel and oyster culture has resulted in 
returns of six to eight times the initial investment by 10 women’s self -help groups, significantly increasing the 
women’s percentage contribution to household income. This activity has tremendous potential for  replication 
                                                             
137 MOEFCC. 2013. Forest Survey of India.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 105 
 
 E 
amongst women self -help groups in other coastal areas. A full Gender Analysis and Action plan has been 
developed and is attached as Annex XIII(c) to this Funding Proposal.  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
211. The coastline of India is vulnerable to the expected impacts of climate change including extreme temperatures, 
changes in precipitation patterns, increased incidence of extreme weather events and sea- level rise. In particular, 
climate change poses considerable risks to the lives and livelihoods of rural communities living in coastal districts. 
Calculations based on 20 years (1993– 2012) of tide gauge  measurements along the Indian coastline show that 
sea level has risen at an average rate of approximately 1.3 mm per year138. Extreme weather events –  such as 
cyclones, floods and drought – are also predicted to increase in frequency and intensity under fut ure climate 
change scenarios (see Sections 2.7 and 2.8 of the Feasibility Study – Annex II).  
 
212. Communities living in the coastal zone will be vulnerable to these impacts of climate change. Climate change 
threatens the well -being and livelihoods of people in  the coastal zone of India by negatively impacting fisheries, 
agriculture, forestry, infrastructure, water availability and health (see Section C.1 of this Full Proposal and Section 
2.8 of the Feasibility Study). For example, coastal flooding will cause loss of life and damage to economic assets 
and infrastructure. Such flooding will be exacerbated by sea- level rise and accelerated coastal erosion. Coastal 
farming and aquaculture operations, as well as freshwater aquifers, are also vulnerable to saline intr usion, which 
is occurring rapidly in some cases as a result of such extreme events, or more gradually as a result of sea level rise. Fisher communities’ livelihoods are vulnerable in cases where fish stocks are expected to decline because 
of the impact of ocean warming on species and habitats that serve as fish nurseries. Farmers are also 
experiencing a decrease in income as changes in rainfall patterns pose challenges to agriculture, with dry periods reducing the yields of crops such as rice.  
 
213. The propose d project will address these expected vulnerabilities in coastal communities through targeting 
climate -adaptive livelihoods support to poor communities whose current livelihoods are vulnerable to climate 
change, for example, fishermen whose fish stocks are declining, and need to supplement their income through 
adding value to fish before selling it (e.g. drying or pickling), or through aquaculture operations in coastal creeks (e.g mussels or crabs). There will also be a focus on farming communities dependen t on a limited number of 
crops for subsistence and sale on local markets, where low er yields and increased  crop failures are anticipated 
as a result of longer dry spells and unpredictable monsoon rains. These communities’ vulnerability will be reduced through using GCF funds and GOI co- finance to introduce  agriculture methods that require  less water  
(e.g. the System for Rice Intensification) , and using GOI co- finance to introduce new crops (e.g. aromatic plants) 
to deal with temperature increases and rainfall changes . Project interventions will focus particularly on groups 
within communities that are particular ly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. For example, women fishers 
will be targeted as they tend to be involved in near -shore fishing activities which are more sensitive to climate 
change impacts than deep- water fishing (which is largely male- dominated). Similarly, women are estimated to 
contribute to more than 79% of agriculture and food production. As climate change is expected to greatly reduce 
agricultural productivity in India
139, women will thus be disproportionately more affected by its impacts. Extreme 
rainfall events – that are likely to increase in frequency because of climate change – have, for example, been 
shown to have catastrophic effects on fish- drying operations in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, destroying 
the business investments of large numbers of local women140. Social and cultural norms also have various 
implications for the climate vulnerability of marginalised groups in India, with “ lower caste” , poorer populations 
being forced by financial conditions to live in marginal ar eas along the coast that are particularly exposed to 
climate change impacts. Project interventions have been designed to take the various needs and priorities of 
such vulnerable and marginalised groups into consideration during the design of project interv entions for climate 
change adaptation.  
                                                             
138 INCCA 2010.  
139 EPTRI 2012. State Action Plan on Climate Change for Andhra Pradesh. Survey No. 91/4, Gachibowli, Hyderabad  
140 Salagrama, V. 2012. Climate Change and Fisheries: Perspectives from Small -Scale Fishing Communities in India on Measures to Protect Life and 
Livelihood. International Collective in Support of Fishworkers (ICSF).


---
*Page 66*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 105 
 
 E 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
214. India is a lower middle- income country141 with deep disparities in wealth and wellbeing and high levels of income 
inequality. Approximately 29% of Indians – i.e. more than 300 million people – live below the national poverty 
line of US$ 1.90 per person per day at purchasing parity power. Given th is large number of people, GoI is 
constrained in its ability to fund investments into climate resilience through domestic financing, as much of  
government expenditure is focused on socio- economic development activities to address the widespread 
poverty. In  particular, GoI has limited financial capacity for the investments required to enhance the adaptive 
capacity of vulnerable, rural communities living in the coastal areas of India. For example, while the government 
is investing in development across India’ s coastline, much of this finance is directed toward ports, roads, railways 
and associated economic infrastructure, rather than on building the climate resilience of the poorest communities 
along the coast. India's economic development is expected to be severely impacted by climate change, which is 
expected to push an additional 45 million people into poverty142. 
 
215. Poverty, gender inequality and social exclusion –  especially as a result of the caste system –  are most prevalent 
in rural areas of India, including in coastal areas of the three target states. The districts where the project 
interventions will be undertak en contain significant numbers of members of scheduled castes and tribes who 
suffer disproportionately from poverty because of, inter alia, social discrimination,  landlessness and limited 
access to resources and economic assets. Within these communities, women, children and the elderly are 
amongst the most vulnerable to disaster impacts, such as flood and droughts. Lack of access to paid employment 
affects youth and women disproportionately. Many households  have limited access to markets and inadequate 
provision of basic infrastructure and services.  Given the factors described above, there is an urgent need to 
undertake climate- resilient development within the coastal areas of India to protect communities, their economic 
assets and their lives and livelihoods from the impacts of climate change.  
 
216. There are also technical and institutional capacity needs to enable integrated approaches to climate change adaptation to be adopted in an integrated, cross -sectoral manner. Limited awarenes s of linkages between 
sectors related to coastal development currently results in little collaboration between relevant institutions and 
stakeholders. The GCF project will strengthen institutional capacities of government institutions, local 
communities and other stakeholders for planning, coordinating and implementing adaptation interventions to build climate resilience along the coast. In particular, this capacity building will focus on the importance of 
ecological infrastructure and EbA as cost -effective and complementary means of adapting to climate change 
when integrated with “hard” adaptation measures. GCF resources and co- finance will be used to t rain local 
communities and government officials on planning for climate- resilient coastal development to address climate-
induced risks in the long- term.  
 
217. The GoI and the private sector are not currently investing significantly in ecosystem -based adaptation measures 
in coastal areas of India. This is as a result of limited technical capacity and undervaluation of the adaptation 
benefits of coastal ecosystems (see Section C.2 of this Full Proposal and Section 5.1.4 of the Feasibility Study). 
Moreover, adaptation interventions –  such as those to be implemented under this project –  largely result in the 
generation of public goods. There is thus little incentive for the private sector to invest in such measures, while 
communities have inadequate resources and expertise to do so. For example, communities themselves cannot 
afford to invest in costly activities such as restoration or establishing new infrastructure for aquaculture or agri -
processing operations as they do not have the financial or technical means to undertake large- scale restoration, 
and there are few incentives in place for effective co- management of ecosystems. Without  grant financing, largely 
impoverished coastal communities would not have the technical or financial capacity to make the investments 
required for maintaining and restoring coastal ecosystems to buffer disasters and as the basis for sustainable 
livelihoods .  
 
218. The proposed interventions do not lend themselves to financial reflows back to private sector investors, the GoI 
or the GCF, as there will not be large- scale generation of revenue or recovery of costs. Instead, the expected 
small -scale financial returns that will be generated from investments into livelihood diversification, in the form of 
                                                             
141 World Bank. 2016. List of economies . 
142 Hallegatte  et al. 2016. Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty. World Bank


---
*Page 67*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 105 
 
 E 
income from enhanced yields and new activities, will  accrue at the local (household and community) level; 
savings from avoided expenditure on r epairing disaster -induced damages will also be made at household level. 
The Government of India seeks maximum concessionality for the proposed urgent adaptation actions that will 
benefit vulnerable communities in the coastal zones of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. A grant financing mechanism is thus sought to support the prioritised interventions of this project.  
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
219. The proposed GCF project is in line with, and supports the implementation of the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC, 2008) and the target states’ State Action Plans on Climate Change, as well as the Government 
of India’s  Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in terms of the Par is Agreement within the UNFCCC, with 
its adaptation and mitigation targets.  
 
220. The NAPCC  focuses on strategies and priority interventions for mitigating and adapting to climate change. The 
mitigation strategies include Planned Afforestation, while relevant Adaptation strategies are Coastal Regions and Islands, Disaster Management, Protecting Biodiversity (and Himalayan Ecosystem), and Rural Livelihoods 
Security. The Plan is being implemented through eight National Missions, outlining the main priorities for dealing 
with the challenge of climate change in India. The eight missions are the National Solar Mission, the National 
Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency, the National Mission on Sustainable Habitat, the National Water 
Mission, and the National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem. Three missions of central 
importance for the project are:  
 
1. Green India Mission:  Through this Mission the NAPCC aims to restore/reforest 6 million hectares of degraded 
forest lands, thus expanding India’s forest cover from 23 to 33%.  
2. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture: In implementing the NAPCC this Mission will support climate 
adaptation in agriculture through: i) the development of climate- resilient crops; ii) the expansion of weather 
insurance mechanisms; and iii) improved agricultural practices.  
3. National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change : Government will use this Mission to gain a 
better understanding of the impacts, effects and challenges of climate change. It also encourages private sector 
initiatives to develop adaptation and mitigation technologies through venture capital funds.  
 
The NAPCC identifies several priority areas for India’s coastal zones, including:  
• Developing an air -ocean circulation modelling system especially for the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea, to 
simulate regional climate change and, in particular, monsoon behaviour  
• Carrying out high- resolution ocean- atmosphere variability studies in tropical oceans, in particular , the Indian 
Ocean  
• Engineering a high- resolution storm surge model for coastal regions  
• Developing salinity -tolerant crop cultivars  
• Raising community awareness on coastal disasters and necessary action  
• Establishing timely forecasting and cyclone and flood warning systems  
• Increased planting and regeneration of mangroves and coastal forests.  
 
221. The proposed project is aligned with the all of the abovementioned priorities –  in particular the last four –  as well 
as the objectives of the Green India Mission, the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture and the National 
Mission on Strategic Knowl edge for Climate Change. In addition, the project addresses priority areas related to 
agriculture, coastal disasters, cyclone and flood warning systems, and restoration of coastal ecosystems.  
 
222. The project is also fully aligned with the three target states’ State Action Plan for Climate Change (see Section 
C.2 of this Funding Proposal and Section 3.2 of the Feasibility Study in Annex II for further details on each state’s


---
*Page 68*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 105 
 
 E 
Plan).  In particular, th e project helps to implement the following priorities for climate change adaptation, 
contained in all three Plans:  
• addressing the impacts of climate change agricultural practices and livelihoods;  
• protecting and conserving natural ecosystems and biodiversit y to buffer against climate change impacts; and  
• protecting low -lying and vulnerable populations against climate- induced disasters.  
 
223. India’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) outlines the country’s commitment towards a low carbon 
emission pathway. I t identifies priorities for: i) clean energy; ii) energy efficiency in various sectors of industries; 
iii) a major thrust to non- fossil based electricity generation; and iv) a building sector based on energy 
conservation. The INDC’s adaptation strategies i nclude:  
 
1. Adaptation component. Aims to better adapt to climate change by enhancing investments in development 
programmes in sectors that are vulnerable to climate change, particularly agriculture, water resources, the 
Himalayan and coastal regions, health and disaster management.  
2. Mobilising finance.  Aims to mobilize domestic and additional funds from developed countries to implement the 
above mitigation and adaptation actions.  
3. Technology development and transfer . Aims to build capacities, and create a domes tic and international 
framework for sharing of climate technology in India.  
 
224. The proposed project is closely aligned with these adaptation goals. The NDC also includes a target for 2030 to 
reduce the emissions intensity of India’s GDP by 33- 35% from 2005 l evels and to create an additional carbon 
sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO 2 equivalent through additional forest and tree cover by 2030. This ties in with 
a related commitment mentioned in the NDC to increase forest and tree cover “eventually” from 24 to 33% of the 
country’s terrestrial area. The GCF project will contribute to mi tigation by maintaining and restoring both 
terrestrial and blue carbon sinks (see Output 1.3 in Section C.2) in the three target states.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
225. UNDP is a long -term partner of the Government of In dia and UNDP has built strong relationships with decision-
makers, and proven its strengths as an impartial provider of technical advice and support. UNDP has worked in India since 1951 in almost all areas of human development, from democrat ic governance to poverty eradication, 
to sustainable energy and environmental management. UNDP’s programmes are aligned with national priorities 
and are reviewed and adjusted annually. In addition to managing a large portfolio of environmental projects in 
India, U NDP has for the past 8 years supported the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 
preparation of a series of State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs). UNDP has also been a key partner 
in disaster response efforts follo wing the 1 999 Odisha cyclone,  the 20 04 tsunami, and the 2008 Kosi River flood 
in Bihar, leading recovery work and mobilizing funds to ensure future disaster risk reduction.  
 
226. The proposed project is aligned with UNDP’s comparative advantage in the areas of capacity building, providing 
technical and policy support, reducing barriers and creating enabling conditions for adaptation planning and 
investments. It also builds on UNDP’s current portfolio of 56 Ecosystem -based Adaptation projects globally, 
undertaking work in protecting, restoring and managing natural ecosystems to help vulnerable communities 
adapt to climate change143funded through The Adaptation Fund, Global Environment Facility  Trust Fund, Least 
Developed Countries Fund, Special Climate Change Fund, Internati onal Climate Initiative of the German Federal 
Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety, Australian Agency for 
International Development and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Canadian International 
Development Agency, and Japan International Cooperation Agency.   
 
227. Since 1985, UNDP has been supporting the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC),  in 
meeting its national and international environmental priorities and commitments. This  includes support to almost 
40 projects in the area of climate change, sustainable natural resource mana gement and chemicals 
management. The technical and policy support provided by UNDP through these projects focuses on institutional 
                                                             
143 UNDP (2015) E cosystem Based Adaptation Analysis Report, http://adaptation-
undp.org/sites/default/files/resources/undp_eba_mapping_analysis_report_jan_2016_final_online.pdf


---
*Page 69*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 105 
 
 E 
strengthening and building capa cities to utilize natural resources in a sustainable way, while increasing resilience 
to climate variability and associated risks and impacts.  
 
228. The lead implementing partner (executing entity) for the project is the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change ( MoEFCC ), which has been responsible since 2015 for all climate change matters including 
implementation of the NAPCC (2008). In most states, the forest and environment departments are responsible 
for coordination and implementation of the State Action Plans on Cl imate Change and also host the state coastal 
zone management authority (CZMA), which is present in all the coastal states. The National Centre for 
Sustainable Coastal Management, a national technical institute under the MoEFCC , promotes sustainable 
coastal  development through partnerships, conservation and scientific research on India’s coast, and has formed 
a consortium with 14 coastal research institutions
144.  
 
229. In the three target states, the MoEFCC  will sign a Letter  of Agreement with each of the forest departments, who 
are best placed to coordinate activities at state level and on the ground in the 24 target  landscapes, based on 
extensive experience with implementing donor -funded projects as well as national and state schemes and 
missions. These are: the Environment, Forests, Science and Technology Department in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh; t he Revenue and Forest Department in the state of Maharashtra ; and the Forest 
and Environment  Department in the state of Odisha.  
 
230. The MoEFCC , together with the three State Governments, will implement the project in close cooperation with 
the other coastal states, and also with a range of other ministries, departments and agencies responsible for 
coastal area management and governance. National  ministries and state- level departments that will collaborate 
on cross -sectoral planning and governance will include those relating to environment and forests, climate 
change, rural development, agriculture and farmers’ welfare, road transport, micro, smal l and medium 
enterprises, and shipping. At district and landscape level, officials responsible for agriculture, fisheries, irrigation, 
disaster management, tourism, enterprise development, housing and waste will be involved in the project, as will 
a wide r ange of private sector, non- governmental and community structures.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
231. Discussions in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF CC) related to priorities around 
EBA and coastal adaptation have been ongoing over the last two years through various related government 
initiatives, two major UNDP -GEF projects, as well as other multilateral partner efforts supported by ADB, GIZ 
and the World Bank. Thes e evolved into project -specific consultations, as the national government and three 
states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha built on the ongoing discussions and state actions plans to 
invest in these priorities, including with funds to be sought t hrough GCF. As various priorities and needs have 
been emerging, the proposed GCF project has evolved as a potential investment channel that enables the 
incremental costs of addressing climate change adaptation to be more effectively addressed.  
 
232. Over the course of 2016, building on national policy priorities outlined in the NDC and NAPCC, the National 
Designated Authority (NDA) for the GCF in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) 
led a focused process of consultations on priorities for climate change adaptation in the coastal zone of the three 
states, seeking to understand vulnerable coastal communities’ adaptation needs and how GCF funding could 
help the country meet the incremental costs of addressing these needs and establishing pathways to scale across 
India’s coastal zone.  
 
233. The proposed project will involve a wide range of stakeholders including communities, community -based 
organizations, non- governmental organizations, monitoring and research institutions, small and large- scale 
private sector operators, in addition to public sector role- players from various spheres of government. During 
2016, the MoEFCC led the process of consultations with key stakeholders at a national level. In the three target states, consultations have been led by the Environment, Forests, Science and Technology Department in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh, the Revenue and Forest Department in the state of Maharashtra, and the Forest 
                                                             
144 University of Calcutta, Andhra University, Anna University, M S Swaminathan Research Foundation, National Centre f or Earth Science 
Studies Trivandrum, Pondicherry University, College of Fisheries Mangalore, National Institute of Technology Surathkal, University of Mumbai, 
Goa University, Bhavnagar University, Gujarat Vidyapith, Madras School of Economics, KIIT Univers ity and Centre for Environment Education.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 105 
 
 E 
and Environment  Department in the state of Odisha. In Odisha, discussions we re facilitated by the Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management Programme of the Forest and Environment Department.  
 
234. A full list of NGOs already engaged through state- level consultation meetings is included in Annex XIII(d). The 
NGO sector, together with small -scale community -based organizations such as Eco Development Committees, 
Van Samrakshan Samitis, self -help groups, producer organizations and fisher associations, will be important 
role-players on the ground in the target states and landscapes. A wide range of smaller NGOs and community -
based organizations in the three target states and the 24 target  landscapes (see maps in Annex IX) will also be 
involved in ongoing stakeholder engagement processes. Private sector role- players will also be engaged during 
the project –  from the financial services sector, and in key economic sectors such as oil and gas, ports and 
shipping, power generation and energy, tourism, fishing and agriculture. These sectors will be engaged on 
investing in upstream activities generated by the livelihoods activities (e.g. processing aquaculture products) and 
on applying EbA principles in managing their own coastal landholdings, including planning of new infrastructure 
development.  
 
235. In addition, a series of s ite-level engagements was conducted with communities in selected target landscapes 
in each of the three states, to understand better their vulnerabilities to climate change, their adaptive capacity. 
These engagements sought input on the ways in which previ ous project activities had enhanced participants’ 
livelihoods and incomes, and the quality of the natural resource base on which these livelihoods depend. During 
these discussions, local communities expressed the need for adaptation projects that will reduce threats to their 
ecosystems -dependent livelihoods and strengthen their resilience to increasing climate change impacts. 
Particular questions were posed in these discussions about the current and potential involvement of women in 
economic and project act ivities, as well as the role of young people and socially marginalized groups. One 
example is the point made in consultations in Sindudurgh District in Maharashtra that livelihoods opportunities in ecotourism, scuba diving and tour guiding should be made available to women through the project, despite social norms which see these activities as a traditionally male preserve. Useful lessons were learnt from these 
engagements and built into the project design, particularly of Activity 1.2, which takes a co- management 
approach to ecosystem restoration and maintenance, and Activities 2.1 and 2.2 which support climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  and enterprises through technical assistance, and strengthened access to finance and markets.   A 
full list of national, state a nd site -level consultations is included in Section 9.4 of the Feasibility Study (Annex II) . 
 
236. The consultations included a series of workshops during which the proposed project concept was discussed in detail with a range of related government sectors. An initial meeting of a MoEFCC -coordinated technical working 
group was held in Delhi in August 2016, including national and state- level role -players. At this meeting, an 
emphasis was placed on drawing out the lessons learnt and building on the gains made in previous projects. In 
particular, lessons were drawn from three projects in the target states – the UNDP -managed GEF -financed 
projects on “Mainstreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity into Production Sectors” in the East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh (East Coast) and in Sindhudurg Coast of Maharashtra (West Coast), and Phase I of the World Ba nk-supported Integrated Coastal Zone Management project  implemented in several states including 
Odisha (with Phase II planned to take place in several states including Andhra Pradesh). The funding proposal 
was validated by this technical working group in March 2017 with parallel civil society consultations happening 
simultaneously in the three states and results recorded in the minutes of the appraisal meeting (see Annex VII).  
 
237. The process of engagement with community m embers and beneficiaries in the 24 target landscapes (project 
sites), listed below (see maps in Annex IX), will be continued during the first year of implementation if the project is approved. This engagement in the sites will include two key elements: i) undertaking participatory, community -
based land- use planning, based on an analysis of vulnerability to climate change impacts and adaptive capacity, 
to identify and locate site- specific measures for ecosystem conservation and restoration, and explore the 
community’s ongoing role in co- managing these sites; and ii) undertaking participatory livelihoods planning in 
target landscapes and villages – evaluating livelihood options in aquaculture, agriculture and MSMEs through 
development of community -centric, value- chain development strategies, and identifying appropriate sites for 
harvesting, growing, fishing, culturing, storage and processing. This is outlined in the Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan in Annex XIII(e).   
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness


---
*Page 71*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 105 
 
 E 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundne ss of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Economic and financial soundness  
238. The overall economic and financial soundness of this project have been determined through conducting a full 
economic analysis during proposal development, in accordance with the ‘Financial and Economic Analysis of 
Projects’ guidelines of UNDP.  The project yields sustainable development benefits across coastal districts of the 
three target states, with more than 1,744,970 direct beneficiaries in the target landscapes whose households 
are involved in livelihoods activities through the project, and 10 million indirect beneficiaries living in these 
landscapes, who will benefit from the mitigation of economic damages and losses  associated with extreme 
weather events, especial ly storm surges that can cause coastal flooding, erosion and saline intrusion. The 
proposed investment demonstrates a high degree of economic efficiency, with an economic rate of return in 
excess of 16% for livelihood activities, of approximately 26% for paddy rice activities, and well above 25% in 
most coastal protection activities. The project also leverages domestic co- finance ($86. 85 million) and builds 
capacities for sustained impact.  
239. Detailed financial analyses have been conducted for Output 2 (separate analyses for SRI for paddy farming and 
all other climate -adaptive livelihood activities). Activities under Output 1 involve mapping vulnerability, restoring 
coastal ecosystems and monitoring progress in achieving adaptation and mitigation benefits . As such, the output 
promotes the protection and restoration of ecosystems that are public goods, and does not generate revenue or financial return. Output 3 involves knowledge management and interventions to influence public and private sector policies, plans and investment decisions, but again does not involve actual investment of GCF funds or 
co-finance in revenue- generating activities. Hence, financial analysis is not considered pertinent for Outputs 1 
and 3,  given the public good nature of these activities, and the fact that they are not designed to generate 
financial benefits to any of the project stakeholders. Financial analysis for the climate- resilient li veliho ods support 
over a 15- year period results in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) higher than the weighted 
average cost of capital (WACC)/hurdle rate for all three states, for both SRI for paddy farming and for other 
climate -resilient livelihoods enhancement activities proposed under t
his project. Hence, the livelihoods 
investments to be made under Output 2 are computed to be financially viable and sustainable in the long- term.  
240. For Output 2, GCF funding is proposed to cover 52% of costs of implementing SRI for paddy farming 
training/capacity building activities and an average of 45% of costs for all other proposed livelihood enhancement 
activities that can increase the adaptive capacity of farming households, with government co- financing covering 
the remaining costs. GCF funding is proposed to be used judiciously to finance primarily training/capacity building/technical assistance/social mobilization costs, with government co-
financing being used to fund 
installation of livelihood generation assets etc., indicating that this project’s proposed funding structure is planned to include, and not crowd out, public investments.  
 
Cost -effectiveness  
 
241. Cost-effectiveness of the project and its interventions  is promoted at a number of different levels,  through: i) 
adapting protocols for ecological restoration and livelihood development that have been used successfully in 
India’s coastal zone and other coastal environments; ii) engaging local communities in establishing appropriate 
co-management structures for the planning, implementation and long- term maintenance of all interventions; and 
iii) intensive cross -sectoral collaboration between national ministries and state- level departments to ensure that 
all operation and maintenance plans for investments in ecological infrastructure and coastal livelihoods are 
rigorously follow ed in the long- term. Particular means through which cost -effectiveness is enhanced include the 
following:  
 
242. Project design with tested EbA solutions to challenges: The bio- geographical and socio- economic suitability 
of the project activities have been successfully tested in the field, as reflected in Section 2.5 of the Feasibility Study (Annex II). The cost -effectiveness of proposed ecosystem - and community -based ada ptation solutions 
has been tested in a number of projects at varying scales. This includes three recent/current UNDP -managed 
GEF-financed projects  (Sindhudurg, EGREE, Gulf of Mannar ) involving restoration of coastal ecosystems and 
generation of ecosystem -based livelihoods. It also includes experience and lessons learnt from the Asian


---
*Page 72*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 105 
 
 E 
Development Bank -managed Special Climate Change Fund project on “India: Climate Resilient Coastal 
Protection and Management” working in Karnataka and Maharashtra, and the GIZ -funded AdaptCap Project in 
coastal Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The project builds on all these initiatives’ lessons of cost - effectiveness 
and efficiency of delivery. The project will also build synergies with other projects and national and state- level 
schemes and missions working in the same target states and landscapes, to maximize effectiveness and cost -
effectiveness.  
 
243. Building on evidence from cost benefit analysis:  Evidence f rom around the world shows that ecosystem -
based approaches can be cost -effective in helping communities adapt to unavoidable climate change impacts, 
whilst simultaneously delivering multiple social, economic and environmental benefits145. UNDP has conducted 
a series of cost -benefit analyses of EBA interventions in Africa, Asia and Latin America146,147, demonstrating that 
potential EBA interventions compare favourably with business as usual scenarios or other adaptation options. A  
cost-benefit analysis of ecosystem and engineering options for coastal protection was recently undertaken by 
GIZ in Vietnam148, assessing the costs and benefits of coastal reforestation and forest conservation – including 
mangrove rehabilitation –  versus hard infrastructure, namely a concrete dyke upgrade. The results showed that 
the cost of mangrove restoration would amount to an estimated 1.7 million Vietnam dong per capita, whilst a sea 
dyke system would cost approximately 38.8 million dong per capita149. The mangroves provided the same 
protection to the coastline as a concrete dyke upgrade, with reduced vulnerability to extreme weather events 
and flooding from spring tides, and was therefore deemed more cost -effective. The project builds on this body 
of work in designing specific EbA interventions fort effectiveness and cost -effectiveness.  
 
244. Ongoing learning and adaptive management: An efficient knowledge management system will be critical in 
providing the necessary conditions for effective coastal development and planning. This system will collate 
information and lessons learned on coastal planning and climate change from external and local sources while 
also encouraging the generation of new knowledge. Knowledge transfer will occur through exchange platforms 
at the level of communities , states, national and international role- players. An iterative adaptive management 
framework will be applied to the long-term operations and maintenance of all adaptation investments , whereby 
success of interventions is continually assessed and adapted as  challenges arise during implementation, based 
on frequent and long- term monitoring and evaluation of all adaptation interventions, with evaluations to quantify 
the benefits and cost -effectiveness of investments and feed back into the adaptive management f ramework.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments (mitigation only)  
245. Not applicable  
E.6.3. Financial viability   
246. Financial analysis of the proposed SRI for paddy farming activity (under Output 2) over a 15 -year period results 
in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) about ~23.9% for all 3 states, which is higher than the 
WACC/hurdle rate of 6.9%. Hence, investments to be made under SRI for paddy activity are computed to be 
financially viable and sustainabl e in the long- term. FIRR and Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the three 
states are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15 -year)  WACC  
                                                             
145 UNDP. 2015. Making the Case for Ecosystem -based Adaptation: The Global Mountain EbA Programme in Nepal, Peru and Uganda. UNDP, New 
York.  
146 Rossing, T, Chhenjum Sherpa, N & Egan, A (2015). Challenging gender roles and crossing castes: Promoting women’s livelihoods through broom 
grass cultivation in the Nepal Himalaya. UNDP.  
147 UNDP. 2015. Natural Resource Economic Analyses for the Ecosystem Based Adaptation (EbA) Project in Mount Elgon Ecosys tem. Uganda, 
Ministry of Water and Environment.  
148 GIZ. 2013. Saved health, saved wealth: An approach to quantifying the benefits of climate change adaptation: Practical applic ation in 
coastal protection projects in Viet Nam. Available at: 
http://www.perspectives.cc/typo3home/groups/Publications/giz_2013_Saved_health_saved_wealth_-
_an_approach_to_quantifying_the_benefits_of_climate_change_adaptation .pdf .  
149 Asian Development Bank. 2015. Ecosystem -based approaches to climate change challenges in the Greater Mekong Subregion.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 105 
 
 E 
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 975.3 Million  23.89%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 569.2 Million  23.87%  6.9%  
Maharashtra   US$ 23.0 Million  23.86%  6.9%  
 
247. Financial analysis of the proposed 6 livelihood activities (non- SRI) to be funded by GCF and GOI co- finance over 
a 15- year period results in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 21.5% for Andhra Pradesh, 
24.4% for Odisha, and 27.6% for Maharashtra, which are all higher than WACC of 6.9%. Hence, investments to 
be made for the 6 livelihood enhancement activities (non- SRI) are computed to be financially viable and 
sustainable in the long- term. FIRR and Financ ial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the 3 states for livelihoods 
enhancement activities (other than SRI) are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15 -year)  WACC  
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 71.9 Million  21.5%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 28.9 Million  24.4%  6.9%  
Maharashtra  US$ 24.0 Million  27.6%  6.9%  
 
248. Financial analysis of the proposed 9 livelihood activities to be funded by GOI funding only over a 15- year period 
results in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 34.8% for Andhra Pradesh, 15.2% for Odisha, 
and 15.6% for Maharashtra, which are all higher than WACC of 6.9%. Hence, investments to be made for the 9 livelihood enhancement activities funded only by GOI are computed to be financially viable and sustainable in 
the long- term. FIRR and Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the 3 states for the 9 livelihoods enhancement 
activities funded by GOI are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15 -year)  WACC  
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 546.8 Million  34.8%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 91 Million  15.2%  6.9%  
Maharashtra  US$ 151.6 Million  15.6%  6.9%  
 
249. Sensitivity analysis of financial returns computed above was performed primarily to assess the impact of lower 
than assumed revenues or higher than estimated costs. The financial returns are still positive if revenues 
decrease by 10% or costs increase by 10%.  While theoretically, SRI for paddy farming activity and all other 
livelihoods enhancement activities as described above are still financially viable without GCF grants, in practice, 
the training and capacity building part of these activities may not be conducted at all or be conducted at a slow 
pace in the absence of GCF grants, given the budgetary constraints in these states. Hence, GCF grants are proposed to act as catalysts in the implementation of these activities in these states, thereby enhancing the 
climate resilience of these coastal communities sooner.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
250. The design of the proposed GCF project incorporates best practices from international literature on ecosystem - 
and community -based adaptation. The Feasibility Study (Annex II) contains detail on methodologies and 
techniques for the restoration component of  the project, identifying best practices based on experience in South 
Asia and internationally for restoration of mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, saltmarshes, and catchments


---
*Page 74*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 105 
 
 E 
including coastal and dune vegetation. In relation to the implementation of  the project through a community -
based approach, important lessons have been applied from key related initiatives, in particular these four:  
• The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (World Bank, GoI, 2010– 2017, US$ 286 million)  
• The project Conservati on and Management of Coastal Resources as a Potential Adaptation Strategy for 
Sea Level Rise (Adaptation Fund, NABARD, 2015– 2019, US$ 689,264)  
• The project Mainstreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Conservation into Production Sectors in 
Sindhudurg Coas t in Maharashtra (GEF, UNDP, MoEFCC , 2011– 2016, US$ 3,4 million)  
• The project Mainstreaming Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Conservation into Production Sectors in the 
East Godavari River Estuarine Ecosystem (EGREE), Andhra Pradesh (GEF, UNDP, MoEFCC , 2011– 2018, 
US$ 6 million).  
Areas in which best practices have been applied in the project design are as follows:  
Community involvement in managing and restoring ecosystems  
251. A major factor for the success of both conservation and restoration projects is invariably strong community 
involvement and cooperation in planning and carrying out activities on the ground. Sometimes community 
members provide labour for works and monitoring as an in- kind contribution, in cases where there are obvious 
benefits that ac crue to all immediately. Where benefits may accrue over a longer time period, it is often 
appropriate to involve paid labour. In the abovementioned projects this has been achieved effectively through 
the Forest Department in coastal states recruiting and r emunerating local villagers for works conducted in their 
districts. Several projects in various ecosystems and regions of India found that including local villagers –  
especially women – into planning and restoration activities had both financial and ecological benefits. This was 
usually attributed to local knowledge and expertise being incorporated into project implementation from the start. 
To ensure ecological sustainability, it was found that the distinction between resource harvesting and 
conservation n eeded to be clearly explained to local communities from the outset of the project. This distinction 
contributed to reducing conflicts that arose between restoration objectives and community livelihood activities. 
These lessons have been applied in the proj ect design through creating opportunities for participatory, 
community -based land use planning in target landscapes.  
 Effective maintenance after restoration to sustain gains  
252. A recurring theme in successful projects was that careful management of resource extraction enabled 
ecosystems to manage or recover from climate change impacts, and in some cases to maintain their roles as 
effective buffers against extreme events. Where ecosystems had been restored, it was found that skills 
development and dialogue wit h all stakeholders leading to effective management of the restoration sites was 
critical. Fostering relationships based on constructive cooperation between conservation authorities and local 
communities was another requirement for successful restoration. W ith regards to averting human- wildlife 
conflicts at certain project restoration sites, educating local communities on the ecological, social and financial 
benefits of restoration was also found to be helpful. Community management of restored ecosystems was  often 
found to add both social and financial benefits to the project. Working with local communities to manage local 
natural resources and materials in a sustainable manner results in a sense of ownership of the resources, more 
productive work and greater  economic development in the long- term. This type of engagement results in greater 
flexibility in terms of adaptive management during project implementation. These lessons have been applied in 
the project design through including the establishment of co- management structures to continue community 
involvement in ongoing maintenance.  
 
Communities understanding the science  
 
253. In terms of monitoring the biophysical results of project interventions on the ground, providing an enabling 
environment for universities and youth to become actively involved in the monitoring of restoration sites has been proven to be a cost -effective way of conducting monitoring activities in India that also advances knowledge 
generation. The use of sustainable and innovative technologies  can, in particular, assist in the long- term 
monitoring process. This has been applied in the project design through training communities in the target


---
*Page 75*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 105 
 
 E 
landscapes to participate in monitoring coastal ecology and ecosystem health, and also in undertaking ca rbon 
assessments and measuring carbon sequestration. This will involve local youth from all social backgrounds, as 
well as NGOs/CBOs –  including using a mobile phone app to facilitate access to a Decision- Support Tool to be 
developed for adaptation planning. Experience has also shown that awareness of climate change and the associated risks is often limited or non- existent in Indian coastal communities and among local authorities. 
Initiatives that create awareness of alternate livelihood options and ways for coastal communities to adapt current 
livelihoods to increase resilience to climate change through training and demonstrations are most successful. 
Past projects on ecosystem restoration and conservation have shown that efficacy of interventions and a sen se 
of empowerment within the community increases when the local people are aware of how the health of 
surrounding ecosystems is strongly linked to their everyday livelihood activities. The GCF project will advance knowledge in the wider community through t raining courses for CBOs on anticipated climate change impacts on 
livelihoods and adaptation options, as well as public education and awareness programmes.  
 
Working through community -based organizations   
 
254. Initiatives that are implemented through community -based organisations (CBOs) were found to be most effective 
in fostering change at a societal level in India, and maximising participation. This has been done through involving 
organizations such as village self -help groups, producer and fisher organization s in a lead role on activities, 
working together with Panchayat Raj institutions. Community -based tools and intensive community participation 
were invariably necessary for uptake of new livelihoods by communities, and helped facilitate linking ecosystem 
restoration activities with income generation activities. CBOs were found to often promote local custodianship 
through community participation, and to promote mutual sharing of knowledge among the individuals of coastal 
communities. These initiatives also served as a platform for education and training to community members. In 
addition, CBOs often acted as social inclusion catalysts, bringing people of all castes together to discuss the 
development of livelihoods in a constructive manner. Lastly, CBOs promoti ng new livelihoods were often able to 
create women- inclusive environments. These lessons have been applied in the project design in placing CBOs 
at the centre of livelihoods activities, and involving youth form all social backgrounds in new livelihoods opportunities such as training to be tour -guides or scuba- dive leaders.  
 
Skills  development interventions  
 
255. Skills development interventions enable coastal communities to build on their existing livelihood skills and also 
manage coastal ecosystems in a sustainable manner. Such interventions have helped communities to adopt 
alternative livelihoods or take up existing work in a more climate- resilient and productive way. Farmers, fisher  
folk and other marginalized groups in Indian coastal communities have i n particular been found to increase 
income streams and reduce seasonal unemployment as a result of such interventions. To maximize  the benefits 
of the skills development, links to industries are required in order to promote employment of newly trained peop le. 
In the case of livelihood skills involving self -employment, developing access to consumer markets was found to 
be critical for providing technical support and skills development for community members on climate- resilient 
and diversified livelihoods, including agri -/aquacultural extension services, Farmer Field Schools and 
demonstration farms. The project will include targeted skills development programmes for climate -adaptive 
aquaculture, ecotourism and non- timber forest products , as well as for climate -smart intensification and climate-
adapted crops, through relevant community -based organizations (e.g. self -help groups) and local self -
governance institutions (e.g. Gram Panchayats).  
 
Access to enabling finance  
 
256. Past projects have shown that access to mi crofinance and insurance greatly increases the financial security – 
and hence climate resilience –  of coastal communities, particularly women. Links to banks and microfinance 
institutions are frequently successfully established through self -help groups. Such links enable loans to be used 
to develop specific livelihood projects that benefit the community as a whole. Access to finance has consequently enabled many communities to undertake alternate livelihoods or expand upon their existing livelihoods (e.g. 
fishing, crab farming, agriculture and micro- enterprises). These lessons have been applied in the project design 
through providing support to self -help groups, producer and fisher organizations, and local entrepreneurs to 
access greater loans from local coo perative banks and regional rural banks (under licence of government -owned


---
*Page 76*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 105 
 
 E 
commercial banks or state governments), by working to enhance their capacity for business planning, their credit 
record and collateral opportunities. The project may also have spin- offs in matching entrepreneurs, banks, 
buyers and opportunities to establish medium -sized processing facilities for the agricultural and aquacultural 
products supplied by the livelihoods activities. All this work will build on decades of experience and bes t practice 
from India’s well established micro- finance sector.  
 
Ensuring sustainability of aquaculture  
 
257. Past projects involving the establishment and expansion of aquaculture, including mussels, oysters, crabs, and 
multitrophic  ponds have leant important lessons on sustainability. These include the importance of managing 
water quality to avoid eutrophication or pollution, as well as keeping stocks within the carrying capacity of the 
ecosystem. Inappropriate waste disposal practi ces have been shown in past projects to lead to pollution of 
groundwater which negatively affects marine ecosystems as well agricultural production of coastal communities 
in India. Past initiatives have shown that an integrated aquaculture systems approach can also prevent damage 
to surrounding ecosystems150,151. Improved waste management techniques will be used in the GCF project to 
mitigate these effects and where appropriate, integrated duck and fish farms, and multi -trophic ponds will be 
established. Stocki ng of coastal creeks, for example with hatchling crabs, will be carefully planned and monitored 
so as not to exceed ecological carrying capacity, building on local knowledge as well as international best 
practice.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
$9.82152 (contribution of conserved and restored blue carbon and terrestrial ecosystem s to climate 
change mitigation through avoided GHG emissions)  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
n/a 
Other relevant indicator  
  
 
                                                             
150 Troel l M, Kautsky N & Folke  C. 1999. Applicability of integrated coastal aquaculture systems. Ocean and Coastal Management  42:63– 70. 
151 Kumar K & Ayyappan S. 1998. Integrated aquaculture in eastern India, DFID NRSP High Potential Systems. Institute of Aquaculture, 
working paper number 5. Current practices in integrated aquaculture from India. Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research, Odisha, India.  
152 This was calculated by taking into account the total investment in coastal ecosystem restoration (GCF and GOI) through Activity 
1.2 of $36,163,615 ($23,376,593 + $10,238,022 + $2,549,000), and dividing this by the number of t CO2 eq sequestered over a 15-
year period,  i.e. 3,682,980 tonnes.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 105 
 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Economic Analysis  
 
Approach and Methodology  
 
258. The economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program.153 The economic efficiency of the investment was 
determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount rate, and the 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR). For consistency purposes, all proposals developed with the support of 
UNDP have opted to use a 10% discount rate, in line with the existing practice of multilateral development banks.  
  
259. Economic values (costs and benefits) are all measured in real terms of 2017. Economic costs of the project are net of taxes, duties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 for unskilled and semi -skilled labor in India. Provided that the economic cost of labor in India is expected to be lower 
than the market wage rate (financial cost), we expect this assumption leads to significantly over -estimating the 
economic cost of the project, and under -estimating the true net economic value of the project. For example, in a 
recent (2016) cost -benefit analysis of an energy efficiency project in India, the Asian Development Bank used a 
shadow wage rate factor of 0.75 for unskilled labor, reflecting a judgment that the labor component of the project had a lower opportunity cost than is implied by the financial labor cost (as a result of the existence of surplus 
unskilled and semi -skilled labor in India.
154 The above assumption allows the use of financial cost as a measure 
of the economic cost of the project (once again noting that in doing so, the economic cost of the project is over -
estimated, and the net present value of the investment is then under -estimated).  
 
260. As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumptions were used 
to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented and 
discussed below. Assumptions were made so as to under -estimate the true net economic value of the pro posed 
investment project. The analysis period is 25 years. In all cases where assumptions had to be made, we have 
adopted conservative assumptions so as to avoid over -estimating the expected benefits of the project. We thus 
believe that the analysis under -estimated the true economic benefits of the project.  
  
261. For purpose of the economic analysis of the proposed investment project, the project’s components and sub-
components have been grouped into two activities: (1) livelihoods; and (2) coastal protection.   
 
262. The coastal protection activities constitute Output 1 while livelihoods activity constitute Output 2. Output 3 as well 
as “project management cost” are not amenable to the conduct of an economic analysis on their own. However, 
the cost of these two proj ect components, amounting to $33,614,423 cannot be ignored. For purpose of the 
economic analysis, it is assumed that this cost is distributed across Output 1 and Output 2 in proportion of the 
contribution of the cost of Output 1 and Output 2 to total cost.155  
 
Outcome of the Economic Analysis  
 
263. The net present value (NPV) of Output 1 and Output 2 are presented below. The benefits of Output 1 are measured 
as the increased livelihoods generated by the activities of Output 1. The benefits of Output 2 are generated by the 
reduction in lost statistica l lives and damages from the project. It is conservatively assumed that those would be 
                                                             
153 UNDP. 2015. Guidance on the conduct and reporting of the Economic and Financial Analysis of Climate Change 
Adaptation and Mitigation Projects and Programmes . UNDP.  
154 The economic analysis is available at  https://www.adb .org/sites/default/files/linked -documents/48224 -002- ea.pdf . 
The shadow wage rate is presented in paragraph 10 of the document.   
155 It may be remembered that the cost (or a share of the cost) of Output 3 and of the management cost was not 
included in the cos t of Output 2 in the financial analysis. The assumption made here in the economic analysis is not 
inconsistent with the assumption made in the conduct of the financial analysis where the purpose was strictly to 
evaluate the direct incremental net revenues of the various livelihood activities.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 105 
 
 F 
reduced by 5% to 20%. Note that the results in Maharashtra are slightly less favorable as a result of a much lower 
incidence of damaging extreme weather events in Maharashtra than in Andhra Pradesh and Odisha.  
NPV and IRR of Output 2  
 
Sub-output  State  NPV IRR 
Livelihood Activities  Andhra Pradesh  66,363,881  20.0 
Maharashtra  22,270,227  24.3 
Odisha  27,160,522  22.4 
Paddy Rice  Andhra Pradesh  1,118,903,068  26.4 
Maharashtra  25,541,680  24.9 
Odisha  654,496,869  26.4 
    
NPV and IRR of Output 1  
 
State  Scenario  NPV ($)  IRR (%)  
Andhra Pradesh  If 10% reduction  55,970,363  28.1 
If 20% reduction  131,962,731  40.8 
If 30% reduction  207,955,099  49.3 
Maharashtra  If 10% reduction  (14,458,290)  1.8 
If 20% reduction  (3,791,224)  8.3 
If 30% reduction  6,875,842  12.7 
Odisha  If 10% reduction  55,274,922  27.1 
If 20% reduction  129,969,681  38.5 
If 30% reduction  204,664,441  46.1 
 
264. Sensitivity analyses showed the economic efficiency of the project to be robust to increase in costs or decrease 
in benefits.  
 
Financial analysis  
 
265. Financial analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the ‘Financial and Economic 
Analysis of Projects’ guidelines of UNDP. Detailed financial analyses have been conducted for Output 2 
(separate analyses for SRI for paddy farming and all other climate- adaptive livelihood activities). Activities 
under Output 1 involve mapping vulnerability, restoring coastal ecosystems and monitoring progress . As such, 
the output promotes the protection and restoration of ecosystems that are public go ods, and does not generate 
revenue or financial return. Output 3 involves knowledge management and interventions to influence public and private sector policies, plans and investment decisions, but again does not involve actual investment of 
GCF funds or c o-finance in revenue- generating activities. Hence, financial analysis is not considered pertinent 
for Outputs 1 and 3, given the public good nature of these activities, and the fact that they are not designed to 
generate financial benefits to any of the pr oject stakeholders.  
 
266. Output 2 proposes to implement livelihood enhancement activities in 24 target landscapes in 12 coastal districts 
in the three target states – Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Maharashtra.  The various climate- resilient livelihood 
activities planned include the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) for paddy farming, crab farming, mussel 
farming, oyster farming, crab hatcheries, ornamental fisheries, integrated duck -fish farming, seaweed farmi ng, 
honey production, mushroom cultivation, cultivation of aromatic and medicinal plants, MSMEs for value- added 
fish products (e.g. fish cutlets, fish pickle, canned mussels ), fishmeal p lants, fish processing units, scuba diving, 
and tour guiding. Financia l analysis is conducted for these livelihoods enhancement activities.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 105 
 
 F 
 
267. Financial analysis of livelihoods enhancement activities is conducted in three parts –  financial analysis of SRI for 
paddy in one part, and financial analysis of the other 6 climate- resilient livelihood enhancement activities 
proposed to be funded by GCF and GOI co- finance together in another part, and financial analysis of the 9 
livelihood enhancement activities proposed to be funded by GOI funding only in another part, as described below. 
This is because SRI for paddy activity is primarily a technical ass istance/capacity building activity without any 
capital costs involved; whereas all the other livelihood enhancement activities involve capital investments into 
livelihood - enhancing physical assets, such as cages for crab hatcheries, as well as capacity building/social 
mobilization costs.  
 
268. Financial Analysis of SRI for Paddy Activity: The System of Rice Intensification (SRI) for paddy farming is a 
methodology of paddy farming that can increase the yield of rice produced per acre of farm, despite increased 
temperatures and more erratic monsoons, through more efficient use of inputs and new growing techniques. 
Implementation of SRI for paddy farming essentially involves training and capacity building of farmers in SRI 
techniques. Details on input data, estimat ion and assumptions that have been used for financial analysis of SRI 
for paddy farming activity are available in the Financial Analysis Annex XII (b).  
 
269. Financial analysis of the proposed SRI for paddy farming activity (under Output 2) over a 15- year period results 
in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) about ~23.9% for all 3 states, which is higher than the 
WACC/hurdle rate of 6.9%. Hence, investments to be made under SRI for paddy activity are computed to be 
financially viable and sustainable in the long- term. FIRR and Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the three 
states are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15 -year)  WACC  
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 975.3 Million  23.89%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 569.2 Million  23.87%  6.9%  
Maharashtra   US$ 23.0 Million  23.86%  6.9%  
 
 Financial Analysis of Other Six non -SRI Livelihood Enhancement Activities proposed to be funded by a 
combination of GCF and GOI funding: Apart from SRI for paddy farming, 6 other climate- resilient livelihood 
enhancement activities are planned to be implemented as part of this proposed project. These activities fall into two 
categories:  
A. Livelihoods that are based on coastal ecosystems r estored to buffer climate impacts, including those that:  
• take place in creeks and ponds in the intertidal zone (e.g. crab farming) and benefit from EbA measures to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems for their disaster buffering benefits  
• provide for value addition to fishing and aquaculture products (e.g. fish processing) that benefit from EbA 
measures to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems, helping to sustain these livelihoods over time, 
alongside evolving climate risks.  
• take place close to the int ertidal zone (e.g. ecotourism) and benefit from the scenic beauty derived from EbA 
measures to conserve, restore and manage ecosystems, especially coral reefs in the case of scuba diving.  
• take place in and near mangroves (e.g. mangrove beekeeping), which benefit from EbA measures to 
conserve, restore and manage ecosystems.  
 
B. Livelihoods that are adapted to specific climate change impacts on agro- ecosystems, including those that:  
• form par t of a strategy to promote climate- resilient agro -ecosystems (e.g the System of Rice Intensification), 
that manage soil and water resources better to withstand erratic monsoons  with longer dry spells


---
*Page 80*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 105 
 
 F 
• form part of a strategy to promote climate -resilient agro-ecosystems through changing cropping patterns 
cultivating new crops that use less water and/or  can tolerate increased temperatures (e.g. aromatic plants) . 
 
270. These activities all involve making some investments into developing/building physical assets, as well training 
and capacity building, and hence, a single financial analysis is conducted for all these activities together. It is 
important to note that GCF grants are proposed to be used mainly for training/technical assistance/capacity 
building/social  mobilization costs of these activities, which amount to an average of 45% of the total costs, and 
the remaining costs, which include costs of developing/building physical assets that can enhance livelihoods and 
income generation, are proposed to be financ ed by co -financing through a range of budgets, schemes and 
missions at State level, as outlined in the co- finance letters from the Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha 
and Maharashtra. Details on input data, estimation and assumptions that have been used for financial analysis 
of these other livelihood enhancement activities are available in the Financial Analysis Annex XII (b).  
 
271. Financial analysis of the proposed 6 livelihood activities (non- SRI) to be funded by GCF and GOI co- finance over 
a 15- year period results in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 21.5% for Andhra Pradesh, 
24.4% for Odisha, and 27.6% for Maharashtra, which are all higher than WACC of 6.9%. Hence, investments to 
be made for the 6 livelihood enhancement activities (non -SRI) are computed to be financially viable and 
sustainable in the long- term. FIRR and Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the 3 states for livelihoods 
enhancement activities (other than SRI) are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15-year)  WACC  
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 71.9 Million  21.5%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 28.9 Million  24.4%  6.9%  
Maharashtra  US$ 24.0 Million  27.6%  6.9%  
 
272. Sensitivity analysis of financial returns computed above was performed primarily to assess the impact of lower than assumed revenues or higher than estimated costs. The financial returns are still positive if revenues 
decrease by 10% or costs increase by 10%.  While theoretically, SRI for paddy farming activity and all other 
climate -resilient livelihoods enhancement acti vities as described above are still financially viable without GCF 
grants, in practice, the training and capacity building part of these activities might not be conducted at all or might 
be conducted at a slow pace in the absence of GCF grants, given the budgetary constraints in these states. 
Hence, GCF grants are proposed to act as catalysts in the implementation of these activities in these states, 
thereby enhancing the climate resilience of these coastal communities sooner.  
 
273. Financial Analysis of the Nin e Livelihood Enhancement Activities proposed to be funded only by a GOI 
funding: In addition to the 7 livelihood enhancement activities described in the previous sections, nine other 
livelihood enhancement activities are planned to be implemented under thi s program with GOI funding only, and 
these are: integrated duck -fish farming, honey production, mushroom cultivation, cultivation of aromatic and 
medicinal plants, fish value added products MSME, fish smoking processing unit, fishmeal plants, scuba diving,  
and tourist guide. These activities involve making investments into developing/building physical assets, as well 
training and capacity building, and hence, a single financial analysis is conducted for all these activities together. 
It is important to note that GOI financing is proposed to be used for both training/technical assistance/capacity 
building/social mobilization costs of these activities, and the costs of developing/building physical assets that can enhance livelihoods and income generation.  
 
274. Financial analysis of the proposed 9 livelihood activities to be funded by GOI funding only over a 15- year period 
results in a positive Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 34.8% for Andhra Pradesh, 15.2% for Odisha, 
and 15.6% for Maharashtra, which ar e all higher than WACC of 6.9%. Hence, investments to be made for the 9 
livelihood enhancement activities funded only by GOI are computed to be financially viable and sustainable in


---
*Page 81*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 105 
 
 F 
the long -term. FIRR and Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) for the 3 state s for the 9 livelihoods enhancement 
activities funded by GOI are as shown in the table below.  
State  FNPV (15 -year)  FIRR (15 -year)  WACC  
Andhra Pradesh  US$ 546.8 Million  34.8%  6.9%  
Odisha  US$ 91 Million  15.2%  6.9%  
Maharashtra  US$ 151.6 Million  15.6%  6.9%  
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
275. This project will support implementation of ecosystem - and community -based adaptation interventions to 
enhance climate resilience and protect lives and livelihoods from the impacts of current and future climate 
changes in coastal areas of India. The approaches that will be followed have been tailored to the local environmental and socio- economic contexts of the target states, after careful consideration of the climate 
vulnerabilities and adaptation priorities of the targeted beneficiaries. In doing this, the project draws from national 
and global best practices on EbA, climate -adaptive livelihoods  and capacity building for planning adaptation 
interventions.  
 
276. The EbA approaches to be implemented have been identified based on their potential for addressing cur rent and 
predicted climate change threats for coastal India, as demonstrated through lessons learned on coastal EbA from 
around the world. Restoration of all ecosystems will be underpinned by a thorough understanding of the ecology 
of each site as well as the climate and non- climate drivers that are undermining their capacity for provision of 
climate -resilient ecosystem goods and services. The specific restoration interventions are described below (with 
further details in Section 7 of the Feasibility Study in Annex II).  
• Mangrove restoration . Restoration and conservation of 10, 575  ha of mangroves will be undertaken in all 
three target states (4,750 ha in Andhra Pradesh; 3,350 ha in Maharashtra; 2,475 ha in Odisha). This restoration 
will use a number of complementary techniques, including: i) restoration of hydrological functioning from upper catchment areas as well as tidal inflow; ii) construction of fishbone and feeder channels; iii) planting of 
mangrove propagules  in degraded areas; iv) enforcement of restrictions on resource extraction; v) protecting 
vulnerable mangrove areas to allow recovery; vi) regulating outputs from aquaculture and agriculture to improve 
water quality and ensure ecosystem health; and vii) co nstruction of permeable dams.  
• Coral reef restoration . Restoration of 35 ha of coral reefs will be undertaken in Maharashtra. This restoration 
will use two techniques, viz . coral gardening and artificial reef creation  through structure placement . These are 
simple, low -technology approaches that have been shown to be extremely cost -effective for growing large 
colonies of corals within a short period of time.  
• Seagrass restoration . Restoration of 85 ha of seagrasses will be undertaken in Odisha. On- site seed p lanting 
will be used for this restoration, as it has been demonstrated internationally as being the most effective 
technique with low environmental impacts and medium to low costs. This involves i) seeding; and ii) 
transplanting seedlings or mature plants from donor sites. In India, seagrass (impacted by bottom trawling) has 
been successfully rehabilitated along the Tuticorin coast (State of Tamil Nadu) and showed a survival rate of 
between 85– 90%, and this specific experience will be built upon.  
• Saltmarsh  restoration . A total of 700 ha of saltmarshes will be restored across the three target states (200 ha 
in Andhra Pradesh; 500 ha in Odisha). The approaches used will follow global best practices for saltmarsh 
restoration, such as: i ) restoration of tidal flushing regimes; ii) removal of sediment from the saltmarsh area; iii) 
planting of saltmarsh species such as Salicornia spp. and Spartina spp.; and iv)  removal of invasive species.  
• Watershed restoration . Watershed restoration and conservation will be undertaken in a total of 3,550 ha 
across all three target states ( 2650 ha in Andhra Pradesh; 4 00 ha in Maharashtra; 500 ha in Odisha). A number 
of  complementary approaches will be used, based on the localized environmental and socio- economic context 
of each site. These techniques will include: i) soil conservation through control of gullies and other badly eroded 
areas; ii) reforestation through planting of tree and shrub species; iii) restoration of hydrological functioning, 
including b reaching of silted estuaries and enhancing natural recharge of soil water and aquifers, iv)


---
*Page 82*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 105 
 
 F 
rehabilitation of wetlands, ponds and wet meadows ; v) improved cultivation and agricultural techniques; vi) 
planting of shelterbelts and coastal dune vegetation; and vii) improved planning, management and conservation 
of degraded areas. Restoration will aim to retain water in the catchment, stabilise soi ls, reduce sedimentation, 
maximise infiltration, recharge aquifers, reduce surges and reduce amplitude of river hydrographs156. 
 
277. Undertaking restoration interventions as described above, through Activity 1.2 of the project, will result in 
numerous adaptation benefits. Examples of such benefits include: i) attenuation of wave energy during storm 
surges, reducing both the risk and the impact of coastal flooding; ii) reducing rates of coastline erosion; iii) creating 
habitat for natural resource -based livelihoods157; iv) provision of timber, non- timber forest products158 and other 
ecosystem goods that underpin rural livelihoods; v) improved  hydrological functioning such as increased 
rainwater infiltration, greater aquifer recharge and reduced flooding; and vi) water purification and enhanced 
water supply. Specific indicators for the achievement of these benefits will be developed for each target landscape 
through coordination structures involving all stakeholders, and community members will be trained to work with 
scientists in regular monitoring of these indicators, in order to track progress towards the achievement of the 
project’s adaptati on outcomes. The reduction in losses and damages from climate- induced hazards as well as 
the increased provision of ecosystem goods that support local livelihoods will result in enhanced climate resilience 
of coastal communities. The approaches proposed he re have been derived from global best practices, as well 
as lessons learned from similar initiatives in India.  
 
278. The livelihoods to be supported by the project were identified based on their potential for enhancing the climate resilience of coastal communit ies – both through harnessing the income- generation potential of r estored coastal 
ecosystems and through adapting prac tices to climate change impacts . During preparation of this proposal, a 
livelihoods assessment was undertaken in the targeted states to as certain which options are most suitable to the 
local social, economic and environmental conditions and have viable market opportunities. Moreover, livelihoods were selected that: i)  add value to existing livelihood strategies (e.g. fish value- added product s); ii) have low 
technology requirements and can be sourced from local materials (e.g. oyster farming); iii) are based around habitats restored under Output 1 and incentivise conservation thereof (e.g. mangrove crab farming); iv) offer 
opportunities for intensification of current livelihoods (e.g. integrated duck -fish farming); and v) comprise adapting 
existing livelihood strategies to climate change impacts (e.g. SRI for paddy). Detailed descriptions of these 
livelihoods are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex II).  
 
279. GCF resources and co- finance will be used to establish an online Decision- Support Tool for  monitoring coastal 
adaptation,  with an associated app and web portal. This tool will be dynamic, with data from relevant assessments 
(e.g. forest and ecosystem surveys, analyses of restoration progress and associated carbon benefits ) being 
uploaded and available immediately for access to “live” information. Uploads will be able to be made through the online platform, as well as through the smartphone app to be developed through the project. The data and 
information to be uploaded will include parameters such as: i) location (latitude and longitude/GPS coordinates); 
ii) ecosystem type; iii) plant species; iv) size of individual plants (e.g. diameter at breast height); v) extent of ecosystem coverage; and vi) observed threats and degradation. The online platform and app will allow a broad 
range of stakeholders –  including technical government officers, community members, NGOs/CBOs, academic 
institutions, s cientists, etc. –  to participate in monitoring of ecosystems . In addition, these and other stakeholders 
– e.g. government policy - and decision- makers, private sector agents –  will have access to detailed, up- to-date 
information on the health of coastal ecosystems to inform decision- making and planning for climate- resilient 
development at all levels and within both the public and private sectors.  
 
280. An additional example of innovative technology to be used in the project is the application of the Coastal 
Calculator tool for each of the three target states to guide design of climate- resilient infrastructure. The use of 
such a tool was demonstrated in t he Cook Islands, where the outputs were used to design a climate- resilient 
harbour for the island of Mangaia. This tool takes into account aspects such as beach profile, intensity and 
frequency of storms, presence of coral reefs and their characteristics, and the local bathymetry to identify 
                                                             
156 Powell, M.P and Jones, L. Catchment Restoration and Sustainable Urban Water Management: A New Paradigm  
157 E.g. crab farming, oyster and mussel aquaculture.  
158 E.g. honey, medicinal plants.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 105 
 
 F 
appropriate placing and design of coastal infrastructure to ensure its resilience to the localised impacts of climate 
change. Use of the Coastal Calculator will enable engineers and planners within the public and privat e sectors 
to develop appropriate designs for shoreline protection and other coastal infrastructure that include 
considerations of climate change and resilience. Such a design process would enable an optimal combination -  
for each particular situation - of “hard” engineered solutions such as building seawalls, “soft” engineered solutions 
such as installing geotubes; semi -natural solutions such as planting of shelter belts, and natural solutions such 
as maintaining mangroves.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Asses sment, including Gender Considerations  
281. A Social and Environmental Screening assessment was undertaken to identify and address any potential 
social and environmental risks that could arise from project activities. Based on the findings of this 
assessment, an Environmental and Social Management Framework was developed for the project (see 
Annex VI).  
 
Environment 
 
282. The project is likely to have some short -term, small -scale environmental impacts during implementation, but will 
ultimately have considerable, long- term environmental benefits (See Section E.3.1). Under Output 1, project 
activities include restoration and conservation of coastal ecosystems using an EbA approach. This will lead to 
improved ecosystem functioning that will yield environmental and social benefits in the short, medium and long term. Examples of such benefits include improved hydrology, biodivers ity conservation and enhanced provision 
of ecosystem goods and services, including disaster buffering. This will in turn lead to enhanced climate resilience 
in coastal areas through maintaining such ecosystem goods and services in the face of climate change in coastal 
areas.  
 
283. Project activities will involve preparation of sites for ecosystem restoration, including: i) digging of channels in mangrove areas; ii) collection of planting materials such as propagules; iii) reforestation; iv) construction of small -
scale rural infrastructure such as check dams and contour bunds; and v) transplanting of corals. All efforts will be 
undertaken to reduce the environmental impacts of such work, e.g. work will be undertaken during the dry season 
and in such a way as to reduce erosion. In addition, site- specific planning will be undertaken prior to 
implementation to ensure that any potential negative environmental consequences are identified and appropriate 
measures undertaken to prevent such impacts as far as possible.  
 
284. The promotion of diversified and climate -adaptive livelihoods  may also potentially lead to negative environmental 
impacts. However, these have been designed to limit such impacts to a minimum. Specific design issues taken into consideration include the follo wing:  
• SRI for Paddy . This system requires less water and fewer potentially harmful inputs (e.g. pesticides and fertilisers) 
while still providing increased production capacity. There will therefore be lower environmental damage than 
existing rice cultivation practices , including downstream impacts on water quality in creeks where aquaculture is 
practic ed. Moreover, existing paddies will be used as opposed to clearing of new areas for additional cultivation. 
This activity is thus likely to produce little or no negative environmental impacts.  
• Mud Crab Farming . Mud crabs are farmed in existing mangrove areas.  While environmental disruption may occur 
at a very small small -scale (smaller than 1 hectare) for each farm, this disruption is minimal and limited to 
construction of fencing around the specific area. This fencing is fully permeable, allowing flow of water and sediments as well as movement of micro- fauna. This activity is thus likely to produce minimal environmental 
impacts.  
• Oyster and Mussel Farming . Oysters and mussels are farmed on small structures constructed within estuaries 
along the coast. These str uctures are built from locally sourced materials such as wooden poles, and do not 
interfere with water flow. Moreover, there are no additional inputs. Increase of farming will take ecological carrying 
capacity into account. Consequently, this activity will  have no significant environmental impacts.  
• Integrated Duck -Fish Farming . This involves integrated duck farming into extant aquaculture. This is unlikely to 
have any environmental impacts, as there will not be construction of new ponds. In addition, integr ated duck -fish


---
*Page 84*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 105 
 
 F 
farming results in negligible waste production, while at the same time increasing biological diversity and productivity 
of aquaculture ponds.  
• Seaweed Farming . Cultivation of seaweed requires no input of fertilisers, and no physical alteratio ns of the 
environment, and reduces eutrophication and pollution. Seaweed is cultivated on bamboo rafts, with no negative 
environmental impact, and the potential for a positive impact as described.  
• Mushroom Cultivation . Mushrooms are cultivated on compost t hat is created from agricultural residue. Such 
residues are generally burnt, and mushroom cultivation thus provides an opportunity to reduce burning and the resultant carbon emissions and particulate pollution. No negative environmental impacts are anticip ated from this 
activity.  
• Cultivation of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants . The cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants largely involves 
diversification of existing agriculture such as cereals and pulses. These plants can also be grown in marginal or degra ded lands, as they are tolerant to drought, brackish and waterlogged areas. Moreover, they have little 
requirement for fertilisers, pesticides or conventional tillage practices. Therefore, cultivation of medicinal and 
aromatic plants have negligible enviro nmental impacts, and is often less detrimental than conventional agriculture.  
• Fish Value Added Products . Value addition for fish involves processes such as pickling, mincing, battering and 
breading. This process is energy -efficient, and can been powered by  renewable energy. Also, there is no major 
pollution effluent, as water is only used for washing and can thus be diverted into normal treatment facilities. Therefore, there are limited environmental impacts expected from this activity.  
 
285. Furthermore, the project makes provision for a complaint’s register along with a two- tiered Grievance Redress 
Mechanism consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and 
World Bank Group Safeguards Policies.   The G rievance Redress Mechanism has further been designed in 
consideration of the specific local context and draws on existing processes and procedures for the resolution of 
complaints and grievances in India.   The Grievance Redress Mechanism established goals and objectives along 
with eligibility requirements to make a complaint and/or grievance.   It has been designed that all parties will act 
in good faith throughout the process and more importantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve 
mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties.   The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering 
of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so as individuals and/or groups are not disadvantaged by bring 
complaints to the attention of MOE FCC and UNDP.   Finally, the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows 
individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the Social and Environmental Compliance Unit within the 
Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP should they have any concerns as to corruption, unethical behaviour or where they believe their complaint or grievance has not been adequately addressed.  
286. An independent specialist study conducted in response to iTAP review, attached as Annex XIII o, reviewed the potential environmental risks associated with the planned climate- adaptive aquaculture activities, and concluded 
the following:  
• Out of the four small -scale coastal aquaculture activities, ornamental fish culture is an activity which is carried 
out in confined aquaculture system and using hatchery reared seeds. Hence, the aquaculture system has no negative impact on the external environment.  
• Pen-culture of crabs being a mangrove conservation programme; a low impact sustainable aquaculture 
system (LISA) and not dependent on wild seed for stocking, is truly sustainable. The proposed hatchery 
development programme in all the three states would help expansion of the activity, resulting in reduction of 
pressure on wild stock for harvest.  
• The oyster farming activity is least demanding in terms of natural resource use for their sustenance and seed 
requirement, since seeds are plentiful in nature and utilizing the resource which otherwise would have 
perished in the absence of surface to settle and grow. T he oysters being filter feeders survive on the 
planktonic organisms and organic matter in the water and are hence least polluting.  
• The Mussel culture is also a LISA system, like oysters, the only difference being the need to supply mussel 
seeds for stocking in areas where seeds do not occur naturally. To make it sustainable, the activity is being 
planned initially within the limits of natural seed resource, in areas where seed occurs, and later through 
hatchery -produced seeds in other areas . New bivalve hat cheries are being planned to meet the seed 
requirements of oysters and mussels.


---
*Page 85*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 105 
 
 F 
• The development in respect of the three aquaculture activities viz. crab farming, oyster farming and mussel 
farming need to be carried out following the principles of carrying capacity assessment and waste mitigation. 
As such the coastal aquaculture at present in the country is carried out following the guidelines of the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority, which regulates setting up of shrimp/fish farms in the supra -tidal areas, beyo nd 200 
meters from the high tide level (HTL), based on the carrying capacity assessment and their operations through a set of norms limiting production, input use, waste mitigation, post -harvest management and 
disease control etc. Similar guidelines in res pect of the intertidal areas need to be formulated for regulating 
the proposed aquaculture activities. The State of Maharashtra has already taken initiative in this direction and 
formulated a Guideline for Carrying Capacity Assessment of Sustainable, Small -scale Aquaculture Activities. 
Such regulations, once in place in the other target states, will render such small scale coastal aquaculture practices truly sustainable.  
• Recognising the growing need of the sector across India, the National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017, has 
made suitable provisions for the mariculture sector , including, inter alia, the setting up of hatcheries for supply 
of seed for development of the sector, capacity building of fisher communities, and procedures to monitor environmental and social impacts. This national policy also governs wild harvesting of marine resources, 
applying Government’s commitment to the FAO Code of Conduct for responsible fishing, as well as the 
principle of community co- management for fisheries management, as proposed in the project.  
Social  
287. Project interventions will be undertaken in coastal areas of India where communities are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. These communities are largely rural and often have constrained or marginal 
livelihood opportunities. The project will provide two main benefits that will improve the climate resilience of these 
communities. Firstly, project activities will restore and conserve coastal ecosystems using an EbA approach to 
provide an enhanced supply of ecosystem goods and services. These ecosystems will provide adaptation 
benefits to local communities such as buffering against the impacts of climate change including storm surges and sea-level rise. This will lead to social benefits such as reduced loss of lives and reduced damages to infrastructure 
and productive assets during extreme weather events. Secondly, the project will promote diversified and climate -
adaptive livelihood options for coastal communities. These activities will have considerable social benefits for 
local communities, primarily enhanced climate resilience through increased adaptive capacity of livelihoods as well as increased household income. This improved household- level income will in turn promote savings and 
catalyse households investing into activities that result in improved resilience to climate change impacts in the short -, medium - and long- term. For example, households involved in value- addition activities will receive a greater 
share of the profits on those products. Incr eased income will allow households to invest earnings into productive 
assets. Greater income will allow households to adapt to and recover from climate- induced hazards, as well as 
invest in improved healthcare, education, nutrition and other development outcomes.  
 Gender


---
*Page 86*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 105 
 
 F 
288. The project was designed in consultation with women’s organizations  – particularly women’s self -help groups  
(SHGs) – in community -level consultations. The resultant design has considerable focus on ensuring that women 
are integrally involved in project implementation and are beneficiaries of on- the-ground activities , including 
specific opportunities for women’s SHGs. Project interventions are thus gender -sensitive and will target women, 
in order  to address their disproportionately lar ge vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. In particular, rural 
women will receive support for livelihood di versification activities for enhanced adaptive capacity to climate 
change, and will form at least 60% of the beneficiaries of livelihoods interventions. Particular livelihood 
interventions will be discussed within community structures, being sensitive to societal norms around men’s and 
women’s labour, whilst encouraging women’s involvement in the full range of activities, building on India’s 
commitments to gender justice and equality. At least 1,300,000 women in the target states will benefit from 
enhanced and climate -adaptive livelihood opportunities.  
 
289. Women in rural areas of India are at considerable risk to poverty owing to low incomes and l imited participation 
in the labour force. The project will enhance the adaptive capacities of such women through increased income 
security and as well as diversified livelihoods opportunities. Under Output 2, the project will support women in agricultural production as well as value- addition to primary production. The interventions have been designed to 
be culturally and socially acceptable to women, and the project will target women- headed households to increase 
their incomes and reduce their vulnerability  to climate change. Women and women’s groups will be actively 
engaged by project facilitators –  both to take advantage of livelihood opportunities and to strengthen their capacity 
to participate confidently in community and project structures. A key benefit of the project for women is increased 
income, which will in turn lead to improved health, education and well -being, as women will be more able to 
address household needs. Women will also be more involved in community planning and decision- making. A  
detailed Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan is provided in Annex XII(c).
 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement


---
*Page 87*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 105 
 
 F 
290. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial r ules and regulations 
available here. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP POPP 
available  here UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and 
Procurement’ s ection of UNDP’s POPP. The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across 
each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here: 
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit  
 
291. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following these guidelines  
here. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of 
capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach 
to Cash Transfers - HACT ). All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted 
above and applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
 
292. The NIM guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP  Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) . The NIM guidelines were corporately developed and adopted 
by UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
 
293. The national  executing entity  MoEFCC  (also re ferred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology), is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM guidelines). In legal terms, this is ensured through the n ational government’s 
signature of the Agreement concerning Technical Assistance between UN organizations and the Government of 
India (signed by both Parties on 14 February  1952)  and the Agreement between UN Special Fund and the GOI 
concerning Assistance from the Special Fund (signed on 20 October 1959) , together with a UNDP project 
document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. Bot h of these 
documents require compliance.   Prior to signature of the project document, MoEFCC as the national 
Implementing Partner, needs to have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment 
by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the project. During implementation,  UNDP will provide oversight and 
quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF . This may include, 
but is not limited to,  monitoring missions, spot checks,  facilitation  and participation in project steering committee  
meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at implementing 
partner  level on the resources received from UNDP.  
 
294. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer ( HACT) framework consists of four processes, namely: i) macro 
assessments; ii) micro assessments; iii) cash transfers and disbursements; and iv) assurance activities. 
Assurance activities include planning, periodic on- site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, 
scheduled audits and special audits. During micro- assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions 
are required to addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that 
the level of assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing 
partner will have to be reviewed if necessary.  All details are available here:  
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=167&Menu=BusinessUnit . 
 
295. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies,  UNDP will be 
appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP 
assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled 
audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the 
appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or 
an internal control audit.   
 
296. All GCF resources will be provided to the executing entity, less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under UNDP’s 
national  implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the executing entity for the 
implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP standard policies and


---
*Page 88*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 105 
 
 F 
the NIM Guidelines. The executing entity reports back expenditure via a financial report on quarte rly basis to 
UNDP. Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA.  
 
297. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) 
is provided in Annex XIII (a).


---
*Page 89*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  86  OF 105 
 
 G 
 
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
298. This proposal builds on the successes of existing initiatives along India’s coast that promote climate change 
adaptation and/or ecosystem protection and restoration (particularly the UNDP Sindhudurg and EGREE projects) 
and draws strongl y from the lessons learned through such initiatives. The project has been designed to address 
as many potential risks as possible upfront through the project structure itself, building on the lessons learned. 
Potential risks associated with project implementation are also mitigated through the executing agency’s well 
established relationship with the executing entity, and the due diligence already carried out, ensuring sound 
financial and programme monitoring systems as well as strong technical oversight. T he overall risks for the project 
are consequently considered to be low to moderate. The remaining risks and associated mitigation measures are 
detailed in Section G.2.  
 
299. The main risks to project implementation are technical, operational, institutional, soc ial and environmental. 
Risks related to technical and operational aspects of the project may affect the success of the ecosystem 
restoration and livelihood support activities. Technical risks could also result in poor design or application of 
tools and met hodologies such as the vulnerability assessment methodology, Decision- Support Tool, and 
Coastal Calculator. Institutional risks such as limited coordination among project stakeholders and weak political support for the project may result in inefficient del ivery of project outputs and thus reduced impact 
of project interventions. Social risks include poor sensitization – and involvement –  
of participating 
communities, leading to weak buy -in and limited engagement of the communities. This would in turn affect  
the long- term sustainability and viability of project interventions. Environmental risks such as extreme climate 
events could result in losses and damages caused to project interventions, reducing their efficacy and 
success.  
 
300. Several mitigation measures have been designed to address these risks. The project will invest in community mobilization as well as capacity building for communities and officials to promote engagement and 
appropriate refinement of project interventions during the implementation phase. Project activities will be 
undertaken in close collaboration with local communities through co- management structures that include clear 
roles and responsibilities for government, communities and other partners. Site- specific protocols will be developed 
for EbA interventions that take into account local socio- economic and environmental conditions, with due 
consideration of social, environmental and other site- specific risks. Coordination between various stakeholders will 
be fac ilitated through the project management structure (see Section C.7) as well as through the coordination 
mechanisms established under Output  3.  
 
301. Inclusive and participatory planning processes – initiated during the development of this project proposal –  will 
continue throughout the implementation phase to promote ownership and buy -in from communities and 
government officials. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (see Annex VI(b)) has been 
developed to specifically address environmental and social risks that may arise during project 
implementation.  
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Limited capacity of government officers and 
community members (including self -help groups, Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium


---
*Page 90*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  87  OF 105 
 
 G 
CBOs, etc.) to plan and implement restoration and 
livelihood support interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will ensure strong engagement and mobilization of local -level government and community members 
to ensure their participation in project activities. Awareness raising and technical capacity building for both 
officials and communities will be undertaken to ensure that design and implementation of project interventions are based on sound understanding of climate risks and adaptation measures. All planning will be fully 
participatory, involving members of various vulnerable segments of the target communities (e.g. women, youth, 
socially marginalized) in prioritization of project interventions given their particular vulnerabilities to climate change.  This mitigation measure is expected to adjust the risk level to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Limited coordination between government 
ministries, UNDP, communities, NGOs/CBOs, 
private sector and other stakeholders reduces the 
efficiency and effectiveness of implementation of 
project interventions.  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Strong institutional and implementation arrangements for the project’s management framework will ensure effective 
coordination and collaboration between project partners. Project management units at the national level as well as in 
each target state will facilitate constant dialogue between project partners and stakeholders. This will be 
complemented by UNDP’s role as executing agency responsible for project oversight. In addition, co- management 
structures will promote coordination and collaboration between government officials and local communities for on- the-
ground activities. The project will also build institutional capacities for coordination between various stakeholders. In particular, this will be achieved through cross- sectoral coordination structures to be established under Output  3. 
Moreover, project activities focus specifically on building capacities in various institutions for adoption of integrated 
and cross -sectoral approaches to adaptation planning at the national and sub- national levels. This mitigation measure 
is expected to adjust the risk level to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Extreme weather events impact restoration and 
livelihoods activities, either preventing their 
implementation or reducing their efficacy.  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Restoration interventions will be planned and implemented based on site- specific implementation protocols to be 
developed under the project. These protocols will take into account the local environmental conditions – including 
frequency, severity and type of climate- induced hazards – and explicitly outline lowest risk options for implementation. 
Identification of localized sites for restoration (which was initiated during the development of this project proposal) will 
be further refined during implementatio n, taking into account factors such as exposure and sensitivity to climate-
induced hazards (see Activity 1.1). Protocols will be regularly updated to enable adaptive management of sites. By 
identifying risks posed by climate- induced hazards, planners and i mplementers will be able to make provision for site-
specific mitigation measures.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  88  OF 105 
 
 G 
The design of livelihoods interventions – to be supported in each locality – will also take into account the potential for 
disruption by extreme weather events. Local knowl edge on the impacts of climate- induced hazards will be used to 
inform the types of interventions at the localized level. In addition, implementation of these activities will be undertaken 
based on information from weather advisories to ensure that due cons ideration is given to impending climate risks.  
 This mitigation measure is expected adjust the risk level to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Limited awareness and sensitization of local 
communities reduces rates of adoption of livelihood 
practices and involvement in EbA interventions.  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The fully participatory nature of engagement with local communities for Activities 1.2 and 2.1 will be 
complemented by sensitisation and awareness -raising of local communities concerning climate risks, adaptation 
options and the benefits of project activities. This engagement wil l be inclusive of all segments of the population, 
including men, women, the youth, the elderly, people with disabilities and marginalised groups. Inclusive and 
participatory engagement of local communities through such a multi -stakeholder approach is expec ted to 
promote community buy -in and adoption of project activities, which will contribute towards adoption as well as 
longevity and sustainability of project interventions. Extension officers and community facilitators will be selected 
from target landscapes wherever possible, and will be provided with training on techniques for effective 
community engagement.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Project activities result in collateral environmental 
degradation  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The proposed ecosystem and livelihood activities are based on experiences and lessons learned from past ongoing 
initiatives in India, particularly the UNDP -supported Sindhudurg and EGREE projects. These initiatives have 
demonstrated proven approaches towar ds ecosystem restoration and livelihoods support interventions that have 
minimal negative impacts on the natural environment. This proposed project will replicate the methods and approaches 
employed in such activities from these successful activities to ensure the least possible impact on the natural 
environment. This includes careful design and monitoring of aquaculture in creeks and brackish ponds to avoid 
exceeding carrying capacity; or causing pollution or eutrophication of water, or saline intrusion into neighbouring 
paddies. The Forest Department will retain responsibility in each target state for working with community organizations 
and facilitators to monitor any specific risks identified at local level and check that mitigation measures are in place  
throughout project implementation.  
 
Community participation is also essential also as the “eyes and ears” of enforcement by the Forestry Department, 
ensuring that there are no incursions into sensitive areas undergoing restoration or newly under protection – either by 
outsiders, or by community members seeking to undertake illegal activities. The process of developing restoration protocols for each site will involve 
discussions between the Forestry Department and community structures on 
arrangements for co- management and sustainable harvesting in each site. This process will be coordinated and 
monitored across the project by the Natural Resource Management Officer in the national PMU and by the Ecological 
and Adaptation Specialists in the State PMUs. In the target landscapes the development, implementation and 
monitoring of site restoration protocols will be undertaken by the NGOs contracted by the Forestry Department,


---
*Page 92*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  89  OF 105 
 
 G 
working with community co -management structures and the Ecological and Adaptation Speciali sts.  Such 
arrangements will determine communities’ access to the specific resource (e.g. forests, mangroves) where 
appropriate, and within predetermined parameters (e.g. off -take rates, times of the week etc.). In some cases, the 
initial phases of restoration work will necessitate the exclusion of community members from areas where they 
previously had access, for example to harvesting resources. Such restrictions will be explained and awareness raised on the medium and long- term benefits, and where possibl e, alternative sites will be provided for compensatory access 
to resources. 
 
 
Furthermore, the project will engage with all stakeholders to develop landscape- level plans that identify optimal land 
use and management within a given project sites. This process will include – wherever necessary – obtaining the 
necessary planning permission for any infrastructural developments associated with restoration and livelihoods work. 
This approach to planning at a landscape scale will help ensure that planning permissi on is not granted in isolation, 
but as part of a wider plan for the specific coastal zone that includes protection of intact and restored coastal habitats.  
 
Regarding climate- resilient infrastructural and urban planning (Activity 3.2), the emphasis of the project is on planning 
for rather than carrying out any major housing, water or sanitation infrastructure development. Any such development 
occurring in parallel with the project, however, will be governed by the Environment Protection Act, and will conduct 
an Environmental Impact Assessment if so obliged in terms of the Schedule of EIA notification (2006)  ensuring that 
any potential environmental degradation is minimised, and that appropriate mitigation measures will be undertaken.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Livelihood support may not  add significantly to income 
generation of local people.  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The choices from the suite of selected climate- adaptive livelihood options to be supported in each locality will be 
determined and finalized after intensive and inclusive consultations with relevant stakeholders, particularly the local communities who are expected to be primary beneficiaries. This will allow for communities to be involved in selecting 
those livelihood options that they perceive to be most likely to augment their income. In addition, only those climate-
adaptive livelihood options that have s ubstantial potential for income generation and have viable markets in specific 
localities will be considered. As part of this process, livelihoods facilitators will be trained to conduct more detailed 
market analyses in the context of specific target lands capes. Facilitators will provide support on appropriate siting and 
permitting, business planning, access to finance, and developing value chains, including facilitating deals with buyers 
of products. All of these measures will mitigate against the risk of livelihoods options not fulfilling their potential for 
income generation.   
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Conflict between potential beneficiaries 
of livelihood interventions in target 
communities.  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1- 20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will follow a fully participatory and inclusive process for identification of eventual beneficiaries in the target 
landscapes, focusing on farming and fishing households whose current livelihoods are vulnerable to climate impacts. Local communi ties and CBOs will be intensely involved in this process to ensure that consensus is achieved on which 
community members are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change and are thus most deserving of being


---
*Page 93*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  90  OF 105 
 
 G 
selected as beneficiaries. Project interventi ons will focus on providing tangible benefits for women, female -headed 
households, the youth and the elderly, and members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes. These groups are particularly 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, as they have limited access  to economic assets and resources (e.g. land, 
fishing equipment), experience high rates unemployment, have limited education, and have limited market access 
(see Annex XIII(c) for gender analysis). The exact beneficiaries will be identified during the firs t phase of the project 
(undertaking the fine- scale vulnerability assessment and participatory livelihoods mapping – see Activities 1.1 and 2.1) 
to ensure that project interventions address climate vulnerabilities within the local socio- economic and environmental 
context. Furthermore, the ESMF creates a framework for a Grievance Redress Mechanism that will allow for potential 
conflict to be resolved to ensure an equitable distribution of project benefits (see Annex VI(b)).  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Limited involvement and participation of 
women and other marginalized groups in 
project implementation  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1- 20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project has a strong focus on inclusion of women and socially marginalized groups within the planning and 
implementation of project activities. This inclusion began during the design of this project proposal, with numerous 
consultations tar geting women’s self -help groups and members of marginalized groups, especially Scheduled Tribes. 
During project implementation, this consultation process will continue to guide implementation of project activities, with certain activities targeting women and other vulnerable groups as the primary beneficiaries, and youth training 
opportunities being open to youth from all social backgrounds. Women’s participation in both co- management 
structures and livelihood opportunities will be actively promoted through  engagement by community facilitators . 
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Project support to climate- adaptive 
aquaculture unintentionally leads  to 
increase in wild harvesting of breeding stock or mature organisms  Social and environmental   
Medium (5.1- 20% of 
project value   
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will improve access to markets for crabs  for benefici aries, but there is already much unmet demand 
regionally.  By promoting sustainable farming of crabs from hatchery -produced seed, the project will help meet this 
demand and take pressure off the wild resource. Oyster spat is plentiful and attaches naturally to the substrate provided (see independent study in response to iTAP review, attached as Annex XIII o ). Mussel seeds are not plentiful 
and will be supplied to project beneficiaries through hatcheries. No harvesting will be allowed to supply ornamental 
fish, breeding stock for which will  be supplied through the Marine Products Export Development Agency. The project 
will strengthen community co- management of marine resources, and enforcement of protected areas along the coast 
in the target landscapes. Beyond these areas, all harvesting of marine resources will be governed by India’s 
Comprehensive Marine Fisheries Policy of 2004.  
Selected Risk Factor 10  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Project support to climate- adaptive 
aquaculture leads to excessive pollution 
of creeks and degraded environment  Social and environmental   
Medium (5.1- 20% of 
project value  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 94*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
                                                    GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  91  OF 105 
 
 G 
Aquaculture of oysters and mussels has a limited impact on water quality , as shown in the independent specialists 
study conducted in response to the iTAP review (see Annex XIII o ), and crab culture is strictly regulated by the 
Guideline for Carrying Capacity Assessment of Sustainable, Small -scale Aquaculture Activities, alread y in place for 
Maharashtra, following international guidelines from FAO and local carrying capacity assessments, and i ncluding 
waste management through estimation of nutrient loading and its dilution through tidal ex change. Similar Guidelines  
will be developed in 2018 in the other two target state s, in line with their existing procedures for applying for aquaculture 
permits which also address waste management and require ongoing monitoring of water quality  (the Fisheries Policy 
of Andhra Pradesh 2015- 2020 and the government of Odisha in its GE/(GL) -S-29/2015/16538 dt. 3/6/2015159). 
Ornamental  fish will be raised  in tanks, and risk of pollution will be mitigated through treatment of wastewater for reuse 
(see Annex XIII o) . 
Other Potential Risks i n the Horizon  
n/a 
 
 
                                                             
159Govt. of Odisha.2015, Principles for lease of brackish water areas in the state, Fisheries and ARD Department, Odisha Gazette.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 105 
 H 
H.1.  Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level  
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate-
resilient sustainable 
development  The proposed project will transform coastal governance in India by integrating climate change 
adaptation – particularly ecosystem restoration and climate- adaptive livelihoods – into coastal 
management and planning. Overall, the project will c ontribute to the Fund- level impacts of 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions  and Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services .  
 The GCF investment will be combined with government co- financing spent in three target states 
on restoring ecosystems through EbA approaches, and promoting climate- adaptive livelihood 
options, as well as strengthening coastal governance for climate change adaptation in all coastal 
states. This will facilitate climate -resilient sustainable development in India by harnessing 
ecological infrastructure for buffering of extreme events, and underpinning sustainable livelihoods 
based on those ecosystems.   
In total, an esti mated 10 million people in the 2 4 target landscapes  (maps in Annex IX) within 12 
coastal districts of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha will indirectly benefit from improved 
coastal planning and governance for adaptation. Support for climate -adaptive livelihood 
development  will directly benefit 1,744,970 household members through increased income and 
enhanced adaptive capacity  (see Section E.1.2 for explanation of how this direct beneficiaries 
figure was arrived at).  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseli
ne Target  Assumptions  Mid-term Final  
Fund -level impacts  
GCF core indicator  Total 
number of 
direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(% of whom is female)   
 Expected 
tonnes of 
carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO
2 eq) to 
be reduced 
or avoided  
 
 Direct 
beneficiaries:   
Household Survey: 
Adaptive Capacity 
and Climate 
Vulnerability  
administered three times in target 
landscapes  
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
Census data  
District government 
data 
Avoided 
emissions:  
Data from coastal 
adaptation 
Decision -Support 0 direct 
and indirect 
benefici
aries  
0 tonnes 
CO2 eq sequest
ered 
per 
year Direct 
beneficiaries:  
500,000 
people (50% 
female, and 
12% f rom 
female -headed 
households) 
whose 
households 
are 
participating in 
new climate-
adaptive 
livelihoods  
Indirect beneficiaries – number of 
residents 
(including 
gender 
breakdown Direct 
beneficiaries:  
1,744,970  
people (50% 
female, and 12% from female -headed 
households) whose 
households are 
participating in 
new climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods  
(0.9% of the 
total population 
of coastal districts
160 
 Indirect  
beneficiaries  
(including direct)  Successful uptake 
of livelihoods that are demonstrably 
climate -adaptive  
Integration of EbA into coastal  
governance is 
successful and leads to effective planning for 
ecosystem 
restoration, climate-
adaptive 
livelihoods, and 
climate -resilient 
infrastructure and 
livelihoods in 24 target landscapes  
 
Restoration efforts succeed in re-
establishing 
                                                             
160 According to Government of India (2015) India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution: Working Towards Climate Justice , p.23, 
14.2% of India’s population lives in coastal districts –  a total of 171,847,466 people


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 105 
 H 
Tool used to track 
the extent of 
restored ecosystems in 
target landscapes  
 
   and number of 
female -headed 
households)  
confirmed by 
mid-term 
through 
household survey  
28,751 tons 
CO 2 eq 
sequestered 
per year as a 
result of  3,500 
ha of coastal 
ecosystems having been restored  
  
10,000,000 (50% female, and 12% from 
female -headed 
households) 
benefitting from Integration of 
EbA into coastal 
governance  
 
(5.8% of total 
population of 
coastal districts)  
 
122,766 tons 
CO
2 eq 
sequestered per 
year as a result of 14,945 ha of 
coastal 
ecosystems having been 
restored  vegetation, and 
estimates of carbon 
captured and stored by restored 
ecosystems are 
accurate  
 
  
 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and regions  1.2 Number of males and females 
benefiting 
from the 
adoption of 
diversified, 
climate -
adaptive 
livelihood 
options 
(including fisheries, 
agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Household Survey: 
Adaptive Capacity 
and Climate Vulnerability  
administered three times in tar get 
landscapes  
  
Market surveys  
 Census data  No new 
climate -
adaptive 
liveliho
ods 
opportu
nities 
yet 
provided 500,000  
people (60% female)  whose 
households 
are 
participating in new climate-
adaptive 
livelihoods  (1,744,970 
people161 (60% 
female)  whose 
households are 
participating in 
new climate-adaptive livelihoods  Successful uptake 
of climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  
Market access ensured for sale of 
goods and services  
not intended for 
household 
consumption  
Establishment and 
strengthening of 
value c hains to 
support ecosystem -
based commodities  
 
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  4.1 
Coverage/sc
ale of 
ecosystems protected 
and 
strengthened 
in response 
to climate Target 
landscapes:  
Data from coastal 
adaptation 
Decision-Support Tool used to track 
the extent of 
restored 
ecosystems in 
target landscapes  No new 
protecti
on or 
restoration 
efforts 
with 
climate 
risks incorpo
rated 3,500 ha  of 
coastal 
ecosystems 
restored through project 
interventions  
 14,945 ha162 of 
coastal 
ecosystems 
restored through project 
interventions  
(Includes 10 ,575 
ha of 
mangroves, 85 
ha of Favourable climatic 
conditions support 
restoration, impact 
of extreme events is not severe  
Restoration 
techniques chosen are successful , with 
                                                             
161 The number of beneficiaries was calculated based on in- country data and expert opinion on: i) number of households with the potential to adopt a 
specific livelihood activity; ii) produ ction potential of each livelihood activity; iii) realistic assumptions of number of households willing to adopt new practices; 
iv) realistic assumptions on number of production units (e.g. crab hatcheries) that could be established.  
162 The number of hectar es that will be restored was calculated based on: i) available budget for EbA; ii)  extent of degraded ecosystems per state that 
have the potential to be restored; and iii) potential for restored ecosystems to provide adaptation benefits to vulnerable co mmu nities. See Indicator 1 under 
H.1.2. below for a detailed breakdown per ecosystem type.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 105 
 H 
variability 
and change   
Site-specific 
restoration 
protocols including 
a) methodology, b) 
monitoring and 
evaluation plan, and c) operations and 
maintenance 
manual  
Data from 
Household Survey: 
Adaptive Capacity and Climate 
Vulnerability  
quantifying 
community 
participation in paid 
work opportunities 
on restoration, as 
well as monthly 
hours of in-kind 
contributions on 
maintenance and 
enforcement 
activities  
All coastal states:  
Data from coastal 
adaptation 
Decision-Support 
Tool used to track 
the restoration and conservation of 
coastal ecosystems 
in all 13 coastal 
states  for 
ecosystems in the 
target 
landsca
pes seagrasses, 35 
ha of coral reefs, 700 ha of saltmarshes and 
3,550 ha coastal 
watersheds)  
 good  follow -through 
and maintenance  
Alternative 
livelihood practices reduce resource 
extracti on from 
ecosystems


---
*Page 98*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 105 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Project O utcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -Level I mpacts  
A5.0 Strengthened 
government 
institutional  and 
regulatory systems 
for climate - 
responsive 
development 
planning  5.1 Degree of 
integration/ of 
climate 
change 
including EbA 
in 13 coastal 
states’ 
Coastal Zone 
Management 
Plans  Scorecard for 
assessment of 
CZM Plans’ 
consideration of 
1. climate 
impacts, 2. 
adaptation 
measures, 3. use 
of ecosystems 
approach, and 4. 
use of 
community -
centred approach  Score -card 
to be 
administere
d to 
determine 
baseline All least 5 of 13 
coastal  CZM 
plans score at 
least 75% in all 
4 categories  All 13 coastal 
state CZM Plans 
score at least 
75% in all 4 
categories  Integration of 
EBA and 
community -
centred 
approaches to 
climate 
change 
adaptation is 
CZM Plans 
leads to s 
stronger 
institutional 
and regulatory 
system  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  7.1: Use by 
participating  
households  of 
support on 
climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods 
and value 
chains , and 
benefit by at -
risk 
households 
from reduced 
disaster 
exposure  Questionnaire 
administered 
annually in target 
landscapes,   
using 
Randomized 
Control Trial 
approaches  -
Household 
Survey: Adaptive 
Capacity and 
Climate 
Vulnerability   
Includes scale to 
provide a rating 
for: 
1. Impact of  
livelihood support 
on adaptive 
capacity  
2. Impact of 
restoration on 
risk exposure  0 people 
benefitting  
(Initial 
survey 
results 
define 
households 
participating 
in 
livelihoods 
and those 
directly at 
risk from 
coastal 
flooding 
and 
damage)  
 500,000  people 
(50% female) 
whose 
households  are 
using  support on 
climate -adaptive 
livelihoods and 
value chains  
Restoration  
interventions 
have reduced 
exposure for at 
least 20% of 
households 
directly at risk (1,744,970  
people (50% 
female) whose 
households are 
using support on 
climate -adapt ive 
livelihoods and 
value chains  
Restoration 
interventions 
have reduced 
exposure for at 
least 70% of 
households 
directly at risk Support on 
climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods and 
value chains 
leads is taken 
up and leads 
to enhanced 
adaptive 
capacity  
Ecosystem 
restoration 
efforts 
strengthen 
shoreline 
protection, 
reducing risk 
to lives and 
property  
Project/program
me outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Enhanced 
resilience of 
coastal and marine 
ecosystems and 
their services  Numbers of 
hectares of coastal 
ecosystems – 
disaggregated 
by type – that 
are Restoration 
protocols for 
each target 
landscape and 
implementation 
report s 0 Mangroves: 
3,100 ha  
Saltmarsh: 
210 ha  
Coral: 10 ha  Mangroves: 
10,575 ha  
Saltmarsh: 
700 ha  
Coral: 35 ha  Favourable climatic 
conditions support 
restoration, impact of 
extreme events is not 
severe  
Appropriate restoration 
techniques chosen,


---
*Page 99*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 105 
 H 
                                                             
163 This is the number of adults receiving training and technical support. The number of direct beneficiaries ( 1,744,970) is this number multiplied by 5, 
based on the assumption of an average household size of 5 people.  successfully 
restored to 
reduce the 
impact of climate -
induced 
disasters and 
other climate change 
impacts  
 Remote sensing  
Field visits  
 
 Seagrass: 25 
ha 
Watersheds 
1,000 ha  
 Seagrass: 85 
ha 
Watersheds 
3,550 ha  
 successful follow -
through and 
maintenance  
 
Alternative livelihood 
practices reduce 
resource extraction 
from ecosystems  
2. Climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods for enhanced 
resilience of 
vulnerable coastal 
communities  Number of 
males and 
females adopting 
diversified, 
climate 
resilient 
adaptive 
practices    Household 
Survey: Adaptive Capacity and 
Climate 
Vulnerability  0 100,000  
people (60% 
women and 
15% the 
heads of 
households)  
receiving 
training and 
technical 
support for 
climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods 
and value 
addition  348,994  
people163 
(60% women 
and 15% the 
heads of 
households ) 
receiving 
training and 
technical 
support for 
climate -
adaptive 
livelihoods 
and value 
addition  Successful uptake of 
climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  
Market access 
ensured for sale of all 
goods and services  
Establishment and 
strengthening of value 
chains to support 
ecosystem-based 
commodities  
Improved access to 
micro -, hybrid and 
other forms of finance 
to support MSMEs for 
value addition.  
3.  Strengthened 
governance and institutional 
framework for climate -resilient 
management of 
coastal areas  
 
 National 
Coastal 
Mission in 
existence and 
operational  
Pan-India n 
Coastal 
Resilience 
Network 
operational 
and functional  
Number and level of 
effective 
coordination mechanisms in 
24 target 
landscapes / 
12 districts  Capacity 
development 
scorecard - 
survey of staff in 
MoEFCC and 
institutions 
involved in work 
of National 
Coastal Mission  
 
Review of 
outputs and 
activities of Pan-
India Coastal 
Resilience 
Network (i.e. 
workshop 
proceedings, 
bulletins, 
newsletters, 
briefing notes)  0 Coastal 
Mission in 
existence  
 
0 network 
in 
existence  
 Coastal 
Mission 
established 
Pan-Indian 
Coastal 
Resilience 
Network 
established 
and 
operational  
Coordination 
mechanisms 
established i n 
24 target 
landscapes / 
12 districts  Coastal 
Mission fully 
operational  
Pan-Indian 
Coastal 
Resilience 
Network 
functional 
and involving 
all 13 coastal 
states  
Coordination 
mechanisms 
operating 
effectively  in 
24 target 
landscapes / 
12 districts  Network of institutions 
is established and 
remains active 
Training and 
knowledge- sharing 
results in improved 
capacity for planning 
and implementation  
 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description


---
*Page 100*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 105 
 H 
1.1.   Conducting 
vulnerability 
assessment of the 
coast to inform planning of 
ecosystem- and 
community -based 
adaptation 
interventions  – in 
13 coastal states  
 
 This activity will see the 
improvement and application of 
current methodologies for 
assessing climate change 
vulnerabilities in coastal areas to 
include ecosystem -related 
parameters for undertaking 
scientifically robust, context -
specific vulnerability 
assessments. These 
assessments will feed into a 
dynamic decision -support tool to 
improve access to up-to -date, 
“live” knowledge on climate 
vulnerability in all of India’s 
coastal districts. The decision-support tool will enable national 
and state governments as well as 
NGOs and local communities to 
design and implement site-specific adaptation measures.  1.1.1 Supporting coastal 
research and 
management  institutions to add 
ecosystem-related parameters 
to methodologies for guiding 
vulnerability assessment and 
national - and state-level 
planning and decision- making 
on adaptation and management 
measures to address cl imate 
change  
1.1.2 Applying the 
enhanced/revised methodology 
to establish a gender -sensitive  
system for periodic  detailed 
assessment  of vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity along the 
entire coastline of  India, using 
the analysis to inform planning 
of restoration 
and livelihoods  activities for 
climate change adaptation.  
1.1.3 Developing a gender -
sensitive Decision -Support Tool 
for adaptation planning at state 
and national levels that 
integrates district -level data with 
site-/district -level assessments 
to provide decision-makers with 
dynamic information that is 
regularly updated using data 
from census, ecological surveys 
and other sources.  
1.1.4 Creating an online 
platform and associated mobile 
phone application  to facilitate 
access to information in the 
Decision-Support Tool for 
decision-makers, communities, 
NGOs/CBOs and other relevant 
stakehol ders, as well as to allow 
them to upload data for tracking 
changes in ecological and 
socio -economic vulnerability to 
climate change in coastal areas.  
 
1.1.5  Producing a national 
series of restoration guidelines 
based on the information used 
for the Decisio n Support Tool – 
one booklet /pdf per ecosystem 
type, drawing on site-level 
experience  
 Inputs will provide an updated 
methodology for collecting and 
analysing data to prepare 
comprehensive climate 
vulnerability assessments for 
India’s entire coastline. 
Assessments will combine bio-
physical and socio-economic data 
– particularly ecosystem -related 
parameters as well as community 
vulnerabilities – to identify risks 
posed by climate change impacts 
and prioritise intervention sites for 
EbA.  
The information from the 
assessments will feed into a 
decision-support tool for climate 
change adaptation that will be 
used to give access to decision -
makers and planners at all levels 
on climate risks and 
vulnerabilities for adaptation 
planning.  
Access to the decision -support 
tool will be through an online 
platform and smart -phone app. 
This will provide dynamic, “live” 
information to decision-makers 
and planners, allowing them to 
use the most up-to -date data 
available to inform adaptation 
planning.  
O&M for the Decision-Support 
Tool, online platform and app will 
be supported by MOEFCC  
funding during and beyond 
project implementation.  
1.2.  Conservation 
and restoration of coastal ecosystems for 
increasing Participatory land -use planning 
will be undertaken to enhance management of coastal ecosystems in the project’s target 
states – mainly mangroves, coral 1.2.1 Supporting participatory 
planning in 24 target landscapes 
of site -specific EbA measures 
for conservation and restoration 
of six ecosystem  types , based Participatory land -use planning, 
monitoring and co-management 
will ensure strong community 
engagement and buy -in for 
project activities, enhancing the


---
*Page 101*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 105 
 H 
ecosystem 
resilience  –  in 3 
target states  
 
 reefs, saltmarshes, seagrass 
ecosystems and coastal 
watersheds. Site-specific 
protocols will be developed in the target landscapes to guide 
implementation of restoration and 
conservation activities, using an 
EbA approach to enhancing the provision of critical ecosystem 
goods and services. Participatory 
approaches to monitoring and co-
management of restored s ites will 
be established and strengthened.  on the vulnerability assessment  
undertaken through Activ ity 1.1 , 
to produce Target Landscape 
Integrated Management Plans  
1.2.2 Developing Rest oration 
Protocols for sites in 24 
landscapes  – based on global 
and national best practices –  for 
restoration of coastal 
ecosystems  
1.2.3 Establishing 2 4 co-
management structures in target 
landscapes to foster community 
support for and participation in 
conservation and restoration 
activities, including pollution 
management to minimise impact 
on ecosystems.  
1.2.4 Undertaking ecosystem 
conservation, restoration and 
managem ent (including pollution 
control) activities –  based on the 
EbA protocols and through the 
co-management structures – in 
the project sites in the three 
states.  
1.2.5 Developing and 
implementing 24 community -
based/participatory monitoring 
and maintenance pro grammes 
through the co- management 
structures to maintain restored 
ecosystems and capture 
lessons learned and best 
practices from the project sites ; 
including preparing a post -
implementation monitoring plan 
and budget in the final year of 
the project and updating the 
O&M Plan accordingly  
1.2.6 Training and supporting 
communities in 24 target 
landscapes – with a focus on 
local youth as well as 
NGOs/CBOs – to use  the 
coastal adaptation Decision-
Support Tool to track the 
restoration and conservation of 
coastal ecosystems in 3 target 
states, including extent of 
restored ecosystems and 
carbon sequestered.  
1.2.7 Producing a video in each 
of the three target States on the 
restoration and conservation 
work of the multi -stakeholder 
partnerships in the target 
landscapes  long-term sustainability and 
maintenance of restoration and 
conservation efforts.  
Development of context -specific 
protocols for EbA activities will 
increase the success rate of 
ecosystem restoration activities.  
Conservation and restoration of 
16,325 ha of mangroves, 85 ha of 
seagrasses, 65 ha of coral reefs, 
1,200 ha of saltmarshes and 
4,350 ha coastal watersheds –  
will be undertaken in 
collaboration with local 
communities to enhance climate 
resilience through buffering 
against climate risks.  
O&M for ecosystem  restoration 
and management will be 
supported by state-level 
governments during and beyond 
project implementation.  
Training will be provided to local 
communities (particularly the 
youth) and NGOs/CBOs to work 
with scientists on monitoring 
ecosystem functio ning and 
uploading this information into the 
decision-support tool as a means 
to track both ecosystem 
restoration as well as carbon 
sequestration.  
O&M for the Decision-Support 
Tool and ongoing monitoring will 
be supported by MOEFCC  and 
State Forest Department  funding 
during and beyond project 
implementation


---
*Page 102*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 105 
 H 
                                                             
164 Processing of climate -adaptive aquaculture products: for example fish drying, production of value- added prawn products   
2.1. Building 
climate resilient 
livelihoods and enterprises 
through value 
chains and 
strengthened 
access to markets  
– in 24 target 
landscapes  
 This activity will support 
participatory mapping and 
planning for promotion of diversified and climate -adaptive 
livelihoods . Extension officers and 
community mobilizers w ill receive 
training to climate-proof 
investments. Communities will get 
technical support for small 
enterprises, access to finance and 
 
value addition associated with 
climate -adaptive livelihoods. 
Bankable business plans will be 
developed for resilient and 
diversified livelihood options. 
Value chains – including both 
supply and market linkages –  will 
be strengthened.   2.1.1 Undertaking participatory, 
user-centric planning in 24 
target landscapes for climate-
adaptive livelihood and value 
chain support  based on 
vulnerability assessment and  
value-chain development 
strategies , monitoring progress 
through household survey  
2.1.2 Providing technical 
support to community groups in 
24 target landscapes to set up 
the adaptive livelihoods and add 
value to the products of climate -
adaptive aquaculture164  
2.1.3 Providing training for 
extension of ficers and 
community mobilizers in 24  
target landscapes on ensuring 
that planned livelihoods and 
value addition activities are 
climate -risk informed  
2.1.4 Supporting the 
development of value chains for 
climate -adaptive livelihoods  in 
24 target landscapes , facilitating 
backward linkages for in put 
supply, and forward linkages for 
processing, packaging, storage, 
refrigeration, transport and 
market access  
2.1.5 Providing technical 
assistance to community groups  
in 24 target landscapes to set 
up certification schemes for 
“eco” products, and to dev elop 
bankable business plans to 
access loan finance for 
expansion, during or post -
project, as well as insurance on 
assets.  Promotion of diversified and 
climate -adaptive livelihoods  as 
well as strengthening of value 
chains will lead to increased 
income of local communities 
under current and future climate 
scenarios. This will increase their 
capacity to adapt to climate 
change impacts. At the same 
time this will produce 
environmental and socio-
economic co -benefits.  
O&M for the livelihood activities 
will be undertaken by 
beneficiaries and participating 
CBOs/NGOs during and beyond 
project implementation.  
2.2. Improving 
capacities of local communities for community -based 
adaptation and 
climate -adaptive 
livelihoods  – in 24 
target landscapes  
 
 Livelihood support and skills 
training will be undertaken in 
targeted communities with fishing 
and farming households whose 
current livelihoods are threatened 
by climate change. Capacity 
development activities and 
knowledge exchanges will be carried out, w ith a particular focus 
on women, youth and 
marginalised population groups  2.2.1 Conducting multimedia 
public education and awareness 
campaigns across the three 
states on climate change and its 
impacts, and the need to 
conserve and restore 
ecosystems to underpin 
livelihoods and buffer extreme 
events  
2.2.2 Undertaking village- level 
capacity building on climate 
change and EbA in 24 target Promotion of diversified  and 
climate -adaptive livelihoods  as 
well as strengthening of value 
chains will lead to increased 
income of local communities 
under current and future climate 
scenarios. The synergy 
established between ecosystem 
conservation and livelihoods will 
serve to prevent conversion of 
natural habitats to 
agriculture/aquaculture which has


---
*Page 103*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 105 
 H 
landscapes in light of evolving 
climate risks - involving 
women’s groups, self -help 
groups, producer and fisher 
organizations, CBOs, NGOs 
and Panchayat Raj institutions, 
with focus on women, youth, 
and marginalized groups  
2.2.3 Delivering training courses  
in 24 target landscapes for 
climate -adaptive aquaculture, 
ecotourism and non-timber 
forest products , as well as 
climate -smart intensification and 
climate -adapted crops through 
relevant community -based 
organizations (e.g. self help 
groups) and local self -
governance institutions (e.g. 
Gram Panchayats)  
2.2.4 Facilita ting sharing of 
lessons in 12  districts between 
target landscapes on effective 
techniques for climate- adaptive 
livelihoods, including through 
exchange visits between 
communities, with focus on 
women, youth, and marginalized 
groups.  been one the major drivers of 
ecological degradation on the 
Indian coastline that is 
compounded by climate change.  
3.1. Network of 
institutions for 
enhanced climate 
resilience and 
integrated planning 
and governance in 
all 13 coastal 
states  
 Planning and implementation of 
coastal adaptation measures will be coordinated through a network 
of institutions that govern coastal 
management and planning. This 
will enhance coordination of 
adaptation planning at the 
landscape level, while also promoting  cross- sectoral planning 
that involves a wide range of stakeholders. This follows the 
successful model demonstrated 
by structures such as the Chilika 
Development Authority and the 
East Godavari River Estuarine 
Ecosystem Foundation.  
 
The mainstreaming of EbA 
approaches to coastal adaptation – as a complementary measure to 
“hard” approaches – will be 
facilitated through the various State Action Plans on Climate 
Change for all coastal states of 
India. This will enable lessons 
learned on coastal adaptation and 
EbA – particularly through this 
project – to be upscaled in the 
other 13 coastal states. Similarly, 
the integration of EbA into the 3.1.1. Establishing multi -
stakeholder coordination 
structures  in 24 target 
landscapes / 12 districts in the 
three states to provide a 
platform for dialogue on and 
coordination of climate-resilient 
development planning and co-
management of coastal 
ecosystems.  
3.1.2. Using existing 
interdepartmental platforms in 
13 coastal states –  particularly 
State Action Plans for CC and 
CZM A uthorities – to facilitate 
integration of EbA approaches 
into relevant policy and 
legislation, including state CZM 
Plans, and to share lessons 
learned and best practices from 
target landscapes and states.  
3.1.3. Establishing a Pan-Indian 
Coastal Resilience Network of 
organizations, tertiary 
institutions, coordination 
platforms and coastal districts – 
to promote knowledge 
exchanges on integration of 
climate change adaptation into Co-finance for the activities of 
Output 3 in the 13 coastal  States 
and at national level will be 
forthcoming from national 
Government under the umbrella 
of the National Coastal Mission. 
The Mission will be successful in 
supporting integration of climate 
change adaptation into coastal 
management will be supported. 
This will increase institutional 
capacities to integrate climate 
change considerations into 
planning and decision- making 
within local communities, state - 
and district -level government and 
economic sectors.  
  
In selected institutions, the 
project will build  capacity in 
identified areas and strengthen 
institutional arrangements for 
dialogue and collaboration on 
climate resilience in coastal 
planning and management.  
These institutions will promote 
engagement of a wide range of 
stakeholders including from 
gover nment, development 
partners, local communities,


---
*Page 104*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 105 
 H 
National Coastal Mission’s 
programme of work will be 
supported, making a broader 
range of policy options available to decisi on-makers.  
 
Further upscaling of project results will be achieved through a Pan-Indian Coastal Resilience 
Network. This will include 
stakeholders such as the landscape-level coordination 
structures (see Activity 3.1.1), government departments for 
coastal g overnance (e.g. CZM 
authorities), universities, the 
National Coastal Mission and 
other relevant national missions, 
and NGOs/CBOs.  coastal development planning, 
with a focus on EbA.  
3.1.4. Supporting the propos ed 
National Coastal Mission in 
integrating climate change 
adaptation – and particularly 
EbA – into Government in 
various sectors  
 donor agencies, and private 
sector institutions.  
 
O&M for the landscape -level 
institutions and Pan- India Coastal 
Resilience Network will be 
supported by MOEFCC  funding 
during and beyond project 
implementation . 
3.2. Integrating 
ecosystem-centric 
approaches to 
climate change 
adaptation into public and private 
sector policies, 
plans and budgets, 
and scaling up finance for EbA  – 
in 13 coastal states  
 Integration of climate change 
concerns and the potential for 
EbA to promote climate resilience 
in coastal areas into policies, 
plans and strategies will increase institutional capacity for reducing 
climate change risks in vulnerable 
coastal areas. Government  co-
finance through the new National 
Coastal Mission  will develop 
government’s capacity to 
mainstream EbA into relevant policies, plans and finance 
mechanisms, using 
interdepartmental platforms in all 
coastal states, and facilitating 
public and private sector 
dialogues.  
This activity will also enhance 
capacities for undertaking climate-
resilient planning in urban areas 
along the coast, using a Coastal 
Calculator Tool to support climate-resilient design of coastal 
infrastructure.  
 
 
 3.2.1 Supporting the new 
National Coastal Mission to 
integrate climate risk 
management and EbA 
principles into national policies 
and schemes, including CAMPA 
afforestation fund and Smart 
Cities Mission   
3.2.2 Facilitating 3 biennial 
intersectoral  dialogue event s 
under the auspices of the 
National Coastal Mission - 
engaging public and private 
sector role -players on coastal 
adaptation as a risk 
management strategy, incl. 
fisheries, agriculture, tourism, 
ports and shipping, oil and gas  
3.2.3 Equipping the 
interdepartmental CZM 
platforms in 13 coastal states to 
use scenario planning for 
business as usual vs 
ecosystem-based adaptation in 
the coastal zone  
3.2.4  Developing gender -
sensitive EbA  plans for four 
coastal Smart Cities (Kalyan in 
Maharashtra; Kakinada an d 
Visakhapatnam in Andhra 
Pradesh; and Bhubaneswar in 
Odisha)  
3.2.5  Working through state-
level interdepartmental 
platforms in 3 target states to 
provide coastal town planners 
and engineers with training on 
the Coastal Calculator tool, 
using EbA for shorel ine Relevant policies, strategies and 
plans – including state action 
plans on climate change – will be 
reviewed and revisions proposed 
to integrate climate change 
considerations in a more 
systematic approach. In 
particular, the importance of EbA 
and climate -adaptive livelihoods  
as effective means of building 
adaptive capacity will be 
mainstreamed into coastal 
governance.  
 
Climate change adaptation and 
EbA will be integrated more 
effectively into spatial and 
development planning at the 
district and state levels. 
Furthermore, gaps and 
challenges related to climate 
change adaptation within existing 
plans for economic sectors within 
coastal areas will be identified 
and addressed. A landscape-
based approach –  with inclusion 
of multiple stakeholders – will be 
adopted to promote cross -
sectoral planning for climate 
change adaptation.  
The Coastal Calculator will take 
into account parameters such as 
the beach/coast profile, local 
bathymetry, presence and types 
of coastal  ecosystems, coastal 
erosion, longshore drift, 
frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events, and 
sea-level rise. The outputs of the 
Coastal Calculator will be


---
*Page 105*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 105 
 H 
protection and climate -resilient 
infrastructure  
 information on climate -resilient 
design options for coastal 
infrastructure planning, 
particularly with the inclusion of 
EbA options.  
Application of the Coastal 
Calculator will be complemented 
by training to town and village 
planners to understand the 
potential of “soft” measures for 
coastal protection, in order to 
better undertake climate-resilient 
urban planning.  
3.3. Knowledge 
management for 
coastal resilience  
 Capacity building of local 
communities, government officials, the private sector and 
other stakeholders will improve 
knowledge and awareness on the 
benefits of adopting EbA  
approaches to build climate 
resilience. This will be based on 
partnerships with academic 
institutions to ensure that experimental learning is captured 
to determine quantitative benefits 
provided by adaptation measures 
such as EbA. This will be informed by  a data collection 
system on coastal adaptation to 
collate information from project 
activities as well as other national and global initiatives for analysis.  
Training on climate change 
adaptation for public servants and 
government officials will be 
develop ed. This will ensure at 
least a basic understanding of 
climate change impacts and the 
importance of adaptation –  and 
particularly EbA –  across a range 
of government sectors.  
Knowledge on EbA and coastal 
adaptation will be disseminated 
within the target states, across all 
coastal states of India, and across 
all coastal countries in South Asia. Knowledge products will be 
developed and (where 
appropriate) translated into local languages for community -level 
knowledge exchange. This will be 
complemented by expos ure visits 
to field sites for government 
officials, as well as regional knowledge sharing opportunities.  3.3.1 Supporting the 
establish ment of  a system under 
the National Coastal Mission for 
collating data and information 
on global best practices, 
lessons learned, evidence from 
the field and scientific 
knowledge on ecosystem - and 
community -based approaches 
to adaptation in the coastal zone 
of India.  
3.3.2 Establishing a series of 
annual workshops (5 in project 
period) under the auspices of 
the pan-Indian Co astal 
Resilience Network, involving 
tertiary institutions, research 
organizations and relevant 
NGOs to share research 
findings related to coastal EbA  
3.3.3 Developing and piloting a 
training course or curricula on 
EbA, for delivery through 
administrative t raining and other 
relevant institutes at national 
and state levels, incorporating 
project experience and lessons 
especiall y on community -based 
adaptation – at least one in 
each of 3 target states  
3.3.4  Working through the Pan -
India Coastal Resilience 
Netwo rk to develop and 
disseminate knowledge 
products at national, regional 
and international levels and to 
share experience and learning.  
3.3.5  Developing 12 district -
specific, gender -sensitive 
knowledge products translated 
into local languages for use in 
the community -level training 
courses for village self -help 
groups and CBOs, and women’s Transfer of lessons learned and 
best practice on coastal resilience 
and EbA will promote replication 
and upscaling of such 
interventions across the coastline 
of India.  
Using a range of knowledge 
products and channels for 
dissemination will ensure that the 
widest possible reach is 
achieved, i.e. promoti ng access 
to such knowledge for diverse 
stakeholders such as local 
communities, various levels of 
government, private sector 
agents and other development 
partners.  
O&M for the knowledge 
management and dissemination 
will be supported by MOEFCC  
and state- level government 
institutions during and beyond 
project implementation.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 105 
 H 
 capacity development 
programmes.  
3.3.6  Undertaking at least 9 
exposure and exchange visits  
(involving 3 target states) for 
national -, state - and district -level 
government officials and 
community leaders to promote 
knowledge sharing on cross -
sectoral coastal governance, 
climate change adaptation and 
EbA.   
3.3.7  Creating a knowledge 
exchange platform involving 
South Asia’s five coastal 
countries with 3 international 
events for dialogue and sharing 
learning on ecosystem -and 
community -based adaptation to 
climate change in the coastal 
zone, building on existing 
forums.  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
302. GCF funding will be used to ensure that monitoring and evaluation systems are put in pl ace to track progress over 
the 6 years of project implementation towards the planned project outcomes and fund level impacts. This will be 
achieved through the means of verification outlined in Table H.1.2 above, where progress on each indicator from 
the baseline to the mid- point and end- point targets for those indicators will be tracked. For exampl e, a detailed 
survey instrument, the Household Survey: Adaptive Capacity and Climate Vulnerability, will be used in the target 
landscapes , using Randomized Control Trial approaches  to monitor communities’ adaptive capacity and exposure 
to climate risks, tracking their involvement in both ecosystem restoration and climate- adaptive livelihoods activities. 
The questionnaire section on community participation in climate- adaptive livelihoods will include gathering baseline 
data on household economic activities, production yields (fishing, farming, aquaculture), monetary income and harvesting of natural resources.  The questionnaire will also include analysis of additional variables  contributing to 
vulnerability to climate change and adaptive capacity, including understanding of climate change impacts on 
livelihoods, gender roles, market linkages, access to credit, physical location of household assets, and state of 
neighbouring shor eline protection infrastructure (natural and built).  
 
303. Table H.1.2 also outlines  an area of monitoring that form s part of the project design for Output 1 on ecosystem 
restoration – involving tracking of coastal adaptation and mitigation benefits , to be led by the Climate Change 
section in the MoEFCC under the National Coastal Mission that is charged with implementing the NAPCC in the 
coastal zone. Output 1.3 involves establishing a long- term monitoring framework in the target landscapes, 
supporting long- term sustainability of the project interventions. Communities will be trained – with a focus on local 
youth as well as NGOs/CBOs –  in monitoring coastal ecology and ecosystem health, using the coastal adaptation 
Decision -Support Tool to track the restoration and conservation of coastal ecosystems in all 13 coastal states, 
including the extent of restored ecosystems and carbon sequestered. The state -level coordination platforms in 
Output 3 will be used to upscale this approach to other coastal states.  
 
304. Secondly,  Output 1.2 involves the development of specific indicators for the achievement of EbA benefits –  to be 
developed for each of the 2 4 target  landscapes through coordination structures involving all stakeholders. 
Community members will be involved in defining these indicators, and trained to work with scientists in regular 
monitoring of them. Examples include indicators for benefits include: i)  attenuation of wave energy during storm 
surges, reducing both the risk and the impact of coastal flooding; ii) reducing rates of coastline erosion; iii) creating 
habitat for natural resource -based livelihoods; iv) provision of timber, non -timber forest pr oducts and other


---
*Page 107*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 105 
 H 
ecosystem goods that underpin rural livelihoods; v) improved hydrological functioning such as increased rainwater 
infiltration, greater aquifer recharge and reduced flooding; and vi) water purification and enhanced water supply.  
 
305. Site-specific restoration protocols will be developed, detailing the methodology being used. The protocols will be 
revisited frequently and adjusted based on the data collected from the restored ecosystems, enabling an adaptive 
management approach Site-specific re storation protocols will each include a detailed M&E plan that describes how 
rigorous, frequent, long- term monitoring of the following variables will take place: plant survivorship, of all species 
planted, plant vigour of all species planted, rate of growt h, soil/sediment chemistry (where applicable) and water 
chemistry. Where feasible, monitoring of the following will be included in the restoration protocol: stream flow, 
sedimentation, erosion, groundwater volume, wave energy, size of storm surges, supply of non- timber forest 
products and supply of timber. Rigorous archiving of the long- term monitoring datasets of all project EbA 
investments will take place within an appropriate Indian research institution. Formal plans will be signed off by 
government and an appropriate Indian research institution in each of the three target states  (e.g. Andhra University, 
University of Mumbai, KIIT University), covering continued long- term monitoring over at least three decades of the 
project’s EbA investments.  The protoco ls will be revisited frequently and adjusted, based on the data collected from 
the restored ecosystems, enabling an adaptive management approach.   
     
306. As part of the Household Survey: A daptive Capacity and Climate Vulnerability a section will be included to monitor 
community involvement in the target landscapes in ecosystem restoration –  tracking participation in paid work 
opportunities, as well as ongoing involvement in co- management through in- kind commitment of time to 
maintenance and enforcement activities. This will include respondents’ estimation of approximate number of hours 
per month spent on co- management of restored sites, as part of implementing the Operations and Maintenance 
Plan (see Annex XIII(b)). Detailed Operations and Maintenance Manuals that are site- specific will be developed 
during the planning phase of each intervention, taking into account the biophysical factors associated with EbA (as 
well as the equipment/facilit ies associated with livelihood interventions), and will collectively form an overarching 
O&M Implementation Plan.  
 
307. The project is designed to engage the communities in continuous monitoring of the project activities as indicated 
in the ecosystems restorati on efforts. The project monitoring will engage beneficiaries and mechanisms will be put 
in place to collect data through participation of local communities. To capture the impacts of the proposed 
interventions, the project includes the use of Randomized Co ntrol Trial approaches as part of its annual surveys 
(Household Survey: Adaptive Capacity and Climate Vulnerability) to assess the (i) Impact of  livelihood support on 
adaptive capacity and (ii) impact of restoration on risk exposure.  
 
308. Project -level monito ring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy . The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the 
National Project Coordinator and the State Project Managers. The  National Project Coordinator and State Project 
Managers will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The National Project 
Coordinator and the State Project Managers will inform the National Pr oject Steering Committee and the UNDP 
Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The  National 
Project Coordinator and the State Project Managers will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of 
transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.  
 
309. The UNDP Country Office will support the  National Project Coordinator and the State Project Managers  as needed, 
including through annual supervision missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as  outlined in the UNDP POPP
. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, 
and troubleshooting support will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project 
target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level 
M&E.  
 
310. A project inception workshop will be held at the beginning of the implementation phase to: i) re- orient project 
stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project


---
*Page 108*
---

 
 
RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 103 OF 105 
 H 
 
 
 implementation; ii) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and comm unication 
lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; iii) review the results framework, re- assess baselines as needed, and 
discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; iv) review financial 
reporting proc edures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; and v) 
plan and schedule Project Steering Committee meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The National 
Project Coordinator will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final 
inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the National Project Steering Committee .  
 
311. A project implementation report (PIR) will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The  National Project 
Coordinator , the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to 
the annual PIR. The  Nationa l Project Coordinator will ensure that the indicators included in the project results 
framework are monitored annually well in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annu al PIR will be shared with the National Project 
Steering Committee and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be use d to inform the 
preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package. Semi -annual reporting will be undertaken in 
accordance with UNDP guidelines for quarterly reports that are produced by the National Project Coordinator . 
 
312. An independent mid- term review (MTR) process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half 
of the project’s duration. The term s of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Centr e. The final MTR report will be cleared 
by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the National 
Project Steering Committee. The final MTR report will be available in English. An independent terminal evaluation 
(TE) will take place no lat er than three months prior to operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, 
the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP 
Evaluation Resource Centr e. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP 
Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the National Project Steering Committee. The TE report will 
be available in Englis h. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP 
Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource C entre (ERC) (
www.erc.undp.org ). The MTR and TE will be 
carried out by an independent evaluator.  The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then 
quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent E valuation Office.  
 
313. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to six  years after project financial closure 
in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
 
314. While the UNDP Country Office, through its ongoing presence in the country, will continue to engage with the GoI, 
there is no provision for human and financial resources to undertake formal reporting post -completion of the project. 
Information, where avail able, will be communicated to the GCF Secretariat as feasible.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 104 OF 105 
 
 I 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☐ NDA No -objection Letter Annex I  
☐ Feasibility Study Annex II  
☐         Integrated Financial Model for Output 2 on Livelihoods (Summary) Annex III (a) 
☐         Letters of commitment for co- financing commitment Annex IV  
☒         Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) Annex V  
☐ Social and Environmental Screening Procedure Annex VI (a)  
☒         Environmental and Social Management Framework Annex VI (b) 
☐         Environmental and Social Report Disclosure Annex VI (c)  
☐ Appraisal Report and Due Diligence Reports with recommendations Annex VII  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project Annex VIII – not applicable  
☐         Maps indicating the location of target landscapes in the 3 target states Annex IX  
☐         Timetable of Project Implementation Annex X  
☐ Project confirmation Annex XI  
 
Additional information  
☐         Economic Analysis Annex XII (a)  
☐         Economic Analysis (excel) Annex XII (b)  
 ☒ Procurement Plan Annex XIII  (a)  
☒ Operations & Maintenance Plan Annex XIII (b)  
☐ Gender Assessment  and Action Plan Annex XIII (c)  
☐  Stakeholder Consultations  Annex XIII (d)  
☐  Stakeholder Engagement Plan Annex XIII (e)  
☐  Evidence of internal approval  Annex XIII (f) 
☒  Detailed budget and work plan Annex XIII (g)   
☐  Project activities and responsibilities  Annex XIII (h)   
☐  Restoration and livelihoods and activities per landscape Annex XIII (i)  
☐  Unit Costs for Climate- Adaptive Livelihoods Annex XIII (k)  
☐  HACT Assessments Annex XIII (l)  
☐  DPC Calculations Annex XIII (m)  
☐  Technical Study 1 a: Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Seagrass and Coral Reef Restoration Components
 Annex XIII (n -1) 
☒  Technical Study 1 b: Cost -Benefit Analysis of the Seagrass and Coral Reef Restoration Components 
 (excel) Annex XIII (n -2) 
☒  Addendum to Technical Study 1: Cost -Benefit Analysis of the Seagrass and Coral Reef Restoration 
 Component Annex XIII (n -3)


---
*Page 110*
---

AN
NEXES 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 105 OF 105 I
☐ Technical Study 2: Promoting Sustainable Livelihood in Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, and Odisha 
A nnex XIII (o)  
☒         Responses to GCF comments on funding proposal  Annex XIV  
☐         Letter of Endorsement from UNDP Senior Management  Annex XV (a)
☐ Letter of Agreement between UNDP and Government of India on UNDP support services  Annex XV (b)  
☒         Responses to iTAP comments


---
*Page 111*
---

Annex I – NDA No – Objection Letter
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL I
Map 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies)


---
*Page 112*
---

 
 
Page 1 
 
 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Enhancing climate resilience of India’s coastal communities  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  2018 -01-23 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English , Hindi, Marathi, Odiya , and Telugu  
Link to disclosure  English  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -310518 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)1%20_final.pdf  
Hindi  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Hindi)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
Marathi  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Marathi)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
Odiya  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Oriya)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
Telugu  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Telugu)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
A simplified ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://  
www.in.undp.o rg/content/india/en/home/library/environment_energy/enhancing -
climate -resilience -of-india -s-coastal -communities.html?cq_ck=1516703154714  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  2018 -01-23 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English , Hindi, Marathi, Odiya , and Telugu  
Link to disclosure  English  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -310518 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)1%20_final.pdf  
Hindi  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Hindi)%20 -31.5.18.pdf


---
*Page 113*
---

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
Marathi  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Marathi)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
Odiya  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Oriya)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
Telugu  
http://www.in.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/EnE/FP -UNDP -261117 -5991 -
Annex%20VI%20(b)%20(Telugu)%20 -31.5.18.pdf  
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project is contained in 
the Environmental and Social  Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://  
www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/library/environment_energy/enhancing -
climate -resilience -of-india -s-coastal -communities.html?cq_ck=1516703154714  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Not applicable  
 
________