=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180922163517+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/ModDate: D:20180927182753+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
17 – 20 October 2018  
Manama, Bahrain  
Provisional agenda item 17  GCF/B.21/1 0/Add.02/Rev.01 
27 September 2018 
Consideration of funding proposals  - 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP 083 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Indonesia Geothermal Resource Risk
Mitigation Project ”;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);  and
c)Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;
The funding proposal package for FP083 i s b eing submitted for the first time for the Board's 
consideration at its twenty -first meeting.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
Project/Programme Title:  Indonesia Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Project  
Country/Region:  Indonesia/East Asia and the Pacific ________________ 
Accredited Entity:  The World Bank _______________________________  
Date of Submission:  August 16, 2018_____________________________


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 56 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Indonesia Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Project  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Indonesia / South East Asia  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  The World Bank  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (Persero)  
Beneficiary:  Geothermal developers (public and private)  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤  10) 
☐  Medium (50 < x ≤ 250)  ☐  Small (10  < x ≤ 50)  
☒  Large (>  250) 
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  August 16, 2018  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Peter Johansen, Senior Energy Specialist  
Organization  The World Bank  
Email address  pjohansen@worldbank.org  
Telephone number  +1.202.458.5578  
Mailing address  1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation   
(E.g. on- grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport   
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation system , etc.) 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g.  sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 56 
 
 
 A 
 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
 
The national grid in Indonesia has been dominated by fossil -fueled generation.  Based on PLN’s RUPTL 2018, t he 2017 
generation mix was 58.3 percent coal, 23.2 percent gas, 6 percent diesel, 12.5 percent  renewables.  At the 2015 COP21 
in Paris, Indonesia comm itted to a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  at 29 percent reduction of GHG emissions 
by 2030. In support of the Indonesia n Government ’s NDC and plan to increase the share of renewable energy in the 
power generation mix to 23 percent by 2026, the proposed Project  aims to support a scale- up of investment in geothermal 
energy development . As a result , the Project  is expected to contribute to: (i) displacing highly -polluting power supply 
alternatives and diversifying its generation portfolio; (ii) reducing reliance on fossil fuels and exposure to commodity pric e 
volatilities; and (iii) ultim ately lowering the energy sector ’s emissions compar ed to the business -as-usual scenario.  
 
The proposed Project  support s the GoI in the establishment of a Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Facility, under 
which debt financing will support geothermal developers ’ resource confirmation drilling. The Project  will be financed by  
IBRD ( US$325 million  loan), and GCF ( US$25 million soft loan,  US$15 0 million  reimbursable grant, and US$10 million 
grant ). Specifically, t he GCF reimbursable grant will be used to finance the subscription of convertible bonds issued by 
private developers for the financing, together with the corresponding portion of the IBRD Loan,  of their resource 
confirmation drilling. Ultimately, the Project  is expected to enable reduction of 187 – 281 MtCO2e over the generating 
assets ’ lifetime  (to be cross -checked post drilling in a two- step approach to GHG accounting, see Section E6) , an 
additional electric power generation capacity of 1 –  1.5 GW from geothermal resources and US$ 4 – 5.5 billion of mostly 
private capital mobilized for investment in geothermal power generation.  The Project will be implemented in tranches the 
impact of t he first tranche (a total of US100 million from GCF) is expected to be around 60% of the impact from the total 
project.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  15/12/2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  N/A (The project  intervention takes place prior to financial close of 
the power plant construction and operation phase)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 28/02/2019  
End:  28/02/2029  
Project/programme lifespan  10 years


---
*Page 6*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 56 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
To achieve its  objective,  the proposed Proj ect will provide financing instruments to mitigate resource risk, which is 
the key barrier to geothermal development in Indonesia. The Project  includes  a risk mitigation facility for geothermal 
resource confirmation (including exploration and delineation/test drilling ) and technical assistance. GCF funds will be 
used to provide soft financing to public developers  (GCF soft loan) , and to subscribe to convertible bonds  issued by 
private developers (GCF reimbursable grant). M itigation of the drilling risk is possible because of the level of 
conces sionality and the characteristics of the GCF reimbursable grant. A breakdown by components of the proposed 
Project’s  cost estimates is  presented below . 
 
The Project has initially been prepared on the basis of a GCF financing representing in the aggregate the sum of 
Tranche 1 and Tranche 2: for this reason, this Funding Proposal includes the figures for the overall Project. Then 
the Project has been sequenced and its GCF financing has been divided into Tranche 1 and Tranche 2. It is 
estimated that the tranc hing of the GCF financing remains a viable option for the Project: as a result, only Tranche 
1 of the GCF proposed financing is submitted for approval by the GCF, and the numbers for Tranche 1 are 
separately reflected in this Funding Proposal. With respect  to the funds which may be allocated at a later stage by 
GCF as Tranche 2, amounts allocated and dates for disbursements showed in Table 2 are purely tentative, since 
these funds are not part of this Funding Proposal and will not be approved by the GCF at this stage. A Funding 
Proposal to GCF for Tranche 2 of the financing of the Project will be prepared to seek approval by the GCF Board 
after 70% of the aggregate amount of GCF reimbursable funds and non- reimbursable funds extended under 
Tranche 1 previousl y disbursed by GCF to the Bank have been disbursed by the Bank or legally committed by SMI 
It is understood that the funds which may be approved by the GCF Board for Tranche 2, could only become 
available for the Project after GCF Board approval and satisf action of the conditions stated in the Board approval, if 
any. 
 
Table 1: Breakdown of Cost Estimates  
 
Component  Sub-component (if 
applicable)  Amount 
(for entire 
Project)  Currency  GCF funding 
amount  Tranche  
1 Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  
Component 1 
– Geothermal 
Resource 
Risk 
Mitigation  1.1. Soft Loan provided through the Public Sector Window 
for resource confirmation 
(Senior loan)  
 125 
 
 
 million 
USD ($)  25 (Public 
Sector 
Window)  
 7.5 
USD 
1.2. Loan and bonds 
subscription through the 
Private Sector Window for 
resource confirmation  375 
 150 (Private 
Sector 
Window)  90 
Component 2 
– Technical 
Assistance 
and Capacity 
Building  2.1. Governance and 
management support  
 2.5 
 
 
million 
USD ($)  10 0.5 
USD 2.2. Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building to 
support MEMR, PLN and 
Geo Dipa  
 7.5 
 2.0 
Total project financing  510  185 100  
 
A breakdown of the main cost categories supported by GCF  and tentative disbursement schedule of the GCF funds 
is provided.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 56 
 
 B 
Table 2: Budget Category Breakdown and Disbursement Schedule    
 
Expenditure Type  Budget (US$ million) Disbursement Schedule  (US$ million)  
Component 1 - Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation  
Reimbursable Grant  for subscription of 
convertible bonds for Private Sector 
Resource Confirmation  150 Year 1: 90 million  (Tranche 1)  
Year  3: 60 million  (Tranche 2)  
Soft Loan for Public Sector Resource 
Confirmation  25 Year 1: 7.5 million  (Tranche 1)  
Year  3: 17.5 million  (Tranche 2)  
Component 2 - Technical Assistance and Capacity Building  
Governance and Management S upport, 
Technical Assistance and Capacity 
Building Activities  10 Year 1: 2.5 million  (Tranche 1)  
Year 6: 7.5 million  (Tranche 2)  
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  510  million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i)  Senior Loans  25 (Tranche 1: 7.5)  million 
USD ($)  20 
years  Senior (1.25%)  
(ii) Subordinated Loans   Options    
(iii) Equity   Options  
   
(iv) Guarantees    Options  
  
 (v) Reimbursable grants * 150 (Tranche 1: 90) million 
USD ($)  10 
years  
(vi) Grants *  10 (Tranche 1: 2.5)  million 
USD ($)   
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF  is 
expected to provide, part icularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between 
GCF financing and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should 
corresp ond to the level of the project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria 
indicated in section E .


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 56 
 
 B 
Total r equested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  185 million 
USD ($)   
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of  
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior Loans  
Options  325 Options  
million 
USD ($)  
 IBRD  IBRD1 
Terms   
IBRD 
Terms  
 senior  
 
Lead financing institution: World Bank/IBRD ( Co-financing)  in the amount of US$ 325 million . 
MOF/ SMI will provide US$ 150 million as parallel  financing.  The private sector will provide US$100 
million in leveraged  equity financing.  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment  in section I  issued by the co -financing 
institution.  
(d) Financial 
terms between 
GCF and AE  
(if applicable)  Refer to Terms Sheet to be attached to this Proposal 
 
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non- concessional) determined?  Please provide an 
overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets  which could be tapped 
to finance  the proposed project/programme.  Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1- year T -Bill, 5 -year 
government bond, 5- year corporate bond (specify credit rating) and 5- year syndicate loan.  Provide examples or 
information on comparable transactions.  
 
Indonesia’s financial markets are considered very shallow , and capital markets smaller and less liquid, compared to 
the regional and emerging market peers. This is primarily  due to low capital market utilization to finance investments 
and limited intermediation by non- bank financial institutions (NBFIs) with modest hedging and insurance facilities. 
Securities and equity markets are relatively underdeveloped and market capital ization of Indonesia’s listed 
companies is lower than that of its regional peers. The country’s banking penetration –  both conventional and Islamic 
– remains at a relatively low level.   
 
Despite relatively stable gross domestic product (GDP ) over the past decade , the shallow financial market in 
Indonesia is characterized by limited- to-nascent development of various key financial instruments, such as corporate 
bonds , exchange- traded funds (ETFs), real estate investment trusts (REITs), options and futures for index and 
individual stocks and other money market instruments. For capital users, there is a limited number of equity and debt 
capital markets issuers at around 20, compared to 116 in Malaysia, due to lack of participation of large state- owned 
enterprises as major players in the economy. For capital providers, the Indonesian corporate sector is heavily relia nt 
on bank funding, whereas the market is const rained  by limited asset base of domestic institutions . While basic 
building block s for market infrastructure are in place ( such as the establishment of the Indonesian Stock Exchange  
in 2007, the availability of a resettlement mechanism of over -the-counter (OTC) derivatives for the foreign exchange 
(FX) market, and the improving coverage and quality of credit information) , there remains a lack of clear guidelines 
on risky asset pricing,  as well as a credible benchmark for corporate bond market. Currently, the 5-  to 20- year 
government bond curve is well -established, however, there is no such curve in the less -than- 5-year and greater -than-
20-year windows . To improve financial deepening, t he country is undergoing fundamental changes, including 
developing long -term domestic institutional investors in the market, expanding investor base for bond and equity 
                                                             
1 Tenor of pricing of IBRD loan will be as per negotiation between EA and EE. Pricing information and 
conditions are available on the IBRD webpage


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 56 
 
 B 
markets and developing collateralized money market product s with non -bank participation , among others  (link to 
source ).  
 
The broader financial market structure and infrastructure has presented limited financing instruments  and options  to 
address  geothermal resource risk in Indonesia. Existing projects were financed by both the public and private sector. 
Public sector projects were financed by a mix of internal funding and concessional funding from the MDBs. Private 
sector projects (e.g., Wayang Windu, Star Energy)  – once the resource w as significantly proven – were financed by 
expensive, limited- long- term recourse project finance loans from international (offshore) commercial banks. These 
project finance loans were later refinanced by project bonds, which  was only after the assets had been in operation 
for many years thereby demonstrating commercial viability. In the context of Basel 3 regulatory requirements on 
banks regarding risk-adjusted capital, long- term commercial bank lending along the lines of 2007 are no longer 
feasible. Partic ipation of international finance institutions ( IFIs) and export credit agencies ( ECAs ) is necessary  to 
ensure long- term lending can be arranged for the construction phases.  
 
Further more, 58% of corporate funding is provided by commercial banks, and not by the bond market as in other 
regional and more developed markets. In no event could investors in the corporate bond market consider financing 
the complex risks of a greenfield geothermal project ( i.e., before development and construction phases ). The ratings 
on such issuances would be extremely low and therefore cost prohibitively high. This is a worldwide phenomenon 
with capital markets in the financing of infrastructure.  
 
It is expected that greenfield geothermal projects will be financed by bank lending, and not the capital market. Even 
in developed countries, the capital market does not take construction risks on greenfield projects. Capital market 
participation is only possible for refinancing operating assets. The risk sharing facility supported through this Project  
will help develop database of information on risks and losses, which is how banks will be able to make decisions on 
how to fund projects and how to price loans to compensate for expected losses.  
 
Under the existing financial market constraints, this proposed Project  aims to utilize a combination of financing 
sources with an innovative risk sharing mechanism to mitigate the uncertainties associated with geothermal resource 
risk and leverage the initial investment of US$50 0 million  (plus US$100 million in leveraged equity financing from the 
private sector)  to achieve some US$4 – 5.5 billion in downstream investments.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 56 
 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub- national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous nation with over 260 million people, the eighth largest economy globally and 
the largest economy in Southeast Asia with a GDP per capita in terms of purchasing power parity of US$11,612, and a 
member of the G20. An emerging middle- income country, Indonesia has made enormous gains in poverty reduction, more 
than halving the poverty rate since 1999 to 10.9 percent in 2016. Indonesia has maintained a real GDP growth of five 
percent over the past three years, which is expected to maintain at  5.3 percent in 2018. Economic growth has thus far been 
supported by higher commodity prices, stronger global growth, rebounding international trade, and relatively 
accommodative monetary and financial conditions. Greater investment has been bolstered by lower financing costs, 
improved business environment, and stronger public capital investment.  
 
The national grid in Indonesia has been dominated by fossil -fueled generation. The total installed power generation capacity 
is estimate d at 55 gigawatts (GW) at the end of 2017 to meet an estimated demand of 30 GW. The primary energy mix is 
made up of 34.6 percent coal, 33.8 percent oil, 23.9 percent gas, and 7.7 percent renewable sources. The current 2017 
electricity generation mix is coal 58.3 percent, gas 23.2 percent, diesel 6 percent, and RE 12.5 percent . According to the 
state -owned national utility, PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN) 2017- 2026 Business Plan (RUPTL), Indonesia is expected 
to add about 78 GW capacity: 31.9 GW from coal, 24.4 GW from gas, 14.1 GW from hydro, 5.8 GW from geothermal, and 1.2 GW from other renewable sources. By 2027, the generation mix is expected to be as follows: 54.4% coal, 22.2% gas, 0.4% diesel, and 23% renewable energy ( RE). The sub- project candidates (i.e. the developers) considered for support 
under  the Project  have been included in the latest RUPTL , which means that PLN would be the off -taker for  the new 
generation. It should be noted that  system redundancy is at acceptable level to ensure n- 1 conditions and that  dispatch 
gives prior ity to RE but due to the rapid expansion PLN is not at risk of signing more PPAs than the off -take potential.  Due 
to the rapid demand expansion,  PLN has no current plans to decommission existing plants.  
 
Figure 1: Generation Expansion Plan by 2026 (MW)  
 
   
 
PLN, plans to achieve 99.7 percent national electrification rate by 2025 from a current rate of 93 percent.  The expansion 
of transmission and distribution will include an additional 63,853 km of high voltage transmission, 278,351 km of medium 
voltage t ransmission/distribution , and 247, 215 km of distribution. This p lan ensures that the necessary power infrastructure 
will be constructed to allow the planned geothermal generation development.  
 
Constant pressure to keep electricity cost low favors more coal  in the generation mix, where new coal plants are expected 
to lock in several million tons of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions during their useful life. To maintain a stable economic 
growth rate and achieve the national access goal, Indonesia is expected to become increasingly dependent on energy 
imports of up to 25 percent of total demand by 2019.  
 
President Joko Widodo committed Indonesia to a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  at 29 percent reduction of 
national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2030 at the 2015 COP21 in Paris . For the national energy planning, this is 
translated into an ambitious target to increase the share of renewable energy in the power generation mix to 23 percent by 2,688 5,956 18,671 
6,384 7,914 7,860 
5,548 7,292 11,299 
4,260 
 - 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 18,000 20,000
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
CFPP HEPP GeoPP CCPP GT/GEPP Other RE


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 56 
 
 C 
2026. Geothermal energy is planned to contribute 7 percentage points of the 23 percent, which is equivalent to adding 5.8 
GW to the present 1.8 GW  geothermal generation capacity . This would require investments in the order of US$ 25 billion  
(assuming an average cost $4.3 million per MW as per Indonesian experience) , most of which would have to come from 
the private sector.   
 
Indonesia’s geothermal power potential is estimated at around 29 GW, roughly 40 percent of the world’s known reserves. 
Geothermal resources in Indonesia can be found on islands with large populations, such as Sumatra and Java- Bali, where 
electricity demand is high and growing, as well as in more remote regions such as Eastern Indonesia, offering an opportunity 
for poverty alleviation through rural electrification and substitution of expensive diesel -based generation. Despite this  
tremendous potential, only 1.8 GW, or about six percent, of geothermal resources in Indonesia has been developed to 
produce power due to the high resource risk coupled with high drilling costs.  
 
Figure 2: Potential Geothermal Resources in Various Islands in Indonesia  
 
 
Geothermal power is a baseload generation technology not subject to the same intermittency and variability associated 
with most renewable energy sources. Under the right conditions, it can be cost -competitive with coal or natural gas, which 
means that countries with such indigenous resources can depend less on imported fuels and increase their energy security. 
As a cleaner source of electricity, geothermal energy can play a significant role  in decarbonizing the power sector and 
furthering the country’s climate change agenda. It can also contribute to expanding access to electricity,  economic growth, 
job creation, and boosting prosperity, particularly on the eastern islands where electrification rates are much lower and poverty rates higher than the national average.  
 
Geothermal energy is developed through a multi -stage approach that begins with surface investigations followed by 
exploration drilling to confirm the availability of the geothermal resource, and by delineation drilling to confirm the exten t of 
the resource. The key parameters of geothermal development – temperature, permeability, and resource size – can be 
estimated from geoscientific surveys, but can only be confirmed through an exploration drilling program, which in Indonesia 
is estimated between US$2 0 – 40 million  for a minimum of three wells in a greenfield project. Exploration drilling requires 
owner’s equity or balance sheet finance, which is put at risk without a chance of recovery if the resource is not adequate. 
Therefore, even though initial costs for explor ation drilling are modest compared to the total cost of developing all stages 
of a geothermal operation, finding this initial capital can be challenging for developers.  
 
The geothermal tariff system in Indonesia, while underpinned by the need to keep elect ricity prices low, has not been 
conducive for geothermal development, particularly for the private developers. The first  geothermal power plant in Indonesia 
was developed in 1983 by Pertamina, the state- owned oil and gas company. Throughout the end of the 1990s, PLN offered 
competitive tariffs for geothermal of around USc 7- 10/kWh (about twice that if converted to 2018 US$) and several projects 
were implemented through Joint Operation Contracts with private sector companies from the oil and gas industry who  were


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 56 
 
 C 
willing to take resource risk . The 1998 Asian Financial Crisis caused the Indonesian rupiah  (IDR)  to fall dramatically against 
the US dollar and compromised PLN’s financial position. The Government of Indonesia (GoI) was forced to decrease the 
geothermal tariff to less than USc 5/kWh. Most geothermal projects subsequently became unviable at the new tariff level  
and all the  original private geothermal developers have exited the Indonesian market  since the lower tariffs no longer were 
seen to compensate for the high resource risk . Since then, the GoI has made several attempts to find an optimal geothermal 
tariff system . Recent regulation that related geothermal tariffs to the average cost of generation (BPP) provides for workable 
tariffs in eastern Indonesia, whereas workable prices only can be achieved through so- called Business -to-Business  (B2B)  
negotiations with PLN in the country’s main load centers  where avoided costs are lower . Whereas the tariff framework 
needs furt her improvements , market sounding has demonstrated that an effective exploration risk mitigation scheme would 
facilitate investments under the existing conditions.  
 
GoI has realized that reaching its ambitious target for scaling- up geothermal -powered generation will require: (i) judicious 
use of public funds while mobilizing private sector capital at a large scale; (ii) implementation of an effective upstream ri sk 
mitigation mechanism; and (iii) ensuring a conducive doing- business environment with transparent and competitive 
licensing and power purchase agreement (PPA) award procedures , effective cost -competition for drilling services, as well 
as management of bottlenecks related to drilling in forest areas. GoI sees the present Project  as the main vehi cle to achieve 
these goals –  thanks to its  risk mitigation facility and capacity building and technical assistance program.  
 Prior to 2017, tariffs were the element of competitiveness for the tendering of geothermal concessions/licenses. At that 
time, the winning bidder would be awarded the concession and could sign the PPA before conducting the exploration – 
there are still a number of such “grandfathered” licenses in Indonesia.  Since 2017, tariffs are no longer included in the 
tender procedure and explor ation drilling should be completed and resource confirm ed before a PPA can be signed. The 
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) conducts the concession tender, issues the geothermal license, and 
supervises  geothermal development at all stages. Only one entity can be awarded a geothermal license for  one geothermal 
work area. However, it is possible that the entity which engages in the earlier phase of resource confirmation and steam -
field development be different from the entity which develops the later phase of power plant  development . PPAs are signed 
with PLN as the sole off -taker and the tariff is stated in US  dollar;  however , the actual payment to the developer will be in 
Indonesian rupiah using the exchange rate at the payment date,  which does not introduce for eign exchange risk. 
 
Effective facilitation of greater investments in the sector investments will also require close coordination among key 
stakeholders, namely the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR), Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry (MoEF), and the local governments.  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers , challenges  and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario.  
 
Based on Indonesia’s First Biennial Update Report submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC)  in January 2016, national GHG emi ssions w ere 1.453 GtCO2e in 2012. The main contributing sectors 
were land use change and forestry , including peat fires (47.8%) and energy (34. 9%).  For the energy sector, the baseline 
scenario for Indonesia is rapid fossi l-fired generation expansion in Indonesia in the short and medium term.  
 
The persistently  low and declining commodity prices will continue to drive cheap coal -fired generation in the major grids of 
Java, Bali and Sumatra; and diesel -fired generation on the  small grids of the poorer Eastern islands . The GoI’s coal-based 
electricity generation expansion plan poses significant challenges. In addition to increas ing Indonesia’s dependence on 
fossil fuels for power generation for years to come, i t will also exacerbate local and global environmental impacts. Over 80 
percent of the current electricity generation in Indonesia is based on fossil fuels, and environmental conditions will further 
deteriorate when the planned additional 10  GW of coal -based capacity i s fully commissioned (See Figure 1) .  
 
In more recent years , the GoI has begun to increase support for renewable energy  with geothermal power making up 40 
percent of the expected renewable energy generation target. This investment in renewable energy will reduce the carbon 
footprint of the power sector and lower lo cal environmental impacts.  Nevertheless, w ith the increasing power demand, the


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 56 
 
 C 
national mandate for universal electrification, and the projected supply gap, Indonesia is expected to resort to foss il fuel 
sources  that will lock in millions of tons of GHG emissions for the long term.  
 
Exploration drilling risk, also known as resource risk, is the biggest barrier to obtain financing as the uncertainties 
associated with the availability of productive and developable resources increase investors’ requirements for return on 
equity. In the absence of major developers willing to take on resource risk at a large scale, the World Bank through its 
Geothermal Energy Upstream Development Project  (GEUDP) has begun to support the GoI in address ing this issue . 
GEUDP  provides financing for government -sponsored exploration drilling in unassigned geothermal work areas (Wilayah 
Kerja Panas Bumi, or WKPs ). The Project  is financed by US$49 million contribution from the GoI through the Government’s 
Infrastructure Fund for Geothermal Sector (also known as Pembiayaan Infrastruktur Sektor Panas Bumi, or PISP ) matched 
by a US$49 million contingent grant from the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), as well as a US$6.25 million technical 
assistance grant from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) ;it is implemented by PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur ( SMI) (the 
same entity as the one who would manage the proposed Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Project under this Funding Proposal) , a state -owned enterprise. The project started in July 2017 and drilling is expected to start in the second half of 
2018.  
 
The GoI has realized that even though GEUDP can make an i mportant contribution , the capacity of SMI to carry out drilling 
on its own remains limited (at no more than two projects per year) and this modus operandi  will not be sufficient to facilitate 
the pla nned scale- up of geothermal development. The GoI therefore wishes to expand the risk mitigation to exploration 
drilling that can be implemented by SOEs and private developers.  This would complement the government -sponsored 
drilling and crowd in private sec tor financing.  
 
MEMR has further designated 67 WKPs  for development over the next seven years  (see Figure 3) , even though both the 
geothermal industry and MEMR assess that it is unrealistic that the pipeline will move without an effective resource risk 
mitigation mechanism . The proposed Project , including the scope and design of the Facility it supports , aims to address 
this issue (see Section C.3 below ). 
 
Figure 3: Designated Geothermal Work Areas by Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 56 
 
 C 
 
Against the baseline identified above, the project  interventions are expected to enable reduction of 187 – 281 MtCO2e over 
the lifetime of the generating assets , an additional electric power generation capacity of 1 –  1.5 GW from geothermal 
resources and US$ 4 – 5.5 billion of mostly private capital mobilized for investment in geothermal power generation.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with t he information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.  
 
The objective of the proposed Project  is to scale up investment in geothermal energy development and support Indonesia 
in its efforts to reduce GHG  emissions in the country . The Project  will contribute to Indonesia’s geothermal  development 
goal of adding 5. 8 GW by 2026, and in  doing so, contribute to: (i) displacing high ly-polluting power supply alternatives  and 
further diversifying its generation portfolio; (ii) reducing reliance on fossil fuels and exposure to commodity price volatilities ; 
and (iii) ultimately lowering emissions from the energy sector in comparison to the  business -as-usual (BAU) scenario.  
 
The full Project  will have two components:  
• Component 1, US$ 500 million, for geothermal resource risk mitigation (with additional US$150 million in parallel 
financing from SMI/PISP) ; and  
• Component 2, US$10 million, for technical assistance and capacity building.  
 
Based on a request from GCF this proposal has been prepared with the understanding that if it is funded, the GCF funding 
may be d ivided  into two tranches with tranche one being committed immediately and tranche two being subject to separate 
approval at a l ater stage. Throughout the proposal, reference has been made to the items where a tranched approach 
would have effect. This proposal therefore covers the total project as well as a specific focus on Tranc he 1 (T1). 
Under the proposed Project , a new Geother mal Resource Risk Mitigation Facility will be established. The existing 
government -sponsored exploration drilling program supported by the GEUDP will become the first window under the 
Facility, and two additional windows will be created: (i) a Public -Secto r Window  and (ii)  a Private -Sector Window . The 
Facility will be managed by SMI as the financial intermediary.  
 
Under Component 1  (Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation ; US$500 million from IBRD and  GCF (with US$150 
million parallel  financing from Government of Indonesia), SMI , through  the Facility , will provide  to geothermal  
developers  debt financing for their resource confirmation drilling2, through: (i)  the extension of soft loans to public sector 
developers , and (ii) the extension of loans to private developers and the subscription of convertible bonds issued by private 
sector developers , to be used alongside the private developer’s equity . As explained at the end of Section C.1, it is only 
after resource has been confirmed that new  developer s can enter into a PPA and achieve financial close  for the 
development and operation of the corresponding power plant . The proposed Facility  will propose support for the exploration 
and delineation/test drilling - these early phases  are considered highest risk (See Figure 5), for which developers can only 
use corporate finance and no project finance would be possible.  The financing support will cover exploration and 
delineation/test  drilling depending on the size of the sub-project , to confirm whether there is sufficient productive steam 
resource for power generation. After the resource is confirmed, the developer can negotiate (i) a PPA (if the Developer has 
not benefited from pre- 2017 regime grandfathering), and (ii) financing from  commercial or other lenders under a project 
finance structure,  for power plant development and exploitation drilling. As such, the support provided under the proposed 
project is a prerequisite which, if the resource is confirmed, would allow the subsequent phase (power plant development 
and exploitation drilling) to be financed by commercial and other financiers.  
 
For each sub-project, it is envisaged that the Facility debt support  will be capped at US$30 million  for both windows .  
 
• For the public -sector window, support will be provided to public entities, such as  state -owned enterprises ( SOEs ), 
SOE subsidiaries , or public service agencies . It is expected that  SMI w ill provide  a soft loan (using funds from IBRD 
                                                             
2  A resource confirmation program consists of an initial phase of explorat ion drilling, the successful conclusion of which will 
be followed by a phase of delineation/test drilling.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 56 
 
 C 
and the GCF soft loan to do so) , which  would be matched (50/50) by funds from PISP. At the discretion of MoF, 
the PISP  part of the loan could include a contingent feature to allow SMI to forgive and write off  up to 50 percent of 
the loan in case the SOE relinquishes the license for the WKP in question  (i.e., the exploration is deemed 
unsuccessful3). PISP funds with loan forgiveness cannot be used for the private sector window due to the risk of 
potential inequitable or non -transparent subsidies being delivered. It is expected that SMI will make available to 
public sector developers 20 -year loans with financial terms derived from the financial engineering of the GCF’s soft 
loan term s, IBRD loan term s and PISP loan terms, plus SMI’s reasonable mark -up and costs . It is expected that 
one public sector sub- project will be supported under Tranche 1 with additionally up to three public sector sub-
projects financed under Tranche 2 with the last project financed in the 202 0-2021 timeframe.  
 
Flow of Funds under the Public Sector Window  
 
 
 
• For the private sector window, it is assumed that a  project owner (Sponsor) has created a special purpose vehicle 
(SPV – referred to as the “Developer”4) to develop a geothermal site and has secured a license to explore (which 
also will confer the right to exploit the geothermal reservoir to the same SPV) .  Developers will be required to 
commit Sponsor Funds  equivalent to at least 25 percent of the total cost of the exploration drilling  program with the 
remaining funds coming from SMI (maximum US$30 million). For exploration this support can be funded in equal 
portions from an SMI Loan financed by IBRD funds and a convertible bond (CB) package financed from the GCF 
Reimbursable Grant. The Reimbursable Grant would have a tenor of 10 years , with the last sub- project financed 
by year 4 to accommodate a maturity of the CB of six years which is the maximum time resource confirmation is 
expected to take up to six years. The SMI Loan will initially be for four years and for exploration only but can be 
extended through an additional loan for  delineation.  As the CB will have a maturity of 6 years, new 
issuances/purchases will stop after Year 4 of project implementation to ensure that all reflows can be captured 
before the closing date. For the delineation drilling an additional SMI Loan financed from IBRD would be offered without matching funds from GCF –  this loan could be of a size up to US$30 million. It is expected that t he resulting 
IBRD financing over a portfolio of deals  would be in a proportion of 2:1 with the GCF funds (GCF Reimbursable 
Grant: US$150 million leveraging a total of US$300 million IBRD funds.  
 
                                                             
3 A successful sub -project is one that has confirmed the geothermal resource and where this resource is adequate for a financially viable 
operation.  
4 The main eli gibility criteria to be fulfilled by  Developers include:  The company has been operating for a minimum of three years, or in the case of 
a new company, at least one of the founding companies/parent companies/JV partners (Sponsors) have been operating for a minimum of three 
years ; (ii) The company has at least three years of audited financial statement or in the case of a new company, at least one of t he Sponsors has 
three years of historical financial statements, with minimum two years audited financial stat ements; (iii) The company has a valid Geothermal 
WKP license ; (iv) The company , or in the case of a new company, at least one of its  Sponsors , has geothermal exploration expertise (as indicated 
in project references) and/or engaged consultants (as indicated in the key personnel curriculum vitae) which have such experience; (v) The 
company , or in the case of a new company , its Sponsors , has/have never been involve d in any activities related to money laundering and/or 
financing of terrorism (assessment of ant i-money laundering and prevention of financing of terrorism in application of  SMI’s internal financing 
procedure), and is not under sanction in application of the WB sanction regime with respect to fraud and corruption.; and (vi) The company 
provides a proper environmental and social impact documentation and policy .


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 56 
 
 C 
• The CB is an innovative  instrument to mitigate the resource r isk of geothermal exploration . GCF funds are used to 
provide the co -financ ing (alongside the IBRD Loan) , which allow SMI to extend a debt for the financing of the 
geothermal exploration. In addition, and unlike the funds provided through the IBRD Loan, the proposed instrument 
allows GCF to participate both in the Sponsor’s possible downside and possible upside resulting from the 
exploration (as the case may be). GCF’s revenues from sharing of  the upside  (through monetizing part of the value 
created through successful exploration) are intended to balance the losses incurred from sharing in the  downside 
(i.e. losses from potentially unsuccessful exploration ventures)  at the overall Facility level.  The guiding principle is 
that when a sub- project is successful SMI should be able to flow back to GCF not only the reimbursement of the 
grant amount used to finance the CB but also a share of the additional value created.  
 
• The mechanics of the CB is that SMI will provide debt through a bond facility under which the amount to be repaid 
will be calculated at the time of repayment based on the value of the geothermal Developer . The general idea is 
that the Sponsor can choose to buy  back the CB as long as it is willing to pay a premium of 30- 50% (the original 
value of the CB plus the premium is referred to as the Notional Bond Value – NBV) depending on how long time 
SMI has held the CB . However, if  the Sponsor believes the value of the Developer is limited due to inconclusive or 
unsuccessful exploration an d wants to pay less than the NBV, then the Sponsor can have the Developer valuated 
and will be allowed to pay only a share commensurate with its financial participation level ( Share of Participation) 5 
of the estimated value. This creates a market based price setting of the CB.  
 
• There is a clear strategy for exit of GCF participation to ensure that GCF always gets at least the Share of 
Participation of any residual value of a partially successful or unsuccessful sub -project based on fair market value 
at the time of exit from the sub- project. Sub- project exit will happen either due to (i) Sponsor buy -back of the CB, 
(ii) SMI exercising its conversion option or (iii) project abandonment and hand ing-back of drilling license.  
 
(i) In case the Sponsor buys back  the CB the result is payment either of the NBV or the Share of Participation 
of the estimated market value of the Developer. The other two cases are briefly described below  
 
(ii) In some events SMI would have to monetize its conversion option because the Sponsor disagrees to buy 
back the CB for whatever reason. In this case, SMI would first try to sell or auction off the CB (including the 
conversion option) to a third -party develop er. In such case, the exit will be the sale of the conversion option 
for the best price received through the auction process. In case the CB cannot be sold SMI may consider converting the CB into shares as a way of monetization, whether through a sale of t he shares of the 
Developer or a liquidation of its assets
6. However, if  SMI is unable to sell the  CB into shares of the 
Developer,  it is an indication from the market that the CB lacks value. If , after two unsuccessful attempts , 
the CB cannot be sold then SMI c an either ask permission from IBRD  to write off (see point (iii) below) or  
choose to  convert into shares and try to sell those7.  Any funds raised will be returned to GCF.     
 
(iii) SMI will only have the right to write off  the CB  (i.e. no longer actively seek to monetize a CB for the pur pose 
of returning funds to GCF)  provided (i) the Developer hands back his exploration license following proof 
that exploration drilling was unsuccessful (as per feasibility study and drilling logs verified by independent 
technical experts which confirms to IBRD that no useful resource is found), and (ii) SMI has demonstrated 
in a manner acceptable to IBRD (following guidelines specified in the Operations Manual) that the expected 
value of the residual assets of the Developer is not worth an auctioning. An additional event that can trigger 
a write -off (depending on IBRD consent) is that there have been no takers in spite of two consecutive 
attempts to auction off the CB  (see point (ii) above) . In this  context it is worth to note that with the license 
handed back, the Developer is no longer allowed to carry out geothermal development on the site and will 
therefore have no residual value related to steam resources on the site. As an antigaming measure, neither 
the Sponsor nor any associated person or company may take ownership of the right to explore or exploit 
the same site for geothermal activity for a period of 10 years.  
 
                                                             
5 This share will be equivalent to the share of the total exploration costs financed from the CB (maximum 37.5%) . 
6 The AE confirms that according to legal due diligence by Indonesian legal expertise SMI will be able to convert the CB into shares 
and to auction such shares to the public.  
7 In the case the shares are sold, then due to the nature of the situation, it can be assumed that value of the Developer is lower than 
the NBV and that  a buyer would therefore be able to take control of the Developer. If there is any residual value in the Developer it 
can therefore be monetized through this sale. If a sale is not feasible it is indication that the value of the Developer is close to zero.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 56 
 
 C 
• This mechanism will ensure that GCF will take resource risk without taking regula tory risk. If, in spite of successful 
exploration, a project does not move to financial close before year 6, for instance due to protracted off -take price 
discussions, the CB can still be monetized through auction to third party or through independent valu ation.  
 
• If the entire operation is so successful that t he reflows received by SMI are i n excess of the princip al amount 
disbursed to it by IB RD under the Reimbursable Grant Agreement, such excess funds shall be considered “Surplus 
Amounts” which are not s ubject to repayment to GCF. The legal agreement between IBRD and SMI shall provide 
that the SMI shall only use Surplus Amounts to support the objective of the Project, i.e. to mitigate resource risk for 
geothermal exploration.  The Surplus Amount will be reduced by tax payments by SMI. There will only be taxation 
of the difference between Facility revenue (reflows) and loss (when CB is not paid back in full) meaning that taxation 
will never reduce the amount to be reflowed to GCF.  
 
• In conclusion, the CB mechanism will achieve (i) full repayment of the original value of the CB  plus an upside to be 
passed on by SMI to GCF  if a Developer ’s exploration is successful , and (ii) partial or no repayment  of the CB  (due 
to reduced payment rece ived by SMI under the CB) in the cases where the exploration is only partially successful 
or unsuccessful . The full details of the conversion mechanism are spelled in the Operations Manual.  A model of 
fund flows and reflows using realistic assumptions of t he drilling risks has been prepared to estimate facility -level 
profits/losses under different scenarios. The model has been included with this Funding Proposal package and its 
key findings are further elaborated in Section E.6.3.   
 
Flow of Funds Under the Private Sector Window  
 
 
As necessary, technical assistance will be provided under Component 2 of the Project  to support SMI. SMI will need to 
implement W orld Bank-compliant financial management system , which will ensure proper use of funds  and rigorous due 
diligence process to ensure that loans are based on benchmarked cost estimates and that the funds are used to finance 
the intended activities.  WB will monitor c ompliance and , as per the IBRD Loan Agreements,  in case non- compliance is not 
addressed in a timely manner the WB will have the right to exercise its remedies (i.e. principally suspension of 
disbursements or early repayment of amounts used for ineligible expenditures) . For the 10 years of the Facility life, the 
World Bank will receive and send on to GCF  periodic  reports on the loan performance and repayments.  
 
In terms of facility uptake , several public and private developers have already expressed interest in the financing support 
to be made available through the Facility during the earlier rounds of market sounding. The market sounding was conducted 
with all the state- owned  developers and the largest and most active private developers . Among the private developers , 
established developers such as Medco Power, Supreme Energy, and Energy Development Corporation (EDC)  as well as  
a consider able number of emerging players  have expressed interest to step in when risk mitigation facilit y is in place . Of 
these,  four projects  with existing PPA arrangements are the most likely to seek financing from the Facility . Of the public 
sector developers, Geo Dipa Energi, a geothermal developer mostly owned by MoF, holds licenses for three WKPs and


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 56 
 
 C 
has expressed strong interest . Pertamin a Geothermal Energy (PGE)  has indicated interest for one project , while PLN has 
indicated that they would be interested in support that could help attract private funding and expertise to implement their 
large portfolio of recently granted licenses (seven licenses assigned in 2017 with another seven expected to be assigned  
in near future) as part of its expansion of electricity supply in eastern Indonesia.  The market indicated interest in the Facility 
and confirmed the attractivenes s of the proposed financi al instruments . 
 
The list of WKPs as indicated by MEMR  presents  a potential project pipeline  (refer to Annex 1)  consisting of projects that 
have already been licensed to private developers or assigned to public developers. There is also a list of unassigned areas 
where market forces are expected to push developers to move first to sites with highest  development pot ential  and bring 
these into the Facility in a second wave of projects . The potential resources were estimated based on earlier surface 
investigations and surveys. Based on the sizes of the projects,  the Facility is expected to enable drilling of up to 2 0 projects  
on a first come- first served basis  (subject to due diligence)  (this assumes a commitment period of 6 years so that the funds 
can be paid back  to SMI  before the initial 10- year project  lifespan.  
 The project pipeline consists of domestic and international developers, many of which have extensive experience in geothermal development and all are well aware of the tight regulatory environment. Nevertheless, one- on-one market 
sounding have confirmed th e interest of several private developers in accessing financing provided through the facility, and 
in some case, readiness to submit a funding application. Tariff negotiations are in any case expected where the average 
cost of generations is low and while regulation can be improved (with the support of the technical assistance envisioned 
under the proposed project), there is consensus among developers that exploration drilling is where support is most needed. 
Funding support using concessional finance is cr itical to reducing to overall cost of electricity generation, thereby reducing 
the tariff requirements to make projects developed by independent power producers ( IPPs ) viable.  
 
Based on the project sizes and the proposed support to the developers, the funding allocation  for each window is expected 
to be as follows.  
 
Table 2: Funding Allocation by Windows  (US$)  
  
SMI / PISP  
(parallel financing)  World Bank / IBRD  Green Climate Fund  Total  
Public Sector  Window  150 25 25 (T1: 7.5)  200 
Private Sector  Window  0 300 150 (T1: 90)  450 
Facility  150 325 175 (T1: 97.5)  650 
 
After exploration drilling, delineation drilling could be financed by SMI using IBRD funds or any other funds from 
development partners and banks who have an interest in doing so and can offer similar terms  such as possibly  the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AfD), 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), and Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC).  KfW and AFD in par ticular have  
expressed interest in cooperating with SMI and the World Bank on support to geothermal development  via parallel financing 
towards  the proposed resource risk mitigation facility.  Discussions are ongoing with KfW and AfD on  align ing the eligibility 
criteria and financing terms that would allow a concerted approach to risk mitigation envisaged under the Facility . There is 
also an option that a soft loan from the Canadian government can be mobilized as parallel financing of the resource 
confirmation loans in parallel with the IBRD funds, which could serve to further bring down the financing costs.  
 The outputs for Component 1  will be blended soft loans for exploration and delineation well drilling  and auxiliary 
infrastructure built by public and private developers.  The outcomes will be resource risk removed on geothermal greenfield 
areas through drilling, and therefore financial close achieved for steam -field development and power plant constructio n. 
Depending on the project size, t his would  leverage an additional US$4  – 5.5 billion investments by 2030, an additional 
geothermal power capacity of 1 – 1.5 GW, and 6. 2 – 9.3 MtCO2e/year. The outcome and result  indicators are described in 
more details in Section H.1.  The estimated development impact from the first tranche of GCF allocation is expected to be 
around 60% of the impact from the total project.  
 Figure 4: Stage -wise Risk Profiles and Capital Requireme nts for Geothermal  Development


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 56 
 
 C 
 
 
 
Component 2  (Technical Assistance and Capa city Building; US$10 million from the Green Climate Fund) will finance 
a multi- year support program to cover for incremental operating costs and enhance SMI’s capacity  in managing the Facility, 
to build capacity within the key sector stakeholders and to provide technical assistance support  towards improving the 
overall sector governance and investment climate for geothermal development in Indonesia. Tranche 1 allocates US$2.5 
million to support Component 2.  
 
Support  will include broad assistance  in governance of the Facility and management of the GREM portfolio. This support is  
expected to cover the implementation/management fees for the duration of the proposed Project . It is expected that a 
Project Management Unit will be established within SMI to run the Facility. The PMU will be led by the Head of PMU, 
supported by a Projec t Manager with two Deputies for Operational and Planning/Administration. The PMU will include a 
team of specialists  responsible for technical, procurement, financial management, and environmental and social 
safeguards . GCF grants will be used to support around half of the project management and incremental operating costs 
related to facility managem ent by SMI . 
 
An Exploration Supervision Team (EST) in SMI will be responsible for the Facility’s technical, financial and legal aspects . 
Support under Component 2 may includ e further development of eligibility criteria, vetting  developers’ proposals, valid ating 
complex geoscientific data, and evaluating the quality of environmental and social safeguards due diligence and de velopers’ 
financial capability.  Furthermore, t he EST is expected to review the outcome of the drilling carried out by developers and 
supervise drilling activities as dictated by the sub -project’s business needs.  The EST will leverage in- house knowledge of 
SMI’s developed under GEUDP on key drilling st rategies, critical cost benchmarks, project management timelines and 
management of project and portfolio risks. Specifically, the support could also cover  the following areas : 
 
- Technical Advisory  would support SMI in procuring the service of a firm with specialized geothermal expertise in 
reviewing the geology, geochemistry and geophysics surveys (3G surveys) and topographic mapping for project proposals. Technical assistance will be delivered through strong on- site support and on- the-job training from 
technical consultants that are world- class experts in the geothermal field.  
- Financial Advisory  would support SMI to  carry out financial due diligence of borrowers, which includes but are not 
limited to integrity due diligence such as anti -money laundering/com bating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), 
blacklists and reputational risk searches.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 56 
 
 C 
- Legal Advisory  would allow SMI to retain legal services to handle ad -hoc issues related to loan and contract 
management.  
 
Regulatory support  would  be targeted at MEMR,  with a view to improv ing the investment climate and doing business 
environment in the sector and addressing the key sectoral bottlenecks  to scaling up geothermal development. This would 
cover, but not  be limited to,  support to MEMR in understanding the economics and impacts of the existing (including 
geothermal) tariff system.  MEMR would also benefit from support on geothermal upstream development, with a focus on 
improving the tender process for unassigned WKPs . 
 Capacity building could support  SMI, PLN  and Geo Dipa as key stakeholders of an inclusive geothermal development 
program in Indonesia. The support could include  assistance with: transmission and distribution planning for geothermal 
development, geothermal geoscientific and resource data management, drilling management expertise, procurement and 
contract management expertise, preparation and implementation of project -level gender action plan ( GAP) , and twinning 
arrangements for better on- the-job learning and sharing of best practice in geothermal sector in Indonesia.  Finally, technical 
assistance could include research on the feasibility of other geothermal financing instruments, possibly involving the capita l 
markets.  
 
The outputs for Component 2  will be: (i) a well -staffed and competent Project Management Unit to support SMI in 
managing the Facility; (ii) technical, financial and legal advice and upstream development and regulatory support to  MEMR 
to improve the sector investment climate; (iii) c apacity building and training activities provided to key  sector  stakeholders ; 
and (iv) research on future possible instruments to finance geothermal activities . The outcomes will be improved capacity 
of SMI in managing a complex geothermal funding facility , better human resources with knowledge of cutting edge 
geothermal knowledge and drilling management capacity for state- owned entities, and more appropriate tariff -setting 
mechanisms and transparent license allocation process by policy -makers such as MEMR.  The support envisioned would 
also assist with enhancing SMI’s capability to manage and ensure compliance with the Project’s  environmental and social 
safeguards standards, complementing the support on safeguards  management provided  under GEUDP. The outcome and 
result indicators are described in more details in Section H.1.  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity ) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, production and 
marketing.  
 
SMI – an accredited entity with GCF  – will be the Executing Entity for this Project  and owner of the Facility  in a financial 
intermediary function.   This would include vetting process for the pipeline and setting eligibility criteria for developers 
accessing the Facility’s funds, among others. The Project Management Unit (PMU), which has been established within SM I 
to manage GEUDP, will also manage the expanded Facility and handle the interfacing with developers. The PMU will be 
sized up as appropriate and be aided by a world- class specialized geothermal consultant with deep geotechnical and 
geothermal market exper tise to help SMI manage the developers and prepare relevant recommendations to key 
stakeholders.  
 With 100 percent ownership by the Indonesian Ministry of Finance, SMI is a non-bank financial institution  with a mandate 
to facilitate the implementation of the GoI’s infrastructure development agenda through partnerships with private and 
multilateral financial institutions. SMI  is expected to transform into Indonesia ’s national  development bank and is seen as  
the GoI’s key effort in creating a more open and transparent investment regime and better institutions for infrastructure 
finance. Under a set of enabling regulatory mandates, SMI  has plans to strengthen corporate governance, partnership 
schemes and inves tor base to become the facilitator and financier for infrastructure crucial for Indonesia’s conti nued growth.  
 Most recently, MoF assigned SMI to be the Fund Manager for the PISP . In August 2017, MoF  issued the ministerial 
regulation (PMK No. 62- 08/2017) t o provide the legal basis and framework for the use of the PISP funds by SMI. PISP is 
capitalized with about IDR 3.1 trillion, or US$229  million,  to support geothermal exploration drilling through steam -field 
development and power plant construction. With US$49 million already committed under GEUDP for government -
sponsored exploration drilling, i t is expected that US$150 million will be provided by GoI towards support ing exploration 
and delineation drilling by public and private developers  under the Facilit y.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 56 
 
 C 
SMI has three primary business areas: investment and financing, advisory, and project development. It has developed or 
is cultivating strategic partnerships with AFD (renewable energy), United Nations Development Program (wind power), 
Asian Development Bank and Korea Development Bank (public -private partnerships transaction advisory), World Bank 
(regional infrastructure development fund and geothermal exploration drilling), ADB and KfW (municipal financing and 
development of environmental and social management  system (ESMS)), and Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) (renewable energy, energy -efficient street lighting, and sustainable urban transport/bus rapid 
transit).  In the medium term, SMI  is expected to focus on: (i) structuring financing for electricity, transportation and dam as 
national strategic priority projects, (ii) supporting local governments and regional development efforts, and (iii) developing 
cooperation with donors and development partners in renewable energy  and energy efficiency projects.  This Project  fits 
within SMI’s corporate priorit ies and national development mandates.  
 
SMI’s continued growth is backed by its prudent financial management. In 2017, it received a AA+(idn) Rating with a 
Stable outlook  by Fitc h and IdAAA/Stable by  PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia (PEFINDO ), the oldest and most trusted 
credit rating agency in Indonesia. SMI has maintained this high credit rating since 2014 (link to source ). SMI raised IDR 5 
trillion  (US$ 3 70 million ) and an IDR7 trillion  (US$500 million ) through bond issues  for the First Sustainability Bond Phase 
1 and 2, respectively . Phase 1 was oversubscribed by 20 percent and Phase 2 by 30 percent thanks to SMI ’s high credit 
rating, investor’s confidence and high interest in infrastructure bond. A  summary of SMI’s financial performance during the  
period of 2011 –  2016 is presented below .  
 Figure 5: SMI’s Financial Performance in Recent Years  
 
 
 
In implementation of the Facility, it is expected that SMI will be overseen by a similar (if not the same) Joint Committee (JC) 
established under GEUDP. The existing  JC is made up of key stakeholders, namely MoF  and MEMR. MoF and MEMR 
provide strategic guidance to SMI  related to the decision to drill and decision to tender a de- risked geothermal work area, 
and in doing so, play an important coordination role. MoF is responsi ble for allocating funds to support sector development 
through dedicated program (such as PISP), ministerial budgetary allocations, or fiscal incentives  for geothermal


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 56 
 
 C 
development . MEMR is responsible for tendering and managing the tendered geothermal work  areas and regulating 
geothermal off -take price.  Badan Geologi  (BG) , the Geological Agency of MEMR , support s project implementation through 
supplying geological data on the candidate projects  and providing SMI with technical inputs as relevant for screening 
developers’ proposals .  
 
Early  assessment on environmental and social safeguards, procurement and financial management capacity finds that SMI  
has the system in place to manage a large -scale lending facility  (more in Section F) . While  GEUDP has supported SMI in 
building its capacity for managing complex drilling operations, this Project  will strengthen SMI’s system and capability  for 
managing  a large fund for renewable energy  investments . It will further expand SMI’s risk appetite and improve its c apacity 
in managing those risks, as stated as one of the objectives of C omponent  2.  
 SMI aims to implement Good Corporate Governance (“GCG”) to achieve the company’s business objectives as well  as 
protect the interests of all stakeholders. The implementation of GCG is based on Ministry of State Owned Enterprises (SOE) Decree No. PER -01/MBU/2011 dated August 1, 2011 on the Implementation of Good Corporate Governance in State 
Owned Enterprises. A schematic of the Corporate Governance Structure of SMI  is presented below.  
 
Figure 6: Corporate Governance Structure of SMI  
 
 
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  Describe the competitive 
environment including the list of  competitors with market shares and customer base and key differentiating factors  (if 
applicable).  Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
 
Indonesia is currently the third largest geothermal market in the world with 1,809 MW  of installed capacity, after the United 
States (3,591 MW) and the Philippines (1,868 MW), as of January 2018. With its strategic location in the Pacific Ring of 
Fire, Indonesia is blessed with high temperature productive resources for the indirect use of electricity generation. 
Nevertheless , many of the large geothermal fields lie in conservation and protected forest areas. Besides  resource risk, 
land use, particularly in the conservation forest areas, remains  a significant bottleneck for geothermal development. While 
recent regulatory changes have been made to accommodate geothermal development in certain parts of conservation


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 56 
 
 C 
forest areas as per G eothermal Law 2014 and Ministry of Environment and Forestry Regulation (MoEF) No. 46/2016, steps 
will need to be taken to translate the new regulation into clear implementation guidelines agreed by MEMR and MoEF . 
 
The MoEF Regulation No. 46/2016 concerning the Utilization of Environmental Services for Geothermal in the National 
Park, Grand Forest Park and Natural Recreation Park provides a legal basis to enable geothermal power development in the utilization zones (zona pemanfaatan) of National Parks (Taman Nasional) and the utilization blocks of Grand Forest 
Parks (Taman Hutan Raya) and Nature Recreational Parks (Taman Wisata Alam) through the Environmental Service Permit (IPJLPB).The laws and implementing regulations prohibit geothermal power development i n Nature and Wildlife Reserves 
(Cagar Alam dan Suaka Margasatwa). Core zones and core blocks of these conservation areas remain legally off -limits for 
such developments. The Facility  will be in compliance with the government  regulation and World  Bank Polic ies OP 4.04 for 
Natural Habitats. Development of geothermal power projects in high- risk conservation areas  such as the core zones of 
national parks will not be financed.  
 
Under Presidential Decree No. 22/1981, Pertamina (the state- owned oil and gas company ) was provided the mandate to 
explore and operate the geothermal fields, sell steam to PLN (the state utility company), and enter into joint ventures with local and international partners. The J oint Operation Contract (JOC)  arrangement was introduced under the 1990s mining 
regulations, when Pertamina was the only entity with the mandate to develop geothermal projects in Indonesia. Under JOC  
signed between the partner and Pertamina.  Pertamina holds the license and manages the geothermal work area, while the 
private partner (which could be a contractor and/or an investor) operates the area for steam product
ion and power 
generation. JOCs have been operated under a Build- Own-Operate (BOO) or Build -Own-Transfer (BOT) arrangement  (link 
to source ). Through the JOC the partner put in early funding to explore and develop the project on WKPs under Pertamina, 
where Pertamina would later build and operate the geothermal power plant known as t he total project. The subsequent 
issuance of Geothermal Law No. 27/2003 and Oil & Gas Law No. 22/2001 mandated that Pertamina be required to meet 
its future contractual obligations to continue to draw investor’s interest in developing geothermal business w ith Pertamina 
and later, its subsidiary, Pertamina Geothermal Energy (link to source ). 
 
The first geothermal power plant in Indonesia was developed in 1983. Many projects were  explored and developed under 
the Joint Operation Contract (JOC)  modality . The private partners involved in the JOCs included Chevron, Unocal, 
Amoseas, Magma Nusantara, Bali Energy, Karaha Bodas, and Star Energy.  All but Star Energy have now exited the 
Indonesian market.  These JOCs have facilitated the exploitation of some of the biggest geothermal fields: Darajat, West 
Java (27 0 MW); Katheraha & Talaga Bodas, West Java ( 30 MW); Salak, West Java (377 MW); Kamojang, West Java ( 235 
MW); Sarulla, North Sumatra (220 MW); and Wayang Windu, West Java (227 MW). For Wayang Windu, A 110 MW 
extension is being planned, which will bring the total capacity up to 330 MW.  The remaining fields in operation include: 
Waypanas Ulubelu, Lampung (220 MW); Lahendong, Nor th Sulawesi (120 MW); Dieng, Central Java (60 MW); Patuha, 
West Java (55 MW); Sibayak, North Sumatra (12 MW); Ulumbu, East Nusa Tenggara (10 MW); and Mataloko, East Nusa 
Tenggar a (2.5 MW).  
 
There are several public developers in the market. First , PT Geo Dipa was created in 2002 as a subsidiary of PT Pertamina 
and PT PLN to develop two geothermal working areas of Dieng, Central Java (total potential of 400 MW), and Patuha, West Java (also expected to be 400 MW). In 2011, Geo Dipa was transformed into a state- owned enterprise majority -owned by 
MoF, and assigned two additional fields Umbul Telomoyo, Central Java and Arjuno Welirang, East Java. Second, Pertamina 
Geothermal Energy  (PGE) was created in 2006 as a wholly owned subsidiary of  Pertamina, which has now inherited 
Pertamina’s geothermal licenses.  Third , PLN, the state power utility , has a unit dedicated to geothermal development.  State -
owned enterprises  are considered catalytic to the GoI’s infrastructure delivery. Many of the key infrastructure projects and 
programs have been implemented by SOEs. The challenge lies in developing a risk -sharing model where  SOEs can use 
government -backed lower borrowing costs to deliver public infrastructure cost -effectively  without exposing the national 
budget to undue fiscal burden, while creat ing a more conducive environment for private sector participation to help close 
the infrastruc ture gap.  
 Through a competitive tender process and licensing procedure for geothermal licenses, MEMR has attracted to the sector 
a wide range of developers. Medco Power (Indonesia), Supreme Energy (Indonesia), ENEL (Italy), Energy Development 
Corporation (the Philippines) are all major energy developers and independent power producers . Others include Hitay 
Energy (Turkey), Sabang Geothermal Energy, Jabar Rekin Geothermal, Vijaya Karya, Sintesa Banten, Giri Indah Aejahtera, 
and Spring Energy Sentosa (Indonesia) . These companies either are looking to expand their geothermal operations in 
Indonesia or have obtained WKPs to develop geothermal  power . The expected sizes of the projects can be found in Annex 
1.


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 56 
 
 C 
The market has also observed active participation by  Jacobs (New Zealand), GeothermEx (USA), Schlumberger  (USA) , 
Halliburton (USA) , and Pertamina Drilling Service, Inc (Indonesia) in providing specialized technical advisory  in geotechnical 
investigations and surface manifestations  and development of drilling program, and/ or drilling services.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Provide  details of government licenses  or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange 
regulations.  Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
 
The GoI issued Regulation No. 79/2014 on National Energy Policy (KEN) , setting a target for renewable energy of 23 
percent by 2026 , even though the national energy supply is , and remains in the medium term, largely dominated by fossil -
fuelled sources . Recent regulatory changes related to tariff setting and PPAs reflect the GoI’s efforts to facilitate geothermal 
investment while keeping electricity costs affordable for consumers . 
 
MEMR  has issued several regulations to guide the development of the geothermal sector.  The most pertinent to this Project  
include:  
(i) Regulation No. 17/2014 which mandates PLN to purchase geothermal steam and electricity produced by geothermal 
power  plants;  
(ii) Regulation No. 44/2016 c oncerning the f orm and p rocedure of placement and withdrawal of e xploration commitment;  
(iii) Regulation No. 36/2017 which lays out  the procedures  for assignment of conducting preliminary survey (PSP), and 
for assignment of conducting preliminary survey and exploration drilling (PSPE);  
(iv) Regulation No. 37/2017 which lists the 67 WLPs for Indirect Use;  
(v) Regulation No. 49/2017 (previously No.10/2017 concerning the principles in power sale and purchase agreement)  
which set the maximum period for Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) to be the same as  the concession validity 
period;  
(vi) Regulation No. 50/2017 (previous No. 12/2017), which sets the reasonable level of investment returns , or ceiling tariff, 
at average electricity supply costs (biaya penyediaan pokok, or BPP) defined as PLN’s avoided costs in the local 
power systems , as well as allowance for a business -to-business (B2B) scheme between PLN and the developer for  
tariff negotiation.  
 
Most recently,  MOF Regulation (PMK No. 62- 08/2017)  provides the legal and regulatory framework for financing the 
operationalization of the PISP to support geothermal investment to be managed by SMI. PISP was transformed from the 
previous Geothermal Fund Facility (GFF) . The original design of the GFF was to provide loans to address the high costs 
and risks incurred during the exploration phase. But this scheme was not successful, since the GFF loans required sufficient 
collateral from project developers and were to be pai d back in full even in the case of unsuccessful drilling. The design of 
the PISP, which is expected to support  exploration drilling  (among others ), hinges on a more balanced approach to risk 
allocation in the overall geothermal development process.   
 
In ad dition, MoF also offers fiscal incentives such as tax holidays and allowances and an income tax facility for the 
geothermal sector, as well as value- added tax (VAT) and import duty exemption for capital goods. Regulation No. 18/2015 
provisioned a 30 percent  reduction of corporate net income for 6 years  for geothermal developers . At this stage there are 
no tax incentives  for the Geothermal Risk Mitigation Facilit y and this will be explored further with the legal team  during 
Appraisal . 
 Sub-borrowers will be responsible for obtaining the required licenses and permits, which may be particular to the site 
proposed for exploration and will need to indicate the nature of the needed permits when seeking to access the Facility. 
Sub-projects will be accepted only whe n meeting eligibility criteria specified in the Operations Manual –  including ensuring 
that environmental and social risks can be adequately mitigated.  
 
It will be made clear to EE (SMI) and sub- borrowers that no additional financing will be provided to cover applicable taxes.  
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 56 
 
 C 
Please describe in detail the governance structure  of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization 
structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities 
and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.   Also describe which of these structures are already in place and 
which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them.  Describe 
construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements. D escribe operational arrangements with key 
contractual agreements following the completion of construction.  If applicable, provide the credit analysis of key 
counterparties  of key contractual agreements  and/or structural mitigants to cover the counterparty risks.  
SMI will be as the Executing Entity  for this Project  assuming a financial intermediary role.  This would entail  managing the 
vetting process for the project pipeline,  setting eligibility criteria for developers accessing the Facility’s funds, and managing 
the loan portfolio.  A PMU will be established to help SMI manage the daily operations of the expanded Facility. The PMU 
will be aided by a world- class specialized geothermal consultant with deep geotechnical and geothermal market expertise 
to help SMI manage the developers and prepare relevant recommendations to key stakeholders.  
 
More specifically, SMI and its PMU will be responsible for:  
• Administering the Facility  and managing accounts . 
• Appraising and approving or rejecting project proposals  based on a technical, economic  and financial review of  
applications  from developers . 
• Monitoring and evaluating progress and results at the Facility level and preparing periodic progress and supervision 
reports as requested by the World Bank ( and, through the World Bank, by  the Green Climate Fund) . This may 
include develop ing a system for gathering and maintaining data needed from the developers to track the  individual  
sub-projects  and identifying mitigation measures for risks that  may affect individual projects and the Facility . 
• Financial management of the Project  and accounting and financial reporting; a rranging for the submission of 
audited financial reports.  
• Preparing Terms of Reference for consulting services funded with WB/GCF resources  to be approved by the WB.  
• Facilitating external evaluations and ensuring that recommendations are implemented.  
 SMI will coordinate closely with a Joint Committee which will constitute the key stakeholders in the geothermal sector , 
namely MoF  and MEMR. MoF is responsible for allocating funds to support sector development through dedicated program 
(such as PISP), budgetary allocations, and fiscal incentives  for geothermal development . MEMR  is responsible for tendering 
and overseeing the broad development progress of the tendered geothermal work areas, assessing the market environment 
and regulating geothermal off -take prices , and deciding if and to what extent the financing support from GREM Facility can 
be considered in future tendering considerations . BG support s project  implementation through providing any necessary 
inputs related to geotechnical data to support SMI’s technical due diligence in evaluation of the proposed drilling program 
and validation of the drilling reports submitted by the developers . 
 
Figure 7: Governance  Arrangement and Flow of Funds


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 56 
 
 C 
   
 
As the Accredited Entity, the World Bank will provide support to the Executing Entity (EE) in its implementation of the 
Project . This includes working with the EE in defining the key features of the Facility and supervising compliance with WB 
requirements and standards, such as the decision- making process and eligibility criteria, fiduciary requirements and 
safeguards standards, stakeholder management, sub- loan, CB and contractual arrangement, and  providing independent 
advisory support on reviewing drilling results and capacity building for drilling management. As the co- financier for the 
Facility, GCF will receive period ic reports on overall progress and SMI’s management of the portfolio of sub- projects 
supported by the Facility,  from WB’s bi -annual project  supervision missions and as per the reporting arrangement defined 
in the agreed Project Term Sheet and respective L egal Agreements. Throughout implementation, GCF representatives may  
be invited to join the World Bank supervision missions. As a standard procedure, the WB will prepare an Implementation 
Completion Report (ICR) at the end of project  implementation to take stock of project  achievement and impacts.  
 
In terms of l egal agreements, t he Bank will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement with GCF for the financing provided by 
GCF.  In addition, it will enter into  (a) a Loan Agreement in the amount of US$7.5 million, (b) a R eimbursable Grant 
Agreement in the amount of US $90 million, and (c) a Grant Agreement in the amount of US$2.5  million  with the Executing 
Entity for the implementation of the portion of the Project funded by GCF . The Bank  will also enter into a Sovereign 
Guarantee agreement with the Government of Indonesia,  pursuant to which the Government of Indonesia will guarantee 
the Executing Entity’s obligation to repay the GCF Loan to the Bank  under the Loan Agreement, up to the amount of US$7.5 
million.  
 
 
Figure 8: Key Stakeholders in Project  Implementation


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 56 
 
 C 
 
In addi tion to the key stakeholders and their roles, a schematic of the sequencing of key actions for an individual loan or 
debt package is presented below.  
 
Figu re 9: Life Cycle of an Individual Loan


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 56 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below  is used, please refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.  
  
*Note:  All outputs are expected to be completed by the project  closing date.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 56 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
 
GCF funds are an integral element of the project  design for two main reasons : (i) the risk profile of GCF’s  instrument  and their 
catalytic effect in  attracting  public and  private finance towards geothermal development; and therefore (ii)  its contribution in helping 
Indonesia achieve its NDC and fight cl imate change as one of the Energy Transition countries (besides Brazil, China, India, Mexico  
and South Africa) . 
 
First, GCF instrument s have the risk capital profile to match the risk associated with early -stage geothermal exploration drilling  
supported by this Project . In Indonesia, exploration drilling comes at a hefty price tag of up to US$8 million plus supporting 
infrastructure, which needs to be put at risk and therefore could be prohibitive for developers to significantly expand their  geothermal 
operations. This is a similar position to the CTF contingent grant contribution of US$49 million under GEUDP. GCF sources will be 
a crucial element of a blended financing arrangement for public developers and a convertible bond for private develop ers.  
Experiences in the past decade have shown that without support for de- risking in the exploration phase, investments  -particularly 
private-  have been lacklustre at best. Th e use of the GCF funding and soft loan as part of the whole project  is demonstr ated in the 
attached Integrated Financial Model.  
 Second, GCF funds plays a critical role in enabling innovative c limate solutions to facilitate a low -carbon future for Indonesia  
through scaling up geothermal investments as a clean source of energy and electricity . The alternatives, as discussed in Section 
C.2, will be a rapid ramp- up of coal in place of a cleaner solution in the short and medium terms, and therefore the lock -in of millions 
of tons of GHG emissions for the long term.  This Project  – underpinned by much needed climate finance from GCF –  will help the 
GoI in reaching its NDC of 29 percent reduction of GHG emissions by 2030 with an annual avoidance rate of 6.2 – 9.3 MtCO2e 
compared to a business -as-usual scenario with heavy ramp- up of  fossil -fuelled electricity generation. The Project  has already been 
highlighted at the 2017 One Planet Summit in Paris by SMI President Director as one of GoI’s priority efforts in reaching the NDC 
(link to source
), as well as the World Bank Group President as one of the flagship Projects that will have a transformational effect 
in reducing carbon emissions by one of the biggest coal -producing countries in the world ( link to source ). This showcases the 
strong commitment from the GoI and the WB for this initiative, and GCF stands to become a pivotal part of that effort.   
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 30*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 56 
 
 
 
 D 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long- term financial viability 
demonstrated in E .6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if 
applicable) . 
 
As mentioned above and in Section C.3, the Facility will support public and private developers . The attached Integrated Financial 
Model provides details on the use of each funding source and the respective reflow schedules.  The model has been used to 
describe some exit scenarios testing sensitivity of key assumptions in terms of GCF non- recovery rate. The results are presented 
in the table below and show that the non- recovery rate (GCF net loss)  would be less than 0 % in a base case version and not higher 
than 7.1 % in a 65%  development success rate scenario (see model attached to FP) . This indicates that the concept is sustainable 
and that there is a solid exit strategy for GCF.  
 
Base case  Alternative 
Scenario 1  Alternative 
Scenario 2  Alternative 
Scenario 3  Alternative 
Scenario 4  Alternative 
Scenario 5  Alternative 
Scenario 6  
(13 projects, 
~75% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 
mixed realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~75% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 100% 
realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~75% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 80% 
realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~85% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 
mixed realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~85% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 100% 
realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~65% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 
mixed realized 
potential)  (13 projects, 
~65% success, 
6.5% CB 
premium, 100% 
realized 
potential)  
-1.2%  -12.8%  -5.4%  -9.9%  -21.5%  7.1%  -4.6%  
 
 
It is expected that the funds mobilized will have leveraged  an additional US$4  – 5.5 billion investments and catalyze an additional 
geothermal power capacity of 1 – 1.5 GW – possibl y making Indonesia the world’s biggest geothermal market.   The estimated 
development impact from the first tranche of GCF allocation is expe cted to be around 60% of the impact from the total project.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
In this section , the accredited entity  is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionalit y made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub- criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework . When applicable, specify the degree to which the 
project/programme avoids lock -in of long- lived, high emission or cl imate -vulnerable infrastructure.  
 
In Indonesia, constant pressure to keep electricity cost low favors more coal in the generation mix, where new coal 
plants are expected to lock in several million tons of GHG emissions during their useful life. The GoI has plans to add 
10,000 MW of electricity generation from coal and 6,500 MW from gas  by 2019 (See Section C.1) . Once successfully 
implemented, this Proj ect is expected to enable an additional 187- 281 MtCO2e over the lifetime of the generating 
assets , which represents a 18.7- 28.1 percent of GCF’s 1,000 MtCO2e avoided from its existing 53 projects to date 
(link to source ). The estimated development impact from the first tranche of GCF allocation is expe cted to be around 
60% of the impact from the total project.  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  6.2-9.3 MtCO2e  
Lifetime  187-281 MtCO2e  
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  Not applicable  
Percentage (%) Not applicable  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  • Additional electric power generation capacity enabled ( 1,000- 1,500 megawatt  (MW) ) 
• Private capital mobilized for investment in geothermal Exploration (US$ 0.5 billion)  
• Private capital expected to be mobilized for investment in geothermal development over time 
(US$ 3.5 billion)  
Methodology for calculating the project  indicators:  
• Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided: The CO2 emissions 
reduction potential is estimated by subtracting projected lifetime emissions from a given s ub-project (Sub-
Project scenario) from the projected lifetime emissions in the BAU  scenario (Baseline).  
• Additional electric power generation capacity  enabled ( 1,000 megawatt  (MW) ): The generation capacity 
enabled is estimated by identifying the number of projects that can be supported by such a facility and the 
sizes of the pipeline projects that would be available to obtain financing support.  
• Private capital mobilized for investment in geothermal power generation: The inv estment required is estimated 
based on the cost data of the sub- projects being considered for inclusion under the Facility.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s  expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate- resilient 
development pathways could be scaled- up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to 
accomplish it.  
 
The proposed project  expects to contribute to the global low -carbon development pathways by implementing an 
innovative risk mitigation approach that have the potential to be replicated in other geothermal -rich countries and 
regions . They may include but are not limited to Chi le, Dominica, Mexico, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Costa Rica and 
Saint Lucia in Latin America; Ethiopia, Tanzania, Kenya and Djibouti in East Africa; Turkey and  Armenia in Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans; and the Philippines  and Fiji in the Pacific.  The risk mi tigation model developed under this 
Project  could be adapted to country contexts  to potentially facilitate a rapid world -wide scale -up of geothermal 
development through demonstration effects .  
 
The approach is underpinned by three key elements : 
(i) The Project ’s approach to geothermal resource risk mitigation by providing financing support to the whole 
exploration drilling program as a package has been its most innovative feature. Instead of a well -based guarantee 
program like in Turkey or in Latin America, this Project  will finance the whole exploration drilling program, 
including site infrast ructure for eligible developers. This would allow for the developers’ management of the 
drilling risks on a portfolio basis, spreading  the risk cross projects. It will also be expected to reduce the 
administrative burden and time cost of well -based guarant ee programs with long well testing time between wells 
drilling.  
 
(ii) The proposed Project  is expected to enable the establishment of  a facility that would provide support  to de- risk 
a large number of geothermal projects. The facility is expected to attract new players with lower costs of funds 
and present a more equal playing field, while enabling participation of the existing, but lately dormant, private 
players with a vi ew to take advantage of their drilling expertise and valuable in- house knowledge.  
 
(iii) The Project ’s implementation arrangement through a financial intermediary has been adapted to work within the 
currently underdeveloped financial markets and regulatory cons traints in Indonesia. This would allow the Facility 
to reach a greater number of developers  and inducing greater competition , thereby facilitat ing an expansion and 
deepen ing of  the geothermal sector  in Indonesia.  
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 33*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
 
First, the Project  will improve knowledge and capacity of key stakeholders  in geothermal sector in Indonesia, 
contributing to achievement of the development objectives of the Project  and the wider sector.  The Project  creates an 
avenue for key sector stakeholders , such as MEMR, MoF, PLN, and SMI to dialogue and solve challenges collectively 
– through provision of legal mandates, development of streamlined and more transparent licensing procedures to 
attract private developers and serving on joint committee to provide strategic guidance to improve the investment 
climate in the sector. Through the Project , the key stakeholders will also benefit from just -in-time technical assistance 
to take advantage of the state- of-the-art knowledge on drilling technology, legal advisory on contract management, 
international roadshow for tendering of geothermal prospects to attract the most technically qualified and financially 
solid investors and developers.  
 Second, the Project  will contribute to the world’s state of collective knowledge and experience on how to undertake a 
geothermal resource risk mitigation operation.  The successful implementation of the facility for geothermal exploration 
drilling will showcase the benefits and impacts of such a facility to expand the geothermal market, while revealing how 
institutional, technical and operational challenges can be addressed. These les sons can be readily applied or adapted 
for other countries looking to develop a similar process and institution.  
 
Third, the Project  is expected to strengthen the link between educational institutions, such as the renowned  Bandung 
Institute of Technology , to develop a cadre of market -ready engineers , scientists and researchers and the geothermal 
industry, as well as between the professional training institute in Yogyakarta and the government’s technical staff and 
decision makers  to improve the general state of knowledge around the geothermal sector, its most pertinent technical, 
economic and operational challenges and potential solutions. The link could be fostered through support t o internship 
programs , vocational training and on- the-job learning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of  
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program. Describe 
how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include:  
• Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region  
• Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme  
 
The proposed measures are expected to create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation 
of private and public actors in low -carbon development through improvement of the overall investment climate and 
provision of tailored finan cing support for developers in the geothermal sector  in Indonesia that could be applied to any 
other countries rich in geothermal resources . First, the technical assistance and capacity building support made 
available through Component 2 of the Project  is expected to create enabling environment and transform the geothermal 
sector in Indonesia. Second, given the risk profile of the geothermal sector, the Facility is expected to improve the risk 
appetite for geothermal development through provision of low -cost financing and risk capital. Financing support will 
support the project viability, therefore incentivizing the developers to direct more capital towards geothermal 
development. The Facility’s design also enables management of drilling risk on a portfo lio basis, which has not been 
adopted at a national level anywhere else in the world.  The innovative features of Project  design have been clearly laid 
out in Section C.3 and E.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 34*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national  / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climat e-responsive planning and development.  
 
In the past two decades, Indonesia has strengthened the body of national and local regulatory and legal frameworks , 
underpinned by the first Geothermal Law 2003,  to systematically drive investment  in the geothermal sector as one of 
its strategically important  low-emission technologies . In supporting the GoI in establishing the resource risk mitigation 
facility and interacting directly with the private and public developers, it is observed that some of the recent regulatory 
changes  – including a tariff ceiling for geothermal and other renewable sectors –  have made geothermal projects not 
financially viable, hindering sector development at large.   
 
Component 2 of the Project  has identified specific  interventions to strengthen the legal framework and regulatory 
environment for the geothermal in the long run. Regulatory support would be targeted at MEMR, with a view to improv e 
the investment climate and doing business environment in the sector and addressing the key sectoral bottlenecks  to 
scaling up geothermal development.  This would cover, but is not limited to,  support to MEMR in improving the tender 
process for unassigned WKPs  and understanding of the economics and impacts of the existing RE (including 
geothermal) tariff system.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental co- benefits:  
 
A significant scale -up of geothermal energy investment through the proposed Project  is expected to deliver tremendous 
environmental benefits to Indonesia, mainly through the magnitude of avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions in 
Indonesia and beyond.  
 
• First, it can be extracted without burning a fossil fuel such as coal, gas or oil and there is no combustion in the 
geothermal development process. Geothermal fields produce only about one- sixth of the carbon dioxide that a 
relatively clean natural gas -fueled power plant produces. Binary plants release essentially no emissions. While 
direct emissions do exist and are linked to the geology of the underground reservoir and fluids, these are dwarfed 
by the emissions of thermal power plants. At the local pollution level, geothermal power has negligible emissions 
of sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), and total suspended particulates (TSP). In a closed loop geothermal  
system, there are no CO2 emissions. With the most advanced technology and drilling techniques, the 
environmental impact of chemical release from the drilling process can be greatly minimized.  Unlike other 
geothermal markets , GHG emissions from geothermal in Indonesia are negligible based on ongoing testing and 
measurement from existing and active fields.   
• Second, geothermal operations have minimal freshwater requirements. For example, a geothermal plant uses on 
average five gallons of freshwater per megawa tt-hour (MW h), while binary air -cooled plants use no fresh water. 
Coal- and gas -fired facilities in contrast use hundreds of gallons of freshwater.  
• Third , geothermal drilling has a smaller footprint than conventional energy extraction operations, as a relatively 
small area of land is needed for reinjection and production wells thanks to minimal equipment. Horizontal drilling 
techniques and programs will also allow for avoidance of critical conservation or protection forest areas and 
minimize habitat dis turbance issues.  The presence of major drilling management firms such as Halliburton and 
Schlumberger also mean that the most advanced and efficient technologies will be employed to ensure the most 
sustainable drilling techniques.  
 
Social and economic co- benefits:  
 The socio- economic benefits brought by this Facility are mainly related to energy security and job creation for both 
men and women.  
 
• First, the proposed Project  will enable drilling activities, thereby contributing to direct job creation  for skilled and 
manual workers engaged in drilling, civil works, infrastructure construction and auxiliary services in up to 20 
locations throughout Indonesia. According to the Geothermal Energy Association, a typical 50 MW geothermal 
project could generate employment for approximately 860 people with diverse skills over its full development cycle.  
Furthermore, as discussed in descriptions of Component 2 in Section C.2, the Project  will support efforts in working 
closely with developers at corporate level and academic institutions in creating and  improving the opportunities for 
female engineers and project managers in the geothermal sector, and to the extent possible, enhance the 
participation and employment of women in geothermal developers.  
• Second, geothermal power can have great implications for greening and diversifying the energy mix and increasing 
energy security of Indonesia and other geothermal -rich countries. Geothermal energy is not affected by price 
fluctuations and delivery of fuels, as is the case of higher -polluting alternatives. The replenishment of heat from 
natural processes and modern reservoir management techniques enable sustainable use of geothermal resources  
– the same cannot be said about fossil fuels. With appropriate resource management, the tapped heat from an 
active reservoir is continuously restored by natural heat production, conduction and convection from surrounding


---
*Page 36*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
hotter regions, and the extracted geothermal fluids are replenished by natural recharge and by injection o f the 
depleted (cooled) fluids.  
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the l evel of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc).  
 
Not applicable  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs  of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
As discussed  extensively  in Sections B.3, C.1 and C.4, this proposed Project  fill the gap of a shallow local capital 
market unable to provide adequate and attractive financing terms to geothermal developers. As a key development 
objective, it also aims to support the GoI in bring ing on -line on a mass scale more reliable and cheaper power in the 
fossil fuel -dominated national grids. Following exploration drilling which will be cost -shared between the Facility and 
the developers under the proposed Project  and where the resources are confirmed, the developers will be able to 
access project finance from the market. Component 2 sets out to provide the pre- identified technical assistance and 
capacity building for the implementing entity as well as the broader group of stakeholders in ens uring that the 
exploration drilling results will constitute an integral part of the geothermal data package that can be used to raise 
adequate financing for the exploitation of the resources and power plant development.  
 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
 
The proposed Facility seeks to contribute to Indonesia ’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate resilient 
development as described in Section C.1; and is supported by the country’s enabling policy and institutional framework 
as outlined in Sections C.6 and E.2.4.  
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities  with respect to the 
activities that  they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
SMI has extensive experience in managing the World Bank's and other donors' safeguards policies and complying with 
relevant fiduciary procedures and standards under the Indonesia Investment Guarantee Fund (IIGF), Indonesia 
Infrastructure Facility Fund (IIFF) and the Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF). As the Executing Entity


---
*Page 37*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
for the Project , SMI has been screened for capacity under the proposed Project in three main areas: (i) technical and 
financial due diligence, (ii) environmental and social safeguards management, and (iii) fiduciary management, including 
procurement and financial management.  The detailed assessments are as follows.  
 
Technical and financial due diligence: Refer to Section s C.2,  C.3 and G.2.  
 
Environmental and social safeguards management : 
 
SMI has developed a specific Operations Manual and Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for use 
on its programs supporting local government investments through various infrastructure funds. They have a safeguards 
team in the Environmental Social Safeguard and Business Continuity Management (ESS&BCM) Division under the 
Risk Management Directorate, with qualified and experienced staff members. This team will be responsible for 
overseeing the implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF ) to be developed for 
GREM .  
 
On the geothermal sector, SMI has been engaging with the World Bank on the on- going GEUDP, the first window of 
the proposed Resource Risk Mitigation Facility, for which the ESMF was developed and duly implemented. This 
document details the environmental and social safeguard policies, principles, procedures, institutional arrangements, 
and workflows of SMI  to guide the avoidance, minimization, or mitigation of any adverse environmental or social 
impacts of infrastructure projects supported by the GEUDP. Furthermore, SMI has brought on board  one Environmental 
Specialist and one Social Specialist under the GEUDP’s Project Management Unit ( PMU ), which is expected to be 
expanded  to support GREM. SMI’s corporate  Project Advisory Division  has access to a pool of on- call environmental 
and social expert consultants  ready to support the Project . 
 
Fiduciary management :  
 
Financial Management (FM) . This financial ma nagement of the several World Bank projects implemented by SMI has 
been rated satisfactory, reflecting SMI’s capacity and their  institutional arrangement in place to uphold high fiduciary 
standards by MDBs. A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for the proposed Project  will be prepared as part of 
ongoing World Bank’s project preparation process and is expected to be completed by September 2018.   Further 
detailed financial management arrangements will be fleshed out at the time of Appraisal, including on the use of 
international financing reporting and auditing standards.  
 
Procurement . The proposed operation envisages on- lending by SMI to (i) public sector developers, including state -
owned enterprises (SOEs),  and joint ventures formed between SOEs and private partners; and (ii) private sector 
developers . For sub -loans to SOEs, the procurement of g oods, works, non-consulting services, and c onsulting services 
shall follow  the World Bank Procurement Guidelines  for Investment Project Financing ( IPF) Borrowers dated November 
2017. For private developers , the Bank  guidelines will not apply; and the procurement will be done on a commercial 
practice basis. Normally, projects implemented by  a PPP that is  majority -owned by the public partner , would be subject 
to World Bank procurement guidelines . However , if the PPP is set up in a way to ensure private sector control of all 
operational decisions it may be more correct to look at this as a private sector entity . This issue  will be assessed  based 
on a broader  review of the proposed joint ventures  structures,  which is expected to be finalized in the coming months  
of project  preparation.   
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no- objection letter.  Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement 
plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was developed.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
The proposed Project  has been prepared in close coordination with the Ministry of Finance as the NDA and SMI as 
the executing entity, as well as the broader stakeholders in the geothermal sector in Indonesia. Their inputs have been 
duly reflected in the project  design and the requested capacity building activities as part of the project  design . MoF’s 
commitment of US$150 million of parallel  financing from the government fund for geothermal sector demonstrates  
strong support  from GoI for the proposed project . A draft of this Funding Proposal has also been shared with the NDAs 
early on for feedback.  At the sub- project level, community consultations, including with local governments , will be a 
requirement as part of the implementation of the Project’s  Environmental and Social Management Framework. SMI 
will review and oversee compliance with the safeguards requirements by the developers.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without cr owding 
out private and other public investment.  Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total 
project financing and the mitigation/ adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to 
E.6.5 ( core indicator for the 
cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
The proposed Project  aims to address resource risk (also known as drilling/exploration risk), which constitutes the 
biggest barrier to obtaining commercial financing for resource exploitation. Concessional financing from GCF and WB 
combined with government funds  will help developers finance highly risky exploration drilling (mainly due to resource 
uncertainties) and related infrastructure development. It will bridge the financing gap between equity investors and 
commercial lenders . In Indonesia, geothermal exploration drill ing comes with a hefty price tag of up to US$8 million 
per full -sized well plus supporting infrastructure, which can be prohibitive for developers not guaranteed downstream 
returns on their pre- production investments , if sufficient resource is not found or  the exploration is deemed 
unsuccessful.  Slim-holes can be used at the cost of about US$2- 3 million per well on average, but they would not be 
able to be converted into production wells if the resource is confirmed.  
 
In the past few years, geothermal exploration activities in Indonesia have been lackluster at best, given the high 
resource risk, low off -take price environment, and shallow capital market development. Instead of relying on costly 
equities, the combination of concessional financing and risk capital mobilized through this Project  to facilitate up to 5.8 
GW of geothermal capacity by 2026 is merited. It is expected that an initi al capital contribution of US$500 million from 
GCF and  WB for resource risk mitigat ion will enable development of about  1 GW of geothermal capacity , and in doing 
so, leveraging at least US$4 billion of total financing for downstream  investments  – most of which will come from the 
private sector . The Project  is expected to contribute to an annual GHG emission reductions of at least 6.3 MtCO2. 
More in- depth financial viability and economic analysis of the Facility and sub- projects are provided in Section E.6.3.  
 
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co- financing ratio (total amount of co- financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment. Please make a 
reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
Co-Financing and Leverag e Factor   
 
The GCF funding contribution of US$185 million would be co- financed by a US$325 million IBRD loan .  On top of the 
IBRD co -financing, US$150 million of parallel  financing would be provided by GoI/SMI as loans. With an added  US$100 
million as equity contributions which would be injected by the private developers receiving support through priva te 
sector window , it is expected that at least US$4 billion of total investments with more than US$3 billion coming from


---
*Page 39*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
the private sector  will be mobilized.  This translates to the following leverage ratios: (i) WB to GCF  co-financing : 1.8 to 
1; (ii) pri vate financing to GCF: 18  to 1; and (iii) total financing to GCF: 22 to 1. 
 
Long- term Investments  
 
The proposed Project  is in line with the Government’s intention of strategically putting in government funds in the early 
stages in order to unlock private sector financing for geothermal development. It is expected that the lion’s share of the 
investments needed to develop the planned 5.8 GW of geothermal  capacity  as a low -emission source of electricity  
over the next eight years would need to come fr om commercial sources , and that these funds would be leveraged 
through public -private partnerships . 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1 . Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. Please 
describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).  
 
Financial Viability  of Geothermal Development  
 
The viability of geothermal development has been assessed by looking at a typical medium/large project (55 MW) 
expected to be situated in the major power market s of Sumatra and Java- Bali, and a typical small project (10 MW) in 
eastern Indonesia.  Without the Project , neither the larger  55 MW nor the smaller  10 MW geothermal development will 
be financially viable due to high equity requirement s for exploration phase in combination with an unmitigated resource 
risk. This fact has constrained geothermal development in Indonesia till now.  
 
With the Project , calculations show that FIRR for a private investor  will be adequate to meet or exceed his required 
return on investment for  the 55 MW case - even for l ow enthalpy scenarios. For the 10 MW plant, high or medium 
enthalpy resources would, marginally, allow a private developer an adequate return whereas an SOE, due to their 
lower hurdle rate,  would be able to develop the 10 MW plant in all enthalpy scenarios.  
 
Long- Term Sustainability  of Facility  
 The attached Integrated Financial Model provides details on the use of each funding source and demonstrates the 
long-term financial sustainability of the Facility  based on a portfolio approach to geothermal development, where 
success mitigates the downside of failed drilling campaigns that may prevent a developer from retaining a license and 
further ing development .  In terms of upside, a success fee has been modelled into the project design and must be paid 
by the developer to SMI (who will eventually return the funds to GCF), when the project reaches financial closure. T he 
model allows to change the success fee on the “Facility Level Summary” tab, hence allowing real time scenario 
modeling of the facility outcomes. It is noted that after the project implementation period, the Bank would not be taking 
on fiduciary and safeguards responsibilities.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
Geothermal  is a mature technology  that uses the earth’s underground heat to produce electricity. The first attempt to 
produce electricity out of geothermal resources dates back to over 100 years ago. In 1904, the world’s first geothermal 
power plant to test the production of electricity out of a dry steam -field was established in Larderello, Italy. After over a 
century of developments, geothermal technolog ies have constantly been improved to provide technical solutions to 
develop projects that were previously con sidered not feasible. This would include (i) drilling of deeper wells, (ii)


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
horizontal drilling to avoid forest or protected areas, (iii) production of  fractures to improve resource flow or to create 
large and sustainable reservoirs , also known as Enhan ced Geothermal Systems, and (iv ) introduction of efficient binary 
cycle power plant with lower overall power production costs. For  smaller subproject s in the project  pipeline, it is 
expected that some would use s lim-holes  at the per -well cost of about US$2- 3 million , to reduce the cost of the 
exploration drilling program, though there is a need to consider the disadvantage that they cannot be converted into 
production wells if the resource is confirmed.  
Furthermore, the design of the Facility has benefitted from a review of the similar programs such as the World Bank -
supported Turkey Geothermal Development Project and Armenia Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project, the African 
Rift Geothermal Development Program (ARGeo), and KfW’s Geothermal Risk Mitigation Facility for East Africa and 
Geothermal Development Facility for Latin America. This project ’s design is informed by an understanding of the 
options related to business model, implementation arrangement and flow of funds in these programs and adapt to the 
Indonesian context.  
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
(a) Total project  financing  US$ 4 billion   
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$ 185 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  187 MtCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 21.4 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  US$ 1 / tCO 2eq 
 
GHG accounting methodology . The project implementation period does not include the construction of 
power plants. The expected geothermal capacity will be counted at financial closure.  Depending on 
whether SMI will be able to recycle funds beyond the 10- year project period the facility would be able to 
support more projects resulting in more MW s.  Based on this, a two-phase analysis will be carried out: pre-  
and post -drilling. The assumptions behind the analysis are:  
• Pre-Drilling .  The CO2 emissions reduction potential is estimated by subtracting projected lifetime 
emissions from a given s ub-project (Sub- Project scenario) from the projected lifetime emissions in the 
BAU scenario (Baseline). In the Sub- Project scenario, CO2 emissions are estimated using an average 
emission factor for geothermal energy facilities of 62.9 tCO2e/GWh.  In the Baseline scenario, CO2 
emissions are estimated based on the combined margin grid emission factor of 838 tCO2e/GWh.  The 
net emission factor is therefor e calculated as 838 tCO2e/GWh minus 62.9 tCO2e/GWh, wh ich gives 
775 tCO2e/GWh. The emission factors assumed are in line with the World Bank GHG guidelines . 
 
• Post -Drilling . A specific requirement for final borrowers to submit evidence on GHG emissions as part 
of the Project ’s monitoring and evaluation framework  will be included.   This is in line with the industry 
practice and the World Bank will encourage geothermal developers  benefitting from its financing to 
collect and share project data that may eventually help reconcile pre- drilling estimates with post -drilling 
findings.  
 
Emissions from possible deforestation which were derived from emission factors expressed in terms of 
t/hectare, areas of lands needed for drilling (approximately 2~3 ha/one standard well pad), and expected number of wells to be drilled are calculated as 59,870 ton based on the pre- identified pipeline.  This 
emissions from the deforestation is reflected in the project GHG accounting although it is negligible 
compared to the GHG emission reduction amount from the project. Emissions from the drilling phase is 
already considered in the emission factor (62.9 gCO 2e/kWh) used in the current calculation and the


---
*Page 41*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
number is country specific . The estimated development impact from the first tranche of GCF allocation is 
expected to be around 60% of the impact from the total project.  
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
The Facility’s two new lending windows are expected to be financed with an initial capital of US$50 0 million: 
(i) US$ 175 (T1:US$ 97,5)  million from GCF ; (ii) US$325 million loan from IBRD to SMI8 (co-financing) ; and  
in addition (iii) US$150 million from GoI to SMI  (parallel  financing)  as well as  leveraged equity contributions 
from the private sector are expected in the measure of US$100 million.  It is expected that MoF  would be 
providing backstopping in term s of potential partial loan forgiveness for SOEs . 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  The relevant indicators for the proposed operation 
have been considered.  
 The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Economic Analysis  
 
The proposed Project  will contribute to Indonesia’s geothermal development goal of adding 5.8 GW by 2026, and by 
doing so, will contribute to: (i) displacing highly -polluting alternatives; (ii) diversifying Indonesia’s generation portfolio; 
and (iii) ultimately contributing to lowering emissions from the energy sector in comparison to a BAU scenar io.  An 
economic analysis was carried out to assess the economic viability of two sample sub- project candidates (the full 
development of a 55 MW and a 10 MW  power plant), and the results are presented below.  
 
Cost -benefit analysis  
 The economic cost estimates were derived based on known or inferred relationships between costs and technical characteristics of geothermal projects, excluding taxes and duties. Investment costs of geothermal development are 
determined by the following factors: (i) size of the de velopment (MW) determined by both resources availability and 
demand; (ii) the enthalpy and depth of the resources; (iii) difficulty of access to the concession area; and (iv) cost and 
efficiency of project  management.   
 
In terms of composition, geothermal  development comprises four types of costs: (i) drilling costs, a function of the 
number wells and the cost of each well; (ii) infrastructure costs for construction roads, well pads and other infrastructure 
facilities; (iii) equipment costs, including power plant and steam field above ground systems (SAGS); and (iv) project  
management costs.  
 
Drilling cost is a function of the following factors: (i) well productivity; (ii) success rate of drilling; (iii) well depth,  and (iv) 
prevailing services and material cost. Well productivity, in turn, depends largely on the enthalpy of the resources and 
well permeability (i.e. the ease with which fluids flow into the well).  
 
Three enthalpy scenarios were assumed in the analysis: (i) low enthalpy, i.e., temperature between 180°C and 230°C; 
(ii) medium enthalpy with temperature above 230°C but relatively low pressure
9; and (iii) high enthalpy with both high 
temperature and high pressure. The base case scenario assumes medium enthalpy for both fields. It was further 
assumed three wells will be drilled at the exploration phase.  
 
                                                             
8 Either direct loan or on-lent via MoF.  
9 Defined as less than 10% excess enthalpy compared to reservoir temperature when measured in a discharging well 
with at least 5 barg WHP, a definition agreed with MEMR albeit minor insistencies with the international conventions.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
Infrastructure Costs are driven primarily  by the difficulty in site access. The analysis laid out three scenarios: (i) easy 
access with initial access road length ranging between 0 and 7.5 km from existing public access road; (ii) medium with 
initial access road between 7.5 km and 20 km; and (iii ) difficult with initial access road longer than 20 km.  
 
Power Plant Equipment Costs were assumed at US$1,500 per kW for a standard single- unit 55 MW plant, and $1,650 
per kW for the 10 MW plant. For any other sizes, the plant costs were estimated using an experiential formula derived 
from actual plant cost data.10   
 
Assuming medium enthalpy and easy access, the total cost of geothermal development under the base case scenario 
was thus estimated at US$209.3 million for the 55 MW site, and US$41.2 million for the 10 MW site.  
Table 3 –  Total Investment Cost 
 
Development 1  
(US$ million)   Development 2  
(US$ million)  
Drilling  90.5 18 
Infrastructure   7.1 3.3 
Power plant and SAGS  101.8  18 
Project  management  10 2 
Total  209.3  41.2 
 
 
Benefits  
The economic  benefits of each development comprise two parts: (i) the economic value of the power supply from the 
plant; and (ii) the avoided cost in CO2 emissions vis -à-vis thermal powered generation.  
 
Plant Factor. A plant factor of 92% was assumed based on experience from operations of existing geothermal power 
plants in Indonesia.  
 
Power supply. The annual power output amounts to 443.3 GWh from the 55 MW plant, and 80.6 GWh from the 10 MW plant.  
 
The economic value of the power supply from each geothermal development is estimated as the weighted average of 
the cost of diesel -based power supply it substitutes and the willingness -to-pay for the additional power supply it enabled 
to provide access to un- electrified households.  
 
Table 4 – Economics Analysis, ENPV and EI RR Results  
 Development 1  
55 MW  Development 2  
10 MW  
ENPV @ 6% discount rate  US$240 .7 million  US$166 .3 million  
EIRR  16.4% 32.4% 
                                                             
10 Single unit plant cost = 1.6051 * (MW)-0.316


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
 
Financial Analysis.   
 The Financial Analysis (FA) was carried out from two different perspectives: (i) one from the developer’s perspective, 
assessing the financial viability of the 55 MW and 10 MW developments  on a with-  and without -project bas es; (ii) the 
other from the implementing agency’s perspective, assessing its cash in-  and out -flows related to the Facility.  
 
From a Developer’s Perspective  
 
Financing mix. In Indonesia, the costs of geothermal exploration are typically  born by the developer through full equity 
financing because debt financing is usually not available at this stage of the development due to the h igh levels of 
resource uncertainties.  Once resources risks are greatly reduced, developers can access debt financing more easily.  
Thus, in the without -Project  scenario the financing mix is assumed to vary from full equity financing at the exploration 
stage, to a 70/30 debt -to-equity thereafter.  
 Financing cost. Each stage of geothermal development is associated with a certain amount of risks and capital 
requirements. Although the capital requirements are higher in later stages, the resource risks at early exploration stages 
are often deemed insurm ountable from a financial perspective, stalling the sector’s development.  Developers would 
demand a risk premium commensurate with the high resource uncertainty associated with the exploration stage of the 
geothermal development.   
 
Cost of capital.   A  cost of debt at 8.0% and corporate tax at 25%  have been assumed.  
 
Outcome of the financial analysis from a developer’s perspective:   
 
• Without the Project  intervention, the 55 MW and 10 MW geothermal  developments are unlikely to be pursued 
due to high equity exploration costs coupled with real and perceived geothermal development -related risks.  A 
coal baseline for the country’s main load centers and a diesel baseline  (with less electrification)  for the smaller 
island grids of Eastern Indonesia would likel y be the alternative scenarios; and  
 
• With the Project  calculations show that FIRR for a private investor will be adequate to meet or exceed his required 
return on investment for the 55 MW case -  even for low enthalpy scenarios. For the 10 MW plant, high or  medium 
enthalpy resources would, marginally, allow a private developer an adequate return whereas an SOE, due to their lower hurdle rate, would be able to develop the 10 MW plant in all enthalpy scenarios . 
 
From the Implementing Agency’s Perspective  
 Facility Capitalization.  The proposed F acility would be capitalized with the following contributions: (i ) US$ 175 million 
through GCF;  (ii) US$325 million from IBRD; and (iii)  as parallel  financing, US$150 m illion from SMI  through PISP.  
 
Investment Mix. The proposed Facility would be supporting public, private and public -private partnership (PPP) 
investments, based on a pipeline of WKPs designated by MEMR. The pipeline as well as the site specifications, such 
as ease of access and expected sizes, have been included in the financial model.  
 
Development Success Rate.  For purposes of the financial analysis, the development success rate (including resource 
risk and downstream  development) is assumed to be 75%.  This is in line with a development success rate r ange of 
75%-80% for Indonesia. It is noted that with a single well success rate, the likelihood that the well can be used for 
steam production is around 55% -60%, and that a normal site success criteria is two/thirds of the exploration wells being 
productiv e. 
 
Funding Considerations.  Funding eligibility and mix for each Facility window are shown in the table below.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
Table 5 - Funding Eligibility and Mix  
 
 PUB  PRIV  
Loan 
Eligibility  Exploration  Delineation/Refinancing 
of Exploration  Exploration and 
Delineation  
Max facility 
share of total 
investment   
100%   
100%   
75% 
 
Outcome of the financial analysis from the implementing agency’s perspective:  
 
• It is expected that at least 1, 000 MW of new  geothermal capacity could be enabled, thus leveraging at 
least US$4,000 million and reducing GHG emissions by 6.3 MtC02 annually.  
 
With the first tranche of US$97.5 million, the Project is still considered viable.  
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
Geothermal technologies use hydrothermal resources that have both water (hydro) and heat (thermal). Depending on 
the site and resource ch aracteristics observed from surface manifestations and various geoscientific studies, there are 
three main types of technologies for the exploration drilling phase: ground source heat pumps, direct use, and deep 
and enhanced geothermal systems (EGS). The developers are expected  to submit, as part of the sub- project funding 
proposal, a drilling program that will include considerations for the optimal technology for a given site, which will 
ultimately be vetted by SMI  and its technical expert consultants.   
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy an d 
Action Plan.  
The Project  will target prospective geothermal work areas across the Indonesian archipelago. Although the project 
locations are not yet defined, screening of potential sites indicates that they are likely to be remote areas, potentially 
with agricultural land uses, f orests, surface geothermal features and landscapes, and potentially other types of natural 
habitats within the project area of influence. Infrastructure such as roads and wharfs may be basic and require 
upgrading to allow rigs to get to site. Indigenous pe ople may be present in the project area of influence. Geothermal 
developments may not be well understood by the host communities, and there is the potential that host communities 
are not connected to an electricity grid or have other basic infrastructure. Locations and scope of the environmental 
and social impacts of projects seeking financing from SMI will be determined during the screening and appraisal of the 
proposals.  
The developer’s proposals for financing will consist of the activities for geothermal  upstream resource development 
(exploration and delineation drilling). These activities will result in adverse environmental and social impacts and each 
proposal could fall as Category A or B. The potential environmental and social impacts might be signifi cant, diverse 
and irreversible.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
Exploration involves construction of access roads, mobilization and operation of large, heavy drilling rigs, construction 
of work camps. Potential impacts include: (i) impacts on soils, vegetation, biodiversity and the surf ace water network 
due to the construction of access roads and drilling platforms during the exploration phase, and production drillings, 
steam pipelines, powerhouses, road networks, and transmission lines during the operational phase; (ii) potential 
damage to, or conversion of natural habitats, as a significant percentage of geothermal resources is located in or near 
terrain on which forest cover is to be maintained for watershed protection; (iii) temporary and permanent land 
acquisition, or damage to, or l oss of assets or livelihoods; (iv) damage or disturbances to physical cultural resources; 
(v) damage or disturbances to geothermal features, water supplies, community infrastructure; and (vi) production, handling, storage and disposal of drilling mud and f luids during the exploration phase; (vii) production, storage and 
handling of brines, noise and visual impacts during the production phase.  
As part of standard practice for geothermal industry and in Indonesia, developers are required to return the site t o prior 
drilling state in the demobilization process. Compared to most other technologies, geothermal drilling has small and 
confined footprint. Nevertheless, 60 percent of the geothermal sites in Indonesia tend to be in forest areas. The World 
Bank will c onsult with the lawyers in considering a strategy for re- forestation of unsuccessful sites, including the 
possibility of making it contractually binding.  
The ESMF has provided  three stages of screening: (1) desk review of the long list of potential sites to exclude non-
starters such as sites within biodiversity reserves; (2) document review/field reconnaissance to identify any fatal flaws 
in sites proposed for further consideration, such as no way to evacuate power except through a protected area; and (3) 
undertake screening to determine what level of environmental assessment should be prepared for a site where 
exploration is planned. The ESMF will include model terms of reference for ESIAs and Environmental and Social 
Management Plans ( ESMPs ). In addition to assessment of exploration impacts, sub-project -level ESIAs and ESMPs 
will identify the key potential impacts of site development and operation along with mitigation requirem ents and 
approximate costs, as this information will be relevant to the decision whether or not to explore.  The World Bank will 
review and approve the TORs for TA activities. The ESMF will provide guidelines for assessing environmental and 
social consequences of proposed reforms, to be applied by the entities conducting the TA, and the team will review the 
results of such assessments prior to implementation of the reforms. The WBG EHS Guidelines will apply to the Project , 
both the general guidelines and those for geothermal power generation.  
Along with the implementation of safeguard for environmental and social issues, careful attentions  and considerations  
will be made for gender aspects in the design and implementation of the project. Gender assessment s will be carried 
out along with the sub- project level ESIAs and ESMPs to identify and resolve gender issues associated with the 
exploration activities such as female employment etc. This practice will follow the gender related recommendations to 
be made in the Operations Manual.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
Financial Management (FM) . This financial ma nagement of the several World Bank projects implemented by SMI has 
been rated satisfactory, reflecting SMI’s capacity and their institutional arrangement in place to uphold high fiduciary 
standards by MDBs. A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for the proposed Project  will be prepared as part of 
ongoing World Bank’s project preparation process and is expected to be completed by early September 2018 prior to 
the GCF Board decision.  SMI will follow World Bank procurement guidelines, including independent auditing 
arrangements, use of IFRS and quarterly financial reporting. Designated trust fund account will be established for GCF 
funds by the World Bank and SMI .  
 
Procurement . The propos ed operation envisages on- lending by SMI to (i) public sector developers, including state-
owned enterprises (SOEs), and joint ventures formed between SOEs and private partners; and (ii) private sector 
developers (i.e.,  IPPs ). For sub-loans to SOEs, the pro curement of goods, works, non-consulting services, and


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 56 
 
 
 F 
consulting services shall follow  the World Bank Procurement Guidelines  for Investment Project Financing ( IPF) 
Borrowers dated November 2017.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 44 OF 56 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent t he 
project/programme objectives from being achieved.  Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
The GoI has set clear strategies and policies to develop 
the geothermal sector. There have however been 
significant and frequent changes in the regulatory 
framework, which has introduced uncertainties in the 
sector and deterred investments. First, the most  recent 
tariff policy requiring power price to be competitive with 
the average cost of generation in a region rather than 
the marginal economic costs of new supply appears to create an additional barrier to bringing on- line 
renewable energy more broadly and geothermal energy more specifically. This can become a disincentive for 
geothermal development in areas with low average 
costs, including large power markets with rich 
geothermal resources and large power demand, such 
as Java and Sumatra. Second, uncerta inty related to 
post-exploration business -to-business negotiations of 
PPA sales price with PLN may prevent developers from 
investing in exploration. This uncertainty could be 
compounded by the new requirement for ministerial 
approval of PPA sales price, wh ich may be perceived 
as excessive scrutiny and may further deter investors.  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
Through the Technical Assistance Component, the project  team will continue dialogue with key policy -makers and 
stakeholders on ameliorating the regulatory barriers to the sector.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The Project  aims to establish a first -of-its-kind Facility 
to support exploration drilling by geothermal developers 
in Indonesia. The Project  design is still being tested with 
key stakeholders and issues related to legal, Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provi de a summary of main risk factors . Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G .2. 
The Risk factors are described in detail  in Section G.2.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 45 OF 56 
 
 G 
operational, financial, and commercial risks for different 
parties will be considered and addressed.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
The financing terms will need to reflect market conditions and developers’ risk appetite. The team is undertaking 
extensive market sounding to ensure adequate uptake for the Facility, while working with key government stakeholders 
to ensure the enabling legal framework for such a Facility is in place.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Piloting a new financing facility with a complex modus 
operandi has inherent risks related to the institutional 
capacity of the key entities and stakeholders involved in 
establishing, managing, and overseeing such an 
innovative mechanism.  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
There is high- level support and commitment toward this Project  among the key stakeholders, which provide 
momentum to address the main institutional bottlenecks both at the ministries and at SMI . The Technical Assistance 
Component will be designed to addres s the capacity issues and will focus on specific policies / regulations / practices 
to unblock some of the existing constraints and facilitate investment into the geothermal sector. Furthermore, the Bank 
will build on its ongoing experience of working with SMI, MEMR, and PLN, as well as draw on international experience 
in supporting efforts to improve the geothermal investment through extensive dialogues and consultations with 
developers and private sector stakeholders.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The major procurement risks currently envisaged are 
SMI’s capacity for due diligence and oversight of 
implementation of complex drilling operations by SOEs. 
The procurement risks will be further assessed during 
project  preparation and mitigation measures agreed. 
For each sub- project, the SOEs will also be required to 
develop Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
(PPSD) with support from the Bank and SMI.  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
PPSD will include inter alia a market analysis to design the appropriate approaches to the market and to facilitate 
preparation of the procurement plan. The need for hiring the consultants by SMI for carrying  capacity asses sment of


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 46 OF 56 
 
 G 
SOEs with market analysis and preparation of PPSD, and supporting SMI in overseeing the procurement and contract 
management by SMI will also be discussed during the early stages of project  preparation.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
There are potential direct and negative impacts during 
project  implementation are associated with exploration 
infrastructure, such as access roads, drilling pads, 
extraction of geothermal water, and discharges of water 
and drilling muds. There are also potential long- term 
impacts from induced development and the benefits of 
renewable electricity generation.  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
Some environmental impacts may be considered irreversible or unprecedented without adequate mitigation and 
management , which is outlined in detail in the accompanying ESMF . With regards to s ocial issues, land acquisition is 
expected to be willing buyer -willing seller. I n previous Bank -financed project implemented by PGE in Lahendong and 
Ulubelu, land acquisition was conducted through direct negotiation and there was no involuntary resettlement. The 
infrastructure, access route and drilling program can be adjusted in case land- owners object to releasing their land.   
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of  “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors . 
 
Not applicable  
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 56 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Fram ework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts  at the Fund level11 
Paradigm shift o bjectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The proposed Project  expects to contribute to Indonesia’s shift to low-emission sustainable  
development pathways by implementing an innovative risk mitigation approach that have the 
potential to be replicated in other geothermal -rich countries and regions . They may include 
but are not limited to Chile, Dominica, Mexico, Nicaragua, El Salvador, C osta Rica and Saint 
Lucia in Latin America; Ethiopia, Tanzania, Kenya and Djibouti in East Africa; Turkey and 
Armenia in Eastern Europe and the Balkans; and the Philippines  and Fiji in the Pacific.  The 
risk mitigation model developed under this Project  could be adapted to country contexts  to 
potentially facilitate a rapid world- wide scale- up of geothermal development through 
demonstration effects .  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level i mpacts  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as 
a result of Fund 
funded projects/ 
programmes   SMI’s M&E 
Function as  
Implement.  
Agency   0 93.5 
MtCO 2eq 187 
MtCO 2e
q Refer to Section 
E.6.5.  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation   
 
Cost per t CO2eq 
decreased for all 
Fund- funded 
mitigation projects/ 
programmes  
 
 SMI’s M&E  
Function as 
Implement.  
Agency  0 US$ 1.2  / 
tCO 2eq US$ 1.2  
/ tCO
2eq Total financing 
of US$4 billion 
divide d by the 
GCF amount mobilized of  
US$185 million.  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  MWs of Low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or rehabilitated as a SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implement.  
Agency  0 500 MW  1,000 
MW Expected values  
                                                             
11 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under r efinement) : 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-
_Performance_Measurement_Framew orks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef -7c87- 475f-809e -4ebf1acbb3f4


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 56 
 
 
 H 
result of the GCF 
support.  
 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access an d 
power generation   
Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund 
funding   
 SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implement. 
Agency  0 US$2 
billion  US$4 
billion  Full geothermal 
development 
cost around 
US$4 million per 
MW * 1,000 MW enabled  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund funding  – Sub-
Element 1: Private 
capital mobilized for 
investment in 
geothermal 
Exploration  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implement. 
Agency  0 0 US$0.5  
million  Expected values  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund funding  – Sub-
Element 2: Private 
capital expected to 
be mobilized for 
investment in 
geothermal 
development over time SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implement. 
Agency  0 0 US$ 3.5 
billion  Expected values  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
1. Geothermal projects 
explored  Number of projects 
explored  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  0 10  17 (T1: 
10) Each project will 
benefit from 
around US$30 
million loan from 
the facility  
2.  GREM Facility  
governance and 
management procedure 
under SMI adequate  PMU established, 
well-staffed and 
well-resourced  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  No Yes Yes (T1: 
Yes) TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 56 
 
 
 H 
3. Geothermal 
investment climate 
improved  TA support 
extended to key 
players, including 
MEMR, PLN and 
Geo Dipa  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  No Yes Yes (T1: 
Yes) TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Funding for 
exploration drilling 
extended to explore 
new prospective 
sites  Number of loans 
for resource 
confirmation drilling  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  0 10  17 
(T1:10)  Investment 
support 
mobilized 
through TA 
support under 
Component 2  
2. Appraisal and drilling 
result evaluation 
reports prepared by 
the PMU  Number of reports 
prepared by PMU  SMI’s M&E 
Function as Implementing 
Agency  0 20  34 
(T1:20)  TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2 .  It 
assumes two 
reports per 
project.  
3. Project -level GAP 
prepared and implemented  Number of project -
level GAPs 
prepared and 
supervision 
provided  SMI’s M&E 
Function as Implementing 
Agency  0 10  17 (T1: 
10) TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2  
4. PLN adopts 
bankable PPA 
reflective of  
transmission and 
distribution planning  Geothermal PPA 
including T&D 
arrangements  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  No Yes Yes (T1:  
Improved 
PPA 
template 
agreed)  TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2  
5. Proposed tariff report 
for MEMR  Proposed tariff 
report delivered to 
MEMR  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  0 1 1 (T1: 1) TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2  
6. Improved resource 
data management 
capacity by Geo Dipa  Number of data 
management 
software with 
training (one) 
delivered to Geo 
Dipa SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  0 1 3 (T1: 1)  TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2  
7. Geothermal 
development 
capacity of Geo Dipa 
and PLN increased  Number of 
geothermal 
exploration and 
exploitation 
management 
focused trainings  SMI’s M&E 
Function as 
Implementing 
Agency  0 3 6 (T1: 2)  TA activity 
funded under 
Component 2


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 56 
 
 
 H 
 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Output 1 –  Number of loans for resource confirmation drilling  
1.1 Funding for resource 
confirmation drilling  Funding  packages provided to 
developers, and where relevant 
technical assistance  Investment support 
mobilized through 
TA support  under 
Component 2  Preparation and specialized 
advisors on retainer basis to 
provide international 
expertise to SMI and its 
PMU  
1.2 Supervision of 
drilling loans  Supervision of drilling loans  Investment support 
mobilized through 
TA support under 
Component 2  Preparation and specialized 
advisors on retainer basis to 
provide international 
expertise to SMI and its 
PMU  
Output 2 –  Number of appraisal and drilling result evaluation reports prepared by PMU  
2.1 Appraisal and drilling 
result evaluation  Technical r eports will be prepared 
by expert consultants early on in 
project implementation and by 
SMI’s in-house staff in later stage   TA support under 
Component 2  TA budget  
Output 3  – Number of project- level GAPs prepared and supervision provided  
3.1 Preparation of 
project -level GAPs and 
supervision   GAPs will be prepared by 
developers and supported with 
supervision by PMU  to contribute to 
the gender efforts under the Project  TA Component 2  GAPs will be in compliance 
with guidelines laid out in the 
OM 
Output 4 –  PLN’s geothermal PPA including T&D arrangement  
4.1 Transmission and 
distribution planning for 
geothermal development  Delivery of report with 
recommendations  on transmission 
and distribution planning for 
geothermal development  TA Component 2  TA budget  
Output 5 –  Proposed tariff report delivered to MEMR  
5.1 Preparation of revised geothermal tariff  Tariff report considering market 
conditions  building on the previous 
regulatory TA efforts with a view to 
provide advice on key topics for 
greater investment, including 
private sector participation  TA Component 2  TA budget  
Output 6 –  Number of data management software with training (one) delivered to Geo Dipa  
6.1 Data managem ent 
software with training  Delivery of d ata ma nagement 
software with training based on the 
private sector experience with data management tools  TA Component 2  TA budget  
Output 7 –  Number of geothermal exploration and exploitation  management  focused trainings for Geo Dipa 
and PLN


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 56 
 
 
 H 
  
 7.1 Geothermal 
exploration and 
exploitation 
management focused 
trainings  Delivery of g eothermal exploration 
and exploitation management  
focused trainings . The focus of the 
training spans the entire geothermal development process, from 
development of a conceptual model 
for exploration to power plant 
operation and maintenance. The 
training could be provided by the 
Bandung Institute of Technology.  TA Component 2  TA budget  
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid- term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  Please provide 
methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key out comes of the project/programme.  
 
Project  implementation involves: (i ) monitoring of perform ance indicators in Section H; (ii ) periodic progress reports; and 
(iii) a Mid-Term R eview of implementation progress .  This is in line with the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework  
of World Bank projects.  In greater detail:  
 3. As part of the World Bank project implementation, SMI is expected as the implementing agency  through a PMU, to  
administer the sub- loan portfolio and monitor the project  implementation against the  performance indicators of the 
Project  results framework. In their M&E function, they will also be supported by experts sourced through the technical 
assistance component. Data and statistics on actual project outputs and outcomes will be gathered, analyze d, and 
included in the quarterly progress repor ts to be submitted to the Bank.  
 
4. The Bank will review standard and ad- hoc progress reports as well as  requests submitted by SMI, including no 
objections .  Procurement and financial management controls will be put in place according to the Bank corporate 
standards. These will include detailed reviews of costing benchmarks from other geothermal development 
engagements in Indonesia  - first and foremost, the ongoing Geothermal Energy Upstream Development Project 
(GEUDP)  - to ensure reasonableness of costs incurred.  
 
5. These efforts on monitoring progress towards the achievement of the project development objective will be 
complemented by the World Bank’s Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), which will be submitted at 
least biannually by the task team  following on the ground implementation support missions . Halfway through p roject  
implementation, the World Bank will conduct a Mid- Term Review, the results of which will be captured in a dedicated 
ISR.  At com pletion, an Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) report will be prepared with input s from all 
stakeholders, including WB, the local agencies involved during implementation as well as the project  beneficiaries.   
WB will report on its monitoring exerc ise to GCF, as required by the project needs.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 56 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
  I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment (If applicable)  
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations ( An Appraisal Report is currently being 
prepared and will be submitted at a later stage)  
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 56*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 56 
 
 
 I 
Annex 1: List of Potential Pipeline Projects  
 
The following list consists of WKPs where geothermal development is being considered and where the developer either has not started exploration drilling or has only made very early exploration efforts. It also 
includes projects that have been designated for development, but not yet assigned to a developer. These 
KPs therefore constitute a potential pipeline of sub- projects for appraisal and investment purposes –  not 
all sub- projects may end up being developed.   
 
No Working Area  Developer  Plan of 
Development 
(MW) Remarks  
Public 
Sector 
Projects  
1 Tangkuban 
Perahu  PLN 60 West Java, a slim hole exploration 
program has been started but it failed 
on technical drilling issue, showing 
interest to get the facility  
2 Atadei  PLN 10 Lembata Island – East Nusa Tenggara, 
two shallow wells were drilled early 2000s by MEMR, showing interest to 
get the facility  
3 Songa 
Wayaua  PLN 10 Bacan Island – North Maluku, no wells 
drilled yet, showing interest to get the facility  
4 Sembalun  PLN 20 Lombok Island – West Nusa Tenggara, 
no wells drilled yet, showing interest to get the facility  
5 Ungaran  PLN 55 Central Java, no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
6 Kepahiang  PLN 110 Bengkulu – South Sumatera, no wells 
drilled yet, showing interest to g et the 
facility  
7 Gunung 
Sirung  PLN 5 Pantar Island – East Nusa Tenggara, 
no wells drilled yet, showing interest to 
get the facility  
8 Oka Ile Ange  PLN 10 Flores Island – East Nusa Tenggara, 
no wells drilled yet, showing interest to get the facility  
9 Danau Ranau  PLN 55 Lampung – South Sumatera , no wells 
drilled yet, showing interest to get the facility


---
*Page 57*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 56 
 
 
 I 
10 Dieng 
Candradimuka  Geo Dipa  40 Central Java, no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
11 Umbul 
Telomoyo  Geo Dipa  55 Central Java,  no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
12 Arjuno 
Welirang Geo Dipa  185 East Java, no wells drilled yet, showing 
interest to get the facility  
13 Iyang 
Argopuro  PGE  55 East Java, no wells drilled yet, showing 
interest to get the facility  
14 Seulawah 
Agam  PGE  110 Aceh – Sumatera, no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
Private 
Sector 
Projects  
1 Blawan Ijen  Medco  110 East Java, first exploration drilling 
program has been started, showing interest to get the facility  
2 Gunung 
Talang – Bukit 
Kili Hitay 
Energy  20 West Sumatera, no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
3 Way Ratai  ENEL JV  55 Lampung – Sumatera, no wells drilled 
yet, showing interest to get the facility  
4 Rajabasa  Supreme  220 Lampung – Sumatera, no wells drilled 
yet, showing interest to get the facility  
5 Jaboi  Sabang 
Geothermal 
Energy  10 Aceh – Sumatera, no wells drilled yet  
6 Cisolok 
Cisukarame Jabar 
Rekin 
Geothermal  50 West Java, no wells drilled yet  
7 Tampomas  Wijaya 
Karya  45 West Java, no wells drilled yet  
8 Rawa Dano  Sintesa 
Banten  110 Banten – West Java, no wells drilled 
yet 
9 Guci Spring 
Energy 
Sentosa  55 Central Java, no wells drilled yet


---
*Page 58*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 56 
 
 
 I 
10 Pentadio  - 25 Gorontalo – North Sulawesi, in process 
for PSPE (exploration assignment) to 
an IPP  
11 Hu’u Daha  - 20 West Nusa Tenggara , in process for 
PSPE (exploration assignment) to an IPP 
12 Graho Nyabu  - 110 Jambi – Sumatera , in process for 
PSPE (exploration assignment) to an 
IPP 
13 Suoh 
Sekincau  - 220 Lampung – Sumatera , in process for 
PSPE (exploration assignment) to an 
IPP 
14 Gunung 
Hamiding  - 10 Halmahera Island - North Maluku , in 
process for PSPE (exploration assignment) to an IPP  
15 Gunung 
Geuredong  - 35 Aceh – Sumatera , in process for PSPE 
(exploration assignment) to an IPP  
Not Yet 
Assigned  
1 Sipoholon Ria 
Ria - 20 North Sumatera  
2 Simbolon 
Samosir  - 110 North Sumatera  
3 Tanjung Sakti  - 55 South Sumatera  
4 Gunung Gede 
Pangrango  - 85 West Java  
5 Gunung 
Ciremai  - 110 West Java, no wells drilled yet, 
showing interest to get the facility  
6 Marana  - 20 Central Sulawesi  
7 Bora Pulu  - 40 Central Sulawesi  
8 Gunung 
Galunggung  - 110 West Java  
9 Lesugolo  - 5 Flores – East Nusa Tenggara  
10 Gunung Endut  - 40 Banten – West Java  
11 Gunung 
Pandan  - 60 East Java


---
*Page 59*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 56 
 
 
 I 
12 Songgoriti  - 35 East Java  
13 Laenia  - 20 Central Sulawesi  
14 Suwawa  - 20 Gorontalo – Sulawesi  
15 Telaga Ranu  - 5 North Maluku  
16 Gunung Wilis  - 20 East Java


---
*Page 61*
---

 
 
Page 1 
 
 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Indonesia Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Project  
Accredited entity  The World Bank  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 1 (I1)  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)   
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  Not applicable  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  Not applicable   
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website   See below  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosur
e Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF ) incorporating the 
Resettlement Policy Framework and Indigenous Peoples’ Planning Framework  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  15 May 2018  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  
Link to 
disclosure  http://documents.worldbank.org/cu rated/en/683141519642635894/pdf/SFG40
77-EA-REVISED -P166071 -PUBLIC -Disclosed -5-15-2018.pdf  
The Draft ESMF  contains an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
consistent with the  requirements for a category I-1 programme . 
Other link(s)  AE’s web page:  
http://projects.worldbank.org/P166071?lang=en  
 
Intermediary’s web page:  
English  
https://www.ptsmi.co.id/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/ESMF -Indonesia -GREM -
Draft -ENG.pdf


---
*Page 62*
---

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
Bahasa Indones ia 
https://www.ptsmi.co.id/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/ESMF -Indonesia -GREM -
Draft -INA.pdf  
 
________