=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206110305+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206110305+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February - 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  15 GCF/B.19/22/Add .10 
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
 
Consideration o f funding 
proposals – Addendum X  
Funding proposal package for FP068  
 
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Scaling -up Multi -Hazard Early 
Warning System and the Use of Climate Information in  Georgia”;  
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or  focal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme Title: Scaling -up Multi -Hazard Early Warning System and the Use of  
Climate Information in Georgia  
 
Country/Region: Georgia  
 
 
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme  
 
 
Date of Submission: 5 February 2018


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
 
Section  F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
 
Section  I ANNEXES


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”  • Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other pro ject documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed  50. Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template


---
*Page 5*
---

A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 73   
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Scaling -up Multi -Hazard Early Warning System and the 
Use of Climate Information in Georgia  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Georgia  
 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ms. Ekaterine Grigalava, Deputy Minister of Environment 
and Natural Resources Protection; E -mail: 
e.grigalava@moe.gov.ge  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: Ministry of Environment Protection and  
Agriculture of Georgia (M oEPA)  
Beneficiary: up to 1.7 Million people at risk of climate -induced 
extreme events and hazards  
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million USD)  ☐ Micro (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☐ Mitigation  ☒ Adaptation  ☐ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  5 June 2017; 5 October 2017; 22 November 2017; 12  
December 2017; 15 January 2018; 5 Feb 2018  
 
 
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Natalia Olofinskaya, Regional Technical Specialist  
Organization  UNDP  
Email address  Nataly.olofinskaya@undp.org  
Telephone number  +90(543)532 -3046  
 
Mailing address  UNDP Istanbul Regional Hub for Europe and CIS  
Key Plaza, Abide -i Hürriyet Cd., İstiklal Sk. No:11, room 1107 
Şişli, 34381, Istanbul, Turkey  
 
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power  generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Low emission  transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and  appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ Forestry and land  use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)


---
*Page 6*
---

A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 73   
 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Due to the complex mountainous terrain and climate, Georgia is subject to both geological and hydro -meteorological 
hazards. According to Georgia’s 2nd and 3rd  National Communications and other studies1, under climate change the 
frequency, intensity and geographical spread of extreme hydrometeorological hazards will increase. Georgia’s INDC 
estimates  economic  losses  from climate -induced  hazards  without  adaptatio n measures  for the period  2021 -2030  to be 
$US 10 -12 billion, while the cost of adaptation measures is estimated to be 1.5 -2 billion USD2. 
2. To date, hydrometeorological hazard risk management has relied on the limited and expensive hard structural 
protection  measures; emergency response with limited reliance on forecasts and early warning of the population; post 
event compensation and relocation of victims, resulting in eco -migrants; and post event recovery and risk reduction. In 
order to adapt to climate cha nge, Georgia needs to adopt a proactive integrated climate risk management (CRM) 
approach  centred  around  risk reduction,  prevention,  and preparedness  through  the establishment  of a multi -hazard  early 
warning system and an enhanced use of climate information in planning and decision -making across all sectors. This 
GCF  project  will address  the main  barriers  to the establishment  of a multi -hazard  early  warning  system  (MHEWS)  and all 
other aspects of a priori climate risk management required to suppor t an effective  MHEWS.  
3. The project will achieve transformative change in climate risk reduction and management in Georgia by development 
of a fully -integrated impact -based MHEWS system. In doing so it will introduce a standardised hazard, risk and 
vulnerabi lity assessment and mapping methods and technologies and provide critical climate risk information to enable 
the implementation  of nation -wide risk reduction  policies.  Importantly,  it will develop  long-term institutional  and community 
capacities  in climate  risk reduction  (CRR),  climate  change  adaptation  (CCA)  and MHEWS.  The project  will thus catalyse 
a paradigm shift  towards  climate  risk-informed  and resilient  development  and will directly  benefit  up to 1.7 Million  people 
(40% of the population) currently at risk from hydrometeorological hazards.  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD (date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF)  
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/08/2018  
End: 31/07/2025  
Project/programme lifespan  7 years 0 months  
 
 
1 World Bank project: Reducing the Vulnerability of Georgia’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change ; USAID/GLOWS project: 
Integrated Natural Resources Management in Watersheds of Georgia; Regional Climate Change Impacts for the South Caucasus 
Region’ funded through ENVSEC (Environmental Security) initiative and commissioned by UNDP  
2 Georgia’s Intended Nationally Determined C ontribution submission to the UNFCCC  (E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
Health and well -being, and f ood and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, eco tourism, etc.)  ☒ 
 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ Increased resilience of:  
Most vulnerable people and communities


---
*Page 7*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 73   
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
4. The Government  of Georgia  requests  funds  in the form of grant,  given  the public  good  nature  of the proposed  climate 
risk reduction  investments  targeting  enhanced  resilience  of around  1.7 million  people,  including  the most  vulnerable  and 
poor rural communities living in remote mountainous areas. It is unlikely that revenue streams will occur from these 
investments and hence loans or no n-grant instruments will not be feasible. The project will develop climate risk 
information products which will mainly benefit the population at risk in line with the statutory obligations of the GoG to 
provide the necessary information to enable them to s afeguard their lives, livelihoods and assets from climate induced 
extreme  hydrometeorological  risks.  The majority  of recipients  of climate  risk information  (i.e. the public  at large)  is unable 
to pay for such services.This is the responsibility of governme nt and therefore this activity does not lend itself to cost - 
recovery for these essential statutory services to be provided to the  public.  
 
5. The project  is fully aligned  with the national  government  plans  for strengthening  the hydro -meteorological  monitoring 
network and will leverage new and additional co -financing from a wide range of national partners. The Government of 
Georgia  identified  several  sources  of co-financing  and partner  initiatives  to align  with GCF  financing.  Major  co-financiers 
are: 
 
i) The MoEPA  and its subordinate agencies – National Environmental Agency (NEA) and Environmental 
Information  and Education  Center  (EIEC)  – $ US 12.78  Million  co-financing  to the Outputs  1 and 2 of the project3: 
this co -financing is new and additional and cover specifically: (i) O&M costs for new hydrometeorological 
observation  equipment  to be procured  by the project  incurred  over the project  lifetime;  (ii) purchase  of additional 
monitoring equipment for the enhanced and expanded hydrometeorolgical monitoring network, including three 
meteorological  radars,  a drone,  hydrological  station  on Aragvi  river;  (iii) costs  of new NHEWS  data management, 
periodic update of hazard and risk maps, creation of warning and other data management activities for the 
adequate operation of the new MHEWS over the lifetime of the project; (iv) EIEC contribution to the CRM - 
related communication, capacity building, education and awareness activities to be carried out in the course of 
the project implementation complementary to Activity 3.2. of the GCF project; (v) in -kind contribution of $0.212 
mln (0.7% of the total commitment) associated with the activities of the MoEPA  and EIEC in support of the 
project management and and US$$0.278 mln for policy and regulatory work under activity 2.1. (staff time, 
travel,  use of premises  for the project  implementation).  In addition,  the MoEPA  is commited  to allocate  another  
$US 18.85 million for the post -project O&M of hydrometeorological equipment and post -project data 
management and system updates (this amount is not included in the GCF project co -financing). Details of the 
contribution are outlined in the letter of co -financing commitment from MoENRP enclosed in the Annex IV.  
ii) MoEPA  (for the former  Ministry  of Agriculture/MoA)  - $US 0.6 Million  co-financing  to the Output  2 of the project: 
O&M of expanded agrometeorological network (15 new agrometeorological stations to be procured by the 
project) over the course of the GCF project (5 years period). In addition, there is a commitement to allocate 
another $US 1.8 million for the post -project O&M of agrometeorological stations (this amount is not included in 
the GCF project  co-financing);  
iii) The Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (MRDI) – $US 7.27 Million co -financing to the  Output 
3 of the project: implementation of flood defence measures. These government funds are new and additional 
and will be released in the course of the project (2018 -2023) for the implementation of the priority structural 
measures identified and design ed by the GCF project. The MRDI committed to co -finance these specific 
measures identified through the project development phase for 13 high -risk sites. Details on the structural 
measures are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex  II). 
iv) The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) - $US 16.54 Million co -financing to Outcomes 1, 2 and 3: EMA costs of 
managing  a centralized  disaster  risk meta -data base  and MHEWS  (US$63,272;  Activity  1.4.);  Joint  Operations  
 
 
3 In January 2018, the Ministry of Environment and N atural Resources Protection and Ministry of Agriculture were merged into one 
Ministry now called the Ministry of Environment Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA). MoEPA will be the project Executing 
Entity/Implementing Partner. Consultations have been conduc ted with the new MoEPA Management. MoEPA takes over all the 
previous co -financing commitments of the MoENRP and MoA, thus the co -financing commitments communicated in the letters from 
MoENRP and MoA are valid and will be fully met by MoEPA.


---
*Page 8*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 73   
 
Centre (JOC) surveillance network - procurement and maintenance (US$16.44 mln; Activity 2.2.); MIA annual 
capacity building/trainings for local self-governance authorities (US$34,005; Activity 3.2.);  
v) Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation (SDC) - $US 5 Million co -financing to Outcomes 1 and 2: setting 
up institutional and legal frameworks for the hazard mapping system (as part of the MHEWS) – US$0.8 mln; 
hazard mapping for climate -induced hazards – US$ 3.2 mln; undertaking related capacity -building of the 
Georgian  institutions,  including  technical  advisory  services  and trainings  – US$ 0.6 mln; guidance  and advisory 
services for multi -hazard risk management planning, including municipal -level multi -hazard response and 
preparedness  plans  – US$ 0.4 mln. Within  these  ammounts  indicated  in the co-financing  letter,  the management 
costs are included in the amount of US$ 0.508 mln associated with the activities in support of the project 
management  
vi) In addition to this, the Local Governments (LGs) of the municipalities where the structural measures will be 
implemented  are committed  to cover  post-project  20-year O&M  costs  for the 13 flood  defense  structures  for the 
total amount  of $US 3.15 Million.  Details  on the O&M  are provided  in the O&M  Plan (Annex  XIII.b.);  the activities 
to be covered will include periodic removal of sediments and control of vegetation in the riverbeds. These 
financial  commit ments  were  not included  in the GCF  project  co-financing  as they refer to the post-project  period.  
vii) Tbilisi Mayor’s Office - $US 1.05 Million co -financing to the Output 2 of the project: the co -financing will be 
closely coordinated with the GCF activities under Output 2 on the regulatory frameworks, institutional 
strengthening  and planning  and will cover  activities  related  to enhanced  regulations,  planning  and management 
capacity  for resilience  in the framework  of the 100 Resilient  Cities  project  (US$1  Million). The co-financing  also 
include in -kind contrinbution of $51,600 in support of the project management in the form of the office space, 
work  shop  and meeting  venues  for the GCF  project  events  and specialists.  In addition  to this, the Tbilisi  Mayor’s 
Office  is committed  to invest  another  US$12.1  Million  in the course  of the GCF  project  into structural  measures 
to enhance resilience to floods, mudflows and landslides as part of the implementation of the PDNA 
recommendations.  
All co -financing letters are  submitted in the Annex IV.  
 
Table 1: Financial Elements per project outputs4 
  
 
 
Output   
 
 
Activity   
GCF  
funding 
amount 
(million 
USD)   
Co-financing amount (USD million)   
Amoun 
t (for 
entire 
project  
) (USD  
million)  Amou 
nt (for 
entire 
project  
) 
(millio 
n   
GEL)*   
Tbilisi 
Mayor’ 
s Office   
MoEPA  
(MoENRP)   
MoEPA  
(MoA)   
SDC   
MIA  
MRDI  
Output 1. 
Expanded 
hydro - 
meteorolo 
gical 
observatio 
n network 
and 
modelling 
capacities 
secure 
reliable 
informatio 
n on 
climate - 
induced  Activity 1.1. 
Expanding 
hydro - 
meteorologica 
l observation 
network   
 
 
5.663    
 
 
9.520       
 
 
15.183   
 
 
36.652  
Activity 1.2. 
Risk zoning 
based on 
hazard and 
risk maps for 
all major 
basins in 
Georgia for  
key climate -    
 
 
1.008    
 
 
 
3.050     
 
 
4.058   
 
 
9.796  
 
 
 
4 The fee arrangement for the proposed project to be aligned with the GCF Board’s decision on fees. The Accredited Entity (AF) Fee for the 
proposed project is US$ 2,164,288. The budget figures presented in this proposal exclude the fee.


---
*Page 9*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 73  
 
 hazards,  induced            
vulnerabili  hazards  
ty and   
risks   
 Activity 1.3:           
 Introduction     
 and    
 implementatio     
 n of methods     
 and tools for     
 the systematic     
 gender - 
sensitive  0.325  0.325  0.784  
 socio -    
 economic     
 vulnerability     
 assessment     
 Activity 1.4: A           
 centralized      
 multi -hazard      
 disaster risk  
information   
0.305   
0.063  0.368  0.888  
 and     
 knowledge      
 system      
 
 
 
 
Output 2:  Activity 2.1: 
Institutional 
and legal 
frameworks 
and 
institutional 
capacity 
building for 
the MHEWS 
and for the 
enhanced  use 
of climate  
information.           
Multi - 
hazard    
0.200   
0.278   
1.043   
1.628   
3.931  
early  
warning  0.107       
system        
and new        
climate        
informatio        
Activity 2.2:  
Development 
and 
implementatio 
n of the 
MHEWS  
covering all 
Georgia           
n      
products       
supported  
with 2.621  1.050  16.440  20.111  48.549  
effective       
national       
regulation       
Activity 2.3: 
Enhancing 
access and 
the use of 
weather and 
climate 
information 
and 
agrometeorol 
ogical 
information 
services by 
farmers and 
agricultural  
enterprises   
   
     
s,     
coordinati      
on     
mechanis      
m and     
institution      
al     
capacities  
. 1.075  0.600  1.675  4.043


---
*Page 10*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 73  
 
  Activity 2.4: 
Climate - 
informed 
MHRM  
planning: 
development 
of basin -level 
multi -hazard 
risk 
management 
plans; 
municipal - 
level multi - 
hazard 
response and 
preparedness  
plans   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.261   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.800     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.400     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.461   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.354   
 Activity 3.1: 
Implementatio           
 n of    
 community -    
 based early     
 warning     
 
Output 3: 
Improved 
communit 
y 
resilience 
through 
the 
implement 
ation of 
the 
MHEWS  
and 
priority 
risk 
reduction 
measures  schemes and 
community - 
based climate 
risk 
management   
5.272   
5.272   
12.727  
Activity 3.2: 
Public 
awareness 
and capacity 
building 
programme to 
effectively 
deliver climate 
risk 
information 
and training to 
communities  
and local first - 
responders.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.447    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.710     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.034    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.191   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.288  
 Activity 3.3: 
Implementatio 
n of priority  
risk reduction 
interventions   
 
5.862        
 
 
7.272   
 
 
13.134   
 
 
31.705  
Project Management 
Costs  2.117  0.051  0.212   0.508    2.888  6.971  
 
Total Project Financing  27.054  1.051  12.778  0.600  5.000  16.538  7.272  70.293  169.68  
6 
 
*UN exchange rate as of 1 June 2017. 1 US dollar = 2.414 Georgian Lari.  
 
Please see Annex V for the budget breakdown by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, 
services, etc.) and disbursement schedule.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing


---
*Page 11*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 73  
 
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)   
70.293   
million USD ($)   
  
(i) Senior Loans   
 
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
 
27.054       
 (ii) Subordinated 
Loans  Options  
Options  (  ) years  
(  ) years    (   ) %  
(   ) %  
 (iii) Equity  Options    ( ) % IRR  
 (iv) Guarantees  Options      
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (v) Reimbursable 
grants  * 
(vi) Grants  * Options  
million USD ($)      
 * Please provide economic and financial justification in  section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing 
and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in  section  E. 
 Total requested     
 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  27.054  million USD ($)  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
 Grant  12.368  million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  MoEPA  ( ) years  ( ) %  Options  
 In-kind 0.410  MoEPA  ( ) years  ( ) %  Options  
 Grant  0.600  MoEPA  (MoA)   ( ) % IRR  Options  
 Grant  7.272  MRDI    Options  
(c) Co - 
financing to 
recipient  Grant  
In-kind 1.000  
0.051  City of Tbilisi  
City of Tbilisi     
 Grant  5.000  SDC     
 Grant  16.538  MIA    
 Lead financing institution: n/a  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.


---
*Page 12*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 73  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF 
financing passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the 
proposed financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
 
 
If there is a financial arrangement between the G CF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or 
financial terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed 
instrument and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
 Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  ( ) years  ( ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the  AE. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
6. Only a qualitative  financial  market  overview  has been  undertaken  for the project  due to the public  good  nature  of the 
project interventions and the limited commercial market for the climate services to be developed by the project (See 
Table 2 in the new Section C.5. Market Overview for profile of climate services  customers).  
 
The project is developing a multi -hazard early warning system which is an essential element of any country’s climate 
risk management framework and which will serve 1.7 Million ordinary Georgians currently at risk from climate -induced 
hazards. A cost -benefit analysis has been undertaken for the project as a means of assessing its viability (See annex 
XIIa and b) with benef its calculated based on:  
 
• Damages  avoided  to property  and agriculture  from the  construction  of flood  mitigation  works  at 13 locations 
short listed in both East and West  Georgia  
• Savings in damages to flood plain properties located in Georgian fluvial flood plains because of timely 
warnings to the public at risk through investment in Flood Forecasting and Multi -Hazard Early Warning 
Systems  (MHEWS)  
• Reduction in the loss of life as a result of introduction of MHEWS  
 
7. The analysis  found  that the present  value  of benefits  of the project  is $80.8  Million  USD.  Given  the nature  of the main 
beneficiaries  of the climate  information  services  who are ordinary  Georgians  with no means  of paying  for such  services, 
and given  the fact that these  services  are the statutory  obligation  of the GoG  to provide,  it is unlikely  that any commercial 
sectors  will provide  a significant  long-term customer  base  to leverage  their funding  against  these  present  value  benefits. 
Several commercial sectors have been approached to gauge their willingness to pay for climate services including 
Hydropower sector, infrastructure investment and development sector (see letter of support from the Georgian Co - 
investment  Fund  – Annex  IV) and insurance  sector.  While  these  sectors  will benefit  from the climate  information  services 
and will continue to pay for such services, together they will not provide the weight of financing needed to match the 
present value benefits.  
 
8. With regard  to DRR  financing,  it should  be noted  that there  is government  willingness  to make  financial  resources  
available for sectors that contribute to risk reduction (such as environmental sustainability, climate change adaptation, 
etc.). However, the state budget has no specific DRR annual allocation. Moreover, in the light  of recent economic fall,


---
*Page 13*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 73  
 
the 2017 state budget is significantly cut for almost all budget categories, as recommended by IMF and other 
international  finance organizations and if the situation is not improved, further reduction of the state budget is expected 
for 2018  and beyond.  Resources  allocated  throughout  different  sectors  are not coordinated,  prioritised,  systematised  or 
regularised. Similarly, t here is no specific annual recovery allocation in the state budget. Disaster response allocations 
are made  through  specific  requests  to the Ministry  of Finance  based  on damage  and loss assessments  and calculations 
of costs, which are not made based on inte rnational standards. According to the Ministry of Finance, the allocation of 
extra funds must be approved by the  Parliament.  
 
9. With regard to the potential for partial GCF loan funding for this project, the following is a statement of the GoG 
position:  
“According to Moody’s rates Georgia has “Ba3” - rating balances high growth rates with a small economy and low GDP 
per capita. Ranking is about creditworthiness, however, it does not state about country’s capability for taking loans.  
Investment projects fi nancing that are envisaged by loans from various financial institutions and donor organizations in 
the medium  term are already  agreed  (Practically  all investment  projects  for next four years  are identified  and reflected  in 
medium term fiscal plans). Accord ingly, taking additional loan even for such an important project will negatively affect 
the debt sustainability. In addition, Georgia has already agreed the main fiscal parameters with the IMF and 
Government do not want to put this agreement under the risk . The development of early warning systems is a priority 
for the country, therefore government mobilized co -financing to the GCF project which amounts USD 45.5 million 
(including grants and international loans for Government of Georgia) and involves key go vernmental and municipal 
authorities. This is the reason why Georgia is insolvent to refund additional foreign dept. Therefore the country is not in 
a position to get an additional loan for that  purposes”5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Email response from Gizo Chelidze. Head of the Department of Integrated Management of Environment (Water, Air, Land, 
Climate Change). Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection of Georgia


---
*Page 14*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 73   
 
 
C.1. Strategic  Context  
Climate Change impacts and vulnerability  
10. Due to the complex  mountainous  terrain  and climate,  Georgia  is subject  to both geological  and hydro -meteorological 
natural  hazards  including  landslides,  mudflows,  erosion,  avalanches,  floods  and flash  floods,  drought,  and strong  winds. 
There  is evidence  that frequency  of these  climate -indiced  disasters  and associated  damages  have  been  increasing  over 
the past decades.  Climate  change  studies6 have  indicated  that these  hazards  will further  increase  in frequency,  intensity 
and geographical spread over time and will have significant negative impacts on various sectors, including agriculture, 
health,  critical  infrastructure,  tourism  and protection  of culture  heritage,  environment,  natural  resources  and ecosystems. 
Georgia’s  Second  and Third  National  Communications  to UNFCCC  as well as other  studies  provide  evidence  that further 
escalation  of geological  and hydrological  processes  is expected  until 2050.  The climate  change  scenarios  indicate  more 
extremes as prolonged rainfall events, concentrated in a short period of time with the potential to generate more runoff 
during these short periods, thereby increasing the potential for flash flooding (due to high peak river flows), mudflows 
and landslides.  The trend  of increasing  average  temperature  for all seasons,  decreasing  precipitation  and longer  duration 
of dry periods, which will persist until 2050 in already dry areas will further increase the risk of droughts. Currently, the  
number  of days  with precipitation  more  than 50 mm and 90 mm rainfall  will be reduced  in almost  entire  East Georgia  by 
2050.  In lower  courses  of Alazani  and Iori River  Basins,  located  in south  and south -east municipalities  of Kakheti  region, 
crop and irrigation water demand will increase due to prolonged warmer, drier periods, but will be offset to some extent 
by greater duration of wet periods. By the end of the century, the trend will be more towards prolonged droughts rather 
than towards wet periods therefore, dry areas of the country a lready affected by the climate change will become more 
vulnerable. More specifically, Kvemo Kartli will stay the driest region as it is now. South and southeast municipalities 
(Sagarejo, Dedoplistskagro, etc.) of Kakheti region and Shida Kartli, which are also prone to droughts will continue to 
be susceptible to this  phenomenon.  
11. Over the last 21 -year period total damages from hydrometeorological hazards were GEL 2.8 billion ($1.2 Billion 
USD) at a cost of 152 lives (22 of which occurred in the Tbilisi flash  flood of 2015). Floods, landslides and mudflows 
make  up 60% of these  damages/losses  and 67% of loss of life. National  disaster  statistics  indicates  that there  is growing 
trend in cumulative damages and losses of lives from floods, droughts, avalanches, wi nd storms and hails over the last 
20 years. The damages from single extreme events range from over 300 million GEL ($121 Million USD) which was 
attributed  to 2000  extreme  drought,  to 700 Million  GEL (US$  283 Million)  attributed  to the 1987  flood.  In addition,  natural 
hazards have resulted in internally displaced eco -migrants from economically disadvantaged  areas.  
12. Economic assessment of the impact of hydrometeorological hazards under climate change conditions7, shows  that 
1.7 Million people (40% of the  population) including the most vulnerable communities in remote rural and densely 
populated  urban  areas  are at risk from the main  hazards.  Annual  average  damages  (AAD)  to properties  from floods  are 
estimated at 116.3 Million GEL ($US51.2 Million) without climate change and at 282.7 Million GEL ($US 124.4 Million) 
with climate  change.  The risk to agricultural  land from all hazards  is between  251,225  ha and 325,020  ha under  baseline 
and climate change conditions respectively. Annual damages to agriculture fr om flooding alone would be 126.3 Million 
GEL (55.6 Million $US) and 154.2 Million GEL (67.8 Million $US) under baseline and climate change conditions 
respectively.  
13. Regional flood risk profiles indicate that flood plains in Racha -Lechkhumi -Kvemo Svaneti  and Samegrelo -Zemo 
Svaneti in Western Georgia have almost 50% of their flood plain population at high risk whilst 68% of the flood plain 
population in Ajara and 47% in Guria are at low risk. Risk for the other regions is largely balanced across the three  
zones.  Under  Climate  Change  scenarios  those  at medium  risk will tend towards  high risk over time especially  in Western  
 
 
6 Georgia SNC and TNC  
 
7 At feasibility stage only broad -brushed national -scale hazard mapping was available. Climate change has been  assessed based 
on an assumption of escalating hazard conditions by assuming current hazard is intensified to the next hazard category above  
it. Hence low hazard becomes medium and medium hazard adds to high hazard etc. This re -categorisation is assumed to  be valid 
for the project planning horizon of 27 years. It should be noted that detailed hazard modelling and mapping incorporating cli mate 
change parameters will be undertaken during the full project under Activity 1.2.


---
*Page 15*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 73   
 
 
Georgia  when  it is conjectured  that, with the exception  of Ajara,  around  two thirds  of flood  plain  population,  especially  in 
Western Georgia, will become subjected to higher  risk. 
14. Some 269,377 (22.8%) people live in Droughty or Dry zones in Georgia with 7.3% in the extreme droughty zone. 
Kvemo Kartli has over 58% of its population in the droughty zone and this rises to almost three quarters under cli mate 
change. Tbilisi region currently has less than 2% of its population in the droughty zone but this will increase to almost 
50% under climate change. With the exception of Kakheti with less than half a per cent in the droughty and dry zones 
no other  region presents  as being  at risk from drought  both currently  and into the future.  Some  83,633  Ha of agricultural 
land is currently affected by severe drought conditions with a potential to rise to 149,302 Ha. Almost 100% currently is 
in Kvemo Kartli Region th ough in the future some 14,016 Ha could be affected in Kakheti, (primarily a wine producing 
Region), an 18 -fold rise on present  day. 
15. Some  79,903  (5.4%)  properties  are exposed  to powerful  (> 14 to 18 days  per year)  and moderate  (14 to 18 days  per 
year) hail  risk in Georgia, with 1.3% exposed to powerful risk. Some 90% of agricultural land affected by severe 
hailstorms  is currently  in Kvemo  Kartli  though  future  climate  change  will potentially  increase  the area of land affected  by 
over threefold with Kvemo Kar tli joined by Samgerelo -Zemo Svaneti as the most severely affected  Regions.  
16. Some 95,376 (6.5%) of properties in Georgia are within the two severe wind zones with 1.1% in the most severe 
zone. Currently 7,131 Ha of agricultural land is at the severest risk conditions roughly split between Racha -Lechkum - 
Kvemo  Svaneti  and Shida  Kartli.  However,  in the future  almost  60% of risk from severe  wind will be within  Imereti  where 
risk now is  negligible.  
17. Some 29 properties in Georgia are situated in very strong avalanche zones largely in Mtskheta -Mtianeti. This rises 
to 3,288 (0.22%) properties under climate change with 1,602 in Mtskheta -Mtianeti. Achara has 862 properties exposed 
to strong or very strong avalanches with 284 in Samagrelu -Zemo -Svaneti and 237 in  Samtskhe -Javakheti.  
18. In general, around 70% of the country’s territory, 3,000 settlements (62%) and 400,000 households are under the 
risk of geological disasters. Some 14.2% of agricultural lands have been seriously damaged by geological processes 
and requir e conducting of cardinal protective measures, with 13.1% of agricultural lands located within the high -risk 
area. The largest number of recorded landslides is in Imereti (28.6%) followed by Ajara, Mtskheta -Mtianeti, Racha - 
Lechum -Kvemo Svaneti, each with a  little over 10% of Georgia’s  total.  
19. Hence,  hydro -meteorological  hazards  are intensifying  over time,  and increasing  in spatial  distribution.  These  spatio - 
temporal  changes  in hazards  will together  negatively  impact  communities  in Georgia  including  socio -economic  impacts. 
The increase in numbers and severity of observed hazards as recorded in the hazards database, and the increase in 
spatial distribution of each hazard as outlined above, demonstrates the intensification of hydro -meteorological hazard s 
in time and  space.  
20. Negative  impacts  of climate -induced  hazards  on the natural  resource  base  on which  rural communities  rely for their 
livelihoods, and the resultant socio -economic impacts on rural populations, are significant and will exacerbate the 
vulnerability of those communities in the  future.  
21. There  is no nation -wide hazard  forecasting  early  warning  system in  the country.  The most  complete  and integrated 
almost real -time EWS for flood/flashfloods was recently developed and operationalized for the  Rioni River Basin, 
developed under the UNDP project financed by the Adaptation Fund (Rioni project). For other basins, as well as for 
other climate -induced natural hazards, there are no such completed and integrated  system.  
Adaptation and CRM policy conte xt 
22. Given  the current  and future  vulnerabilities  of the Georgian  population  to climate  change  and related  natural  hazards, 
in 2015 the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Management on behalf of the Government of Georgia 
developed  and submitted  to UNFCCC  its Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (INDC),  with a main  objective  to 
improve the country’s preparedness and adaptive capacity by developing climate resilient practices that reduce 
vulnerability of highly exposed communities. Developmen t and implementation of National Adaptation Programme and 
sectoral  adaptation  plans,  including  agriculture  adaptation  plan as well as establishment  of early  warning  systems  for 
climate related hazards are considered among top priority measures under INDC. The INDC refers specifically to all


---
*Page 16*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 73  
 
 
natural hazards identified within the context of extreme natural events aggravated by climate change, and identifies 
agriculture,  coastal  zones,  tourism  sector  development,  forestry  and the health  sector  as at-risk sectors.  The INDC  also 
outlines the need for continuous development of national and local capacities for implementation of adaptation actions 
for 2021 -2030.  Furthermore,  Third  National  Communications  apart  from GHG  inventories  and mitigation  measures  offers 
a wide menu of climate adaptation actions, including sectoral adaptation and the recently launched Fourth National 
Communication that will focus on removing legal -policy and instituti onal barriers towards better integration of climate 
change adaptation into development and sectoral policies and  programmes.  
23. Reducing the risks of climate -induced natural hazards is addressed in various national DRR -related strategies and 
plans. The major document - National Strategy on DRR, adopted in 2015 under the leadership of the State Security 
Council  functioning  within  the auspices  of the Prime  Minister’s  Office  focuses  on reducing  risks of climate -induced  hydro - 
meteorological  and geological  hazards.  In this regard,  it targets  five strategic  areas:  i) ensure  that disaster  risk reduction 
is a national and a local priority with a strong institutional basis for implementation; ii) identify, assess and monitor 
disaster risk and enhance early warni ng; iii) use knowledge, innovation and education to build a culture of safety and 
resilience at all levels; iv) deduce the underlying risk factors and; v) strengthen disaster preparedness for effective 
response at all levels. Capacity development activitie s under the monitoring and early warning pillar target the 
development  of unified  methodology  and tools  for multi -hazard  risk assessment,  mapping  and monitoring;  a centralized 
multi -hazard disaster risk information and knowledge system, consisting of natio nal e -Library, databases, information 
systems and knowledge portal; local -level detailed hazard mapping and risk assessment by hazard and sectors; and 
end-to-end multi -hazard nation -wide integrated early warning system (EWS). Recently, a National Action Pl an on 
Disaster  Risk Reduction  (DRR  NAP)  for 2016 -2020  stipulating  from the national  DRR  strategy  was finalized.  In the area 
of risk reduction of climate induced natural hazards the actions planned comprise soft and hard measures, including 
improvement  of risk knowledge,  preparedness,  resilience,  implementation  of preventive/protective  structural  measures, 
public  awareness  and education,  planning  and implementation.  The most  recent  development  in the area of DRR/EWS 
is the process of preparation of National  EWS concept paper under the coordination of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
The document consists of five components/outputs, including elaboration of relevant legal -regulatory basis for EWS, 
systematic data collection on hazards and risks from various sources, setting common rules and means for 
communications, development of a system for regular data collection, processing, analysis, risk assessments, effective 
information dissemination and communications, strengthening national and local response capac ities through public 
awareness campaigns, development of disaster response plans and response capacities and, development of human 
resources.  
24. Concerning integration of climate change considerations into various sectoral strategies and plans, there is a 
number of documents  adopted  or under  development  that reflect  various  aspects  of climate  change  vulnerability  and 
adaptation. The National Environmental Action Plan of Georgia focuses on reduction of risks from climate -induced 
natural hazards as means for cli mate adaption. The Agriculture Development Strategy, among various priorities, 
focuses on climate smart agriculture and food security. Adaptation Plan for Agriculture Sector is currently under 
development and also includes provisions for climate -smart  agriculture.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
25. The project objective is to reduce exposure of Georgia’s communities, livelihoods and infrastructure to climate - 
induced natural hazards through a well -functioning nation -wide multi -hazard early warning system and risk -informed 
local action.  The project  will achieve  this by nation -wide scaling -up of several  projects  and initiatives  such  as of the Rioni 
Basin flood forecasting and early warning system (FFEWS). The scaling up will be attained by developing and 
implementing a nation -wide Multi -Hazard Early Warning System (MHEWS), developing and delivering climate 
information services, implementing community -based risk reduction measures which will reduce exposure of the most 
vulnerable local com munities to climate -induced hazards. The project will address existing gaps/barriers towards 
establishing an effective functioning, fully -integrated Multi -Hazard Early Warning  System.  
 
Baseline scenario  
 
26. To date,  hydrometeorological  hazard  risk management  has been  dealt  with in an ad hoc and reactive  manner,  relying 
on measures  such  as hard structural  protection  measures  which  are expensive  to build,  provide  limited  standard  of


---
*Page 17*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 73   
 
 
protection  and have  a limited  service  life; emergency  response  once  a disaster  unfolds,  with limited  reliance  on forecast 
of the event or satisfactory prior warning of the population, and with limited centralised resources; and post event 
compensation to victims, including medium and long -term relocation out of the hazardous areas (so called eco - 
migration); and post event recovery and disaster risk  reduction.  
 
27. The baseline financing of DRR and CCA by GoG has been low and reducing over the years. The state budget h as 
no specific DRR annual allocation, resource allocation is throughout different sectors which are not coordinated, 
prioritised,  systematised  or regularised.  Disaster  response  allocations  are made  through  specific  requests  to the Ministry 
of Finance  based  on damage  and loss assessments  and calculations  of costs,  which  are not made  based  on international 
standards. As for the operational budgets of important agencies, in 2017 the State Security and Crisis Management 
Centre (SSCMC) annual budget is defined a t 3.8 Million GEL (approximately US$1.58 Million), which is only 73% of 
2016  budget  and 55% of 2015  budget.  The average  annual  budget  of the National  Environment  Agency  (NEA)  between 
2006 and 2015 was approximately 3.74 Million GEL, of which some 70% were allocated to hydrometeorological and 
geological  monitoring,  including  communications,  during  that period.  Since  2014,  when  NEA became  a fully self-financed 
agency, the annual budget increased to 2.3 -2.6 times the annual average values and totalled 8.6 Million GEL in 2014 
and approiximately 10 Million in 2015. Sub -Activity 2.1.2 will specifically address this barrier, building on cost -benefit 
tool to be developed in Activity 1.3  1. 
 
28. Post-disaster  recovery  and disaster  risk management  are funded  through  the reserve  funds  of the President  and the 
government managed by the Ministry of Finance, budgets of the sectoral ministries and municipal budgets. Funds are 
primarily spent on the rehabilitation of roads and bridges, water supply systems, energy infrastruc ture (transmission 
lines, sub -stations, pipelines, etc.), various buildings as well as on the purchase of houses for ecomigrants and direct 
compensation  of affected  population.  In accordance  with official  data,  in 2014 -2015,  68.369  million  GEL was spent  from 
the Prime  Minister’s  reserve  funds  through  the Ministry  of Regional  Development  and Infrastructure  (MRDI),  construction 
companies, Ajara Autonomous Republic, United Water Supply Company of Georgia and local municipalities. MRDI 
through its Road Depart ment during the period from 2007 through 2014 spent 46.960 million GEL on the rehabilitation 
of road infrastructure, including construction of flood defence structures. Average annual spending by the Road 
Department is about 5 million GEL (US$ 2 mln). The total amount spent on recovery and rehabilitation works annually 
is significant, but still is very small compared to annual average losses. This reactive approach to disaster risk 
management is neither efficient not effective and would be even less so unde r the expected increased frequency and 
increased damages and losses that would result from climate  change.  
 
29. With annual losses from flooding alone estimate at 126.3 Million GEL, it is clear that the budgets of the key state 
institutions as well as the allo cations from the President’s reserve fund are grossly inadequate to address the risk and 
potential losses from all hazards facing Georgia annually. The whole project is aimed at addressing this reactionary 
approach to disaster risk management. Specifically , all of Outputs 1 and 2 are addressing this. On the issue of risk 
financing, Sub -Activity 2.1.2 will specifically address this barrier, building on the cost -benefit tool to be developed in 
Activity 1.3 1. Furthermore, the project will address risk informa tion gaps to enable the development of a national 
catastrophe  insurance  scheme  (beyond  the scope  of this project),  which,  in the future,  could  be an effective  risk transfer 
instrument to replace the existing post -event compensation approach to addressing disaster damages and  losses.  
 
30. In the baseline scenario without GCF investment, Georgian population and economy will be facing increasing 
pressures from more frequent and severe climate induced natural disasters due to climate change. Losses of lives and 
economic losses due to climate -induced disasters and associated impact on GDP and sovereignty credit rating will be 
increasing. Scaling -up of tested EWS will not be possible due to the existing financial gap between CRR needs and 
investments, underdevelope d national capacities for inadequate hazard and risk knowledge for all major basins in 
Georgia, as well as due to a lack of monitoring stations on which such risk knowledge  relies.  
Key baseline projects to scale -up and other initiatives to cooperate with  
31. The GCF  proposal  will scale -up pilot activities  and achievements  of the UNDP  project  Developing  Climate  Resilient 
Flood  and Flash  Flood  Management  Practices  to Protect  Vulnerable  Communities  of Georgia  (Rioni  project)  
financed by the Adaptation Fund (2012 -2017) as well as another UNDP project Strengthening National Disaster Risk


---
*Page 18*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 73   
 
 
Reduction System in Georgia . In addition, the GCF project will implement recommendations arising from the 2015 
Tbilisi Disaster Needs Assessment Report prepared by the World Bank, UNDP and USAID experts and 2015 Tbilisi 
Disaster Recovery Vulnerability Redu ction Plan supported by UNDP in particular, its soft components related to EWSs  
- risk knowledge, monitoring, warning and dissemination and response.  
32. The main project being scaled up is the Rioni project (2012 -2017, US$ 5 Million), which was funded through  the 
Adaptation Fund. Under it, UNDP supported the government and municipalities in the Rioni basin with total population 
of around 200,000 direct beneficiaries and approximately 500,000 total beneficiaries. The project included direct 
interventions in 6 p ilot municipalities - four upstream municipalities (Tsageri, Lentekhi, Oni and Ambrolauri) and 2 
downstream municipalities (Samtredia and Tskaltubo). The Rioni project piloted an integrated approach to flood risk 
management. The approach involved: i) devel opment of policies, guidelines and tools, and recommendations to 
enhance  the flood  risk management  legislative  and policy  framework  in the area of floodplain  zoning  and weather  index - 
based flood insurance; ii) establishment of fully -integrated Flood Forecasting and Early Warning System (FFEWS), 
through upgrading of 5 meteorological stations, 20 meteorological posts and 10 hydrological posts as well as installing 
several landslide monitoring equipment (inclinometers) in upper and lower watersheds of th e basin; iii) digitizing and 
visualizing historic data and creating a unified archive for both meteorological and hydrological data; iv) introducing 
modern hazard and risk hydraulic and hydrologic modelling and mapping and, establishing and running of Delf t-FEWS 
platform for the Rioni River Basin; v) capacity building and training of the NEA’s staff in modelling; vi) running FFEWS 
and operatizing and maintaining new equipment; vi) construction of flood defences, stabilization and restoration of 
riverbanks a nd shores according to the best international practices in 12 high risk areas, using bioengineering 
(agroforestry, floodplain restoration) and hard structures such as rip -rap boulders and  gabions.  
33. The GCF project will scale up the prototypes piloted by the  Rioni project (including the hazard mapping, floodplain 
modelling, floodplain zoning and EWS) to include the other river basins and regions of Georgia and to encompass a 
broader range of key climate -induced hazards. More specifically the following key ele ments of the Rioni project are 
being scaled up within the GCF  project:  
• Hazard and risk assessment, modelling and mapping – Rioni project introduced comprehensive international 
best practice in this area and provides the basis for standardising the methodologies and approaches across 
Georgia, based on EU Flood Directive method ologies which will be a requirement for Georgia under the 
Association agreement. In addition, some capacity for hazard and risk assessment, modelling and mapping 
has already been built under the Rioni project. Activities 1.2, and 1.3 of the GCF project wil l scale up and 
extend  the hazard,  and risk modelling  and mapping  to the rest of Georgia  and will  extend  it to other  hazards.  
• Hydrometric network expansion and optimisation for the main purpose of FFEWS and strategic hazard 
management – Rioni project has do ne this for the whole basin and has linked to the expanded hydrometric 
network to a FFEWS system. In addition, capacity has been built in the installation and maintenance of 
hydrometric  networks.  Activity  1.1 is scaling  up the hydrometric  network  expansion  undertaken  by Rioni  project 
to cover the rest of  Georgia.  
• Institutional capacity development in DRR and CCA – The Rioni AF project has assessed this specifically with 
respect to flood and landslide hazards and has developed short and long -term capacity de velopment plans. 
Activity 3.2 is scaling up some of the capacity development in climate risdk assessment and modelling and 
implements some of the recommendations of the capacity development plan developed by the Rioni  projects.  
• Development  and installation  of an early  warning  system  – Rioni  AF project  has been  the first project  to develop 
a comprehensive forecasting and early warning system for one of the most important hazards facing Georgia. 
The platform  was designed  to be extended  geographically  to cover  the rest of Georgia  and to include  a number 
of other hazards. The Rioni project also comprehensively addressed institutional arrangements, 
communications  and dissemination  and response  for EWS,  and made  detailed  recommendations  of appropriate 
arrangements  that will need  to be implemented  for the national  EWS.  Activity  2.4, is scaling  up the development 
of an early  warning  system  to include  the implementation  of an impact -based  MHEWS  for the whole  of Georgia. 
Activity 3.1 is a further extension of the early  warning system to include community based early warning 
systems.  
• Interventions – structural measures – Rioni project has introduced climate -informed design and construction 
approaches and piloted a number of different types of structures such as boulder e mbankment gabion  baskets


---
*Page 19*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 73   
 
 
which  can be implemented  elsewhere  based  on the Rioni  experience.  It has also implemented  innovative  agro- 
forestry measures as standalone ‘non -structural measures’ as well as in combination with structural measures. 
It has developed municipality -based employment guarantee schemes for engaging local populations in the 
implementation and maintenance of ris k reduction measures. Actvitity 3.3 is scaling up structural intervention 
measures  successfully  designed  and constructed  in Rioni  and leans  on the best practices  developed  for Rioni.  
• A key and innovative non -structural measure suggested by the Rioni projec t is the weather index insurance 
which could be a key financial risk transfer mechanism for DRR financing in the future.  The insurance scheme 
developed for the Rioni project will not be scaled up as part of the GCF project. While the risk and insurance 
model and scheme were successfully developed, national coverage needs the hazard and risk modelling that 
the GCF project will provide. Once this is completed, the insurance sector with the GoG can take this forward. 
Based on consultations undertaken for the R ioni project, there is currently a lack of enabling environment for 
this scheme to be implemented within the lifetime of the GCF  project.  
34. UNDP  Project  “Strengthening  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  capacities  in Georgia ” was aimed  at increasing 
national  capacities  for DRR  to enhance  the resilience  of the population  through  mainstreaming  DRR  in development  and 
sectoral  policies  and plans  and building  national  preparedness  capacities  for effective  response  at all levels.  The project 
assessed the situation concerning the MHEWS and based on its findings made concrete recommendations. 
Furthermore, the project developed an outline for Multi -hazard Risk Assessment Methodology which will need further 
elaboration  and relevant  capacity  building.  In addition,  the report identified  institutional  and staff-level capacity  gaps  and 
barriers including lack of legal and institutional framework for well -coordinated EWS, duplication of roles and 
responsibilities between key agencies, weak capacities and infrastructure for sy stematic data collection, analysis and 
forecast, low public awareness. The report suggested implementation of such measures as: i) multi -hazard risk 
assessment (based on agreed methodology and standards); ii) improvement of communication/cooperation and 
strengthening data exchange mechanisms between scientific institutions and government agencies; iii) storing and 
updating DRR data and information in one central repository national disaster data base and introducing procedures 
and regulations  ensuring  open  access  and data sharing  from all relevant  stakeholders  at all levels;  iv) integration  of risks 
assessment into local risk management plans and warning messages and development planning; v) upgrading 
hydrometric  network,  vi) enhancing  NEA’s  forecasting  and modelling  capacities,  vii) clarification  of roles  between  various 
agencies in terms of warnings and communications and development of relevant SOPs; viii) enhancing disaster 
preparedness and response capacities at all levels and developing/updating municip al response plans. Key findings of 
this project are outlined in institutional and barrier analysis of the feasibility study and, most of the GCF project outputs  
and activities are based on recommendations to address  them.  
35. Following the Tbilisi floods of Ju ne 2015, in response to the request from the GoG to UNDP and World Bank to 
undertake  a rapid  needs  assessment,  a team  of national  and international  consultants  from UNDP,  the World  Bank,  the 
Global  Facility  for Disaster  Reduction  and Recovery  (GFDRR)  and the United  States  Department  of Agriculture  (USDA) 
joined Georgian government and Tbilisi City Hall experts to conduct the Tbilisi Post -Disaster Needs Assessment 
(PDNA) . The assessment was led by the Georgian Ministry of Finance and was co -ordinated by Tbi lisi’s City Hall. The 
government  identified  the following  sectors  as a priority  for the assessment:  housing,  transportation,  water  management, 
the zoo, and Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) as a crosscutting sector. The study team has come up with medium and 
long-term recommendations highlighting the need to ensure a detailed understanding of the hazard and risks posed by 
the combination of hydro -meteorological hazards that can affect Tbilisi – multi -hazards risk assessment, the need to 
develop and implement a  detailed master plan, based on the detailed hazards assessment, of the structural and non - 
structural measures, the need to reconsider floodplain development and relocation of at -risk infrastructure such as the 
zoo and to build a more resilient public tra nsport system and public spaces, i.e. adopt a floodplain zoning policy that 
includes building flood resilience and resistance into the planning and building of critical infrastructure. The PDNA 
specifically  highlights  the need  to adopt  a comprehensive  multi-hazard  early  warning  system  as one action  in protecting 
the public and minimising the loss of life and minimisation of losses. The recommendations of the PDNA are therefore 
fully aligned with the approaches to managing flood risk that have been developed  and introduced by the Rioni project, 
and which  the GCF  project  is seeking  to scale  up. Given  the density  of the population  of Tbilisi,  the density  and criticality 
of the urban  infrastructure  at risk from flooding,  specific  activities  will be implemented  under  the GCF  project  to address 
the medium and long -term recommendations of PDNA, and to address barriers specific to Tbilisi, which currently  limits  
its ability to cope with major hazards such as the 2015 event. The City of Tbilisi development of Multi -hasard response,


---
*Page 20*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 73   
 
 
preparedeness and resilience plan for the City of Tbilisi under Activity 2.4, which will be co -funding to this project is 
scaling up the recommendations of the PDNA.  
36. There are some other on -going projects that the GCF project will cooperate with, as well as completed projects 
whose relevant experience, knowledge and approaches will be applied to the extent possible. Specifically, The GCF 
project will cooperate with and build upon the outcomes of 2016 -2018 EU project Pre vention, Preparedness and 
Response  to Natural  and Man-made  Disasters  in the EaP countries  – PPRD  East 2 and EU Water  Initiative  Plus for the 
Eastern Partnership (EUWI+4 EaP) on strengthening national capacities of EaP countries for implementation of Water 
Framework Directive to be implemented in 2017 -2020 in aspects of river basin management planning. Furthermore, it 
will build upon FAO’s technical support provided to the MoA in climate -smart agriculture and establishing of EWSs for 
droughts.  
37. Lessons  learne d and best practices  of other  completed  or on-going  projects  addressing  climate  and/or  disaster  risks 
are also taken into consideration in particular, community -based initiatives that focus on community -based resilience 
projects  in the areas  of community -level participatory  climate  and disaster  vulnerability  assessments,  community  climate 
adaptation and DRR planning and watershed/floodplain restoration and agroforestry through small grants -making. 
These projects are USAID/GLOWS Integrated Natural  Resources Management in Watersheds of Georgia project 
(INRMW), UNDP/GEF Small Grants Programme, USAID/CENN climate adaptation project. Despite the baseline 
programmes and projects described above there are still a number of barriers preventing Georgia fro m addressing 
vulnerability to climate induced hazards and  risks.  
Key barriers to fully -integrated MHEWS and an enhanced use of climate information  
Barrier 1. Lack of financial, technical and human capacities within the government to establish nation -wide 
multi -hazard hydro -meteorological risk, monitoring, modelling and forecasting  
38. A key barrier to comprehensive forecasting and early warning is the lack of adequate hydro -meteorological 
monitoring networks, forecasting models and resources for all basins. Th is includes a lack of adequate real time 
automatic observations (due to inadequate hydrometric network) and a lack of human and financial resources to 
implement and maintain a national system for all appropriate hydrometeorological hazards. In addition, th ere is no 
definitive hazard, risk or vulnerability mapping for Georgia for any of the hydrometeorological hazards that it faces. The 
technical and financial capacity to undertake such mapping is lacking. This represents a barrier to effective hazard and 
disaster  risk management  in Georgia  and needs  to be addressed  in order  to enable  risk-informed  development  decisions 
on which  the socio -economic  future  of Georgia  depends,  reduce  the risk to acceptable  levels  and to manage  any residual 
risks using methods such early warning. NEA capacities for flood and landslide hazard and risk assessment and 
forecasting have been significantly strengthened through the Rioni project but needs to be further supported as the 
system will be expanded nation -wide and will integ rate the new data sources. At the same time, there is limited 
experience  in the use of new forecasting  modelling  technologies  of the other  climate -induced  hazards  that will be covered 
by the  MHEWS.  
Barrier 2. Gaps in the legal, institutional and coordination frameworks for the MHEWS and enhanced use of 
climate information  
39. While there have been great strides made in improving the institutional arrangements for the EWS, there is still a 
lack of clarity with respect to roles and responsibilities in t his regard. As the institutional reform continues, there is no 
national protocol for the MHEWS. Various components of the system are not integrated/harmonized. The new Joint 
Operations Center established under the MIA in 2016 to conduct real -time observati on of all emergency situations 
including natural disasters, and to communicate warning to relevant agencies, is not fully operational or resourced as 
yet. Its role and capacities in this regard are still unclear. Clear communication lines between different  agencies, 
Standard Operational Procedures (SOPs), communication protocols and Codes of Conduct are lacking within the 
agencies responsible for the various elements of the MHEWS and response. Multi hazard risk assessment and 
vulnerability assessment mandat es and methodology are not finalized and not enforced, resulting in duplication and 
inefficiencies.  Furthermore,  there  are profound  institutional  capacity  gaps  related  to the risk management  and response  
at the local/municipal level. Adequate protocols and  SOPs as well as organization units directly responsible for disaster


---
*Page 21*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 73   
 
 
prevention, preparedness and response are missing in the capital city of Tbilisi. These capacity gaps manifested 
themselves during the latest devastating disaster that hit Tbilisi in 2015.  
40. Similarly, there are gaps in the existing legal and regulatory framework for water management and disaster risk 
reduction that would prevent operationalization of the MHEWS and integration of climate risk information in decision - 
makin g. There is an on -going work coordinated by the MoENPR in Georgia to develop framework legislation on water 
and flood risk management guided by the EU directives. Technical support is required to accelerate development of 
technical guidelines and other reg ulations for these framework  laws.  
41. While technical expertise exists in various sectors and for specific technical areas, awareness and knowledge of 
climate risk management concepts and practices is an area for improvement. Technical capacities related to r isk 
identification and assessment, risk prevention/mitigation, risk reduction, risk transfer, preparedness, climate risk 
management and climate change adaptation are rather weak across institutions and governance levels. As part of the 
Rioni and DRR projec ts, an assessment was made of the existing gaps in institutional capacity for all aspects of flood 
and landslide hazard and risk management in Georgia. (Please see FS Annex 5 for detailed capacity  assessment).  
Barrier  3. Climate  information  is not effectively  delivered  and utilized  for the national,  sectoral  and local  planning 
and decision -making  
42. Climate risk information is not being systematically used to inform national, sectoral and local planning, mainly due 
to the lack of comprehensive and definitive national hazard and risk mapping. Hence activities within key sectors such 
as water management, energy, transport, agriculture, forestry, spatial planning, are not risk -informed and do not take 
account of climate change. In addition, sectors lac k the sector resilience and preparedness plans which would enable 
them  to manage  hazards  and minimise  the impacts  to people,  critical  infrastructure,  and normal  economic  activity  within 
the sectors. With regard to the climate risk information which will he lp to prevent or minimise the impact of imminent 
hazardous  events,  seasonal  forecasts  are provided  for some  hydrometeorological  hazards  (e.g. floods  and droughts)  in 
the form of bulletins, while geological hazards are forecasted and information disseminate d in an annual bulletin. For 
high-impact imminent hazards, the initial responsibility for warnings lies with NEA who has limited capacity to issue 
specific and targeted warnings to enable effective response.  Warnings are not tailored to user needs and, as forecasts 
do not always indicate the area at potential risk, the messages are not geographically -specific. Moreover, warnings do 
not contain specific information on the potential  impacts.  
43. Agrometeorological monitoring is limited to 24 micro -scale automated  agrometeorologcal stations operated by the 
NFA and 4 outdated stations operated by NEA. Current functioning network is designed to automatically forecast pest 
outbreak that is then used for advising farmers on pest control measures. Other forecasting and advisory products are 
not developed at all, including drought and frost forecast, short, medium and long -term weather and climate forecasts 
and related planting/crop and irrigation calendars, etc. While MoA held new agrometeorological data generated at 24 
stations, it was lacking relevant hydrometeteorological and agrometeorological expertise. Meanwhile, NEA has such 
expertise,  but lacks  necessary  infrastructure  and up-to-date agrometeorological  data as well direct  communication  lines 
with farmers, as end -users of warnings on unfavourable agrometeorological conditions and relevant advisories. 
Cooperation between NFA and NEA is currently  absent.  
44. At present, planning platforms for multi -hazard risk management, including disaster preparedness and response 
plans  do not exist at regional (river basin), municipal and community levels, nor do the relevant methodological and 
knowledge base for carrying out climate -informed planning  exercises.  
Barrier 4. Insufficient adaptive capacities and outdated risk reduction sol utions for effective community -based 
climate risk management (CBCRM), including CBEWS  
45. In Georgia, flood defence and flood risk management is done in a reactive manner and as budgets allow. The 
Ministry for Regional Development and Infrastructure (MRDI) use s its limited annual budget to address urgent repair to 
riverbank defences, which does not currently take a strategic approach (e.g. river basin approach) and does not take 
account of climate change. During the Soviet era, there was a significant programme  of flood defence construction, 
almost exclusively, as a means of flood risk management. Most structures built in that era, have not been upgraded,  or 
maintained have now exceeded their design life and are therefore now largely ineffective for protection against current,


---
*Page 22*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 73  
 
 
let alone, future hazards. Furthermore, in the modern era, flood risk management is now a mixed approach, which 
combines both structural and non -structural measures (as done under the UNDP project for the Rioni basin). In terms 
of design standards for flood defences, levels are normally defined as the 1% (or 1 in 100 year) event for rivers and 
0.5% for coastal defences, subject to the proposed scheme being cost beneficial  and environmentally sustainable. It 
also depends on what is being protected behind the defence (1% Annual Exceedances Probability (AEP) being the 
minimum standard for populated areas). Allowances need to be made for climate change and other future scenari os, 
which should be reviewed and updated frequently as further research is undertaken and knowledge is improved.  
46. A significant gap to be addressed for an effective MHEWS is related to the “last mile” communication and delivery 
of the warnings to the local communities and an enhanced community -based risk reduction. There is no experience in 
Georgia in community -based EWS. Clear communication protocols and SOPs are required at all levels. Community 
based organizations are neither informed about risks nor empo wered for action. Some community -based climate risk 
reduction  approaches  (e.g. agroforestry,  restoration  of floodplain  zones,  etc.) have  been  piloted  by various  international 
projects, including the Rioni project, but have not been  scaled -up. 
 
Adaptation Alternative  
47. In order to deal with the hydrometorological hazards that are intensifying due to climate change, Georgia needs to 
move towards a more proactive integrated risk -informed approach centred around early warning, risk reduction, risk 
prevention,  and preparedness.  There  is a need  to support  the commitment  of the Georgian  government  to avoid  losses 
of lives and to reduce economic and infrastructure losses caused by climate -induced hydrometeorological disasters 
through the establishment of a multi -hazard early warning system and all associated risk management  approaches.  
48. A multi -hazard early warning system and effective hazard emergency response rely on effective forecasting and 
warning, knowledge of where and when the hazards will occur (high  risk areas identified by hazard mapping), 
engagement of all key players in the response, actions to be taken by each individual (or groups of individuals) and 
response/evacuation plans.  
49. It relies on accurate and representative measurement of hydrometeorol ogical variables for the provision of timely 
warnings  to emergency  responders  and the population  at risk. More  accurate  forecasts  of the location  and extent  of the 
hazard will result in more effective warnings and response. In order to achieve more accurat e forecasts, as well as 
better  strategic  assessment  of hazards,  there  is a fundamental  need  to expand  and optimise  the hydrometric  monitoring 
by increasing  the density  of monitoring  stations  over the forecast  basins,  which  will capture  the large  spatial  and temporal 
variability in hydrometeorological processes that are characteristic of Georgian river  basins.  
50. In addition,  there  is a need  to have  critical  climate  risk information  that would  enable  the Government  of Georgia  to 
implement  a number  of nation -wide transformative  policies  for reducing  exposure  and vulnerability  of the population  and 
economic  sectors  to climate -induced  hazards.  There  is a need  to introduce  and standardise  hazard,  risk and vulnerability 
assessment, modelling and mapping methods and technologies and build long -term institutional capacity for producing 
and updating  hazard  maps  at a level of detail  for all uses,  such  as spatial  planning,  resource  planning,  sectoral  planning 
and decision making, and climate risk  management.  
51. At community  level there  is a need  to improve  community  resilience  and capacity  to understand  their vulnerabilities, 
adapt and respond to hazards, through the implementation of community -based early warning schemes and structural 
and non -structural communi ty-based risk reduction  measures.  
52. The adaptation alternative will be achieved by nation -wide scaling -up of the Multi -Hazard Early Warning System 
(MHEWS), developing capacities for climate information services, enabling and embedding the use of climate risk 
information in sector planning and decision -making, and reduction of exposure of the most vulnerable communities to 
climate -induced hazards through community -based EWS and risk reduction  measures.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
53. The project  objective  will be achieved  through  three  outputs:  i) expanded  climate -induced  natural  hazard  observation 
network  and modelling  capacities  secure  reliable  information  on climate -induced  hazards,  vulnerability  and risks;  ii) multi -


---
*Page 23*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 73   
 
 
hazard early warning system and new climate information products supported with effective national regulations, 
coordination mechanism and institutional capacities; iii) improved community resilience through  the implementation of 
the MHEWS and priority risk reduction measures. A brief description of the project outputs and main activities are 
provided here. Please refer to the log -frame and feasibility study for a more detailed description.  
 
Output 1: Expanded hydro -meteorological observation network and modelling capacities secure reliable  
information on climate -induced hazards, vulnerability and risks  
54. Under this output, the project will apply a unified methodology and tools for multi -hazard risk and v ulnerability 
assessment, mapping and monitoring based on the prototype developed through the Rioni project. The project will 
upgrade and expand the hydrometeorological and agrometeorological monitoring network, and support establishment 
of a centralized mu lti-hazard risk information and knowledge system, consisting of national e -Library, databases, 
information systems and knowledge portal. Local -level detailed hazard mapping and risk and vulnerability assessment 
will be  developed.  
 
Activity 1.1: Expansion o f the hydrometeorological network  
55. This activity will address the inadequacy of the national hydrometric network and will involve the design and 
expansion  of the hydrometric  monitoring  network  to include  the purchase  and installation  of the following  equipment:  12 
meteorological stations, 73 meteorological posts, 44 hydrological posts, 10 snow measurement stations, 20 
inclinometers;  3 drones  and additional  corpus;  3 meteorological  radars  (co-financed),  drone  for flight  control  and thermal 
camera; visua l computing appliance (VCA) for processing areal photos; geopositioning equipment; upper air sounding 
equipment (x2); 15 agrometeorological stations, 8 mobile discharge meters, 1 super computer for strengthening early 
warning  system;  telecommunication  system equipment.  A forecasting  centre  is already  established  at NEA and technical 
capacity was strengthened under the Rioni project. The super computer to be acquired will be a High Performanance 
Computer (HPC) with several nodes and 70 -100 TFlops performance, with inter -node connections 56Gb / s FDR 
InfiniBand or 100Gb / s EDR InfiniBand. Storage: 500 -1000 Tb. The hydrological stations would include solar panels, 
while  meteorological  stations,  use a combination  of solar  panels  and main  connection,  as the heater  has been  included 
for the rain -gauge requires the station to be connected to the electrical network (a solar panel and battery are not 
sufficient for the  heater).  
In addition,  the project  will provide  technical  assistace  in the expansion  of the network  in the form of training  and technical 
supervison and O&M. Below is a map of the proposed expanded hydrometeteorological network to be achieved with 
the GCF  support.


---
*Page 24*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 73   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Suggested expanded hydrometeorological network  
 
 
Activity 1.2: Risk zoning based on hazard and risk maps for all (11) major basins in Georgia and hazard and  
risk maps for key climate -induced hazards (floods, landslides, mudflows, avalanches, hailstorms and  
droughts).  
56. This activity will develop the hazard, and risk maps for all hazards and all basins in Georgia and form the basis for 
risk zoning, spatial planni ng and sectoral decision making in the future. It will include the following  activities:  
• Development of hazard, risk and vulnerability maps for all hazards and all major river basins in 
Georgia.  
• Introduction of modelling and mapping technology and methodol ogies in line with all relevant EU 
directives and following international best practice. Development of long -term capacity in hazard and 
risk modelling.  
• Use of the hazard maps in development and implementation of spatial zoning  policies.  
 
Activity 1.3: Introduction and implementation of methods and tools for the systematic gender -sensitive socio - 
economic vulnerability assessment for decision making and prioritisation of resilience investments.  
57. This activity  will build  on the bespoke  GIS-based  socio -economic  risk model8 developed  for Rioni  basin  and extended 
as part of this feasibility  study  to include  the rest of Georgia  and all relevant  natural  hazards.  The model  will be enhanced 
with improved datasets to be acquired/established by the project  but the underlying methodology will be the same. The 
model  wil integrate  the hazard  mapping  undertaken  in Activity  1.2 which  will be based  on detailed  hydrometerorological  
modelling for  each  hazard, using the  historical  hydrometric  data as  well  as  data to be provided  by  the  improved  
 
 
8 Developing climate resilient flood and flash flood management practices to protect vulnerable communities of Georgia; Socio - 
economic assessment of flood risk in Rioni basin. UNDP/AF


---
*Page 25*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 73   
 
 
hydrometric  network to be secured under Activity 1.1, with hazard receptor data such as infrastructure (bridges, roads 
and buildings, hospitals, schools, power plants, critical infrastructure), land use (settlements, agriculture, grazing lands,  
and conservation  areas),  property  and socio -economics  data,  to assess  the socio -economic  impacts  of each  hazard  and 
produce risk and vulnerability maps for the river basins. This risk map, based on the accurate hazard mapping of the 
current situation will form the baseline  for implementation of impact -based appraisal -led cost -benefit analysis and 
prioritisation  of future  interventions,  damage  and loss assessments,  development  of long-term risk financing  models  and 
the development of the impact -based MHEWS (Activity  2.4). 
 
The risk score is based on consideration of the following categories of risk:  
• Risk to people (risk to life, disruption to community and disruption to daily life), using people as a  metric  
• Risk to infrastructure, also using people as a metric  
• Risk to roads, also using people as a  metric  
• Risk to Agriculture, using hectares as a  metric  
• Risk to the environment, using both objects at risk and hectares as a  metric  
 
The activity will include the following:  
• Introduction and implementation of methods and tools for the systematic gender -sensitive socio -economic 
vulnerability assessment for decision -making for prioritisation of resilience  investments  
• Development  and implementation  of a GIS-based  socio -economic  risk and vulnerability  model  which  integrates 
various  spatial socio -economic  data with the hazard  maps,  and produces  risk and vulnerability  maps,  which  will 
include economic losses and damages and loss of life  estimates.  
• Introduction of gender -sensitive community -based socio -economic survey technologies and  techniques.  
 
Activity 1.4: A centralized multi -hazard risk information and knowledge system  
58. The activity will consist of the development of national e -Library, databases, information systems and knowledge 
portal  (web  knowledge  portal  to increase  awareness,  provide  interactive  hazard  maps,  with integration  with social  media 
and possible mobile app to increase community engagement and allow two -way flow of information). The hazard and 
risk assessment  described  in activities  1.2 and 1.3 will produce  very relevant  information  for many  different  government 
departments and agencies. To enable access and sharing of this information, a centralised information system and 
knowledge  sharing  platform  will be developed  as an integral  part of the NSDI  currently  being  developed  for Georgia  and 
provide the information access and sharing platform for geospatial information on hazards. The system will represent a 
major  shift in how government  departments  currently  work  and will be supported  by the introduction  of appropriate  data 
sharing  protocols  and importantly  by extensive  training  and capacity  building  to ensure  sustainability.  While  the hazard - 
related part of the database will be hosted and maintained by NEA, as it is now, metadatabase with socio -economic 
parameters, including vulnerability and risk assessments will be hosted by MIA with the SSCMC having access to 
relevant data on disaster statistics, losses and damages and socio -economic vulnerability. Both metadatabases will be 
interconnected and integrated into existing EMA’s GEOdata portal. Data access protocols for various concerned 
government agencies will be  developed.  
 
Output 2: Multi -hazard early warning system and new climate information products supported with effective  
national regulations, coordination mechanism and institutional capacities.  
59. Under this output the project will address gaps in national coordination and institutional set up for effective EWS 
resulting in a functioning coordination mechanism and communication protocols for early  warning. Capacities of 
decision -makers and national institutions involved in generating, processing, communicating and using the warnings 
and other climate information will be enhanced. National and local integrated Early Warning Systems by hazard and 
sectors will be developed and  implemented.  
 
Activity 2.1: Institutional and legal frameworks and institutional capacity building for the MHEWS and for the  
enhanced use of climate information. Improved coordination and communication protocols for early warning


---
*Page 26*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 73   
 
 
60. The Rioni and the DRR projects reviewed the institutional arrangements for flood forecasting and early warning 
systems and made a number of recommendations regarding the necessary improvements for a more effective 
forecasting and early warning system. The GCF project will aim to implement and build upon these key 
recommendations to enhance the capacity to use EWS information for both the public and private sector. The activity 
includes the  following:  
 
• Policy, regulatory framework and tec hnical guidance for MHEWS and climate risk management. The project 
will support  development  of framework  legislation  on floods  management,  corresponding  by-laws and technical 
guidance informed by the EU Floods Directive and other technical guidance related  to other types of 
hydrometeorological hazards will be developed within the climate risk regulatory  framework  
• Support integrating climate induced flood and droughts risks management into water  legislation  
• Develop and support the implementation of technical  regulations and guidance on  EWS  
• Finalise MHRA mandates and  methodology  
• Clarify,  roles,  responsibilities  and institutional  arrangements  for EWS  at all levels,  particularly  the communication 
and dissemination of early warning where there is current ambiguit y. Assist the development of the necessary 
policy and legislative instruments to enforce the agreed -upon  arrangements  
• Standardized and institutionalized hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment methods for  Georgia  
• Nation -wide risk zoning policy based on risk and hazard maps (produced under activity 1.2) will be 
operationalized through relevant national regulations and guidance documents. Clear communication lines 
between different agencies will be established, any duplication and inefficiencies will be el iminated. Standard 
Operational Procedures, Communication Protocols and Codes of Conduct will be developed for each of the 
agencies responsible for the various elements of the MHEWS and response. Roles of regional and local 
authorities will be clarified and  detailed. SOPs and guidelines for Tbilisi Mayor’s office will be developed. 
Moreover, the Mayor’s office will be supported to establish and strengthen a resilience unit there. National 
operational maintenance procedures for hydrometric network will be est ablished  (NEA).  
• Techncial Capacity building – Courses in CRM, climate -induced hazard risk management and aspects of 
MHEWS will be added to the trainings provided by the EIEC to improve the technical capacity and knowledge 
base for hazard and climate risk m anagement, EWS and long term adaptation planning. Moreover, an internal 
capacity for EIEC will be built in terms of Training of Trainers (ToT) in above topics. The issues of gender 
mainstreaming  into climate  risk management  will be integrated  into training  and capacity  building  activities.  The 
project will develop training plans for each technical area of expertise related to climate -induced hazard risk 
assessment and management, and consolidation into an overall capacity development plan. A long -term 
capac ity building plan for Georgia will be  developed.  
• The GCF  project  will engage  with the multi -stakehlder/multi -sector  climate  change  coordination  committee  to be 
formed under the MoEPA in  2018.  
• Georgia is a member of The Southeastern Europe Climate Outlook F orum (SEECOF) which was the very first 
regional climate outlook forum in Europe, started in 2008 at Zagreb, Croatia. The countries participating in 
SEECOF  are: Hungary,  Slovenia,  Croatia,  Serbia,  Bosnia,  Montenegro,  Albania,  the Former  Yugoslav  Republic 
of Macedonia, Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria, Rumania, Moldova, Israel, Cyprus, Armenia, Georgia and  
Azerbaijan. Through the GCF project, Georgia will enhance its capacity to participate in the forum, and provide 
verification of the SEECOF climate outlook. At nat ional level Georgia has an agricultural outlook forum which 
is will be enhanced by Activity 2.3 below. The GCF project will integrate with and strengthen exsiting regional 
and national climate outlook forums through the expansion of the observation network  and the development of 
climate products that include seasonal  forecasts.  
 
Activity 2.2: Development and implementation of the MHEWS covering all Georgia, building on the Rioni basin  
prototype and on the expanded hydrometric network to be achieved through activity 1.2.  
61. Activity 2.2 will build on the FFEWS which was developed for the Rioni Basin and includes development of the 
telecommunications system to support the new EWS, and integration of telemetry system for near real time 
dissemination and use of EWS. The Rioni propotype will be scaled up to the whole of Georgia and extended to other 
hazards including landslides, avalanches, wind, hail and drought. The key activites will  include:


---
*Page 27*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 73   
 
 
• Development of a fully integrated multi -hazard forec asting system to be implemented within NEA to cover the 
whole  territory  of Georgia.  The project  will address  several  improvements  to the meteorological  and hydrological 
forecasting  capabilities  of NEA to enable  the production  of high-quality,  high-resolution  (grid-size 1km)  weather 
forecasts in Georgia, up to 72h ahead, four times a day, although a lower horizontal resolution (5km) model 
with a longer  time horizon  (7 days)  will also be run daily.  Improvements  to meteorological  forecasting  capabilities 
will include:  i). Model  development  of Weather  Research  and Forecasting  (WRF);  ii) The addition  of a new model 
(COSMO)  to the FFEWS  platform;  iii). The inclusion  of additional  boundary  conditions  to the local meteorological 
forecasting models (ECMWF); iv). A more thorough assessment of the quality of the predictions and the 
associated  work  required  for the improvement  of the predictions,  especially  at local scale;  v) inclusion  of satellite 
precipitation estimates (GPM and MPE) in the EWS; inclusion of double -nesting capabilities enabling both the 
high-resolution Georgia -domain and the lower resolution Caucasus -domain in the efficient way. The new 
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) system would have the variational data -assimilation (e.g. 3D -Var) 
capabilities  as in the current  NEA system.  This would  include  the possibility  for generating  both background  and 
observation  error  covariance  matrices  specific  to NEA model  domain.  Both forecast  model  and data assimilation 
codes would support the usage of parallel computing by using standard Message Passing Interface (MPI) and 
Open Multi -Processing (OpenMP)  techniques.  
• Inclusion of the data from ground weather radars into the forecasting platform to provide for a finer spatial 
resolution of the pre cipitation area, the real -time data availability, and the ability to track approaching storms 
even  before  they reach  the catchment  of interest.  Procedures  for the inclusion  of the radar  data will be developed 
and tested.  
• Inclusion of a high resolution Digital Elevation Model (DEM) data from aerial photographs or LiDAR sources; 
European Centre for Medium -Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) data; a new integrated data management 
system for storage of both real -time and climatolo gical observation needs with real -time quality control 
procedures; various weather forecast information from global, regional and local models, managed through a 
weather forecast production system which allows the visualisation and analysis of grid formatt ed data and 
observation data including local WRF and COSMO models, the regional ECMWF and HIRLAM or the global 
GFS;  satellite  images  data,  such  as EUMETSAT  or NOAA  satellites;  observation  data from the different  stations 
deployed; images from the weather radars deployed within the framework of this  project;  
• Inclusion  of a forecast  verification  system  will be implemented,  to evaluate  the quality  of forecasts  by objectively 
measuring how well the forecasts correspond with the actual data as revealed by obser vations, as part of the 
quality assurance process of a forecast and warning production  environment.  
• Development of drought, landslides, avalanches, wind and hailstorm forecasting including design of the 
forecasting systems, assessment of historical information, product development, development of warning 
criteria.  
• Design and implementation of the “Last -Mile” warning dissemination and communication  system  
• Development  of a link to the socio -economic  risk model  to be developed  in Activity  1.3 to provide  Impact -based 
forecast  
• Design and implementation of the National MHEWS  Protocol  
• Monitoring and evaluation of the designed MHEWS and development of recommendations for the system 
enhancements, expansion and further development for long -term sustainability of the  system  
 
62. In October  of 2016,  the MIA opened  a new Joint  Operations  Center  (a central  hub uniting  all sub-units  of the Ministry, 
with a 24/7 control room/command centre linked to 112 service. The centre includes a video surveillance system with 
national coverage, which is used in the monitoring of hazards and dissemination of warnings. MIA is providing co - 
financing  to enhance  the surveillance  system.  The co-financing  of the surveillance  will include,  procurement  of services 
for the fiber -optic n etwork for CCTV/video surveillance in 3,000 locations and operational and maintenance cost of this 
network. The JOC surveillance system will also be used to verify/validate information from the MHEWS and 
enhance/compliment the EWS in the situation of short  lead time  events.  
 
The following diagram shows the key features of the system to be developed.


---
*Page 28*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 73   
 
 
 
Figure 2: Conceptual component diagram of the impact -based MHEWS  
 
 
 
Activity 2.3: Enhancing access and the use of weather and climate information and agrometeorological  
information services by farmers and agricultural enterprises  
63. The activity will build upon the enhanced capacities of the agrometeorological observation network to be achieved 
through the Output 1, Activity 1.1 and upon FA O’s technical support provided to the MoA in climate -smart agriculture 
and establishing of EWSs for droughts. GCF project will further support capacities of the national agricultural agencies 
and extension services to generate and deliver tailored climate and weather information and advice to the farmers 
through the following indicative  actions:  
• Build upon the enhanced equipment and capacities of the agrometeorological observation network to be 
achieved  through  Activity  1.1. and further  support  capacities  of the national  agricultural  agencies  and extension 
services to generate and deliver tailored climate and weather information and advice to the  farmers  
• Build capacity within Ministry of Environment Protection and Agriculture  in the use of climate information and 
climate change adaptation for the Scientific Research Centre of Agriculture, National Food Agency and for the 
municipal Information and Consultations Centres as well as the training of  NEA 
• Integrate climate risk and a daptation priorities into the agriculture sector plans, investments and budget 
frameworks, including the investment appraisal skills, economic valuation of climate change impacts, based on 
sector  model,  trade  off analysis  and cost-benefit  assessments  for a range  of plausible  adaptation  options  in 
agriculture.


---
*Page 29*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 73   
 
 
• Development of guidance documents, methodologies and technical regulations for the agricultural sector on 
climate risk assessment and management and the use of climate  information  
• Development of new climate information products for the agricultural sector (agri -climate maps, calendars, 
advisories, etc.) and delivery of these products to the farmers to help them make decisions related to timing, 
such as choosing the best planting dat es and deciding when to apply  fertiliser.  
• Supporting  improvement  of agrometeorological  advisory  services  (that links forecasts  with the direct  advice  and 
guidance to farmers as to how to respond to forecasts, what are the most effective response measures etc.) 
through the NFA, its regional service centrers as well as through the Scientific -Research Center of the Mo EPA 
and its information -consultation centers, altogether providing warning and/or extension services to  farmers  
• Capacity building and training f or local farmers in the use the weather forecasts within their farming  methods  
 
64. This activity is aligned with the national agriculture development strategy which includes a strategy for promoting 
climate -smart agriculture. The national agricultural authori ties view enhancing agrometeorological information and 
services as the key priority for the sector. For example, in the previous years the Ministry of Agriculture supported 
development of the agri -climate maps accommodating data from 1965 to 2014. The Mini stry received major 
meteorological  information  from NEA.  In the earlier  years,  there  used  to be long term weather  forecasts,  however  today 
only 3 -day forecasts are being generated. Longer term (monthly, seasonal) forecasts that are essential for the farmers 
do not exist. The Ministry started to build a network of agrometeorological monitoring stations and services with the 
support of the FAO project that provides baseline and lessons for the proposed GCF  investment.  
 
65. The Agricultural  Extension  services  system  in Georgia  is represented  by a network  of regional/municipal  agricultural 
information  and consultations  centres  present  in 59 municipalities.  Advice  and information  to farmers  is provided  for free. 
There  is experience  of delivering  information  to farmers  by SMS.  The consultation  centres  are well positioned  to provide 
climate information and advice on the use of agrometeorological information but capacity building and training will be 
required. The extension network is guided and info rmed by the Scientific Research Centre for Agriculture that plays a 
key role in promoting  innovations  in the sector.  The Centre  is responsible  for the implementation  of national  strategy  on 
climatesmart agriculture development. This activity will therefore  be fully integrated into existing agricultural climate 
outlook forums and information dissememation platforms.  
 
 
Activity 2.4: MHRM planning platforms: development of basin -level multi -hazard risk management plans;  
municipal -level climate -informed multi -hazard response and preparedness plans  
 
66. The project will work closely with central and municipal authorities and local communities to understand the risks 
and vulnerabilities (through climate -induced risk mapping and vulnerability surveys mentioned in Outpu ts 1 and 3), to 
develop appropriate climate induced hazard management and mitigation measures with the full involvement of the 
community through Participatory Risk  Assessment.  
• Develop  integrated  multi -hazard  basin  risk management  plans  for each  major  river basin  (11 in total,  including: 
Enguri, Rioni, Chorokhi -Ajaristskali, Supsa, Natanebi, Khobi, Kintrishi, Khrami -Ktsia, Alazani, Iori, Mtkvari 
(same as Kura) river basins) with participation of all relevant  stakeholders  
• Develop Municipal -level climate -induced multi -hazard response and preparedness  plans  
• Multi -hazard response, preparedeness and resilience plan for the City of Tbilisi . Tbilisi is the capital city where 
more than one third (around 1.3 million people) of total population is concent rated and a high concentration of 
critical infrastructure. Capacities of local municipality as well as the preparedness and knowledge of local 
population is very low as demonstrated during the 2015 multi -hazard events that resulted in human casualties, 
destruction of critical infrastructure and significant damage to the city as indicated in PDNA report. Thus, by 
including the City of Tbilisi preparedness planning and capacity building (under Activity 2.1) into the project, 
GCF will achieve a transformative impact on enhanced resilience of one third of the Georgian population living 
in the capital and depending on its infrastructure. This activity will be implemented in coordination with the 100 
Resilient Cities initiative joined by the Tbilisi  municipality.


---
*Page 30*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 73   
 
 
67. This City of Tbilisi project will be co -funding to the GCF project and will develop the resilience plan for Tbilisi for 
various  areas,  including  natural  hazards  (floods)  and other  natural  hazards.  The GCF  project  through  municipal  planning 
can help Tbilisi mayor's office by providng technical assiatance on the hazard modelling and mapping (which will be 
done  for all catchments),  input  to the design  of resilience  measures,  and assist  in operationalizing  the plan (establishing 
the res ilience unit with the office and building their  capacities).  
 
Output  3: Improved  community  resilience  through  the implementation  of the MHEWS  and priority  risk reduction  
measures  
68. Through this output the project will secure delivery and use of the early warnings and climate advisories with end - 
users. Communities’ capacity to effectively utilize the EWS information and products and respond to climate -related 
disasters through planning and implementing structural and non -structural resilience measures will  be enhanced. In 
addition,  the project  will implement  priority  structural  intervention  measures  in high risk areas  addressing  most  vulnerable 
communities (based on sound cost -benefit analysis using the socio -economic risk model) to reduce the risks that th e 
EWS will be designed to  address.  
 
Activity 3.1: Implementation of community -based early warning schemes and community -based climate risk  
management9 (CBCRM)  
69. Community -based EWS and CBCRM schemes will be implemented with at least 100 communities across Georgia 
based on full community engagement and participation. This project will aim to use gender -responsive participatory 
methods. The choice of the 100 communities (villages) will be made based on the risk assessment and mapping 
completed under the Outpu t 1. Communities’ willingness to participate and actively engage in the EWS and DRM 
activities will be one of the key criteria for the final selection of beneficiaries under this activity. There are some key 
factors that will influence the decision to impl ement a CBFEWS: i) Frequency of flooding or other extreme events; ii) 
Community’s  interest  and awareness;  iii) Possible  lead time;  iv) Cost-benefit  of the implementation  versus  flood  or other 
natural hazard damages. Activities will  include:  
• Community -based  EWS and CBDRM schemes will be developed for at least 100 communities across Georgia 
based on full community engagement and participation which ensure the inclusion of women and vulnerable 
groups.  
• Implementation  of Community  based  EWS  where  appropriate  to complement  the fully integrated  national  EWS. 
The selected  communities  will be relatively  high risk, have  short  lead time of the extreme  events,  have  technical 
constraints  for the central  system  to effectively  service  the community  (e.g. due to remote  location  or connection 
problems). Communities will assist in the design, implementation and operation of the CBEWS and will be 
trained and equipped in monitoring, warning and dissemination, and maintenance of  equipment.  
• Implementation of Community -based Disaster Management Process. Communities will be engaged through 
the CBDRM process to identify all notable hazards using gender -sensitive participatory community hazard and 
vulnerability  mapping,  the socio -economic  impacts  and vulnerability  of their commun ities and the risks they have 
to manage now and in the future. Participatory community -based adaptation interventions will be planned and 
implemented in priority risk areas to include community disaster risk reduction interventions measures. 
Communities (p articularly women and vulnerable groups) will be trained to implement and maintain non - 
structural intervention measures necessary to reduce various climate -induced risks. CBDRM measures to be 
implemented will include community -based agro -foresty on 15 ha of municipal  lands.  
• Gender mainstreaming will be a key aspect of the CBDRM process to be  developed  
• NGOs and CBOs with strong grass -roots experience and relevant local partners in natural resource 
management, women engagement, community mobilization, empowe rment, participatory community planning 
and development and DRR will be engaged to develop and implement this  activity  
• Impact  evaluation  of the measures  implemented  by the project  evaluated  at baseline, year  4 and year  7 of the 
project.  
 
 
9 Community -based DRM may include but is not limited to e.g. bottom -up community -engagement for mapping of known and perceived hazards and 
risks, collection and dissemination of current coping strategies and provision of guidance via different means such as videos etc. on best resilience 
practice; establishment of community -flood (or other hazard)


---
*Page 31*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 73   
 
 
Activity 3.2: Public awareness and capacity building programme at all levels to effectively deliver climate risk  
information and training to communi ties and local first -responders.  
70. The public awareness and capacity building of communities and the other users of the MHEWS is a critical 
component of the successful and effective MHEWS. One of the lessons learnt through the Rioni project is that 
sustainab ility of both structural and non -structural risk reduction measures is dependent on the understanding, 
acceptance and ownership by the local communities. The GCF project will assist the government of Georgia in shifting 
from ad hoc project based awareness and education efforts to a planned, consistent and sustainable national -led 
information and communication system for enhanced climate and disaster risk management. This activity will be led by 
the EIEC  under  the MoEPA  who has a mandate  as well as experience  in environmental  outreach,  education  and capacity 
building.  National  and municipal  level response  trainings  for officials  will be carried  out through  cooperation  of the EIEC 
and EMA. Community level awareness raising and informal education activities will be carried out in close cooperation 
with NGOs having grassroots capacity building and  information.  
71. The following indicative actions will be carried out under this  activity: 
Enhance the capacity already built within the  EIEC:  
• Undertake  further capacity  building  of EIEC  to develop  their curriculum  of training  to include  of the elements  for 
DRR, CCA and EWS related to all hazards for which they will deliver training under the project and on a long -term 
basis  
• Engage  trainers  in the form of project  experts  to embed  this necessary  training  as well as international  universities 
to help develop curriculum and design training courses for  EIEC  
• Alongside the ‘training of trainers’ approach described above, the project will help EIEC to develop the training 
material they will need to deliver the  training.  
Steps 1 -3 will all be done in the first year of the project.  
 
Capacity building at central, municipal and community levels:  
• Emergency response trainings for first responders in cooperation with EMA in Strategic  
• MHRM planning and MHRM intervention identification  approaches  
• Development/adaptation of existing guidelines on community  DRR/DRM  
• Development  of MHRM  and DRM  guidelines  for other  target  groups  including  teachers,  municipal  authorities, 
media, women’s  groups;  
• Capacity building and awareness raising of municipal authorities, local NGOs, CBOs or non -CBO community 
members in Community -based Risk Assessment  approaches,  
• Community -based Early Warning Systems and gender -responsive Community -based 
Multi -Hazard Risk  Management;  
• Working with the appropriate agencies to establish a training task team to  ‘train the 
trainers’ and a syllabus for topics such as first aid, search and rescue and warning 
dissemination, and example standard specifications for exter nal training  providers  
• Working  with the appropriate  agencies  to develop  generic  educational  material  and a 5-year training 
programme on disaster risk and emergency response for use  in 
School outreach programmes, university courses, communities etc. (traini ng material, 
Course notes, plays etc.)  
• Training  on how to use the hazard  and risk maps  provided  (paper  and electronic)  to raise  awareness  but also 
on how to plan development and other activities  locally.  
Networking and advocacy:  
• Organizing annual community  forums on MHRM and CBEWSs with participation of target communities and 
representatives of vulnerable groups to exchange information, lessons learned, successes and impediments; 
Organizing  annual  CBO  award  competitions  on advocacy  around  structural  and non-structural  measures  with 
a purpose of their  inclusion  
• into government  programmes  
• Organizing  community -government  and public -private  dialogues  around  local risks and risk reduction 
strategies and their  financing.


---
*Page 32*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 73   
 
 
Youth engagement and training programmes in Multi -hazard risk management 
(MHRM):  
Development of manual for kindergartens and training of kindergarteners in MHRM;  
• Development of manual for school teachers on  DRR/MHRM;  
• Training of school teachers in DRR/MHRM;  
• Development of info rmal education materials for school -based civil or  environmental/ecoclubs;  
• Training of members of informal civic clubs and/or Eco clubs in  MHRM;  
• School children/Eco club’s students annual award competitions on CBEWS and  MHRM;  
• Development of educational module on CRM/DRR/MHRM for university students from 
ecology/biology/geography/social sciences to guarantee implantation of guidelines at university level and 
growing professionals in climate change and DRR field in cooperation with foreign universities/hig hly qualified 
international  experts.  
National -wide media campaign on gender -responsive MHRM and EWS:  
• Using social media to communicate MHRM and EWS  concept to broader society and to disseminate project 
lessons and  successes;  
• Organizing TV and radio talk sh ows around MHRM and  EWSs;  
• Media coverage of project  activities;  
• Production  of footages,  Public  Social  Announcements  (PSAs)  of short  documentaries  around  MHRM  and GCF 
project  achievement  
• Training for media on MHRM and EWS and annual assay/media article awards  competitions.  
 
Activity 3.3: Implementation of priority risk reduction interventions that would significantly reduce the risks  
against which the MHEWS will operate  
72. This activity will focus on implementation of priority risk reduction interventions f or areas where risk from climate - 
induced natural hazards is highest10. Site specific field assessments by UNDP and NEA of target locations in West and 
East Georgia where mitigation work could alleviate the effects of flooding and mudslides have also been conducted, 
followed by outline and preliminary engineering design and preliminary costing. Initially, 21 sites were subjected to 
conceptual  engineering  investigation  and the broad  costs  of mitigation  work  quantified:  9 sites were  investigated  in West 
Georgia, largely flood mitigation in the Rioni catchment and 12 sites in Eastern Georgia associated with sediment 
extraction to mitigate the deleterious effects of mudslides and also flood mitigation. The above has been followed by 
prioritization of sugges ted measures applying multiple -criteria analysis, including preliminary Cost -Benefit Analysis 
(CBA).  Investment  priority  ranking  results  are summarised  in FS Annex  8. The measures  were  evaluated  using  a number 
of social -economic criteria: i) Highest NPV; i i) Highest BCR; iii) Greatest number of properties benefiting; iv) Greatest 
number of people benefiting; v) Greatest area of agricultural land protected; vi) Combinations of  these.  
 
73. As a result,  13 sites have  been  short -listed  for the GCF  investment.  Based  on the outcomes  of the preliminary  CBA, 
the technical design and costing of the short -listed structural measures were reconfirmed for these 13 sites through 
another  series  of field inspections,  consultations  with the local and national  stakeholders,  and technical  expert/engineer 
review. Following the above two -phase prioritization exercise, a social and environmental assessment was conducted 
for the selected sites/measures, a Social and Environmental Management Framework (SEMF) was developed, the 
Operation al and Maintenance  costs  were  assessed,  and the refined  CBA prepared  for the final list of priority  measures. 
A summary  of CBA and prioritization  analysis  as well as the description  of technical  design  of the measures  are provided 
in the section 3.3 of the  feasibility study (for the detailed CBA analysis and outline studies please refer to the feasibility 
study).  
Types of risk reduction measures to be implemented include:  
• Construction of embankments (using boulders or  gabions)  
• River bank protection (wire mesh  lining)  
 
 
10 Based on August 2016 report “Upscaling of Rioni Flood Damages to all Georgian Flood Plains and an overview of the Impacts on 
Population, Property and Agriculture within Georgia from Other Hydro meteorological hazards”


---
*Page 33*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GRE EN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 73  
 
 
• Sediment extraction, removal of debris and  vegetation  
• Channel  widening  
 
Figure 3: Location of the 13 sites for structural measures  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
74. The Ministry of Environment Protection and Agriculture of Georgia (MoEPA)  has a broad mandate in the field 
of environment and natural resources monitoring, management and protection that includes monitoring and forecasting 
of natural  and anthropogenic  disasters,  coordination  of planning  and implementation  of preventive  activities,  and resilient 
development  of agricultural  sector . MoEPA  is a responsible  body  for climate  adaptation  action  planning  and coordination 
at national level. It has a  special climate change unit – Climate Change Division under the Integrated Management 
Department whose head is also a focal point to the UNFCCC. The unit coordinates development of climate -related 
strategies and national reports required by UNFCCC. The Cl imate Change Division provides assessments of climate 
change impacts on the sectors of economy and ecosystems and prepares relevant predictions, develops the national 
plan for adaptation to climate change, coordinates the national communications to the UNF CCC and provides an 
inventory of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG). The MoEPA is an NDA for Green Climate  Fund.  
75. The National Environmental Agency (NEA) , under the MoEPA , is mandated to monitor ongoing hydro - 
meteorological,  geodynamic  and geological  events,  as well as to provide  monitoring  of environmental  pollution,  to issue 
license permits for the exploitation of natural resources, and to ensure the sound functioning of monitoring systems. 
NEA is the keystone among the agencies of the MoEPA . NEA is responsible for hydrometeorological and geological 
monitoring,  including  monitoring  of climate  induced  natural  hazards,  forecasting,  research  and analysis.  For the purpose 
of providing  input  to the National  Communications,  there  are national  working  groups , representing  all related  ministries 
and state  agencies,  academia,  private  sector  and NGOs.  Currently,  there  is no formal  requirement  for NEA to be 
institutionally responsible for climate vulnerability studies, but in the future under the Fourth National Communications it


---
*Page 34*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 73  
 
 
is intended to strengthen its role as a lead institution in developing CC scenarios and carrying out CC vulnerability  
studies. Comprising 331 staff members nationwide, NEA is responsible for the preparation of normative and 
informational  documents,  forecasts  and warning  regarding  existing  and expected  hydro -meteorological  and geodynamic 
processes, geoecological conditions of the geological environment and the conditions of environmental pollution; 
permanent mapping of the territory, risk zoning and forecasting of coastline developments; the management of coast 
forming processes using engineering activities; the c reation of environmental databases, metadata and ensuring its 
organisational  management.  NEA is divided  into the departments  of Hydrometeorology,  Geology,  Environment  Pollution 
Monitoring,  Licensing  and Fisheries  and Black  Sea Monitoring.  It also has 4 regional  hydrometeorological  observatories 
composed of hydrometric network. MoENRP and NEA have been National Implementing Partners with UNDP for the 
implementation  of the AF-funded  US$5  million  project  “Developing  Climate  Resilient  Flood  and Flash  Flood  Management 
Practices to Protect Vulnerable Communities of Georgia” (Rioni Project) that serves a baseline and a prototype for the 
proposed GCF project. The Rioni Project helped build required operational capacities within MENRP/NEA. NEA has 
been a reliable  and responsible partner and fully met its commitment under the Rioni Project to take over the operation 
and maintenance costs of the new hydrometeorological observation stations installed by UNDP in the Rioni  basin.  
76. Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC) under the MoEPA  has a mandate in environmental 
education and capacity building (http://eiec.gov.ge/Home.aspx?lang=en -US) and will be responsib le for activity 3.2 – 
public awareness.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
77. The project is developing a multihazard early warning system for Georgia, and the integrated multihazard risk 
management framework within which this MHEWS will exist. The projec t will develop climate risk information products 
which will mainly benefit the population at risk (up to 1.7 Million people) in line with the statutory obligations of the GoG  
to provide  the necessary  information  to enable  them  to safeguard  their lives,  livelihoods  and assets  from climate  induced 
extreme hydrometeorological risks. This is the responsibility of government and therefore this activity does not lend 
itself to cost -recovery for these essential statutory services to be provided to the  public.  
 
78. By law, NEA is mandated to provide free of charge services to all state agencies, local municipalities, state 
companies (See table 2 below) and the general public. NEAs commercial customers who pay for services is not large 
in size and is shrinking, since major customers are greenfield HHPs at their design and construction stage and the 
number  of greenfield  projects  has been  reducing  in recent  times.  Therefore,  revenue  generatation  has a declining  trend. 
Currently no hazard risk data/warning type of info is  provided to these customers (only  hydromet and climate data).  
 
79. NEA is a 100% revenue generating agency and receives no government financing. Of its total revenues, around 
80-90% are generated from royalties on mineral resources. The rest is generated from  NEA's commercial/consulting 
services. A small proportion of those commercial services are for climate services. Overall revenues from climate 
services  is within  the range  of 300,000 -489,000  GEL per year,  which  is not enough  to operate  and maintain  the existing 
system.


---
*Page 35*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 73  
 
 
 
Table 2: NEA commercial costumer profile and revenues  generated for climate services between 2013 and 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80. The average  annual  budget  of NEA between  2006  and 2015  was approximately  3.74 Million  GEL with approximately 
70% of total annual budget allocated to hydro -meteorological and geological monitoring, including communications, 
during that period. From 2014, when NEA became a fully self -financed agency, the annual budget increased to 2.3 -2.6 
times the annual average values and totalled 8.6 Million GEL in 2014 and approximately 10 M illion in 2015. Clearly, 
with revenues of only 300,000 to 489,000 GEL per year from climate services, NEA is unable to rely on cost recovery 
from these services to cover the cost of providing these services as well as fulfilling its statutory obligations t o state 
agencies, local municipalities, state companies and the general public. It is clear that the climate services are currently 
being internally subsidised by the revenues from mineral  resources.  
 
81. The GCF project represents an opportuntity to address serious technical capacity limitations of NEA and other 
agencies in providing its mandated climate risk and EW services to the population at risk and state agencies. The 
sustainability of the interventions are being addressed through the examination of ris k financing approaches to enable 
government  to identify  long-term requirements  to enable  budgeting  and planning  for the maintenance  of the system  (See 
discussion  on sustainability  below).  NEA has no plan to scale  up commercial  revenue  generation  as the customer  base 
for this is limited. The examination of financing alternatives is therefore  essential.  
 
82. The agrometeorological climate risk products will be tailored to the agricultural climate risk needs and will enhance 
the climate resilience of the farmin g sector in Georgia which is comprised mainly of small scale farmers with less then 
1ha plots  which  is mainly  used  for subsistence  farming.  The Ministry  of Agriculture  was providing  climate  risk information 
and services  through  its extension  offices  for free to farmers.  There  is a sizable  difference  between  average  household 
and per capita monthly incomes of urban and rural population. More specifically, average rural household monthly 
income is nearly 20% less than average urban household monthly income and average rural per capita income is 25% 
less than average  urban  per capita  income.  The proportion  of population  under  poverty  threshold  is 10.1%,  poverty  rate 
($5/day 2005 PPP terms) is 69%. The share of rural population under 60% of median consumption is 20% and that of 
urban population 15%. The share of  rural population  under  40%  of  median consumption is  15%  and  that of  urban  
population is 10%.  The rural population is therefore characterised by poor and vulnerable communities who engage in  
 
Types of organizations  Payments in GEL  
2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  Total  
Limited liability and joint -stock 
state and private companies: 
developers, construction 
businesses, insurance companies, 
energy companies, engineering 
and design firms, TV and other 
media companies, etc.   
 
 
234004.55   
 
 
271769.42   
 
 
315046.48   
 
 
304705.37   
 
 
273165   
 
 
1398690.85  
State agencies, non -profit 
organizations under state  
agencies and local municipalities   
20737.25   
20389.60   
21926.75   
7681.1   
11649   
82383.70  
Civic Society Organizations 
(CSOs)  161.50  320.20  72180  558.9  2158.82  75379.42  
Legally registered individual 
entrepreneurs   
6171.80   
2194.20   
15885.5   
7014.65   
3153.1   
34419.25  
Physical persons  51365.05  95067.10  94272.8  55534.2  6638.6  302877.75  
Total  312440.15  389740.52  519311.53  375494.22  296764.55  1893750.97


---
*Page 36*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 73  
 
 
farming for subsistence and survival and are therefore unable to pay for climate risk information. At the same time, 
these rural communities and the agricultutal sector on which they rely, are most vulnerable to climate change. Drought 
risk under climate change will impact 149,00 ha of land (90% of which is in Kvemo Kartli), while 87,683 ha of land is at 
risk from hail, 88,035ha at risk from stongd winds. The average annual flood damages to agriculture alone would be 
154 Million GEL and 481,007,976 in total damages with 93,284 ha affected.  
 
83. The provision of improved agricultural climate risk services is an imperative for Georgia give n the relatively high 
vulnerability  of rural agriculture -dependent  communities.  Such  servies  will enable  adaptaion  to climate  change  given  the 
improved risk information and changes in farming practices it will catalyse. For example, the project is implemen ting 
agroforestry as a means of controlling soil erosion, protection against flooding, landslides and mudflows. Moreover, it 
will improve ecological and climatic conditions of the soil at the location that renders it more favorable for agricultural 
practic es. The agro -forestry schemes to developed will be for protective purposes and any commercial value derived 
will not be sufficient and to scale to enable any substantial cost -recovery from this  intervention.  
 
84. Furthermore, the project is enabling Georgia to  fulfil its obligation to the EU under its association agreement. Two 
of the EU’s, six priorities for rural development through 2020 address economic, social and environmental challenges 
are: 
• Restoring, preserving and enhancing ecosystems related to agricu lture and  forestry.  
• Promoting  resource  efficiency  and supporting  the shift towards  a low carbon  and climate  resilient  economy  in 
agriculture , food and forestry  sectors  
The project is addressing both of these requirements.  
 
Given the public good nature of the project interventions and the lack of capacity of the majority of recipients of climate 
risk information (i.e. the public at large) to pay for such services, the GCF funds are requested on a grant basis.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
85. All activities  of the GCF  project,  except  for activity  3.3 imply  implementation  of soft, non-structural  measures  that do 
not require  any government  licenses  and permits.  For hydrometric  and other  equipment  to be procured  under  the project 
1-3-year warranties will be procured from vendors; all new equipment for which insurance products exist in the market 
will be insured. In the absence of the insurance products for any specialized equipment, alternative options include: 
prolonged warrantee service from supplier, contingency reserve for force majeure repairs. These cost considerations 
are taken into account in the budget. The project will analyze and choose optimal locations for the new observation 
equipment to minimize the risk of damages to  the extent possible. Siting of gauging stations will follow international 
standards which will consider the safety of  stations.  
 
86. Flood defence structures that will be constructed/rehabilitated under the activity 3.3 do not require ESIA and 
environmental impact permitting in accordance with Georgian Environmental Legislation. Concerning construction 
permits and meeting technical and safety regulations, given the activity will be implemented by the Road Department 
under the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (MRDI), the latter will ensure the adherence of all 
construction activities to national standards as well as to environmental and social management framework developed 
specifically for GCF project during the feasibility  phase.  
 
87. Procureme nt of goods and services will be carried out in accordance with UNDP and/or national procurement rules 
and procedures,  pending  which  organization  will conduct  procurements,  UNDP  or the implementing  partner/responsible 
party. It will also meet GCF procureme nt standards. All goods and services procured through UNDP will be VAT -free. 
National and international experts have to pay income taxes as defined by the Georgian tax code for resident and non - 
resident persons. The SBAA signed between UNDP and the Govern ment of Georgia serves as a legally binding 
mechanism  as will be the project  document  that will be developed  for this project.  Further,  under  NIM modality  UNDP  is 
accountable  for the effective  and efficient  use of resources  for the achievement  of programme  results  in conjunction  with 
the implementing partner. This encompasses the design of projects, the assessment of capacities of implementing


---
*Page 37*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF  73 
 
 
partners, the joint selection of implementing partners, and the financing and evaluation of programme activities. UNDP 
must monitor progress towards intended outputs and appropriate use of resources. Information with links on financial 
arrangements a re detailed in F.4 Financial Arrangements section of the FP. For each NIM project, a project document 
is formulated,  approved  and signed  by all parties  involved.  This constitutes  the legal  framework  for the project.  In addition 
to background  information,  expected  outputs,  work  plan,  etc., it includes  a clear  indication  of procedures,  a determination 
of the implementing  partner,  different  roles  and responsibilities  of all parties  involved,  a clear  definition  of actions  carried 
out by the implementing  partner,  a Peoject  budget  and corresponding  agreed  cost recovery.  The financial  management 
including auditing of this project will be guided by applicable UNDP financial rules and regulations and  guidelines.  
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Finan cial-Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf  
Within  the Rules  and Regulations,  UNDP’s  Programme  and Operations  Policies  and Procedures  (POPP)  outline  formal 
procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all 
procurements in UNDP, including details of all cash transfer modalities and process under NIM agreements: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/ Pages/Introduction.aspx  
 
88. UNDP’s currency hedging policy is based on the use of natural hedges (matching cash flows with local non -USD 
currencies) to the extent  possible.  
 
89. The Government of Georgia signed a Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) with UNDP on 1 July, 1994. 
According  to Paragraph  7, Article  III of the SBAA,  the title of ownership  on all technical  and other  equipment,  materials, 
supplies  and property  financed  or provided  by UNDP  rests  upon  UNDP  until the ownership  is transferred  to the GoG  or 
the entity nominated by the government.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
90. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Georgia and the policies and 
procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining -a- 
Project.aspx ). 
 
91. The national executing entity - also referred to as the National ‘Implementing Partner in UNDP terminology -  is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, 
including the NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements  on  fiduciary, procurement,  environmental and 
social safegu ards, and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the national 
government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project 
document which will be signed by the Implementing Partne r/Executing Entity to govern the use of the funds.  The 
SBAA  was signed  with the Government  of Georgia  in 1994.


---
*Page 38*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 73   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Project organigram  
92. The (national) Implementing Partner/Executing Entity  for this project is the Ministry of Environment Protection and 
Agriculture (MoEPA)  through its Integrated Management Department, which is accountable to UNDP for managing the 
project,  including  the monitoring  and evaluation  of project  interventions,  achieving  project  outcomes,  and for the effective 
use of UNDP resources. As stated in Financial Regulation 27.02 of the UNDP Financial Regulations and Rules, an 
implementing partner is "the entity to which the Administrator has entru sted the implementation of UNDP assistance 
specified  in a signed  project  document  along  with the assumption  of full responsibility  and accountability  for the effective 
use of UNDP resources and the delivery of outputs, as set forth in such document." By signing a project document an 
implementing  partner  enters  into an agreement  with UNDP  to manage  the project  and achieve  the results  defined  in the 
relevant documents. The accountability of an implementing partner is  to: 
• Report, fairly and accurately, on project progress against agreed work plans in accordance with the reporting  
schedule and formats included in the project  agreement;  
• Maintain documentation and evidence that describes the proper and prudent use of project resources in  
conformity  to the project  agreement  and in accordance  with applicable  regulations  and procedures.  This documentation 
will be available on request to project monitors (project assurance role) and designated  auditors.  
UNDP, in agreement with the GoG, will provide implementati on support (support to NIM) as agreed in the Letter of 
Agreement on Support Services signed between MoEPA on behalf of the GoG and the UNDP. UNDP will also provide


---
*Page 39*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 73   
 
 
oversight through the Country Office in Georgia, and BPPS/UNDP Global Environmental Finance Unit in Istanbul and 
HQ. 
93. UNDP provides a three – tier oversight and quality ass urance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional  and headquarters  levels  in line with the requirements  outlined  in the AMA.  This includes  management  of funds, 
programme quality assurance, fiduciary risk management, timely delivery of financial and programme reports to GCF 
and other  requirements  as per the AMA.The  quality  assurance  role supports  the Project  Board  by carrying  out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project m anagement 
milestones are completed and reported to the donor. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project 
Management function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the Project 
Manager. The project assu rance role is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited 
Entity  to the GCF,  UNDP  is required  to deliver  GCF -specific  oversight  and quality  assurance  services  including:  (i) Day- 
to-day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight o f project completion, (iii) Oversight of M&E plan project including reporting. 
UNDP, in its role as the Accredited Entity, has overall responsibility and oversight for the project including project 
preparation, project implementation and supervision, finan cial management and project reporting. UNDP’s 
responsibilities  are outlined  in the AMA  that has been  entered  into between  GCF  and UNDP  and will also be outlined  in 
the FAA for this project. The FAA and AMA will govern UNDP’s responsibilities for GCF. The ‘senior supplier’ role of 
UNDP is to represent the interests of the parties, which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project 
(designing,  developing,  facilitating,  procuring,  implementing)  and is covered  by the accredited  entity  fee provided  by the 
GCF.  The senior  supplier’s  primary  function  within  the Board  is to provide  guidance  regarding  the technical  feasibility  of 
the project. Furthermore, as the Senior Supplier, UNDP provides quality assurance for the project, ensures adherence 
to the NIM Guidelines and ensures compliance with GCF and UNDP policies and  procedures.  
94. In addition, the Government of Georgia may request UNDP to provide direct project services for this project. The 
UNDP  and Government  of Georgia  acknowledge  and agree  that those services  are not mandatory,  and will be provided 
only upon Government request and specified in the Letter of Agreement on support services. If requested, the direct 
project services would follow UNDP policies on the recovery of direct project costs relating to GCF funded projects. 
These services (in the amount of US $0.100 mln under PMC covered by GCF funds) will be specified in the Letter of 
Agreement. Eligible Direct Project Costs should be calculated on the basis of estimated actual or transaction  based 
costs  and should  be charged  to the direct  project  costs  account  codes:  “64397 - Direct  Project  Costs  – Staff”  and “74596 - 
Direct Project Costs – General Operating Expenses  (GOE)”.  
95. The Project  Board  (PB) will be composed  of the representatives  of: MoEPA,  NEA,  EIEC,  SCMSC,  MRDI,  MIA, UNDP 
and representatives of the local governments and civil society organizations. The Project Board is responsible for 
making,  by consensus,  management  decisions.  Project  Board  decisions  will be made  in accordance  with standards  that 
shall ensure management for development results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective 
international  competition.  The Project  Board  will meet  every  six months  (or more  often  if required  by PB members).  
96. The National Project Director (NPD)  will execute the project on a day -to-day basis on behalf of MoEPA  within the 
parameters laid down by the Project Board. NPD will be accountable to PB and will end his/her authority when the final 
project terminal evaluation report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and 
submitted to UNDP. NPD is responsible for decision -making for the project. The National Project Director’s prime 
responsibility  is to ensure  that the project  produces  results specified  in the project  document,  meet  required  standard  of 
quality,  timeliness  and cost criteria.  In addition,  the NPD  will be a liaison  between  UNDP  and the executing/implementing 
agency  as well as will other  key Ministries  engaged  in various  components  and activities  as responsible  parties/strategic 
partners. GCF funds will not be used to pay salaries of government, local government and CSOs’ representatives in 
their Project  Board  functions,  or the salary  of the National  Project  Director  (NPD)  assigned  by the MoEPA  or the Informal 
Technical Advisory Working Groups (TAWG)  members.  
97. International  Chief  Technical  Advisor  will provide  regular  technical  guidance  to the project  management  and technical 
teams in managerial and technical issues. He/she will be hired for a long -term during the entire project implementation 
period by UNDP based on UNDP recruitment  procedures.  
98. Project Manager (PM)  will manage the project on a day -to-day basis. He/she will be hired by UNDP based on its 
national  project  staff recruitment  procedures.  The Project  Manager’s  function  will end when  the final project  terminal


---
*Page 40*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 73   
 
 
evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP has been completed and submitted to 
UNDP.  The Project  Manager  is responsible  for day-to-day management  and decision -making  for the project.  The Project 
Manager’s  prime  responsibility  is to ensure  that the project  produces  and results  specified  in the project  document,  meet 
required standard of quality, timeliness and co st criteria. The annual work plan will be prepared by the PM, will be 
reviewed and cleared by the Regional Technical Advisor, Global Environmental Finance Unit of UNDP as part of the 
quality  assurance  and reviewed  and approved  by PB through  a signature  by the NPD.  The Project  Manager  will also be 
responsible  for managing  and monitoring  the project  risks initially  identified  and will submit  new risks  to the project  board 
for consideration and decision on possible actions if required and update the status of these risks by maintaining the 
project risks log according to the NIM  Guidelines.  
99. Project support will be hired through UNDP and will be composed of finance officer/accountant, administrative 
assistant, logistics/procurement assistant, driver, project tech nical assistant and other relevant backstopping  staff.  
100. While the overall execution/implementation of project will rest upon the MoEPA as an implementing partner, 
concrete  outputs  and activities/sub -activities  will be implemented  by consultant’s  teams  and organizations  through  open 
competitions  and request  for proposals  as well as by various  government  entities  as responsible  parties,  through  Letter 
of Agreements  between  UNDP  and responsible  parties.  Project  implementation  and funding  flow diagrams  are presented 
on figures 5 and 6 below.  More specifically, the project will engage following responsible parties in achieving project 
outputs:  
• NEA – responsible  party  for the activities  related  to expansion  of the hydrometeorological  network,  multi -hazard 
assessment and mapping, establishment of hazard meta -database, development of telecommunications 
system to support the new EWS and integration of telemetry system for near real -time dissemination and use 
of EWS, river basin multi -hazard risk reduction plan s. 
• NFA – responsible party for expansion of agrometeorological network and its integrtion in existing system, 
enhancing  access  and the use of weather  and climate  information  and agrometeorological  information  services 
by farmers and agricultural  enterprise s; 
• EIEC – responsible party for public awareness and capacity building programme to effectively deliver climate 
risk information and training to communities and local  first-responders;  
• Roads Department under the MRDI  - Design and implementation of risk reduction intervention structural 
measures.  
• Activities  related  to the establishment  and integration  of community -based  EWS  systems  as well as conducting 
Community -Based Climate Risk Management process will be implemente d by a group/consortium of 
international and local NGOs, having grass -roots experience in the areas of community -level participatory 
disaster risk planning and management, integrated natural resources management, community mobilization 
and empowerment,  small-grants  making.  This group/consortium  of organizations  will be hired  by UNDP  through 
open  call – Request  of Proposal.  Technical  guidance  to and QA/QC  of contractor’s  work  will be provided  by an 
international consultant(s) hired by  UNDP.  
101. Informal Technical Advisory Working Groups  (TAWG) will support the CTA and PM. They provide inputs to and 
endorsement of the design and quality of the project outputs. The TAWGs members will be drawn from government, 
private sector, academia and civil society to pr ovide guidance and technical advice on the project. A balanced 
representation of women and men in the TAWGs will be ensured. GCF project Gender Advisor will be a member of all 
TAWGs to ensure that gender is adequately mainstreamed in all technical discussi ons. Local stakeholders and 
community  members  have  a key role in the implementation  and monitoring  of the project.  During  the inception  phase  of 
the project, the MoEPA  working together with UNDP, will consult with all stakeholders, including vulnerable community 
members, CBOs, and local government, etc. and facilitate an understanding of the roles, functions, and responsibilities 
within the Project's decision -making str uctures, including reporting and communication lines, and conflict resolution 
mechanisms.  Local  community  consultations  councils  will be established  at target  municipality  and/or  community  levels 
to maintain dialogue with the local beneficiaries and stakeh olders throughout the project implementation. The project 
Logic Framework (indicators, means of verification, assumptions) will be reviewed and the quarterly and annual plans 
will be refined engaging the communities from the targeted districts. The stakeho lders will also be engaged during the 
mid-term and final evaluations to assess the progress of the project and enable adaptive project management in 
response to the needs and priorities of the  communities.


---
*Page 41*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 73   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Project implementation diagram  
 
 
Figure 6. Annotated funding flow diagram


---
*Page 42*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 73   
 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
102. The implementation schedule with detailed activity progress timeline and output completion is provided in Annex 
X.


---
*Page 43*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 73   
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
103. Georgia’s  INDC  states  that without  international  support  the country  is unable  to deal with negative  impacts  of the 
climate  change,  since  estimated  economic  losses  without  adaptation  measures  during  2021 -2030  are estimated  at about  
$US 10-12 billion,  while  adaptation  measures  cost within  1.5-2 billion  USD.  The INDC  further  states  that “establishment 
of early warning systems for climate related extreme events is considered as priority measure by the Government of 
Georgia…  Georgia  needs  international  support  for the development  and transfer  of technologies  to increase  its adaptive 
capacity... The implementation of adaptation actions for the period 2021 – 2030 requires the continuous development 
and strengthening…  capacity  of communities  to reduce  their vulnerability  to adverse  impacts  of future  climate  hazards”.  
 
104. Annually, GoG invests significant amount of state funds in post -disaster recovery and disaster risk reduction. 
Recovery and rehabilitation operations as well as some preventive measures are funded through the reserve funds of 
the President  and the government  managed  by the Ministry  of Finance,  budgets  of the sectoral  ministries  and municipal 
budgets. Funds are primarily spent on the rehabilitation of roads and bridges, water supply systems, energy 
infrastructure (transmission lines, sub -stations, pipelines, etc.), various buildings as well as on the purchase of houses 
for ecomigrants and direct compensation of affected population. In accordance with official data, in 2014 -2015 
68,368,811.43 GEL was spent from the Prime Minister’s reserve funds through MRDI Road Department, construction 
companies, Ajara Autonomous Republic, United Water Supply Company of Georgia and local municipalities . MRDI 
through its Road Department during the period from 2007 through 2014 spent 46,960,400 GEL on the rehabilitation of 
road infrastructure, including construction of flood defence structures. Average annual spending by the Road 
Department is about 5 mil lion GEL. Total amount spent on recovery and rehabilitation works annually is significant, but 
still is very small compared to GDP and annual average  losses.  
 
105. Concerning  the financing  of EWS/EWS  composite  elements,  e.g. risk knowledge,  monitoring,  communic ations  and 
dissemination and, response to climate -induced natural disasters, these activities are financed through annual budgets 
of NEA,  SCMSC  and MIA/EMA.  More  specifically,  NEA as a “legal  entity  of public  law” is fully self-financed  from its own 
revenue  sources  and its average  annual  budget  during  last two-three  years  made  up around  8-10.5 million  GEL.  Of this, 
around 70% was allocated for hydrometeorological monitoring and forecast. As for other institutions, they are financed 
through  state  budge t. EMA  also a “legal  entity  of public  law”,  but it is by large  is financed  from state  budget  in the amount 
of 60 million  GEL annually.  SCMSC’s  annual  budget  for 2017  is set at 3.8 million  GEL,  which  is only 73% of 2016  budget 
and 55 of 2015 budget.  
 
106. Thus, regardless of the government’s funding of programmes/activities to compensate losses and protect the 
population and economic assets, public investments are still insignificant in comparison with annual damages/losses, 
are largely  focussed  on post-disaster  response  and recovery  and, are not informed  by adequate  climate  risk knowledge. 
As a result, the performance of government programmes has been often sub -optimal. The below table summarizes 
strengths of on -going government programmes and areas where GCF sup port would provide needed  value.  
Table 3 : Synergy of Impacts of Existing Programme Strengths  
  Baseline Government Support  GCF Value Added   
 Government  Rehabilitation of roads, bridges, transmission  Creation of knowledge basis for climate   
Infrastructure 
Investments  lines, water supply systems damaged from  
natural disasters; construction of flood defence 
systems  informed  investments:  hazard  and risk 
assessment and mapping, floodplain zoning 
and planning, development of multi -hazard risk  
  reduction river basin plans; implementation of  
  climate informed investments; awareness  
  raising.


---
*Page 44*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 73   
 
 Community Based 
Adaptation/ Risk 
Management  Central and local government rural support 
and small municipal and rural infrastructure 
development projects (e.g. rehabilitation of 
storm -water drainage systems, 
construction/rehabilitation of flood defence 
systems, cleaning of  agriculture drainage 
systems, etc). There are no government 
programs in community -based adaptation/ risk 
management. Several donors have assisted a 
number of rural communities in Alazani -Iori 
and Rioni River basins and in Ajara to enhance 
the knowledge an d the resilience of local 
communities to climate change and disaster 
risks Establishment of CBEWS in at least 100 
communities and its integration to EWS, 
support to multi -hazard Community Risk 
Management process in 60 -100 target 
communities, including plan ning and 
implementation of community resilience 
measures (e.g. agroforestry, floodplain and 
watershed restoration, etc.) through 
community participation and awareness 
raising.   
 Climate Risk information 
and Early Warning  Operations and maintenance of a limited scale 
hydro meteorological and agrometeorological 
networks;  
support to fully -integrated flood EWS system 
for Rioni River Basin, support to EWS for pest 
outbreak in Kakheti region, hail warning 
system; warning and preparedness through 
EMA of the Min istry of Internal Affair  Expansion, upgrade and full automatization of 
existing hydromet system to cover 11 major 
river basins; expansion of agrometeorological 
monitoring network to cover other CC 
vulnerable regions (e.g. Shida/Kvemo Kartli), 
upscale of Rioni flood EWS prototype to 
national -wide, creation and integration of real - 
time EWS for other climate -induced natural 
hazards, development of relevant protocols, 
SOPs for communications and early warning, 
building capacities of all relevant government 
entities  in EWS  and disaster  risk response  and 
preparedness.   
 
107. The GCF involvement is critical to consolidate, scale -up, systematize and institutionalize earlier efforts of the 
government  and donors  addressing  climate -related  disasters.  GCF  investment  into nation -wide climate  risk and hazards 
monitoring and modelling is prerequisite for further Government policy development, risk reduction and risk transfer 
measures  at all levels,  and for engagement  of all stakeholders  including  private  sector.  The existing  hydrometeorological 
observation network in Georgia doesn’t provide sufficient and reliable data for risk mapping, modelling and forecasting, 
due to its limited geographic coverage, outdate equipment, inadequate O/M of the system and lack of funds and 
capa cities to establish and run almost real -time EWSs. Resources, including financial and human resources are not 
available  to expand  the floodplain  modelling  and zoning  integrating  climate  hazard  and risk maps  for all basins  in Georgia 
and for all climate -induced hazards aligned with international standards. This knowledge of climate risks and hazards, 
supportive enabling environment and relevant institutional and individual capacities at all central, municipal and 
community levels to be built by th e GCF project are the key missing building blocks for improved public and private 
financing  of DRR,  for effective  risk reduction  and risk transfer  mechanisms,  and for community -level climate  and disaster 
risk management. In addition, community -based and ec osystem -based approaches to CRM and risk reduction are still 
not widely known and utilized in Georgia and require external support and systemic  approach.  
 
108. GCF  involvement  is critical  because  there  is a strong  evidence  of climate  change  being  the underlying  factor  behind 
the increasing frequency and severity of extreme climate -related hydrometeorological events, and these events are 
projected to intensify in the coming decades. Therefore, additional investment is required in generating climate risk 
informati on to inform and improve the current government development programmes. Furthermore, the climate related 
threats also require additional climate finance to increase the scale of climate risk reduction investments to protect 
vulnerable  communities,  particul arly in remote  rural areas  - people  and their livelihoods.  Due to its mandate  for 
enhancing resilience of vulnerable communities to climate change, the GCF is best positioned to reduce/close the


---
*Page 45*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 73   
 
existing financing and knowledge gaps and barriers to improved resilience of Georgia’s people to climate induced 
hazards.  
109. The project investment framework consolidates resources from the state budget, bilateral donors and specialized 
agencies  around  the core GCF  investment.  In line with the GCF  sustainability  principles,  this GCF  grant  would  pave  the 
way for private  sector  engagement  into the DRR  sector,  that has been  otherwise  stalled,  and thus for a greater  efficiency 
of the use of public funds. In the cource of the project development, consulattions have been conducted with 
representatives of private sector (including large investors and business associations) working in energy and 
infrastructure, communications, agriculture and insurance sectors. Please see sections on Market Overview ( C.5) and 
Paradigm Shift (E.2.1). All sectors indicated that the new climate information to be generated with the GCF project will 
potentially create areas of growth and/or opportunities for enhahnced risk management. Please refer to the letter from 
the Geo rgian Co -Investment Fund as an example of willingness of the private sector to engage with the  project.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
110. The project will integrate new hydrometorological and telecommunications equipment and EWSs in existing 
systems and institutions. T hese organizations currently have the required capacity to maintain such systems and the 
project  will build  additional  capacity.  For instance,  NEA has long-term experience  in hydrometeorological  monitoring  and 
has various divisions and units to collect, st ore, process, analyse/interpret data, make forecasts and provide technical 
maintenance. Moreover, in January -February 2017, as a result of organizational reform, NEA established a special 
EWS unit, composed of 7 staff members, who will be fully dedicated t o EWS  operations.  
 
111. Various ministries to be engaged in the process, including MoEPA , and MIA and their specialized agencies (e.g. 
NEA, EIEC, NFA, etc.) have significant experience in working with international donors particularly with UN agencies, 
including UNDP. Micro -hact assessments under on -going or recent UNDP programmes as well as a number of Letter 
of Agreements,  certified  audits  and evaluations  are available  for a number  of key agencies  (e.g. NEA,  EIEC,  MoEPA ) to 
be partnered  under  the given  project  indicating  that these  agencies  are capable  to implement  complex  projects  with due 
diligence. For instance, Rioni Flood project has demonstrated that NEA is a trust -worthy partner for  UNDP.  
 
112. In terms of maintenance of infrastructure, under suggested project NEA is committed to provide proper O/M to 
expanded  hydrometeorological  network  and newly  created  EWS  systems  during  and after the end of the project  (please 
refer to MoENRM’s co -funding letter, including co -funding of 20 -year O/M of hydro meteorological network (Annex IV)). 
Furthermore,  new agrometeorological  stations  will be integrated  in existing  agrometeorological  network  operated  by the 
NFA under the MoEPA  who will also take care of its operations and maintenance after the exist of the project (please 
refer to MoA’s commitment letter in Annex  IV). 
 
113. Concerning structural measures, there is already a significant engineering knowledge and experience gained in 
the country  to construct  and provide  adequate  maintenance  to flood  defence  structures.  Hence,  proper  construction  and 
O/M of relevant structures is not an issue. Furthermore, local governments commit themselves to cover O/M costs of 
engineering structures to be built in their respective municipalities from their local budgets/transfers from central 
government (Please see co -funding letters from relevant LGs).  
 
114. Concerning  non-structural  measures  to be implemented  at the community  level,  local contribution  (either  in-kind of 
cash) will be leveraged from target communities to implement on -the-ground activities and to gain greater ownership 
from their side. Besides, a significant capacity development and awareness raising programmes will be designed and 
implem ented  in target  communities  that will ensure  the institutional  sustainability  of results  to be achieved  at community 
level.  
 
115. The project  will help NEA and other  relevant  authorities  design  and implement  long-term sustainable  programs  for 
operations  and maintenance  of expanded  observation  system  and will assist  them  to produce  climate/weather  products 
that may bring about additional revenues for these agencies (activity  2.1.2).


---
*Page 46*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 73   
 
116. The project will help all relevant authorities develop and imp lement a comprehensive short to long -term learning 
and training programs at all levels including community, municipality and state levels as well as for all age groups, 
including  pre-school  and school  age children,  university  students,  young  and senior  professionals.  All these  programmes 
will be integrated in existing education and training systems and will be regularly applied after the end of the project 
(activity  2.1.3).  
 
117. The system -level sustainability  of institutional  capacities  created  will be ensured  by the development  and adoption 
of relevant legal -regulatory and policy/planning frameworks for multi -hazard risk management and early warning 
systems (activities 2.1, 2.2, 2.3,  2.4). 
 
118. Common support, understanding and effective cooperation of various players will be achieved by establishing a 
mutli -stakeholder project board and advisory council(s), where issues of various project components will be discussed 
and solved by the consent of all parties. Furthermore, planning processes at regional, municipa l and community levels 
will apply a participatory approach, where key stakeholders will be engaged from the beginning to the end of each 
process.  
 
119. The project will address the legal frameworks, policies, governance structures and processes which currently 
present barriers to sustainable hazard management, DRR, CCA and EWS in Georgia. Through enhancements to the 
legislative and institutional framework, the project will ensure that the required systems/mechanisms for accountability, 
transparency,  and technica l knowledge  transfer  for DRR,  hazard  management,  CCA  and EWS  are in place.  Importantly, 
the project will address key institutional arrangement barriers to effective and sustainable multi -hazard  EWS.  
 
120. Through the capacity building activities, the technical capacity of institutions will be enhanced and sustainability 
assured by embedding capacity across all of the relevant institutions. Specifically, in order to ensure sustainability, the 
project will seek to embed technical capacity in the government Institu tion for Environmental Information Education 
Centre (EIEC). This approach to capacity development is far reaching and more likely to ensure sustainability of 
technical capacity built. As part of the exit strategy, the project will prepare an end -of-project  capacity report which will 
include  evidence -based  mapped  capacity  development  which  will feed directly  into the long-term cross -section  capacity 
development plan for GoG to take  forward.  
121. Overall, the common thread across the project outputs is the integra tion of enhanced climate risk information and 
application of best practices in broader planning, thereby ensuring sustainability and introducing a paradigm  shift.  
122. To ensure that financial and economic resources are available once the GCF assistance ends, the GCF project 
will provide the tools for government to better identify cost -beneficial risk reduction measures for the long -term 
management of hazards. This will be based on the cost -benefit analysis tool to be developed under Activity 1.3 which 
will all ow GoG to more effectively plan hazard management and intervention measures, and will assist in annual 
budgeting and advocacy for funding, for these activities. In addition, the project will assist NEA and other hydrometric 
equipment owners in developing l ong-term O&M financial planning to ensure that equipment and systems purchased 
under the project will be maintained in the long -term. Specifically, the project will provide the following safeguards to 
financial  sustainability:  
• Review budgetary requirements  for long -term maintenance of optimised hydrometric network and 
development  of a financing  model  to be put forward  to government  for the long-term maintenance  of networks 
(using cost -benefit modelling to support the financing  model)  
• Strengthening cross -agency cooperation in all CRM and DRR areas including DRR  financing  
• Advise the government on optimum/efficient allocation of funds for  DRR  
• Improve the donor coordination in the area of  DRR  
• Strengthen the government capacity to mobilize resources from other  sources  
• Organizing community -government and public -private dialogues around local risks and risk reduction 
strategies and their  financing.


---
*Page 47*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 73  
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
123. The project contributes to the achievement of GCF strategic -level impacts through increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions; and increased resilience of 
infrastructure and the built environment to climate change threats. The project will contribute to the achievement of 
GCF indicator of the reduction in  the number of people affected by climate -related disasters for Georgia’s population 
overall and with the focus on different vulnerable groups (through the application of social vulnerability approach). The 
project will deliver climate change adaptation be nefits  through:  
 
124. Improving resilience of about 258,841 households , 1.71 Million people (0.89 Million women, 0.82 Million 
men)  (47%  of the population)  who are at risk from all  climate -induced  hazards  on an annual  basis,  including  in the 
most vulnerable communities in mountainous rural areas as well as densely populated urban areas  exposed.  
 
125. Direct  impacts  of the project  on increased  resilience  and reduced  vulnerability  as quantified  through  the 
economic analysis  include:  
(i) Present  Value  of savings  of economic  assets  from expedient  use and application of  EWS  of $58 million  over 
20 years.  
(ii) Reduced  losses  of lives:  the CBA assumes  the MHEWS  could  help reduce  loss of  life by half the current  long 
term average of 6.25 per year resulting in 62 lives saved and  the PVB of $22 million over 20  years.  
(iii) 3,500 properties protected through 13 structural measures for the total value of US$ 13 million benefiting 
6,500  people.  
(iv) Protection  of over 3,000  ha of agricultural  land through  13 structural  flood  protection  measures  for the total 
value of $6.5 million.  
 
126. Additional indirect impact of the project to be achieved through enhanced climate information and advisories for 
agricultural  sector,  improved  legal  framework  and floodplain  development  zoning,  and enhanced  adaptation  planning. 
These project deliverables will reduce the risk from all hazards on 325,020 ha of agricultural land currently at risk and 
reduce the annual agricultural losses from flooding which are currently assessed at US$ 67.8 Million, as well as 
reduce ann ual damages from the extreme flood events that are currently assessed at US$ 189.9  Million.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated  by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to  total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only)   
 
 
 
Total  Direct beneficiaries: 1.71 million 
people, 0.89 million women (52%),  
0.82 million men (48%)  
 
 
Indirect beneficiaries (including 
direct):  
3.71 Million people (all Georgian 
population; incl. 1.88 Million women


---
*Page 48*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 73  
 
   and 1.72 Million men) benefit from 
the enhanced nation -wide EWS 
and climate -informed planning and 
risk management through reduced 
damages to infrastructure, reduced 
loss of livelihoods and disruption to 
economic activity, reduced impact 
on GDP and reduced recovery 
costs  
Percentage 
(%) 46% out of 3.71 million total  
population (2016), 24% of women 
and 23% of men  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Indicator : Number and value of physical assets 
considering human benefits  
Target:  
protection of over 3,000 ha of agricultural land an 
measures for the total of $19.4 million, with two 
agricultural land  
Indicator: Total geographic coverage of climate re 
measures established/  strengthened  made more resilient to climate variability and  change,  
 
 
 
d 3,500 properties through structural flood protection 
thirds  benefitting  property  and  one -third benefitting  
 
lated early warning systems and other risk reduction  
 
Target: By the end of the project, MHEWS established in all major 11 river basins – the entire territory 
of the country - and necessary institutional/regulatory framework for its smooth and effective operations 
set; CBEWSs are established in 100 high -risk settlements. Climate -informed multi -hazard risk reduction 
and management planning frameworks and implementation capacities are in place.  
127. Total number of beneficiaries and  reduced annual economic losses under baseline and CC scenarios were 
calculated during the feasibility study of scaling -up multi -hazard early warning system, based on existing indicative 
hazard mapping, socio -economics dataset available for all of Georgia (official statistics of the National Statistics Office 
of Georgia), and by scaling up the GIS -based socio -economic risk model that was developed for the Rioni basin to 
the rest of  Georgia.  
 
128. Digitised data on people, property and agricultural land enabled the enumeration and, in some cases, the 
quantification of the impact of 7 hydro -meteorological hazards. The analysis considered the Base Line scenario and a 
Climate Change projection. Findings of GIS -based socio -economic risk mapping (e.g. vulnerable regio ns, number of 
population affected, properties damaged and related economic losses) are most widely in line with findings of 
UNFCCC Second and Third National Communications as well as with findings of other studies, including WB, USAID 
and EU/RECC climate a daptation  studies.  
 
129. The impact potential of the project in these regions will be significant, reducing exposure of largely rural 
populations. Overall it will contribute to a more resilient Georgia with greater economic stability due to damages 
averted and livelihoods safeguarded by the proposed  interventions.


---
*Page 49*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 73  
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
130. The GCF project will provide critical climate risk information that would enable the Government of Georgia to 
implement a number of nation -wide transformative policies for reducing exposure and vulnerability of the population, 
various sectors (e.g. agriculture, tourism, health and rural development sectors) and critical infrastructure (roa ds, 
bridges, electricity transmission lines, other power facilities, water supply and sanitation systems) to climate -induced 
hazards  and private  sector  engagement.  The project  will thus catalyse  a paradigm  shift in the climate -informed  national 
risk reduction and early warning approaches which will catalyse and scale up the use of climate -risk information and 
approaches across all government sectors. The project interventions are expected the have the following benefits to 
key sevctors:  
 
• Critical  Infrastructure : Climate  risk information  will enable  sector  resilience  planning  for all critical  infrastructure 
impacted by climate hazards. With climate risk information embedded into the planning, design, construction 
and management framework for critical in frastructure, there will be reduced impacts of hazards. Systematic 
and comprehensive assessment of the risk to infrastructure and development of sector -specific resilience and 
response planning, will reduce the disruption of essential services resulting fr om hazards thus increasing 
efficiency of most sectors of critical  infrastructure.  
• Energy . Currently, the hydropower sector only uses (limited) hydrometeorolgical data in the design and 
construction phase of their projects. With more data being made available by the project (through expansion 
of the hydrometric network) and new climate risk products, hydropower companies would have enhanced 
information base to inform design management and operations of their installations. This could provide 
improveme nts in climate resilient design, and efficiencies in management and  operations.  
• Insurance . A weather index -based flood insurance scheme has been developed for the Rioni project. The risk 
and insurance model are developed but for national coverage and inclu sion of other hazard it needs the 
multihazard and risk modelling that the GCF project will provide. Once this is completed, the insurance sector 
with the GoG  can take this forward.  Based  on the Rioni  project,  there  is currently  a lack of enabling  environme nt 
for this scheme to be implemented within the lifetime of the GCF project. However, the GCF project through 
examination of risk financing mechanisms has the potential to address these deficiencies to enable the 
insurance scheme to be part of the longer -term risk financing  solution.  
• Agriculture . The climate risk products to be developed will provide improved and climate resilient farming 
practices which will catalyse efficiencies for subsistence farmers and commercial farmers  alike.  
 
131. The GCF project will develop basin MHRM plans and will implement some of the structural and non -structural 
intervention measures in selected high priority areas. These will provide strong replicability impact as they will 
establish the methods, standards and approaches that wi ll work across Georgia and define these in guidance, legal 
and policy documents. The potential for scaling up these approaches is therefore significant. A total of 13 priority 
structural measures have been identified for implementation in 4 out of 11 river  basins. There are many other 
locations where interventions will be need and these will be identified in the MHRM plans. There is therefore at least 
a threefold replication potential for the structural measures selected assuming there will be at least simi lar required in 
the selected basins, plus what would be required in the remaining  basins.  
 
132. The GCF investment will significantly improve NEA’s capacities to meet WMO standards. At present, NEA does 
not meet WMO standards in a number of  categories  
 
133. The theory of change for this project is presented on the fig. 7  below


---
*Page 50*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 73   
 
 
Figure 7. Theory of change diagram  
 
134. The project will up -scaling the Rioni flood prototype EWS to cover the entire country and all climate -induced 
natural hazards. More specifically, it will expand hydrometeorological monitoring, hazard, vulnerability and risk 
assessments to 11 major river basins, create multi -hazard and multi -level disaster risk management plan ning 
platforms, EWS and relevant capacities central, river basin, municipal and community levels and support 
implementation of up to 13 priority structural measures to reduce flood and mudflow risks.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 51*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 73   
 
135. The project is dedicated to the creation of a comprehensive knowledge basis and the state -of-the-art learning, 
research, mo nitoring and forecasting tools for climate -induced hydrometeorological hazards. The project approach to 
capacity development is to embed capacity within the legal entity responsible for environmental and climate training – 
the EIEC. This will have a long -lasting and transformative change in the way capacity is built, maintained and 
developed. Hence, the project will add CRM, climate -induced hazard risk management and aspects of MHEWS 
sessions to the trainings provided by the EIEC to improve the technical ca pacity and knowledge base for hazard and 
climate risk management, FFEWS and long term adaptation planning. Moreover, the internal capacity for EIEC will be 
built in terms of Training of Trainers  (ToT).  
 
136. The project  will implement  a robust  knowledge  managem ent system  which  will be imbedded  within  the stakeholder 
organisations and will have the following key  aims:  
• To ensure access to data and information generated by the project as well as long -term access to data on 
which their essential institutional functions rely and/or data and information that can be used for evidence for 
policy and practice advice (connecting  people to information and knowledge)  
• Connect  key stakeholder  groups,  practitioners  and experts  to ensure  that key learning  and experience  is shared 
within and across sectors (connecting people to  people ) 
• Ensure  staff in the stakeholder  institutions  know  about  effective  and relevant  KM techniques  so that knowledge 
is shared, captured and retained by the institutions and shared within and across the sector ( institutional KM 
improvement ) 
• By developing and promoting KM as a tool for continuous and sustainable  improvement and ensuring that KM 
tools generated by the project will be systematically used and maintained within the stakeholder institutions 
(Developing and embedding KM tools and  practices ). 
 
137. At the community level the project will seek public particip ation and community support in the design and 
imlementation of the impact -based MHEWS and all other aspects of the project. Co -design and engagement of 
communities  will be undertaken  through  activities  2.3 (agro  advisories),  2.4. (planning  will engage  stakeholders)  and 
3.1 which will be led by grass root organizations \NGOs with communities involved in planning and 
design/implementation  of the CBEWS/CBCRM.  A key project  sub-activity  under  hazard  and risk mapping  (Activity  1.2) 
is the introduction of meth ods and tools for systematically collecting damages and losses data at all levels central, 
municipality  and community  level to include  'crowd  sourcing  and public  participatory’  approaches  to reporting  damages 
and impacts  of flooding.  In addition,  these  socio -economic  survey  methods  will be conducted  alongside  the awareness 
raising  and capacity  building  of communities  (activity  3.2) which  will enable  full participation  of communities  in the design 
and implementation phases of all project activities.  
 
138. Learning,  awareness  raisings  and capacity  building  cut across  almost  all outputs  and activities  of the project,  but 
are particularly articulated under activities 2.1, 3.1 and 3.2. These set of measures imply development and 
implementation of comprehensive multi -hazard risk management and EWS awareness raising, longer -term academic 
learning and short -term professional training/re -training programs targeting all stakeholders, including vulnerable 
communities, local governments, kindergartens, secondary and hi gh schools and universities and, relevant 
authorities.  
 
139. All knowledge products, generated within the project including technical reports, methodological guidelines, 
regulatory and policy, planning and outreach materials will be available on -line. Meanwhile, all project knowledge 
products  together  with other  existing  documents  will be collected  and archived  on e-library  on multi -hazard  disaster 
risk management.  
 
140. Altogether, the project will create solid grounds for better understanding of current and future trends of climate - 
induced natural disasters as well as for improved preparedness and resilience to these  events.


---
*Page 52*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 73  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
141. The project  will create  an enabling  environment  at central,  municipal  and community  level through  improved 
access to climate information and through an enhanced systems and institutional capacity to use the information, 
tools and  technology.  
 
142. The project  will establish almost real -time fully -integrated multi -hazard early warning system and risk knowledge 
basis across the country, using state -of-the-art hydrometeorological and agrometeorological monitoring, field 
assessment/survey (geomonitoring, etc.), mo delling (hydrological and hydraulic models, DEM, etc.), forecasting 
(meteorological  forecasting,  use of ground  weather  radar,  satellite  imagery  and aerial  photography),  EWS  (Delft -EWS), 
telecommunications (GMS, internet, SMS, CCTV, TV and radio, walkie talkies, etc.) and information (GIS, web -based 
information portal and meta -databases, etc.) technologies. It will also create new climate and weather products (e.g. 
climate advisories) for various users, including sectoral ministries, private investors, me dia, population and farmers. 
Participatory “Last Mile” communication solutions tailored to the needs of local communities, including CBEWSs and 
demonstration of cost -effective risk reduction and community resilience measures through such approaches as 
wate rshed/floodplain restoration, agroforestry, and combination of structural and non -structural protection measures 
are also pretty much a novelty for the country. Furthermore, the project will combine best available science and local 
knowledge for vulnerabil ity assessment, hazard and risk mapping and will introduce multi -hazard risk management 
planning processes at river basin and community levels. To enable an effective use of this data, information and tools, 
the project will develop National MHEWS Protocol , enhance interagency coordination and communication, 
operationalize climate -resilient planning at basin level and at the level of municipalities, and upgrade institutional 
capacities,  SOPs  and information  management  systems  within  key institutions,  (e.g. JOC/MIA,  municiplaities  including 
Tbilisi, etc.). A comprehensive training programme will be implemented for professionals and practitioners of key 
government  institutions.  The project  will measure  the change  in institutional  capacities  of the key agencies  for integrated 
risk management. – Activities 2.1, 2.2, 2.4.  
 
143. The project is creating three main categories of enabling conditions for climate resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities  and their assets.  First,  under  Activity  1.1 the hydrometric  moniroting  network  will be significantly  enhanced, 
providing  enabling  technologies  and conditions  for monitoring,  forecasting  and managing  hydrometeorological  hazards. 
Under Activity 1.2 innovative tools and methods will be introduced for hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment, 
modelling and mapping and will provide definitive hazard maps for key hazards for Georgia. Under Activity 1.3, cost - 
benefit  analysis  methods  and tools  will be introduced  to embed  climate -risk informed,  appraisal -led methods  of strategic 
planning for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation. Under Activity 2.1 the project will strengthen 
the legislative framework and build capacity in key institutions which will signifificantly enhance the enabling 
environment for M HEWS. The GCF project will implement and build upon the key recommendations of the DRR 
strengthening project and the Rioni project to enhance the capacity to use EWS information for both the public and 
private sector. The following specific actions will be  implemented with the GCF  support:  
• Policy, regulatory framework and technical guidance for MHEWS and climate risk  management  
• Institutional strengthening, coordination, communication and enhanced use of climate  information.  
• Training and capacity building of  relevant stakeholders at all  levels.  
The specific activities are detailed in E2.4 below.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 53*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 73  
 
144. The project will create a legal -regulatory basis for mutli -hazard risk assessment (MHRA) and vulnerability 
assessment and multi -hazard EWSs, including protocols and SOPs for data collection, processing, analysis, 
forecasting, comm unications and dissemination. More  specifically:  
1. Flood  risk management  regulatory  framework  will be strengthened  by supporting  integrating  climate  induced 
flood and droughts risks management into water legislation by adaptation of #24 EU Water Framework 
Directive CIS guidance document on River Basin Management under Changing  Climate  
2. Translation, adaptation and adoption of the Guidance for Reporting under the Floods Directive  (2007/60/EC)  
3. Technical regulations and guidance on EWS will be developed and thei r adoption  facilitated;  
4. MHRA  mandates  and methodology  will be finalized;  MHRA  technical  regulation  will developed  and its 
adoption  facilitated;  
5. Technical  regulations  on vulnerability  assessment  and CBA methods  will be developed  and their adoption 
facilitated;  
6. Nation -wide floodplain  zoning  policy  based  on risk and hazard  maps  will be operationalized  through  relevant 
national regulations and guidance  documents;  
7. Standard  Operational  Procedures,  Communication  Protocols  and Codes  of Conduct  will be developed  for 
each of the agencies responsible for the various elements of the MHEWS and  response;  
8. Roles  of regional  and local authorities  will be clarified  and detailed.  SOPs  and guidelines  for Tbilisi  Mayor’s 
office will be  developed;  
9. National operational maintenance procedures for hydrometric network will be established  (NEA);  
10. Community warden systems will be elaborated and integrated into national response  system.  
145. In addition, MHRM planning frameworks will be developed at river basin, municipa l and community levels. More 
specifically:  
1. MHRM plans will be developed for 11 major river  basins;  
2. Multi -hazard  response  and preparedness  plans  will be development  for those  municipalities  where  structural 
measures will be implemented (around 10 municipali ties) as well as for  Tbilisi;  
3. Community resilience, response and preparedness plans will be developed for 100 target  communities  
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Socio -economic benefits, including livelihoods and income generation  
146. During the project implementation phase, at least 100 rural communities and particularly, those living in remote 
mountainous areas will directly benefit from the activities. Specifically, while implementing priority structural and non - 
structural interventions (agroforestry, floodplain and watershed restoration, etc.), temporary jobs will be created for 
locals, including women and in parti cular, the most vulnerable groups of women (e.g. single mothers, mothers with 
many children, etc.) by engaging them in on -the-ground activities. The afforestation measures could have significant 
economic effect to local communities, in case of high economi c value plant species (e.g. walnuts, almonds, etc.) are 
used.  
 
147. The project  will directly  result  in the safeguarding  of livelihoods  and income  generation,  due to the activities  which 
will directly  reduce  exposure  to hazards  and provide  early  warning  of impending  disasters,  thus reducing  damages  and 
losses,  improving  food production  (through  protection  of agricultural  land from hazards).  This will have  direct  and indirect 
livelihood stabilization/protection and potentially income generation benefits. The project will develop the socio - 
economic baseline information on all communities and their livelihoods at the household level, and will link this 
information to the calculation of current climate induced risks by integrating hazard and socio -economic data on 
livelihoods, health, access to public services, etc. Thus, ensuring that interventions are climate -informed and take 
account of current and future socio -economic  factors.


---
*Page 54*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 73   
 
148. Multi -hazard early warning systems including improved advisory agricultural bulletins will vastly improve 
productivity  of agricultural  systems  and will protect  other  economic  activities  currently  at risk from the major  hazards.  In 
addition, municipal preparedeness and response plans will safeguard key infrastructure, which enables economic 
activities to recover from, and continue during disasters. Structural and non -structural measures will provide direct 
protection from loss and damages to people and property in highest risk  areas.  
 
149. The project has the potential to bring about long -term social and economic benefits in terms of avoided human 
and economic losses particularly, losses in agriculture sector, considered as one of the most vulnerable strategic 
sectors  to climate  change.  The project  will design  and implement  community  impact  evaluation  surveys  to monitor  and 
measure change in the communities directly and indirectly targeted by the  project.  
 
 
Gender benefits  
150. Gender mainstreaming will be a key aspect of the GCF project and in particular of the CBCRM process to be 
developed. In engaging with the communities, the project will pay particular attention to inclusion of vulnerable groups 
and particularly women to ensure that gender issues are ta ken into account. As outlined in the Gender Assessment 
and Gender Action Plan (Annex XIIIc), there are considerable differences in vulnerability to disasters between the 
genders in Georgia, in line with traditional gender roles. Men are 25% more likely tha n women to be employed, self - 
employed  or engaged  in contract  work.  In general,  male -headed  households  have  higher  incomes  than female -headed 
households  and overall  there  is a considerable  difference  in the income  of male -headed  households,  which  emphasises 
the increased vulnerability of female -headed households. Pregnant and nursing mothers are particularly vulnerable 
because of their increased need for food and water and their decreased mobility. As the primary caretakers of their 
homes, women at tend to the needs of children, elderly and the disabled. This increases their workload and reduces 
their mobility  in cases  where  quick  evacuations  are required  or where  they live a long distance  to water  supply  facilities. 
For effective climate and disaster risk management, the project will ensure that women are primary stakeholders and 
will therefore need to be involved in decisions on the types of solutions that are implemented. Gender mainstreaming 
actions, capacity building and tools will be appl ied at various institutional levels (central government agencies, local 
government, community level), in particular, through the Activities 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1 and 3.2. Gender differentiated 
indicators will be used to monitor the projects performance i n achieving the right gender balance. Please refer to the 
Gender Action Plan (Annex XIIIc) for the description of gender mainstreaming actions to be supported through the 
project.  
 
Environmental benefits  
151. The project will increase the resilience of vulnerab le people, properties, infrastructure and economic sectors. 
Further the project will enhance the resilience of forest ecosystems, including protected areas and land resources as 
well as will protect streams and lakes from siltation and thus, aquatic fauna from increased turbidity. The project is 
addressing  climate  risks by introducing  CRM  and CCA  measures.  In general,  the project  is providing  key environmental 
protection benefits through the introduction of disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation  and protection of 
people, property and the environment from major hazards. Specific environmental benefits include, improved eco 
system functions through better spatial planning and the introduction of agro -foresty which will improve the natural 
functions  of the floodplains and watersheds within which they are implemented. Other environmental benefits include 
reduction in soil erosion and land degradation through the zoning of activities away from high risk areas asa well as 
improved management. Improved a gricultural practices that the project will catalyse, will also provide environmental 
enhancements.  In the long-run the project  will bring  about  significant  environmental  benefits  by increasing  the country’s 
resilience to climate -induced natural disasters and thus, enabling its population to better protect national assets, 
including environmental assets (land, forest and land  resources).  
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population


---
*Page 55*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 73   
 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
152. As described above, the majority of victims from climate -induced natural hazards and eco -migrants come from 
economically disadvantaged highland areas, where people are mostly self -employed, running small -scale subsistence 
agriculture, heavily depending on local natural resource base and earning extremely  low/no income. They are also 
disadvantaged  in terms  of access  to roads,  critical  infrastructure,  telecommunications  systems  and basic  social  services. 
Therefore, coping capacities of remote (mountainous) rural communities are limited. Meanwhile, the major ity of 
economic  losses  are attributed  to densely  populated  urban  areas  regardless  of higher  social -economic  opportunities  as 
well as better  access  to critical  infrastructure,  basic  social  services  by urban  population.  However,  high concentration  of 
people and infrastructure in urban areas makes inhabitants of densely populated areas (e.g. Tbilisi) extremely 
vulnerable. Rural communities, both upstream and downstream suffer significantly from agricultural losses due to 
climate -induced natural hazards that ag gravated already existing rural poverty and  vulnerability.  
153. SNC,  TNC and the vulnerability  analysis  conducted  as part of the feasibility  study  of this GCF  project  indicate  that 
hydro -meteorological hazards are intensifying over time, and increasing in spatial distribution. These spatio -temporal 
changes in hazards will together negatively impact communities in Georgia including socio -economic impacts. The 
predicted higher precipitation in Western Georgia will impact on soil erosion leading to aggravation  of mudflows and 
landslides, with a deleterious effect on farming and the abandonment of settlements and infrastructure, and increased 
economic losses due to flooding. Whilst in Eastern Georgia increased temperatures and stronger winds will lead to an 
increase in droughts, severe hail storms and soil degradation which in turn will significantly affect the yields of the 
important  crops.  Crop  yields  are already  reduced  post the Soviet  era through  the fracturing  of central  land management 
policies and insuffic ient application of fertilizer through the lack of will or finances. Increases in precipitation and 
temperature  will lead to further  reductions  compounded  by lack of disease  resistance,  endemic  to some  crops,  especially 
vines which are old and less resilient to a changing  climate.  
154. The regions at greatest exposure to each hazard both now and potentially into the future are highlighted in the 
table  below.  
 
 
• Currently Racha -Lechkhumi -Kvemo -Svaneti is the region with the greatest population at high flood risk but 
Samegrelo -Zemo Svaneti will overtake under climate change with over 10% of the region’s population in high 
risk flood  zones.  Racha -Lechkhumi -Kvemo -Svaneti  also has the highest  exposure  of property  to strong  winds 
and the number of properties exposed may treble in the  future.  
• Kvemo Kartli is overwhelmingly the region most exposed to drought both now and into the future with 58% of 
properties potentially exposed. Kvemo Kartli has over 6% of its population exposed to risk from extreme hail 
events  at present. Though this is expected to increase into the future some 51% of properties in Samtskhe - 
Javakheti may become exposed to extreme hail  risk. 
• More properties in Mtskheta -Mtianeti are exposed to avalanches than any other  region.


---
*Page 56*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 73  
 
 The highest number of landslides are in  Imereti.
 Northern Kakheti and Mtskheta -Mtianeti are most sensitive to  mudflows. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
155. Despite the last decades’ significant socio -economic transformation, Georgia is still a country in transition with 
around 2.7 -2.9% annual GDP growth rate (2015 and 2016 official statistics), high internal and external indebtedness, 
negative export -import balance, 13% unemp loyment and particularly, high youth unemployment (26%), significant 
disparity between standard of living and incomes of rural and urban population and rural poverty, related to land 
fragmentation, soil degradation, low access to local capital and foreign markets, prevalence of subsistence and small - 
scale  farming,  outdated  infrastructure,  low capitalization  and mechanization  of agriculture  sector,  shortage  of inputs  and 
farmers’ poor knowledge on good agricultural practices, etc. Moreover, in recent years due to various external shocks, 
the country’s  economic  performance  is worsening.  Given  this factor,  the government  was urged  to curb its 2017  budget 
by 10%.  Thus,  Georgia  is not currently  in a position  to fully deal with climate  change  and disaster  risks.  If conservatively, 
this socio -economic trend is maintained in the future, under predicted climate change scenario, existing financial gap 
between CRM investments and the needs will further increase. Thus, the country requires external financing to reduce 
current and projected climate -induced natural disaster  risks.  
 
156. Georgia lacks financial resources, knowledge and capacities at all system, institutional and individual levels to 
conduct multi -hazard, vulnerability and risk assessments, establish real -time mo nitoring, forecasting and early warning 
systems in order to make climate -informed decisions and implement climate -induced disaster risk management 
measures. Moreover, there is significant financial gap between actual and required DRR and CC adaptation 
investments.  Both rural and urban  population  and the government  have  low response  and preparedness  capacities.  All 
these needs are articulated in SNCs, TNCs and INDCs as well as in various DRR related policy documents and 
assessments.  
E.5. Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
157. The project’s  long-term goal,  immediate  objectives  and expected  outcomes  as well as planned  activities  are in line 
with priorities of INDC, National DRR Strategy and Action Plan, draft concept paper/strategy on EWS, being developed 
under the leadership of the Ministry of Interior  and, draft national adaptation plan for agriculture sector, also being 
developed under the leadership of MoEPA  through its Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC). 
Georgia’s INDC (2015) clearly identifies the problem of intensifying climate -induced extreme events as a priority for the 
adaptation action. The INDC specifically states that the “establishment of Early Warning Systems for climate related 
extreme events is considered as priority measure by the Government of Georgia” in the area of adaptation to climate 
change. The National Plan of Action for Capacity Development for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015 -2019) also clearly 
reflects climate vulnerability and climate change as underlying risk factors and the needs for climate change adaptation  
actions. The National Plan envisages development of: (i) Unified methodology and tools for multi -hazard risk 
assessment, mapping and monitoring; (ii) Centralized multi -hazard disaster risk information and knowledge system, 
consisting of national e -Library , databases, information systems and knowledge portal; (iii) Local -level detailed hazard 
mapping and risk assessment; and (iv) Early Warning Systems, national and local, by hazard and sectors; and end -to- 
end multi -hazard nation -wide integrated early warni ng system.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver


---
*Page 57*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 73  
 
158. UNDP globally has an excellent track record  and experience in implementing climate adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction  programmes  and projects  as well as highly  competent  technical  team  at HQs and regional  offices.  Over  years, 
UNDP CO in Georgia with support of technical advisors of BCPR and UND P RBEC has been engaged in preparing 
national communications to UNFCCC, creating methodological frameworks for NHDRA, establishing a Hyogo platform 
and multi -stakeholder thinktank on DRR, conducting various DRR and post -disaster assessments, including Tbil isi 
PDNA and CADRI assessment and, implementing community -based natural resource management and climate 
adaptation measures through GEF Small Grant’s Facility. More importantly, it has recently finished a prototype Rioni 
Flood Project, funded through Adapt ation Fund in cooperation with NEA and MRDI that created almost real -time fully - 
integrated flood EWS and necessary capacities for real -time hydrometeorological monitoring, hazard assessment, 
modeling and forecasting for Rioni Basin as well as enhanced res ilience of a number of vulnerable communities within 
the pilot basin  through  supporting  implementation  of flood  defense  and resilience  structural  and non-structural  measures. 
This prototype  project  will serve  as a basis  for up-scaling  under  this GCF  project.  UNDP  CO in Georgia  has also a track 
record of implementing large -scale (US$ 5 - 20 million budget projects) projects, with both soft and hard assistance 
components.  
 
159. The proposed project is aligned with UNDP’s comparative advantage in the areas of capacity building, providing 
technical  and policy  support,  reducing  barriers  and creating  enabling  conditions  for adaptation  planning  and investments. 
It also builds on UNDP’s EWS and climate information projects in 75 countries with 67 EWS established glo bally with 
UNDP support funded through The Adaptation Fund, Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, Least Developed 
Countries Fund, Special Climate Change Fund, Canadian International Development Agency, and other  partners.  
 
160. The MoEPa  has been  a long-term partner  for UNDP  in Georgia  in implementing  GEF-funded  medium  to large -size 
projects, including climate change mitigation and adaptation, water resources management and forestry projects. 
Moreover, NEA was an implementing partner for UNDP under Rioni AF Flood project and proved to be a reliable 
counterpart as outlined i n terminal project evaluation (See Annex VIII for terminal project evaluation report). Another 
Agency of the MoEPA  that currently implements a UNDP/GEF project aiming at creating Knowledge Management 
System for implementation of 3 Rio conventions is Enviro nmental Information and Education Centre, which will also be 
engaged in GCF project as responsible party for public awareness and capacity building  activity.  
 
161. UNDP CO has also past and current track record of successful cooperation with the MoA, through it s economic 
development and governance portfolios as well as with MRDI and MIA/EMA in the areas of DRM/DRR and CC 
adaptation.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
162. This project proposal together with feasibility study was designed in close cooperation with the First Deputy 
Environment Minister, who is also a NDA and, representatives of Integrated Management (Climate Change and Water 
Resources Management Divisions of) and International Relations and Pol icy Departments of the Ministry. More 
importantly, almost daily communications was established with representatives of NEA to design and cost outputs and 
activities related to the expansion of hydrometeorological network, hazard assessment, establishment o f real -time 
MHEWSs,  river-basin  MHRM  planning  frameworks  and capacity  building.  Public  awareness  component  was elaborated 
with active  participation  of representatives  of EIEC  of the MoEPA.  As a result  of UNDP’s  cooperation  with MoENRP,  the 
latter through NDA issued a Letter of No Objection (please refer to Annex I), agreed to take over the role of the 
implementing partner for the GCF project and, committed to co -finance the GCF project in the amount of $US 31.6 
million (Please refer to Annex IV to this pro posal on MoENRP’s co -funding letter), including 20 -year O/M of 
hydrometeorological  network.  
 
163. Activities related to agrometeorology were consulted with and designed in close cooperation with representatives 
of the FAO and several departments and specialized agencies/units of the MoA (since January 2018 integrated into 
MoEPA) , including  National  Food Agency  (NFA),  Consultation  and Research  Center  and Irrigation  and Regional  
departments as well as in consultation with providers of agrometeorological stations to NFA under FAO -funded project.


---
*Page 58*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 73   
 
Several high (of Deputy Minister and heads of the departments/agencies level) and technical level round table 
discussions with MoA staff were held and e -mail communications exchanged during feasibility study on the issues as 
current capacities of relevant MoA entities, scope, budget and technical architecture of agromet -related activities and 
co-financing. The confirmation letter on the participation in the project with its own resources in the amount of $US 2.4 
Million was issued by the MoA as a result of negotiation (please refer to Annex IV for MoA;s confirmation letter).  
 
164. Several  high (Deputy  Minister  level)  and technical  level meetings  were  held and e-mail communications  exchanged 
with representatives of MIA on integration of JOC -24/7 (real -time surveillance and control center) and EMA’s risk 
assessment, response and preparedness activities in warning, communications and dissemination components of the 
GCF project as well as on MIA’s co -funding issues.  
 
165. Close  contacts  were  established  with representatives  of State  Security  and Crisis  Management  Council  (SSCMC) 
and its Crisis Management Center under the Prime Minister’s Office to exchange background and project related 
information, identify the SSCMC role in the GCF project a nd explore the latter’s willingness to engage in the project. 
The SSCMC  expressed  its readiness  to participate  in vulnerability  assessments,  building  a database  on social -economic 
vulnerabilities to multiple hazards, public awareness and capacity building activities and development and adoption of 
relevant guidance documents and regulations on DRM/DRR and MHEWS.  
 
166. Peer to peer consultations were held and email communications established with representatives of MRDI to co - 
fund implementation and O/M of a num ber of flood defense measures in selected high disaster risk areas as well as to 
implement other structural measures to be  funded through GCF. These consultations  resulted  in mobilization  of  
US$ 7,271,730 million from MRDI to co -finance activity 3.3 o f the GCF project (please refer to Annex IV for MRDI’s co - 
funding letter). In addition, an agreement was reached that the Road Department under the MRDI will be a responsible 
party for activity  3.3. 
 
167. Communication lines were also established with local governments (LGs) of target municipalities where priority 
structural measures will be implemented within the framework of the GCF project, on taking care of flood defence 
structures, after they are built, through e -mail correspondence and exchange letters.  These efforts ended with 
commitment  of target  LGs to fund O/M of flood  defence  structures  to be constructed/rehabilitated  under  the GCF  project 
(Please refer to Annex IV to this proposal for co -funding letters from target  LGs).  
 
168. Very close cooperation was  established with Tbilisi Deputy Mayor and the Head of the International Relations 
Department on inclusion of some of the major recommendations of PDNA in GCF project and on Tbilisi Mayor’s office 
participation in the project. It was agreed that the projec t would support further institutional strengthening of the 
municipality’s on -going resilience efforts, would assist the office in developing flood response and preparedness plan 
and would  assist  the Mayor’s  Office  in developing  feasibility  studies  and detailed  designs  for one or two priority  structural 
measures for Tbilisi listed in PDNA. From its side, Tbilisi Mayor’s Office issued a confirmation letter to participate in the  
project with its ongoing and future activities (Please refer to Annex IV to th is proposal for confirmation letter from Tbilisi 
Mayor’s  Office).  
 
169. Other  stakeholders  consulted  during  the project  design  and feasibility  study  are representatives  of Mobile  Operators 
(funding of development and dissemination warnings and various climate/w eather advisories/products), Ministry of 
Energy (resilience and climate proofing of energy infrastructure), Co -investment Fund (resilience and climate proofing 
of investments  funded  through  the Fund),  SDC  (co-funding  or parallel  activities),  representatives  of EU Water  Initiative+ 
(parallel, complementary  activities).  
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme


---
*Page 59*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 73   
 
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Adequacy of financing structure  
170. Investments  to be made  under  the GCF  project  will largely  create  products  of public  good  nature,  including  climate - 
induced disaster risk knowledge, MHEWS, MHDRM planning frameworks, enhanced national and local capacities. 
Therefore, they won’t generate any revenues and cost recovery funds during and after implementation of the project. 
Despite the fact that various user -oriented climate/weather products, such as climate, weather and agrometeorological 
advisories,  that the project  will create  may generate  revenues  in the future,  at present  the private  sector  is not interested 
to purchase such product s or provide financial resources (either grants or loan) for their development. By no means, 
loan schemes including microcredits can be considered as an option for financing CBEWS and community resilience 
actions  in remote  rural areas,  given  the poverty  level and affordability  of local population  there.  Thus,  100%  grant  scheme 
is required to upscale multi -hazard early warning system in Georgia and enhance the resilience of Georgian population 
including those living in remote mountainous  areas.  
171. Bearing in mind existing financial, technical, knowledge and capacity barriers towards development and 
operationalization of almost real -time MHEWS, generation of relevant climate information and, implementation of 
combined structural and non -structure resilience mea sures at national, municipal and community levels to combat 
current  and future  climate -induced  disaster  risks the Government  of Georgia  is not currently  in a position  to fully finance 
its DRR  and climate  change  adaptation  measures.  Therefore,  it calls for international  aid for technology  and knowledge 
transfer and implementation of CC adaptation measures as outlined in INDC and other DRR -related policy documents. 
By joining its cash and non -cash resources and other donor funds, including GCF funds, the GoG will be able to 
implement a number of transformative policies and measures in areas of CC adaptation and DRR and thus, reduce 
current and future climate -induced disaster  risks.  
 
Efficiency and Effectiveness  
172. The proposed project builds upon lessons learned and success of the past and on -going interventions, existing 
data/information, institutional and management frameworks and capacities and, communications and coordination 
mechanisms operational currently in Georgia in CC and DRR areas. Moreover, it will sc ale-up the outcomes of the 
prototype Rioni AF Flood project as well as other baseline projects. Therefore, expanding the scope of already attested 
and verified  interventions  with close  participation  of national -wide and local stakeholders  is more  cost-effective than the 
implementation of a completely new  initiative.  
173. Comparable efforts (EWs, climate information, and community -based DRM) have shown effective impact related 
to saving of lives, assets, and livelihoods. In Nepal, the community based EWS directly  benefit over 80,000 people in 
communities  around  river basin  systems11. Advanced  EWS  systems  are estimated  to be 100%  effective  in reducing  loss 
of life by cyclones, 60% effective for floods, and 20% effective in case of drought. (Teisberg and Weiher (2009)). In 
Bhutan,  EWS  project  has enhanced  capacities  of district  and local level authorities  and communities  in disaster  risk and 
climate risk  management12. 
174. The project  offers  a cost-effective  alternative  to conventional/baseline  reactive  approaches  to risk management  that 
builds  around  ad-hoc recovery  investment  and compensations,  predominance  of large  scale  hard defense  infrastructure 
and limited  community  engagement.  GCF  project  catalyzes  shift to more  cost-effective  and efficient  approaches  to 
resilience building. The new approach is based on enhaced risk knowledge that allows proactive action to reduce  
 
 
 
11 https://practicalaction.org/docs/region_nepal/early -warning -saving -lives.pdf  
 
12]http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g3722/g2_16676/Final%20Technical%20Review%20and%20Social%20IMpact%20Assess  
ment%2EGLOF %20FSP%2Epdf ).


---
*Page 60*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 73  
 
exposure of people and economic assets to hazardous events, enhanced design of risk reduction investments, a 
combination of structural and non -structural measures, enhancing  adaptive capacities of local communities.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
175. Without GCF funding, 1.7 Million people (40% of the population) including the most vulnerable communities in 
remote  rural and densely  populated  urban  areas  remain  at risk from the main  hazards.  Annual  average  damages  (AAD) 
to properties from floods are estimated at 116.3 Million GEL ($US51.2 Million) without climate change and at 282.7 
Million GEL ($US 124.4 Million) with climate change. The risk to agricultural land from all hazards is between 251,225 
ha and 325,020 ha under baseline and climate change conditions respectively. Annual damages to agriculture from 
flooding alone would be 12 6.3 Million GEL (55.6 Million $US) and 154.2 Million GEL (67.8 Million $US) under baseline 
and climate change conditions respectively. The GoG and particularly, NEA does not have the capacity to manage 
hazard or provide essential warnings to the public.  
 
176. The public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail significant revenue generation or cost recovery 
from the project. Where deferred income generation opportunities exist, these apply directly to the beneficiaries (for 
instance, improved agric ultural income) primarily as household income. A financial analysis for the project is therefore 
not deemed pertinent given there is no profit/income generation from the project. The project cost -benefit analysis is 
provided in Annexes XIIa, and  XIIb. 
 
177. Financial viability of the project investments is assured through a combination of elements that build ownership 
and the technical, financial, operational and institutional capacities of the national and sub -national governments and 
local communities to ma intain and derive economic, social, environmental benefits from the proposed  investments.  
 
178. The project  relies  entirely  on grant  finance  as the proposed  interventions  are public  goods  and there  is no revenue 
generating  activity.  As the proposed  project  is non-revenue  generating,  a traditional  financial  viability  assessment  is not 
appropriate.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
179. International standard and local knowledge -based best practices, approaches and technologies (e.g. numerical 
hazard modelling, GIS-based socio -economic risk and vulnerability assessment methodologies, real -time 
hydrometeorological and agrometeorological observations through automated hydrometeorological and 
agrometeorological monitoring networks, numerical meteorological, hydrolog ical and hydralulic forecasting models, RS 
techniques, including Lidar, Radar, geodetic surveys, aerial photography and satellite imagery, integrated EWSs, 
modern telecommunication and information technologies, including GMS, SMS, internet/intranet, CCTV c ameras, radio 
and TV, walkie talkies, etc.) applied under Rioni AF Flood prototype project as well as under other national or overseas 
funded CC and DRR initiatives will be applied by the GCF project and/or adapted to local conditions. The project is 
build ing on the introduction of EU Flood directives methodology which was introduced under the Rioni project for flood 
risk modelling,  the development  of the flood  forecasting  and eary warning  system  and the EU FD-based  flood  economics 
risk modelling and extend ing these methodologies to the rest fo Georgia while introducing other international bets 
practice methodologies as detailed in the feasibility report Annex  7. 
180. Concerning  flood  defence  structural  measures,  feasibility  study  for each  of the measure  was conducted  during 
project preparation phase and conceptual designs of risk reduction measures were selected based on following 
criteria:  
• ensured safety and stability of the structural measures over the service  life-cycle


---
*Page 61*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 73  
 
• investment cost  effectiveness  
• easy construction and feasibility by local practice of  engineering  
• availability of materials and other  resources  
• easiness of operation and less effort for  maintenance  
• minimal impact on physical and social  environment  
 
181. Stemming from above criteria, various relatively low -cost technologies and measures, well -known and widely 
applied  in Georgia were  suggested,  including  gabion  walls, lining  with boulders,  lining  with wire  mesh  mats  (so called 
Reno mat), reinforced concrete cantilever retaining wall on drilled shafts, cleaning of storm water drainage canals, 
cleaning and renovation of mudflow retention structures (Please refer to FS Annex II for feasibility study of risk 
reduction structural  measures).  
182. In conceptualizing the architecture of community -based early warning systems, the GCF project relied on 
experience, design specifications and costs of CBEWSs piloted in a number of high ly vulnerable villages of 
neighbouring Azerbaijan and supported through SCCF  assistance.  
183. Community -based multi -hazard risk management processes to be run in parallel to establishment and 
operationalization of CBEWSs, will follow GIS -based participatory haz ards, vulnerability and risk assessment approach 
that is widely applied abroad and has been also used in Georgia by CENN in 60 pilot communities of Alazani -Iori and 
Rioni upstream and downstream communities under USAID/GLOWS INRWM  project.  
184. Concerning  the non-structural  community  resilience  measures,  including  agroforestry,  floodplain  and watershed 
restoration, the GCF project will build upon applied practices and lessons learned of Rioni AF prototype and other 
Donor -supported projects that provided assistance to selected communities across the country in above  areas.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
n/a 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
n/a 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)   
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.


---
*Page 62*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 73   
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Approach and Methodology  
 
185. The economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis  of Projects  of United  Nations  Development  Program .13 The economic  efficiency  of the investment  was determined 
by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount rate, and the economic internal rate 
of return (IRR). For consistency purposes, all proposals developed with the support of UNDP have opted to use a 10% 
discount rat e, in line with the existing practice of multilateral development  banks.  
 
186. Economic  values  (costs  and benefits)  are all measured  in real terms  of 2017.  Economic  costs  of the project  are net of 
taxes, duties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysi s assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 for unskilled and 
semi -skilled  labour  in Georgia.  Provided  that the economic  cost of labour  in Georgia  is expected  to be lower  than the market 
wage  rate (financial  cost),  we expect  this assumption  leads  to significantly  over-estimating  the economic  cost of the project, 
and under -estimating the true net economic value of the  project.  
 
187. As is common  when  undertaking  the economic  analysis  of investment  projects,  numerous  assumptions  were  used  to 
delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented and discussed 
in details below. Assumptions were always made so as to under -estimate the true net economic value of the proposed 
investment  project.  
 
188. Details of the economic ana lysis are presented in Annex XIIa and the Excel spreadsheet in Annex  XIIb. 
 
189. Benefits  of the project  were  estimated  using  the August  2016  report  “Upscaling  of Rioni  Flood  Damages  to all Georgian 
Flood Plains and an overview of the Impacts on Population, Property and Agriculture within Georgia from Other Hydro 
meteorological hazards”. The report was based on GIS modelling of spatial economic damages associated with hydro - 
meteorological hazards and quantified the  following:  
• Property and people currently at  low, medium and high risk based on “Report on “MATRA” project of National 
Flood Susceptibility Map of Georgia, University of Twente, The Netherlands,  2011”  
• Annual Average expected flood damage to  property  
• Annual Average expected flood damage to agricultur al land taking the mean annual loss per  hectare  
 
190. The cost -benefit analysis adopted conservative assumptions, and by using only avoided annual average expected 
flood  damages  and thus,  not counting  the benefits  to be accrued  from avoided  damages  due to other  hydrometeorological 
hazards. Benefits of improved data and knowledge and capacities were also difficult to quantify therefore, were not 
integrated in the CBA model, significantly deflating the expected net benefits of the investment  project.  
191. Project Cost benefit Analysis: The net present value (NPV) of the project was estimated to be US$ 23.4 Million, 
with an internal  rate of return  (IRR)  of 16.6%.  The economic  efficiency  of the project  remains  favorable  under  a various  set 
of alternative assumptions.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
192. An architecture of the national -level MHEWS is based on prototype Rioni Flood EWS as well as on best scientific 
knowledge and international practice for multi -hazard risk monitoring and forecasting. It also takes into consid eration 
technical design and operational specifics of existing hydrometeorological network.  
 
 
 
13 UNDP. 2015. Guidance on the conduct and reporting of the Economic and Financial Analysis of Climate Change 
Adaptation and Mitigation Projects and Programmes . UNDP.


---
*Page 63*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 73   
 
193. The MHEWS  will have  EWSs  for all 11 major  river basins  and for following  hazards:  floods  and flashfloods  (based  on 
Rioni FEWS prototype), landslides, droughts, avalanches, hails and windstorms. This design is based on basin approach 
and was derived in close consultation and in agreement with NEA  representatives.  
1940.  Suggested  MHEWS  protocol  is based  on an assumption  that early  warnings  must  reach  those  at risk on time.  Linking 
the warning  provider  to communities  at risk requires  the involvement  of numerous  actors  from different  levels  and the time 
available is limited. EWS protocols follow top -down logic, starting from a warning  provider and ending to the communities 
at risk. Protocols  include  two main  decision -making  processes:  1) The first process  leads  to a decision  on issuing  warnings 
and the respective  warning  levels.  This usually  takes  place  at the institutions  responsible  for hazard  monitoring  and warning 
(“provider organizations”); 2) The second process leads to a decision on whether to officially call for an evacuation and 
helps  to translate  the warning  message  into guidance  for a community  at risk. Three -staged  process  is suggested:  normal, 
alert and warning situations.  
195. The project will develop multi -hazard risk management plans for 11 major river basins, utilizing real -time and historic 
hydrometeorological data, hazard and risk profiles to be developed under the GCF pro ject and standard planning steps 
and processes.  
196. A community based early warning system (CBEWS) is a locally based operational forecasting and warning activities 
of a community that aids them in mitigating the effects of disasters in their area. This is a r elatively cheap, easy to sustain 
system enhanced by the direct and active participation of the community and its leaders. It is suggested to establish 
CBEWSs in 100 upstream rural communities. Community -based local monitoring will complement the national m onitoring 
system and will consist of automatic rain gauges, radar sensor type water level monitoring and post -factum community 
water level monitoring. Three different levels of warning will be defined depending on the time to the event and on the 
accuracy of the prediction, namely level 1 alert (be aware), level 2 alert (be prepared) and level 3 warning (take action). 
Community warden mechanism will be introduced in selected communities. Nominated wardens will be persons who will 
operate community -based ear ly warning systems and disseminate warnings within communities. They will be the persons 
who will receive  warnings  from JOC/EMA  through  various  communications  means,  including  SMS,  HF radio,  email -internet. 
Remote control sirens can also be used in case co ntact can’t be reached and/or at nights. Means for disseminating 
warnings among community members or from community to another community are: bells/drums, wireless portative alert 
sirens,  loudspeakers,  SMS,  walkie  talkie,  TV and radio.  All above  technologies  proved  to work  in many  rural communities, 
including  rural communities  of neighbouring  Azerbaijan,  but before  implementing  these  schemes  local conditions,  including 
demographics, community development level, gender profile will be taken into  consideration.  
197. CBMHRM process will complement establishment of CBEWS and will be carried out using internationally recognized 
participatory hazard, vulnerability and risk assessment, DRR planning and implementation practices. A number of 
communities as well as NGOs in Georgia have experience in community -based DRR and climate adaptation that can be 
replicated in pilot communities of GCF  project.  
198. Project  sites for risk reduction  structural  measures  were  identified  in close  consultations  and agreement  with NEA and 
MRDI,  based  on the experts’  judgement  and rapid  field assessment.  Investment  priorities  among  identified  sites were  made 
based on CBA analysis and conceptual designs of suggested for flood defence structures were developed through 
feasibility assessmen t of various engineering solutions, based on local peculiarities and knowledge, safety and reliability 
of the structure, its cost -effectiveness, simplicity of construction works and O/M of structures, availability of construction 
materials and potential im pacts on environment. Regardless of this, structural measures need development of detailed 
designs that will be carried out during the project  implementation.


---
*Page 64*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 73   
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
199. The project is expected to have moderate environmental and social impacts, although these with be spatially and 
temporally  restricted.  To ensure  the environment  is managed  effectively  an Environmental  and Social  Assessment  Report 
(ESAR) (incorporating an Envir onmental and Social Management Plan) has been prepared for the project. The 
environmental and social impacts are likely only as a result of the structural interventions. Management Plans have been 
developed to avoid, and where not possible, to mitigate the  environmental and social impacts. Based on the assessment, 
the project  is considered  to have  a moderate  risk, and less so with the management  plan actions  include  the development 
of an Erosion, Drainage and Sediment Control Plan (EDSCP). Importantly, the technical solutions for structural risk 
reduction interventions have been tested through a prototype EWS and flood risk management project in Rioni basin and 
there is evidence of positive impact on local environment over the medium to long term, thereby of fsetting the short term 
environmental  impacts.  The non-structural  interventions  combined  with expansion  of existing  hydrometeorological  network 
are unlikely to have medium risk impacts. The project will ensure that all the equipment purchased meets interna tional 
environmental, safety and technical standards. Efforts will be also made to minimize environmental footprint of project 
activities, by introducing internal paper -reduction, re -use, water and energy conservation/saving  policies.  
200. The non -structural community resilience measures, including agroforestry and floodplain/watershed restoration will 
have limited environmental and social impact. The project will carefully assess and select plant species during project 
design  phase  in terms  of their conservat ion and economic  values  that are of local provenance  and have  high survival  rate, 
etc. Moreover, during reforestation/afforestation activities, small scale sediment movement may happen and measures 
have to be taken to control erosion throught the development of an EDSCP. Overall, community resilience measures will 
create temporary jobs for local community members, including women that can be considered as a short -term positive 
social impact. Moreover, if high economic value crops/plant species are selected, they may bring additional revenues for 
local and improve their  livelihoods.  
201. The ESAR  developed  during  the project  design  phase  will be implemented  by the contractor  and supervised/monitored 
by relevant authorities (e.g. MRDI, MoEPA,  local governm ents) in accordance with procedures outlined in the ESAR. A 
Grievance Redress mechanism contained in the ESMF will be applied where and when it is necessary (Please refer to 
Annex VI (b)). There are no known indigenous peoples and/or ethnic groups and/or i nternally displaced peoples known to 
inhabit the specific areas of the interventions. However, prior to undertaking any intervention, additional stakeholder 
engagement will be conducted to ensure that any indigenous peoples and/or ethnic groups and/or inte rnally displaced 
peoples are fully consulted to ensure the project will not impact on them and/or their cultures/traditions. If any people are  
found  to be located  within  the area,  the project  will comply  with the UNDP  Social  and Environment  Standard  and the project 
will develop a social inclusion plan. A draft template is include in the  ESAR.  
202. The project does not require land acquisition and/or resettlement of local population. However, it may be necessary 
to utilise  areas  of land adjacent  to where  the structural  interventions  will be undertaken  so as to access  water  courses  (e.g. 
Khodasheniskhevi  and Milari,  etc.).  The land is currently  under  agricultural  production.  Where  access  is required,  the land 
will be returned in the same condition as it was prior  to any access. Access to this land will only be undertaken through 
voluntary agreements with landholders. Where a voluntary agreement cannot be established, the land will not be used. 
The majority of project sites are located in sparsely populated rural a reas. Only three, Telavi, Gori and Kobuleti project 
sites are located  in urban  areas  where  negative  environmental  and social  impacts  during  construction  works  might  be more 
noticeable to people. None of the project sites are located near or within protecte d areas or natural monuments; there are 
no recorded important bird areas or habitats for red book plant and animal species. Appropriate mitigation measures are 
proposed to reduce the potential impacts on people. None of the project sites are located in pro ximity to important 
archaeological  or other  type of cultural  heritage  site. Notiwthstanding,  in the case  of any chance  find, necessary  measures 
have been included in the ESAR in order not to damage the archaeological artifacts. None of the projects require  setting 
construction camps and thus; environmental impacts from campsites are not expected. All structural interventions include 
sediment removal from water course and any earth excavation works will be undertaken by heavy machinery. These 
activities  may create  such  environmental  and social  impacts  which  may result  in deletrous  short  term and spatially  restricted 
impacts  including  dust,  traffic  and noise,  pollution  of land,  water  and air from vehicle  exhausts,  used  oils, excavated  soil, 
river bank and bed erosion and degradation of floodplain vegetation and landscapes. The ESAR includes measures that


---
*Page 65*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 73  
 
will be implement to control adverse impacts. The ESAR also requires the contractor to undertake all activites and adhere 
to environmentally sound site management practices, by planning and implementing activities in a way to reduce traffic, 
keep strongly the site boundaries/limits, not carry out earth and construction works during rainy day s, install soil erosion 
control structures (embankments, collectors, etc.). Further, it is necessary to implement site rehabilitation measures, 
including re -vegetation at some sites after completion of construction works. Necessary measures have to be take n to 
avoid  over-surface  runoff  and drainage  of soil and turbid  water  into natural  water  bodies  by stabilizing  the soil piles and by 
avoiding construction works during rainy days. Major wastes that would be generated during construction phase would be 
unused soil and leftover concrete and boulder. Where possible, this material should have a beneficial reuse option, 
including using good material for agricultural purposes. Where this is not possible, any materials should be disposed on 
specially allocated  land plots, pre -agreed with local authorities or could be distributed among local farmers for various 
beneficial  uses.  
203. Negative  social  impacts  during  construction  phase  may arise  from work  placen  injuries  as well as during  transporting 
construction  materi als or construction  crew.  Traffic  and workplace  safety  precautions  should  be taken  by construction  crew, 
including  all construction  staff wearing  PPE and complying  with Georgian  laws,  technical  norms  and standard  while  dealing 
with machinery and equipment.  Consistent with the ESAR, crews should always have the medical kits on -site as well as 
should  have  assigned  wardens  among  them  in order  to contact  relevant  rescue  and medical  teams  in case  of emergencies. 
Overall, the crew should follow rules and procedures of the emergency management plan outlined in the  ESAR.  
204. During construction phase temporary jobs for locals can be created as a short -term positive impact. However, the 
long-term sustainable positive social and environmental impacts of the projec t and in particular, flood defence structures 
will be avoided losses in human lives, assets, agricultural lands and ecosystems. In total, 1.7 million people will benefit 
from the initiative, of which 52% are  women.  
205. In case  stakeholder  concerns  and complain ts detected  during  monitoring/inspection  visits  or otherwise  communicated 
to the management of the contractor and MRDI Road Department , a responsible party for the activity, these concerns 
should be addressed properly in a writing form within a period defi ned in the grievance redress  mechanism.  
206. Negative environmental impacts associated with operations phase are solely related to proper O/M of the structures. 
The lifetime of the structures is about 20 years and during this timespan such measures, as cleaning  canals from 
vegetation/weeds and sediments or conducting minor repairs may become necessary annually or within reasonable 
intervals. In case these structures are damaged/scoured/dilapidated as a result of improper aftercare, then damming the 
canals and fl ooding downstream areas can happen. Thus, it is necessary to follow O/M plan, developed during project 
feasibility  phase.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
207. The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations available 
here:  https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial -Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf  
 
208. Further  guidance  is outlined  in the financial  resources  management  section  of the UNDP  Programme  and Operations 
Policies and Procedures available at  https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx.  
 
209. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of 
UNDP’s  Programme  and Operations  Policies  and Procedures  (POPP).  The policies  outline  formal  procurement  standards 
and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here:  
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx.  Procurement of services and good s will be done in a cost 
effective and reliable way and by applying following principles: Best Value for Money , which consists of the selection of 
the offer that best meets the end -users’ needs and that presents the best return on investment; Fairness, Int egrity and 
Transparency, which ensures that competitive processes are fair, open, and rules -based. All potential vendors will be 
treated  equally,  and the process  will feature  clear  evaluation  criteria,  unambiguous  solicitation  instructions,  realistic  
requi rements, and rules and procedures that are easy to understand; Effective International Competition, understood


---
*Page 66*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 73  
 
as giving all potential vendors timely and adequate information on UNDP requirements, as well as equal opportunity to 
participate in procurement actions; and In the best interest of UNDP , which means that any business transactions must 
conform  to the manda tes and principles  of UNDP  and the United  Nations.  As outlined  in the Procurement  Plan,  procurement 
of goods  and services  will be mainly  carried  out by UNDP  and the UNDP  procurement  procedures  will be applied  (POPP). 
However,  for certain  project  inputs,  procurement  will be done  by the national  project  Responsible  Parties  engaged  through 
standard Letters of Agreement (LoA) signed between UNDP and responsible party (such as NEA, EIEC, NFA, Road  
department unde MRDI) . Procurement by Responsible Parties under  the LoAs will be done through centralized e - 
procurement system managed by the State Procurement Agency ( http://procurement.gov.ge  ). It is noteworthy, that prior 
to issuing LoA, UNDP capacity assessments are conducted for the IP/RPs to determine their capacities and fiduciary 
standards, including for procurement and to confirm compliance of these standards with international principles for 
procurement. In addition, UNDP conducts ‘spot check’s annually for each  LoA signatory entity. Additional detailes on the 
UNDP procurement threthholds and methods are provided in the Annex XIIIa. Procurement  Plan.  
 
210. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available at:  
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Implem 
entation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1  
211. UNDP ascertains the national capacitie s of the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity and Responsible Parties by 
undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners/Executing 
Entities (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT ). 
 
212. All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit 
guidelines and policies. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled 
audits are performed annually, during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the 
implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. The project financial statements will comply with international 
accounting standards. A schedule d audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner 
were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial 
audit or an internal control  audit.  
213. The NIM Guid elines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme and 
Operations  Policies  and Procedures  (POPP)  which  are available  here:  
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/Pages/default.aspx . The NIM Guidelines were corporately d eveloped and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and  regulations.  
 
 
214. The national  executing  entity , MoEPA  - also referred  to as the national  ‘Implementing  Partner’  in UNDP  terminology  - 
is required  to implement  the project  in compliance  with UNDP  rules  and regulations,  policies  and procedures  (including  the 
NIM Guidelines).  In legal  terms,  this is ensured  through  the national  Government’s  signature  of the UNDP  Standard  Basic 
Assistance  Agreement  (SBAA), together  with a UNDP  project  document  which  will be signed  by the Implementing  Partner 
to govern the use of the funds. Both of these documents require  compliance.  
 
215. The national Implementing Partner and all Responsible Parties have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer (HACT) assessment to assess capacities to implement the project. The assessment reports are attached to the 
Full Proposal. During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies 
and procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to 
be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and 
participation  in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level  
or at Implementing partner level on the resources received from UNDP.


---
*Page 67*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 73  
 
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary   
216. Risk factors associated with the project implementation include institutional, policy, financial, technical and 
operational aspects to create and run properly MHEWS both national -wide and at community level; and social and 
environmental due to the implementation of climate -resilient livelihoods initiatives and construction of protective 
infrastructures  against  hydrometeorological  risks.  The risk may affect  the sedimentation  movement  during  construction 
of flood defence infrastructures. Other risks may affect the lack of commitment from communities where restoration 
activities, alternative livelihoods and EWS are  planned.  
 
217. The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address thes e risks. This mitigation 
strategies  include  preparing  an erosion  control  sediment  plan and installing  silt curtains  to restrict  sediment 
movement during implementation of structural and non -structural community resilience  measures.  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might 
prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation 
measures.  
Selected Risk  Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Political situation becomes instable due to 
local upheavals or regional conflicts  Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will develop and implement emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s 
crisis management requirements. This may reduce the level of impact of the risk to medium to low level  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Hydrometeorological and/or flood defence 
infrastructure are destroyed due to various 
natural hazards  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will develop and implement emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s 
crisis management requirements. During the design and constructing of relevant infrastructure disaster risks 
will be taken into consideration or in other words, climate proofing will be carried out. These activities will 
reduce the level of impact and probability that the infrastructure will be destroyed to minimum level  
Selected Risk Factor 3


---
*Page 68*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 73  
 
 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Climate adaptation and EWS/DRR do not 
stay a government priority and therefore, the 
latter’s political, financial and technical 
support to these areas and particularly, to the 
project  is reduced   
 
Other   
High (>20% of 
project value)   
 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will have constant consultations with high -level government representatives and will carry out 
lobbying and advocacy campaigns in support of CC adaptation, EWS and DRR. This will reduce the impact 
of the risk to the minimum level  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Absorption and operational capacities of 
project responsible parties and particularly, 
NEA stay inadequate to properly run and 
maintain MHEWS   
Technical and 
operational   
High (>20% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will pay high attention to the capacity building of all relevant agencies through carrying out 
training of trainers, on -the-job and field trainings of the staff of relevant agencies, introducing/strengthening 
internship mechanisms within responsible parties and particularly NEA, developing technical guidelines, 
methodologies and sustainable operations and ma intenance plans for established national -wide MHEWS. 
Altogether will reduce probability and impact of the risk to minimum level.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Due to poor financial performance of the 
government and particularly, ministries and 
agencies engaged in the project as 
responsible parties, significant budget and 
staff cuts occur in these state organizations   
Technical and 
operational   
High (>20% of 
project value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will assist the government authorities to develop and implement sustainable long -term financial 
plan for running MHEWS, including the plan for engaging private sector in the area as well as accessing 
international donor f inancing.  
Selected Risk Factor 6


---
*Page 69*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 73  
 
 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Local communities are not interested to be 
engaged in CBEWS and CBMHRM 
processes   
Other  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will conduct aggressive awareness campaign at grassroots’ level on the climate -induced natural 
hazards, vulnerabilities and risks and benefits for reducing these risks. It will also make significant efforts to 
mobilize and empower local communities in CBEWS and CBMHRM. This will reduce the impact and 
probability of the risk to the minimum  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
No finances are available for proper 
operation and maintenance of CBEWS  Financial  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation measure(s)  
The project will use volunteer warden’s schemes for operating local early warning system as well as will 
make efforts to integrate them into national -wide system and management and institutional structures (kept 
by NEA and MIA). Moreover, the project will seek for minimum level financing for O/M of the system within 
local author ities, NEA and EMA. These measures will reduce the level of impact to the minimum  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Multi -hazard plans are not implemented  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1- 
20%) of project 
value  Medium  
Mitigation measure(s)  
The project will engage all level stakeholders, including line Ministries, international aid organizations, 
development banks and private sector in discussion and endorsement of the plans. Moreover, it will facilitate 
official adoption of the plans by the government and will advocate and lobby to include priority measures of 
the plans in state and municipal budgets. These measures will reduce the level of risk to the minimum  
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Sediment movement during riverbank works  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation measure (3)


---
*Page 70*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 73  
 
 
There is the likelihood for sediment movement during the construction of hard infrastructure. To ensure that 
the sediment is not mobilised that will result in environmental impacts, it will be necessary to prepare an 
Erosion, Drainage and Sediment Control Plan (EDSCP) and install silt curtains to restrict sediment 
movement from the site. Further, any earthworks should be undertaken during the dry season and 
compacted sufficiently to reduce sediment movement. The EDSCP should contain aspects including but not 
limited to the installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the quick placement of 
footing material. These impacts will be spatially and temporally restricted to works periods.  
Selected Risk Fa ctor 10  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Sediment movement during ecosystem 
revegetation works  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation measure (3)  
There is the potential for sediment movement during planting and reforestation. To ensure that the sediment 
is not mobilised through either wind or more specifically water movement, it will be necessary to prepare an 
EDSCP and install silt curtains to restrict sediment movement and the cover ing of sediment where 
practicable.  
Selected Risk Factor 11  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Contamination of existing water sources  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation measure (3)  
To ensure contaminants do not enter waterways and groundwater systems, a water quality monitoring plan 
will be developed to ensure chemicals are not released. This will involve testing sediment prior to movement 
and planning so that the works are not undertaken during rain events. Where rainfall is anticipated, 
appropriate material should be placed under the sediment prior to excavation to ensure there is no seepage 
into groundwater systems. The water quality monitoring for the sources will be designed to identify potential 
impacts so that management measures can be proactively rather than reactively enacted upon.  
Selected Risk Factor 12  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Construction Noise  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation measure (3)  
The construction contractor should consider any sensitive receptors including communities. Noise will be  
limited to excavators removing sediment from the water course. It is likely that more noise will be generated 
through the use of excavators and trucks moving sediment. Where necessary, noise shields should be


---
*Page 71*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 73  
 
 
constructed to reduce the potential for noise to reach the se communities if an impact occurs. The noise will 
have very limited temporal scales.  
Selected Risk Factor 13  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Sediment movement during the installation of 
hydro -meteorological observation equipment 
for the MHEWS  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation measure (3)  
When undertaking the installation of weather stations, the ESAR and EDSCP will be followed to ensure 
runoff does not flow into riverine systems  
Selected Risk Factor 14  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Locating infrastructure that is socially 
detrimental  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation measure (3)  
Stakeholder consultation will be undertaken prior to the selection of infrastructure sites to ensure no 
impacts. No interventions will be undertaken on private land.  
Selected Risk Factor 15  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Agroforestry activities on local pasturelands  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation measure (3)  
Stakeholder consultation will be undertaken prior to the selection of agroforestry sites to ensure no conflicts. 
Economic benefits from protecting housing, infrastructure and agricultural land are expected to be higher 
than opportunity costs related to planting on grazing land. Planting of economically feasible tree species 
(fruits, nuts) are part of the bioengineering measur es. 
 Selected Risk Factor 16   
 Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring   
 Physical and Economic Displacement related to 
intervention construction  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low  
 Mitigation measure (3)   
 It may be necessary to utilise areas of land adjacent to where the structural interventions will be 
undertaken so as to access water courses (e.g. Khodasheniskhevi and Milari, etc.). The land is currently 
under agricultural production. Where  access is required, the land will be returned in the same condition as


---
*Page 72*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 73  
 
 
 it was prior to any access. Access to this land will only be undertaken through voluntary agreements with 
landholders. Where a voluntary agreement cannot be established, the land will not be used.   
 Selected Risk Factor 17   
 Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring   
 Impacts on indigenous peoples and/or ethnic 
groups and/or internally displaced peoples  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low  
 Mitigation measure (3)   
 Prior to undertaking any intervention, additional stakeholder engagement will be conducted to ensure that 
any indigenous peoples and/or ethnic  groups and/or internally displaced peoples are fully consulted to 
ensure the project will not impact on them and/or their cultures/traditions. If any people are found to be 
located within the area, the project will comply with the UNDP Social and Environm ent Standard and the 
project will develop a social inclusion plan.   
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 73*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 73  
 
H.1. Logic  Framework.  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
 
H.1.1.Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level14 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 The project objective is to reduce exposure of Georgia’s communities, livelihoods and infrastructure to climate -induced natural  
 hazards through a well -functioning nation -wide multi -hazard early warning system and risk -informed local action. The GCF project  
 will provide critical climate risk information that would enable the Government of Georgia to implement a number of nation -wide 
 transformative policies and actions for reducing exposure and vulnerability of the population to climate -induced hazards. The project  
 will thus catalyze a paradigm shift in the national climate risk management, climate -proofed disaster risk reduction and early warning  
Increased  approaches. The project innovation and transformative change will also include (a) participatory “Last Mile” communication solutions  
climate -resilient  tailored to the needs of local communities, including CBEWSs; (b) increasing implementation capacities for carrying out cost -effective  
sustainable  risk reduction and community resilience measures through such innovative approaches as watershed/floodplain restoration,  
development  agroforestry, etc., and combination of structural and non -structural protection measures aimed at reducing exposure and increasing  
 effectiveness of the early warning; (c) combining best available science and local knowledge for vulnerability assessment, hazard  
 and risk mapping, disaster modelling and forecasting; (d) (e) carrying out a comprehensive community, municipal and national -wide 
 awareness raising, education and capacity development activities on multi -hazard risk reduction, including preparedness, response  
 and EWSs.  
 
Expected 
Result   
 
Indicator   
Means of 
Verification (MoV)   
Baselin 
e Target   
 
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   
Final  
Fund -level impacts  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total number of 
direct and  Census data  
Baseline and 
periodic vulnerability 
assessments and 
surveys   Institutional, 
legal and 
policy 
frameworks 
and technical 
monitoring 
capacities in 
place in 
readiness for 
the 
implementation 
of the 
MHEWS.  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
1,7 million people  
(47% of  
population, 0.89 
Million women 
and 0.82 Million 
men) in the 
vulnerable/high - 
risk communities, 
and regions 
become more 
resilient through 
the access to 
early warnings/ 
MHEWS and 
other risk 
reduction 
measures  
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries 
(including direct):  
3.6 Million people 
(all Georgian  Capacities created at relevant 
agencies through the project are 
maintained and periodically 
renewed and catalyse improved 
natural hazard and risk 
management  
 MIA data 
SSCMC data   Spatial planning will lead to the 
desired changes in land use and 
behavioural control of the 
population to minimise exposure  
  
Impact evaluation 
programme   Political will to implement relevant 
legal -regulatory reform for 
effective and efficient 
MHRM/MHEWS  
   Government engages in 
development of the plans, 
endorses and commits to 
implement it through resource 
mobilization  
 
GCF core 
indicator    
No 
project  Strong political will for MHRM 
planning platform and active 
participation of all relevant  
 
 
14 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 74*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 73  
 
 indirect 
beneficiaries (% 
of whom is 
female)   benefici 
aries as 
yet  population; incl.  
1.88 Million 
women and 1.72 
Million men) 
benefit from the 
enhanced nation - 
wide EWS and 
climate -informed 
planning and ris k 
management 
through reduced 
damages to 
infrastructure, 
reduced loss of 
livelihoods and 
disruption to 
economic activity, 
reduced impact 
on GDP and 
reduced recovery 
costs  sectors  
All supporting structures/services 
for implementation of advisory 
services are  available and trained 
(e.g. agricultural extension 
services, NGO, CBO 
communities)  
 
MHEWS results in effective 
awareness raising, early 
warnings and response actions 
of communities at risk that will  
a) minimise life loss; b) catalyse 
changes in agricultur al practices 
and spatial planning decisions 
that will reduce agricultural 
losses;  
 
 
1.0 Increased 
resilience and  
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, 
communities and 
regions   
 
1.1 Change in 
expected losses 
of lives and 
economic assets 
(US$)  due to the 
impact of 
extreme climate - 
related disasters  MIA data 
SSCMC data 
Project reports  
District government 
data 0 Protection of 
over 1,500 ha 
of agricultural 
land and 1,750 
properties 
through 6 
structural flood 
protection 
measures 
directly 
benefiting  
3,250 people  Protection of over 
3,000 ha of 
agricultural land 
and 3,500 
properties for the 
total of $19.4 
million through 13 
structural flood 
protection 
measures directly 
benefiting 6,500 
people   
 
 
Structural and non -structural 
measures meet their design 
standards in reducing the risks 
to populations and reduction in 
agricultural land loses  
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
 
Expected 
Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseline  Target   
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if appli -cable)   
Final  
Project 
Outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
 
5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
access climate 
finance from the 
GCF and other 
funds’   
 
5.2 Number 
and level of 
effective 
coordination  
mechanisms    
 
 
 
0  
 
 
 
1  
 
 
 
3


---
*Page 75*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 73  
 
6.0 Increased 
generation and use 
of climate 
information in 
decision -making 
are also proposed  
 
 
 
 
7.0. Strengthened 
adaptation 
capacity and 
reduced exposure 
to risk  6.0 Use of 
climate 
information 
products/servic 
es in decision - 
making in 
climate - 
sensitive 
sectors  
7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses 
and public - 
sector services 
of Fund - 
supported 
tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate change 
and variability.  
 
 
 
 
7.2. Total 
geographic 
coverage of 
climate related 
early warning 
systems and 
other risk 
reduction 
measures 
established/ 
strengthened   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National 
climate change 
and DRM/DRR 
policies, plans 
and  reporting 
at the national, 
district, and 
community 
levels; MIA 
data on the 
performance of 
the MHEWS; 
Project reports: 
annual reports; 
mid-term and 
final 
evaluations, 
site visits.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Absence of  
MHEWS across 
the country at all 
levels; Fully 
functional 
FFEWS exists 
only for Rioni; 
Low public 
awareness of 
MHEWSs, risk 
reduction and 
resilience 
measures; 
Absence of 
knowledge and 
standardized 
methodologies 
on hazard, 
vulnerability and 
risk 
assessments . 50% of Climate - 
informed  multi - 
hazard risk reduction 
and management 
planning frameworks 
and implementation 
capacities are in 
place  
50% of Households, 
business and public 
sector services in 
Georgia with access 
to EWS services and 
relevant climate risk 
information  
 
 
 
 
Agricultural risk 
information products 
developed.  
National MHEWS 
Protocol and 
CBEWS designed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By the mid -term 
project, MHEWS 
established in 4 
major  river basins – 
- and necessary 
institutional/regulator 
y framework for its 
smooth and  effective 
operations set; 
CBEWSs are 
established in 30 
high-risk settlements  Climate -informed 
multi -hazard risk 
reduction and 
management planning 
frameworks and 
implementation 
capacities are in place  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100% of Households, 
business and public 
sector services in 
Georgia with access to 
EWS services and 
relevant climate risk 
information  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By the end of the 
project, MHEWS 
established in all major 
11 river basins – the 
entire territory of the 
country - and 
necessary 
institutional/regulatory 
framewor k for its 
smooth and effective 
operations set; 
CBEWSs are 
established in 100 
high-risk settlements  Government has 
a political will, 
institutional 
capacity and 
necessary 
resources to 
support proper 
O/M of MHEWS  
No staff and 
budget cuts occur 
at NEA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Target communities 
understand shorter - to 
longer -term benefits of 
MHEWSs and risk 
reduction interventions 
and engage on a 
voluntary basis in 
operations and 
maintenance of such 
systems  
Project/progra 
mme outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
 1.1. Number of 
new hydro - 
meteorological 
monitoring 
equipment 
purchased, 
installed and 
operational  Project 
reports, 
evaluation 
reports, site 
observations, 
databases, 
web-sites, 
monitoring and 
risk 
assessment 
products  Hydrometric  1.1. Hydro - 
meteorological 
observation network 
expanded with: 12 
meteostations, 73 
meteoposts, 44 
hydrological posts, 
13 snow 
measurement 
stations, 20 
inclinometers, 8 
mobile discharge  1.1. Hydro - 
meteorological 
observation network 
expanded with: 12 
meteostations, 73 
meteoposts, 44 
hydrological posts, 13 
snow measurement 
stations, 20 
inclinometers, 8 
mobile discharge 
meters; 3 radars; 2  Government 
commitments to secure 
adequate O/M of 
monitoring equipment, 
relevant software and 
databases are fulfilled 
on a continuous b asis 
both during the project 
implementation and 
afterwards  1. Expanded 
hydro - 
meteorological  
observation  monitoring 
network 
outdated and 
inadequate  
network and   
modelling   
capacities secure   
reliable information   
on climate -induced   
hazards,


---
*Page 76*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 73  
 
vulnerability and 
risks    meters; 3 radars; 2 
drones; upper air 
sounding equipment 
(x2); 15 web -based 
agrometeorological 
stations, 1 super 
computer for EWS 
operation; 
telecommunication 
system equipment. 
Community 
members (both men 
and women) raise 
no concerns neither 
complains due to 
installation of 
observation 
equipment. Verified 
through the 
independent 
evaluations.  drones; upper air 
sounding equipment 
(x2); 15 web -based 
agrometeorological 
stations, 1 super 
computer for EWS 
operation; 
telecommunication 
system equipment. 
Community members 
(both men and 
women) raise no 
concerns neither 
complains due to 
insta llation of 
observation 
equipment. Verified 
through the 
independent 
evaluations.   
 1.2 Number of 
river basins for 
which hazard 
and risk maps 
(covering 
landslides, 
mudflows, 
avalanches, 
hailstorms and 
droughts), 
flood plain 
zoning and 
multi -hazard 
vulnerability 
and risk 
assessments   
 
Knowledge 
system: e - 
library, created 
databases, 
information 
systems, 
knowledge 
portal   
 
 
 
Lack of key data 
sets for 
development of 
hazard and risk 
models   
 
1.2. For 7 major river 
basin in Georgia 
hazard and risk 
maps, flood plain 
zoning and multi - 
hazard vulnerability 
and risk 
assessments are in 
place (covering 
landslides, 
mudflows, 
avalanches, 
hailstorms and 
droughts)   
 
 
1.2. For all 11 major 
river basin in Georgia 
hazard and risk maps, 
flood plain zoning and 
multi -hazard 
vulnerability and risk 
assessments are in 
place (covering 
landslides, mudflows, 
avalanches, hailstorms 
and droughts)   
 
 
 
Capacities built across 
relevant agencies 
through the project are 
maintained and 
periodically updated  
  
1.3: 
Introduction 
and 
implementatio 
n of methods 
and tools for 
the systematic 
gender - 
sensitive 
socio - 
economic 
vulnerability 
assessment 
for decision 
making for 
prioritisation of 
resilience 
investments.    
 
 
 
Lack of socio - 
economic data 
for risk, 
damages, 
losses, exposure 
and vulnerability 
assessments 
(beyond Rioni 
River  Basin).   
 
 
1.3 (a) Socio - 
economic data 
collection tool 
developed and 
embedded at local 
and central 
institutionsl to 
systematically 
collect damages and 
losses data at all 
levels: central, 
municipality and 
commu nity level. 
Bespoke GIS -based 
socio -econpmic 
modelling tool 
develeped and 
embedded into 
central and local 
institutiuons.   
 
1.3 (a) Socio - 
economic data 
collection tool 
developed and 
embedded at local and 
central institutionsl to 
systematically collect 
dama ges and losses 
data at all levels: 
central, municipality 
and community level. 
Bespoke GIS -based 
socio -econpmic 
modelling tool 
develeped and 
embedded into central 
and local institutiuons.  
1.3 (b) Baseline, 
progress and final 
report on social and  
gender vuln erability.   
 
 
Relevant government 
agencies cooperate on 
the implementation of 
the MHEWS and data 
management 
(MoEPA /NEA, MIA, 
SSCMC).


---
*Page 77*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 73  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 A 
centralized 
multi -hazard 
disaster risk 
information 
and 
knowledge 
system    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flood plain 
zoning, flood risk 
maps and 
vulnerability 
assessment 
available only for 
Rioni Basin  1.3 (b) Baseline  and 
progress report on 
social and gender 
vulnerability. At 
least 30% 
participants of 
consultations are 
women  
1.4 A multi -hazard 
information 
system/central data 
depository and 
knowledge portal 
designed  At least 30% 
participants of 
consultations are 
women  
 
 
 
 
1.4 A multi -hazard 
information 
system/central data 
depository  and 
knowledge portal fully 
implemented   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatial planning will lead 
to the desired changes 
in land use and 
behavioural control  
Availability of alternative 
land to house people or 
compensate for lost 
farming/economic 
opportunities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Multi -hazard 
early warning 
system and new 
climate information 
products supported 
with effective 
national 
regulations, 
coordination 
mechanism and 
institutional 
capacities.  2.1 Status of 
the nation - 
wide MHEWS 
covering 
landslides, 
floods, 
mudflows, 
avalanche s, 
hailstorms and 
droughts in 
place  Regulatory 
framework for 
MHEWS, 
SOPs,  
communicatio 
n protocols, 
institutional 
EWS  
implementatio 
n plans.  MHEWS does 
not exist: 
institutional 
responsibilities 
and 
communication 
protocols for 
EWS, climate 
and disaster risk  
management 
are not properly 
defined. FFEWS 
is available only 
for the Rioni 
river basin.  2.1 Operational 
MHEWS for floods, 
landslides, 
mudflows, 
avalanches, 
hailstorms and 
droughts in place 
covering 4 river 
basins, including: 
multi -hazard 
forecasting platf orm, 
national warning 
communication 
protocols, 
telecommunication 
systems, warning 
dissemination 
systems. Warnings 
are tailored to the 
needs of vulnerable 
groups; Information 
on hazards delivered 
through multiple 
methods. 
Information is clear 
and not comple x. 
Information is issued 
in understandable 
for the population 
languages.  2.1 Operational 
MHEWS for floods, 
landslides, mudflows, 
avalanches, hailstorms 
and droughts in place 
covering all major 11 
river basins, including: 
multi -hazard 
forecasting platform, 
national warning 
communication 
protocols, 
telecommunication 
systems, warning 
dissemination 
systems.  Warnings 
are tailored to the 
needs of vulnerable 
groups; Information on 
hazards delivered 
through multiple 
methods. Information 
is clear and not 
complex. I nformation 
is issued in 
understandable for the 
population  languages.  Government has 
political will to 
implement relevant 
legal -regulatory reform  
for effective and efficient 
MHRM/MHEWS  
  
 
2.2 Level of 
institutional 
capacity for 
implementatio 
n of MHEWS 
and delivery of 
climate 
information 
among key 
government   
 
 
Institutional 
capacity 
assessment 
scorecard for 
MoEPA  and 
MIA (before 
the project, 
mid-term and 
final)   
 
Institutional and 
technical 
capacities for 
the imple - 
mentation and 
maintenance of 
the nation -wide 
MHEWS a multi - 
hazard early 
warning  system   
2.2. At least 25% 
increase over 
baseline in 
institutional capacity 
within MoEPA,  NEA, 
NFA, MIA, EMA to 
provide early 
warning and climate 
advisories in 11 river 
basins. Gender 
considerations are   
 
2.2. At least 50% 
increase over baseline 
in institutional capacity 
within MoEPA,  NEA, 
NFA, MIA, EMA to 
provide early warning 
and climate advisories 
in 11 river basins. 
Gender considerations 
are reflected in policy   
 
CMC and other relevant 
government units are 
willing to cooperate and 
conduct regulatory and 
institutional reform


---
*Page 78*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 73  
 
 agencies 
(MoEPA , NEA, 
NFA, MIA, 
EMA) – 
measured 
through 
institutional 
capacity 
assessment 
scorecard   are either absent 
or very limited  reflected in policy 
documents and 
technical guidance 
(review by gender 
advisor)  documents and 
technical guidance 
(review by gender 
advisor)   
 
 
2.3 Number of 
farmers with 
access to 
medium and 
short range 
weather 
forecasts and 
longer term 
predictions for 
agriculture 
(seasonal, 
decadal etc.).   
 
Review of the 
river basin 
MHRM plans, 
feedback from 
the MoEPA  on 
the 
introduction of 
the MHRM 
plans into 
national river 
basing 
management 
plans.   
Abse nce of 
climate -proof 
basin level 
MHRM plans 
and municipal 
level multi - 
hazard response 
and 
preparedness 
plans  2.3 Weather/climate 
advisories 
integrating the 
needs of men and 
women, and tailored 
delivery and 
communication 
methods designed.   
2.3.700,000 farm ers 
with access to medium 
and short range 
weather forecasts and 
longer term predictions 
for agriculture 
(seasonal, decadal 
etc.) Capacities created as a 
result of project are 
maintained and 
periodically upgraded; 
Women involvement is 
encouraged  
 
 
2.4: Climate - 
informed 
planning 
platforms: - 
number of 
multi hazard 
basin risk 
management 
plans; - 
number of 
Municipal -level 
climate - 
induced multi - 
hazard 
response and 
preparedness 
plans; Number 
of women in 
planning 
teams and 
consultation 
groups   
 
 
Status  of the 
municipal 
multi -hazard 
response 
plans; surveys 
of targeted 
municipalities 
on the 
utilization of 
the plans.  
Project 
reviews, 
progress 
reports, 
independent 
evaluation 
report, peer 
reviews.    
 
2.4. Five (5) 
Municipal multi - 
hazard risk 
management 
response and 
preparedness plans  
Women constitute at 
least 30% in in 
planning teams and 
consultation groups. 
Gender 
considerations are 
reflected in planning 
(review by gender 
advisor)   
2.4.Eleven (11) Multi 
hazard River Basin 
Risk Management 
Plans;  
Ten (10) Municipal 
multi -hazard risk 
management 
response and 
preparedness plans  
Decision makers and 
practitioners are 
trained on gender  
Women constitute at 
least 30% in in 
planning teams and 
consultation groups. 
Gender considerations 
are reflected in 
planning (revi ew by 
gender advisor   
Various Sectoral 
Ministries, particularly 
MoEPA  and its 
specialized agencies are 
willing to engage in the 
programme and transfer 
received know -how to 
farmers; farmers 
understand the benefits 
of climate advisories 
and engage in the 
programme eagerly; 
private sector is 
interested in developing 
and providing or 
receiving climate 
advisories  
Government engages in 
each step of the 
development of the 
plans, endorses it 
officially and takes a 
commitment to 
implement it through 
allocation of re levant 
funds for implementation 
of priority measures 
and/or resource 
mobilization  
     Local governments 
engage in each step of 
the development of the 
plans, endorse it


---
*Page 79*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 73  
 
      officially and takes a 
commitment to 
implement it through 
allocation of relevant 
funds for implementation 
of priority measures 
and/or resource 
mobilization  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Improved 
community 
resilience through 
the implementation 
of the MHEWS and 
priority risk 
reduction 
measures  3.1 (a) 
Number of 
high-risk 
communities 
covered with 
CBEWS and 
community - 
based climate 
risk 
management 
(CBCRM) 
action.  
(b) women 
participation in 
CBCRM action  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2. (a) 
Number of 
communities 
trained and 
empowered to 
implement 
CBEWS and 
CBCRM 
action.  Project 
reports, site 
visits/inspectio 
ns, final 
evaluation  
 
 
Community 
climate 
resilience 
plans  
 
 
Community 
impact 
evaluation 
programme  
 
 
CRM and 
CBEWS  
guidelines; 
information 
materials; 
training 
reports; media 
coverage  
 
 
Structural 
measures 
completion 
reports and 
hand over 
notes; 
engineering 
inspection 
reports, 
environment 
compliance 
reports  Community 
based EWS and 
“last mile” 
communication 
of warnings are 
not practiced in 
Geor gia 
 
 
Absence of 
systematic 
community - 
based gender 
sensitive 
CBCRM  
 
 
Low knowledge 
and awareness 
of MHRM and 
EWSs at 
municipal and 
community 
levels; absence 
of media and 
information 
campaigns on 
the topic  
 
 
Climate risk 
knowledge is not 
adequately 
integrated into 
the design of 
structural 
protection 
measures  3.1 (a) 30 high -risk 
communities are 
covered with the 
CBEWS and adopt 
gender sensitive 
CBCRM action. 
Institutional, legal 
and policy 
frameworks and 
technical capacities 
in place in readiness 
for the 
implementation of 
the CBEWS.  
(b) Community 
consultation groups 
with at least 30% 
representation of 
women; Ratio of 
women employed in 
CBDRM 
employment 
guarantee schemes 
at least 30%.  
3.2.(a) 5 people in 
each of the 30 
CBEWS  
communities trained 
to operate and 
maintain CBEWS 
and issue warnings; 
Emergency plans for 
educational 
institutions, Staff 
informed on nature 
and effects of 
hazards. Record of 
emergency drills 
practiced. Number of 
staff with the 
knowledge of first 
aid. 3.1 (a) 100 high -risk 
commu nities are 
covered with the 
CBEWS and adopt 
gender sensitive 
CBCRM action;  
(b) Community 
consultation groups 
with at least 30% 
representation of 
women; Ratio of 
women employed in 
CBDRM employment 
guarantee schemes at 
least 30%.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.(a) 5 people in  
each of the 100 
CBEWS communities 
trained to operate and 
maintain CBEWS and 
issue warnings; 
Emergency plans for 
educational 
institutions, Staff 
informed on nature 
and effects of hazards. 
Record of emergency 
drills practiced.  
Number of staff with 
the knowledge of first 
aid. Communities actively 
participate in setting and 
O/M of CBEWS and 
developing and 
implementing multi - 
hazard risk reduction 
measures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local governments are 
capable and willing to 
support implementation 
of community  resilience 
measures and to meet 
their commitments for 
O&M  
 (b) Numbre of 
women among 
tranees and 
beneficiaries 
of the CBCRM 
schemes.    (b) Women comprise 
30% of trainees. 
Information tailored 
to the needs of men, 
women, boys and 
girls (b) Women comprise 
30% of trainees. 
Information tailored to 
the needs of men, 
women, boys and girls  Women engagement is 
encouraged by 
community members 
and local authorities


---
*Page 80*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  79 OF 73  
 
 3.3 Number of 
people (% of 
whom are 
female) 
directly 
benefitting 
from improved 
flood 
protection 
through 
structural flood 
protection 
measures  
3.4. Increase 
in crop yields 
and in 
household 
income in 
target 
communities 
due to 
reduced 
losses and 
damages from 
hazards    3.3. 3,250 people 
from 5 municipalities 
benefit from 
improved flood 
protection through 6 
structural flood 
protection 
measures;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4. Impact 
monitoring 
programme 
designed and 
launched. Ratio of 
women in 
stakeholder 
consultations 
reflects adequate 
representation of 
women.  3.3 6,500 people from 
11 municipalities 
benefit from improved 
flood protection 
through 13 structural 
flood protection 
measures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4. 10% increase in 
crop yields and 5% 
increase in household 
income in target 
communiti es due to 
reduced losses and 
damages from 
hazards. Ratio of 
women in stakeholder 
consultations reflects 
adequate 
representation of 
women.   
 
 
 
 
The CEIE has relevant 
capacity and dedication 
to carry out education 
and outreach activities 
at all levels  
The CEIE cooperates 
productively with EMA, 
Ministry of education 
and science, CMC and 
other agencies and 
NGOs in capacity 
building, outreach and 
education activities  
MRDI fully meets its 
commitment towards 
implementation of 
structural flood 
protection measures  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1. Expansion of 
the hydrometric 
network  he project will contribute 
significantly to the expansion 
and upgrade of the national 
observation network covering 
multiple climate -induced 
hazards, including 
hydrometeorological and 
agrometeoroloical network. The 
observation network of all 
hydrological, meteorological and 
agrometeorological variables will 
be established to provide an 
appropriate level of spatial 
resolution of these  variables.  
While th is project will establish 
and rehabilitate these monitoring 
stations, their long -term 
maintenance will be assured by 
the government of Georgia and 
specifically by the NEA and 
MoEPA  that has the dedicated 
staff and associated budget 
allocations for continue d 
maintenance and operation of 
monitoring and early warning 
systems (corresponding letter of 
co-financing for the operations 
and maintenance costs is 
attached to the proposal). Under 
the project, the training of staff 
will ensure that the capability  
and co mpetences are   
 
 
 
 
 
- Equipment  specifications;  
 
- Bills of quantities;  
 
- Tender  dossier;  
 
- Procurement of  equipment;  
 
- Network installation, calibration  and 
operationalization;  
 
- Supervision of works  
 
-Technical expertise, local and 
international;  
- Supervision of installation  works;  
 
- Project  management;  
 
- Labor  The following new equipment is included in the 
design of the up -graded observation and 
monitoring network (GCF -funded and co - 
financed): 12 meteorological stations, 73  
meteorological posts, 44 hydrological posts, 10  
snow measurement stations, 20 inclinometers; 3 
radars;2 drones and additional corpus; matrice 
600 pro for flight control and thermal camera; 
visual computing appliance (VCA) for processing 
areal photos; geopositioning equipment; upper air 
sounding equipment (x2); 15 agrometeorological 
stations, 8 mobile discharge meters, 1 super 
computer for strengthening early warning system; 
telecommunication system equipment. Detailed 
justification and description of the expanded 
network is provided in t he Feasibility Study 
document, section 3.2.


---
*Page 81*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 73  
 
 established (see Activity 2.1) 
and as part of the institutional 
strengthening, the project will 
identify mechanisms for 
guaranteeing government 
budget commitment for long - 
term maintenance of the national 
hydrometric network.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2. Floodplain 
zoning based on 
hazard and risk 
maps for all major 
basins  Floodplain zoning and hazard 
and risk maps for all major 
basins in Georgia for key 
climate -induced hazards (floods, 
landslides, mudflows, 
avalanches, hailstorms and 
droughts) will be based on the 
most appropriate modern 
technologies and methods and 
aligned with international and 
regio nal standards.  
Hazard maps are essential for 
the assessment of current and 
future hazard scenarios and the 
design of hazard management 
solutions that fully accounts for 
climate change considerations. 
This will include zoning of 
development activity away fr om 
high hazard areas to avoid 
damages to people, property 
and economic activity. In 
addition, the hazard maps will be 
used as the basis of the 
MHEWS. There is currently no 
definitive or accurate hazard 
mapping for Georgia. The 
strategic assessment of risk to 
population, to economic activity 
and to future development under 
conditions of climate change is a 
government priority in order to 
support and guide local 
municipalities to wisely and 
rationally manage risk exposure 
to acceptable levels. GCF 
resources w ill be used to 
develop hazard maps under 
current and climate change 
conditions for the entire project 
area (all of Georgia) and for all 
relevant natural hazards.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Assessment  team;  
 
- Field  visits;  
 
- Vehicles;  
 
- Fuel;  
 
- Accommodation;  
 
- Per diem;  
 
- International  supervisor(s)/advisor(s);  
 
- Data  inputs;  
 
- Printing and  production.  Input will include cost of local and international 
experts, travel -related costs, cost of international 
experts, various data inputs, GIS work, printing 
and production of repor ts and maps; project 
management  
Flood hazard and risk maps will be developed in 
line with EU Floods and Water Directives 
requirements. Landslide and mudflow hazard and 
risk maps will build on the approach used for the 
Rioni AF basin.  
Accurate digital eleva tion models (DEM) such as 
from LiDAR sources for all floodplains of Georgia 
for hazard modelling and mapping will be utilized. 
A comprehensive topographic survey of rivers 
through high risk areas will be undertaken.  
Historical hydro -meteorological and geol ogical 
data for all Georgia required for all hazard and risk 
assessments will be digitised and systematised.  
1.3 Introduction 
and 
implementation of 
methods and tools 
for the systematic 
gender -sensitive 
socio -economic 
vulnerability 
assessment for 
decision making  The tool will integrate various 
spatial socio -economic data with 
the hazard maps, and produce 
risk maps, which will include 
economic losses and damages 
and loss of life estimates.  
Hazard maps and underlying 
information will be used in 
combination wi th infrastructure 
(bridges, roads and buildings,  - Formalized  methodology;  
 
- International  expert;  
 
- Local experts;  
 
- Hazard maps, social -economic 
variables;  
 
- Field  visits;  Inputs will include development of standardized 
methodology, cost of international expert and local 
consultants, input data, field visits and printing and 
production of vulnerability reports.


---
*Page 82*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 73  
 
 hospitals, schools, power plants, 
critical infrastructure), land use 
(settlements, agriculture, grazing 
lands, and conservation areas), 
property and socio -economics 
data, to assess the socio - 
economic impacts of each 
hazard and produce economic 
vulnerability maps for the river 
basins. This  risk map, based on 
the accurate hazard mapping of 
the current situation will form the 
baseline. Gender considerations 
will be mainstreamed in the 
analysis. It will be important to 
assess the macro -economic 
effects of hazards on the 
Nation’s economy, its b alance of 
payments and import/export 
parity.  
This activity will be implemented 
in close cooperation with 
SSCMC, which by mandate is 
tasked to carry out vulnerability 
studies and identify and prioritize 
risks. Other stakeholders and 
beneficiaries will inclu de NEA, 
MIA, Ministry of Economy (for 
the evaluation of the mirco - and 
macro -economic impacts of 
hazards and cost -benefit 
mitigation measures); Ministry of 
Finance (for budget allocations 
for DRR and CCA activities to 
address hazard management); 
MoEPA (ass essment of loss and 
damages to agriculture and the 
assessment of likely mitigation 
measures), and potentially the 
insurance industry in their 
assessment of premiums that 
should be associated with losses 
and damages of insurable 
assets.  - Production of vuln erability reports  This activity will build on the bespoke GIS -based 
socio -economic risk model15 developed for Rioni 
AF basin. The developed model will be enhanced 
with improved datasets to be acquired/established 
by the project.  
 
Agricultural damage per un it of area will be 
calculated based on landuse, typical crop yields 
and current market values. The impact on 
livestock will be evaluated and valued at their local 
market value and their density across each region. 
The loss of dwellings will be valued based  on the 
type of structure. The probability of the loss of life 
and injury will be valued based on the density of 
population and a hazard index (for instance for the 
flood hazard, this index will be calculated 
depending on the average flood depth and 
veloci ty). Costs for the rebuild of damaged major 
infrastructure will be included, as well as the costs 
for post -event aid relief, based on the historic 
records for previous events.  
 
 
 
1.4 A centralized 
multi -hazard 
disaster risk 
information and 
knowledge system  The national multi -hazard 
information system to be 
developed under the GCF 
project will consist of a national 
e-Library, databases (including 
the GIS database previously 
noted), information systems and 
knowledge portal (web 
knowledge portal to incre ase 
awareness, provide interactive 
hazard maps, with integration 
with social media and possible  
mobile application to increase   
- Data  inputs;  
 
- Maps;  
 
- Literature;  
 
- IT/DB  software;  
 
- IT specialist;  
 
- International  advisor(s);  Inputs will include data and studies from previous 
activities and related literature, IT/DB 
software/programme, IT specialist(s), IT and 
communications technology, international 
expert(s).  
The hazard -related part of the meta -database will 
be hosted and maintained by NEA. The 
metadatab ase with socio -economic parameters, 
including vulnerability and risk assessments will be 
hosted by MIA with the SSCMC having access to 
relevant data on disaster statistics, losses and 
damages and socio -economic vulnerability. Both  
 
 
15 Developing climate  resilient flood and flash flood management practices to protect vulnerable communities of Georgia; Socio -economic assessment of 
flood risk in Rioni basin. UNDP/AF


---
*Page 83*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 73  
 
 community engagement and 
allow two -way flow of 
information. It will be an integral 
part of the NSDI currently being 
developed for Georgia and 
provide the information access 
and sharing platform for 
geospatial information on 
hazar ds. - Computer and communications 
technolog ies metadatabases will be interconnected and 
integrated into existing EMA’s GEOdata portal. 
Data access protocols for various concerned 
government agencies will be developed.  
The system will represent a major shif t in how 
government departments currently work and will 
need to be supported by the introduction of 
appropriate data sharing protocols and importantly 
by extensive training and capacity building to 
ensure sustainability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1: Institutional 
and legal 
frameworks and 
institutional 
capacity building 
for the MHEWS 
and for the 
enhanced use of 
climate 
information.  
Improved 
coordination and 
communication 
protocols for early 
warning  2.1.1.  The project will strengthen 
policy, regulatory framewo rk and 
technical guidance for MHEWS 
and climate risk management. In 
particular, the project will 
support development of 
framework legislation on floods 
management, corresponding by - 
laws and technical guidance 
informed by the EU Floods 
Directive. Similarly , technical 
guidance related to other types 
of hydrometeorological hazards 
will be developed. Technical 
regulations and guidance on 
EWS will be developed and 
supported. MHRA mandates and 
methodology will be  finalized.  
Vulnerability assessment and 
CBA metho ds tested under the 
UNDP/AF Rioni project will be 
standardized and 
institutionalized. Nation -wide 
floodplain zoning policy based 
on risk and hazard maps 
(produced under activity 1.2) will 
be operationalized through 
relevant national regulations and 
guidanc e documents.  
2.1.2.  Institutional strengthening, 
coordination, communication 
and enhanced use of climate 
information: the project will help 
the government to clearly define 
major and minor hazards and 
set proper criteria for their 
distinction. Criteria for the 
definition of the different warning 
levels will be established. Clear 
communication lines between 
different agencies will be 
established, any duplication and 
inefficiencies will be eliminated. 
SOPs, Communication Protocols 
and Codes of Conduct will be 
develo ped for each of the 
agencies responsible for the 
various elements of the MHEWS 
and response. Roles of regional 
and local authorities will  be 
clarified and detailed. National   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- International and local  expertise;  
 
- Consultations;  
 
- Workshops  Inputs will include international and local expertise, 
relevant literature, consultations and workshops 
and related costs, printing and production costs.


---
*Page 84*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  83 OF 73  
 
 operational maintenance 
procedures for hydrometric 
network will be established 
(NEA).  
 
2.1.3. Training and capacity 
building of relevant stakeholders 
at all levels. The project will 
develop and implement training 
plans for each technical area o f 
expertise related to climate - 
induced hazard risk assessment 
and management, including in 
the area of:  
• multi -hazard assessment, 
hydrometry, forecasting and 
modelling,  EWSs;  
• agrometeorological 
monitoring;  
• vulnerability and risk 
assessments;  
• multi -hazard risk 
management (MHRM) and 
the use of climate 
information.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Development 
and 
implementation of 
the MHEWS 
covering all basins 
in Georgia, 
building on the 
Rioni basin 
prototype and on 
the expanded 
hydrometric 
network to be 
achieved through 
activity 1.2.  In order to upscale the existing 
Rioni forecasting system 
towards a nation -wide MHEWS 
the following actions will be 
covered with the GCF financing:  
2.2.1  Upgrade of flood 
forecasting - expanding 
meteorological and hydrological 
forecasting  capacitie s. 
2.2.2  Integration of the new 
sources of data/types of data 
into the forecasting  platform.  
2.2.3  Expanding the hydrological 
and hydraulic models within the 
forecasting platform to cover the 
whole territory of  Georgia.  
2.2.4  Development of  drought 
forecasting.  
2.2.5  Development of landslide 
forecasting.  
 
2.2.6  Development of 
avalanches  forecasting  
 
2.2.7  Development of  wind 
forecasting  
 
2.2.8  Development of  hailstorm 
forecasting   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Equipment and software  specification;  
-Tender;  
- Procurement;  
- Installation;  
- International and local  expertise;  
-Technicians for installation;  
- Supervision of works  Inputs will include development of specs, tender 
dossier, procurement, installation, assistance from 
international and local experts, supervision of 
works  
The expanded hydrological and hydraulic models 
for enhanced nation -wide flood forecasting will 
require the following inputs:  
(i) A high resolution Digital Elevation  Model 
(DEM)  
(ii) Provision of the access to the European 
Centre for Medium -Range Weather  Forecasts 
data.  
(iii) A new integrated data man agement  system  
(iv) Expanded input data sources  
(v) Forecasting Data Management  System  
(vi) Forecast Verification  System  
 
 
Development of drought, landslide, avalanches, 
wind and hailstorm forecasting will require the 
following elements:  
(i) Design of the forecasting  system  
(ii) Historical  information  
(iii) Product  development  
(iv) Development of warning  criteria  
 
In order to ensure that the whole MHEWS is 
implemented successfully, the following additional 
system capacities will be secured: additional 
hydraulic modelling software, additional servers 
and storage capacity, additional internet capacity, 
additional redundant back up system


---
*Page 85*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 73  
 
 2.2.9  Development of  general 
forecasting capabilities and 
MHEWS  
2.2.10  Design and 
implementation of the “Last -Mile” 
warning dissemination and 
communication  system.  
2.2.11.  Design and 
implementation of the National 
MHEWS  Protocol  
2.2.12.  Monitoring and 
evaluation of the designed 
MHEWS and development of 
recommendations for the system 
enhancements, expansion and 
further development (in the last 
year of the GCF project 
implementation).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3. Enhancing 
access and the 
use of weather and 
climate information 
and 
agrometeorological 
information 
services by 
farmers and  
agricultural 
enterprises  This activity will build upon the 
enhanced equipment and 
capacities  of the 
agrometeorological observation 
network to be achieved through 
the Output 1. The project will 
support capacities of the national 
agricultural agencies and 
extension services to generate 
and deliver tailored climate and 
weather information and advice 
to the  farmers.  
 
The project will bring ICT -based 
innovations  into the 
communication of forecasts and 
advisories; improve the use of 
historical data and derivati ons; 
improve medium and short  range 
weather forecasts and longer 
term predictions for agriculture 
(seasonal, decadal etc.). This  will 
also include  partnerships  with the 
private sector through the 
partnerships with the internet 
providers or mobile companies  
that are willing to design such 
new products in collaboration 
with NFA, agribusinesses, 
farmers’ groups and other clients 
to deliver timely forecasts  and 
advisories to the 700,000 
farmers.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Assessment and development of 
products;  
 
- Printing and  production  
 
- International and national  expertise;  
 
- Consultations,  meetings  Inputs will include costs of international and 
national expertise, assessment, printing and 
production, consultations, meetings.  
Specific actions will include:  
 
2.3.1.  Capacity  building  and training  for the MoEPA . 
2.3.2.  Integrating climate risk and adaptation 
priorities into the agriculture sector plans, 
investments and budget  frameworks.  
2.3.3.  Development of guidance documents, 
methodologies and technical regulations for the 
agricultural sector on climate risk assessment and 
management and the use of climate  information.  
2.3.4.  Development of new climate information 
products for the agricultural sector (agri -climate 
maps, calendars, advisories, etc.) and delivery of 
these products to the  farmers.  
2.3.5.  Supportin g improvement of 
agrometeorological advisory services through the 
NFA, its regional service centres, the Scientific - 
Research Center of the MoEPA  and its 
information -consultation  centers.  
2.4 MHRM 
planning platforms: 
Basin -level multi - 
hazard risk 
management 
plans; Municipal - 
level multi -hazard 
response and 
preparedness 
plans  2.4.1. Multi -hazard Basin Risk 
Management Plans for all 11 
major river basin in Georgia. 
These plans will take a bottom - 
up, multi -stakeholder approach. 
The MHRM plans will be 
integrated into the broader river 
basin management plans 
developed by the MoEPA. 
Based on the risk management 
plans, the project will finance  - Local experts  teams/companies;  
 
- International  experts;  
 
- Travel;  
 
- Data  inputs;  
 
- Stakeholder  consultation;  
 
- Assessments;  Inputs will include assessments by local and 
international experts, travels to the fields, input 
data, stakeholder consultations, printing and 
production costs.  
The design of the river basin multi -hazard risk 
management plans will include broadely:  
• Hazard and risk  profiles  
• Socio -economic  vulnerability  
• A costed and prioritised list of options and 
activities based on the  CBA


---
*Page 86*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 73  
 
 feasibility studies/design for the 
priority risk reduction options in 
order to inform and accelerate 
risk reduction investments. Up -to 
five priority structural projects 
will be supported with the 
feasibility/design work, including 
at least one flood defens e 
project for the Tbilisi Municipality 
defined under the 2015 Tbilisi 
PDNA.  
2.4.2. Municipal -level multi - 
hazard response and 
preparedness plans will be 
developed for 11 high -risk 
municipalities, including the 
Tbilisi Municipality. The work in 
Tbilisi will  be integrated into the 
resilience planning under the 
100 Resilient Cities initiative. 
Tbilisi is the capital city with high 
concentration of the population 
(around 1.3 million people), 
assets and infrastructure. The 
low adaptive capacities and high 
vulner ability of the city were 
demonstrated during the 2015 
multi -hazard event that resulted 
in human losses, significant 
damages and destruction of 
critical infrastructure. Through 
the enhanced planning and 
capacity building for the City of 
Tbilisi the GCF proj ect will 
outreach and enhance resilience 
of one third of the Georgian 
population.  - Printing and production.  • An action programme based on packaging of 
the options  
• An Action Plan risk  log 
• Preliminary design and a detailed description of 
each option includin g the assumptions used in 
deriving  costs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Implementation 
of community - 
based early 
warning schemes 
and community - 
based climate risk 
management 
(CBCRM).  Community -based EWS and 
CBCRM schemes will be 
implemented in 100 high risk 
communities across Georgia 
based on full community 
engagement and participation.  
 
3.1.1. Implementation of  CBEWS 
to complement the fully 
integrated national EWS. 
Communities will be chosen 
based on relatively high risk, 
short lead time of the extreme 
events, potential  technical 
constraints for the central  system 
to effectively service the 
community (e.g. due to remote 
location or connection  problems). 
For this activity, the project will 
work with smaller high -risk 
communities/settlements with  the 
population of up to 70 00 people. 
For mountainous communities 
upstream   that   are  affected  by 
short lead time events (up -to 100   
- Detailed specs for equipment,  tender 
dossier, procurement;  
- Water level gauges, sirens, loud 
speakers;  
 
- Other IT and telecommunications 
equipment;  
 
- Installation;  
 
- Field visits and oversights of 
installation  works;  
- Stakeholder  consultations;  
 
- International  expert;  
 
- Local expertise/companies  
 
- GIS mapping;  
 
- Printing and  production.  Inputs for the CB EWS will include development of 
detailed specifications  for equipment, tender 
dossier, announcement and procurement and 
installation, supervision of installation costs, travel, 
international and local experts work. The following 
specific equipment inputs will be delivered:  
• Monitoring devices: water level monit oring 
sensors (100); staff gauges  (200)  
• Communication tools: GSM/GPRS modem 
device (2); dedicated web -site; generators (200); 
sirens (200); remote siren system (1); boards 
(200)  
• Response tools: Evacuation routes signaling 
(200); fitting of the local evacua tion centres  (70). 
 
The following specific actions will be supported:  
• Consultations with local authorities and 
community  leaders  
• Refinement of estimates for the numbers and 
locations of households at risk  
• Identifying vulnerable  groups  
• Develop warning and evacuation  maps


---
*Page 87*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 73  
 
 communities) the project will 
provide at least one telemetered 
raingauge in the headwaters to 
provide backup and additional 
information at a national and 
district level (unless there are 
opportunities to share gauges 
between schemes) and with 
communication equipment. The 
downstream communities may 
not require additional local 
monitoring equipment (as the 
national EWS will be ca pable of 
providing timely warnings) but 
will be equipped with the  warning 
communication tools (up -to 200 
communities).  
 
3.1.2. Implementation of 
Community -based Climate Risk 
Management: local communities 
will be trained to plan, implement 
and maintain non -structural 
intervention measures 
necessary to reduce various 
climate -induced risks. 
Participatory community -based 
adaptation interventions will be 
planned and implemented in 
priority risk areas e.g. 
establishing locally controlled 
and managed flood zones; 
erection of visual flood zone 
demarcation posts at strategic 
locations; watershed 
rehabilitation works such as 
construction of natural small 
scale defenses with community 
involvement.  
 
The project will build 
implementation capacities of 
local communities a nd support 
implementation of the prioritized 
measures based on 
communities’ ownership and co - 
financing. Gender 
mainstreaming will be a key 
aspect of the CBCRM process. 
This set of actions will be 
implemented in partnership with 
local NGOs and COBs with 
strong grass -roots experience.   • Placement  of markers  and signs  linked  to alert 
levels  
• Advice on procurement and installation of 
telemetered radar level gauges and rain 
gauges  
• Developing warning thresholds appropriate to 
each community (or group of  communities)  
• Ensuring that central observations and 
forecasts are available at district and 
community level and that training is provided 
on how to interpret the  information  
• Establishing procedures for monitoring and 
evaluation  
• Developing  a community -speci fic engagement 
programme  
• Development of simple forecasting tools for 
use at district and community  level 
• Designing a standard set of warning 
messages, codes, icons  
• Preparing a guidance note on the level of 
technical support to be provided at 
government  level 
• Developing mechanisms for local staff to 
communicate information on rainfall and river 
levels and flood conditions to national and 
district  level 
• Establishing a volunteer observer or ‘spotter’ 
training and recruitment  programme  
 
Inputs for the CBCRM work will include 
assessments, stakeholder mobilization and 
engagement by local experts teams, travel and 
related costs, input data, GIS mapping, printing 
and production. The CBCRM work will involve:  
• identification and mobilization of various 
interest grou ps in target  communities;  
• participatory risk assessment;  
• design of community risk reduction 
interventions measures, including monitoring 
and evaluation  framework;  
• development of community resilience  plans;  
• support to  implementation.  
3.2 Public 
awareness and 
capacity building 
programme at all 
levels to effectively 
deliver climate risk 
information and 
training to 
communities and  The GCF project will assist the 
government of Georgia in  shifting 
from add -hoc project based 
awareness and education efforts 
to a planned, consistent and 
sustainable  national -led 
information and communication 
system for enhanced climate  and 
disaster risk management.  The - Local experts/companies;  
 
- Development of education and 
awareness  materials;  
- Trainings and  workshops;  
 
- Media  product s; Inputs will include development and 
implementation of awareness and outreach 
campaigns by individual experts and 
organizations, trainings and workshops, travel, 
production of education, awareness and media 
products, media coverage, competitions, audio - 
visual equipment.  
This activity will be led by the EIEC under the 
MoEPA  that has a mandate as well as experience


---
*Page 88*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 73   
 
local first - 
responders  following indicative actions will be 
carried:  - Media  coverage;  
 
- Audio -visual  equipment.  in environmental outreach, education and capacity 
building. National and municipal level response 
trainings for officials will be carried out through 
cooperation  of the EIEC  and EMA.  Community  level 
awareness raising and informal education activities 
will be carried out in close cooperation with NGOs 
having  grassroots  capacity  building  experience  and 
information.   3.2.1. Capacity building to the 
EIEC   
 3.2.2.  Capacity  building   at 
central,   municipal  and 
community levels   
 3.2.3. Networking and advocacy 
on MHRM and CBEWSs   
 3.2.4. Youth awareness 
programmes in MHRM   
 3.2.5. Nation -wide media 
campaign on gender -responsive 
MHRM and EWS   
 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Implementation 
of risk reduction 
interventions that 
would significantly 
reduce the risks 
against which the 
MHEWS will 
operate  This project will implement 13 
flood risk reduction interventions 
for areas where risk from 
climate -induced natural hazards 
is highest based on the 
assessments conducted under 
the Rioni pr oject. As a result of 
technical studies, stakeholder 
consultations and CBA, 13 sites 
have been short -listed for the 
GCF investment. A social and 
environmental assessment was 
conducted for the selected 
sites/measures, Social and 
Environmental Management 
Framework was developed,  
commitments for the Operational 
and Maintenance costs were 
secured. The activity is co - 
financed by the MRDI   
 
 
- Detailed  specs;  
- ToRs;  
- Bills of  Quantities;  
- Tender  Dossier;  
- Construction  works;  
- Procurement of construction and/or 
engineering  work;  
- Supervision of construction  works;  
- Local experts/engineering  companies;  
- Construction  companies;  
- Travel;  
- Project  management.  Inputs will include development of detailed 
specifications, bills of quantities, ToRs, tender 
dossier, procurement, construction works and 
supervision of construction works; costs of local 
experts/companies, travel, printing and production.  
The types of flood protection structures to be 
erected:  
• Embankments with rock boulder  
• Wire mesh mat  lining  
• Concrete regulation  wall 
• Wire mash gabion  wall 
• Climate proofing water regulation  facility  
• Canal widening and lining  
• Riverbed and channel cleaning  
 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
218. GCF funding will be used to ensure that monitoring and evaluation systems are put in place to track progress over 
the 7 years of project implementation towards the planned project outcomes and fund level impacts. This will be achieved 
through  the means  of verification  outlined  in Table  H.1.2  above,  where  progress  on each  indicator  from the  baseline  to the 
end-point  targets  for those  indicators  will be tracked.  Additionally,  through  the results  framework  outlined  in tables  1.1 and 
1.2 the project impact will be assessed using the following 6 domains of  impact:  
• Impact on physical and financial assets  
• Impact on Social Capital, Empowerment and change of  behavior  
• Impact on Food  Security  
• Environmental  Impact  
• Impact on Institutions, policies, and the regulatory  framework  
• Impact on  Gender  
 
219. An iterative systematic gender -sensitive socio -economic vulnerability assessment (SVA) will be introduced through 
the Output 1, Activity 1.3. as a tool to measure and monitor change in socio -economic vulnerability of Georgian 
communities. The SVA tool piloted through the Rioni pr oject will rely on a combination of census data, socio -economic 
parameters and field surveys. Initially, through the integration of hazard maps and maps of infrastructure (bridges, roads  
and buildings, hospitals, schools, power plants, critical infrastruct ure), land use (settlements, agriculture, grazing lands, 
and conservation  areas),  property  and socio -economics  data,  the project  will produce  economic  vulnerability  maps  for the


---
*Page 89*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 73   
 
river basins and establish baseline risk. The tool will be further used to monitor changes in vulnerability and risks from 
multiple hazards at municipal and national level.  
 
220. Further,  under  the Output  2, activity  2.2. the project  will carry  out monitoring  and evaluation  of the designed  MHEWS 
and development  of recommendations  for the system  enhancements,  expansion  and further  development  (in the last year 
of the GCF project implementation). Under the same technical Output 2, activity 2.1 change in institutional capacities to 
implement MHEWS and manage climate information will be measured through the integrated institutional capacity 
assessment scorecar d. Institutional capacity assessment will be conducted in the Years 1, 4 and 7 of the project. Key 
agencies to be included in the institutional capacity assessment include but not limited to MoEPA/ NEA, NFA, MIA, EMA. 
Monitoring, evaluation and risk tracking will be integrated into the climate -informed multi hazard basin risk management 
planning and in the municipal MHRM response and preparedness plans (Activity  2.4). 
 
221. In order  to examine  the impacts  of the project  on rural communities,  the review  will examine  whether  the interventions 
implemented by the project have enhanced the value and derived benefits from existing community assets such as land, 
water,  livestock  and livelihoods.  Impact  on income  generation  and improvement  in livelihoods  will be key direct  benefits  to 
be examined while improved skill or health, education, and socio -economic conditions will be key indirect benefits to be 
examined. Impact on increased capacity of local communities to exploit potential economic opportunities and to d evelop 
stronger link with the markets and external partners, through the risk reduction and adaptation interventions provided by 
the project,  will be examined.  Efforts  to strengthen  local level organizations  in the implementation  of similar  projects  in the 
future will be a key impact as this will reflect whether the project has built local capacity to implement and use these new 
climate resilient measures in the long -term. Likely contribution of the project to food security will be examined. Key 
elements of  food security is availability (production and trade), access (income, markets and prices) and stability (storage 
and other marketing arrangement at household and local  level.  
 
222. Environmental  degradation  very often  contributes  to non-resilience  to climate  change  and increased  risk from climate - 
related disasters. The extent to which the project contributes to rehabilitation of the environment (particularly of the 
agricultural  resource  base  and watershed  management)  in areas  currently  affected  by land degrad ation  and at high risk of 
hazards,  is strongly  associated  with poverty  impact.  This domain  concentrates  on the local level environmental  impacts  of 
the project, as well as any environmental consequences of the project. It is also concerned especially with those 
environmental  aspects,  which  are under  the control  of, or are influenced  by, the rural communities.  Environmental  impacts 
may be negative as well as positive intended or unintended and all of these will be  examined.  
 
223. Existing institutions, policies a nd regulatory frameworks significantly influence the lives and resilience of the rural 
poor. This encompasses the change brought about in sectoral and national policies affecting exposure of local 
communities to hydrometeorological hazards. In addition, th e degree to which the project impacts local -level decision 
making capacity, is also a relevant consideration and important to this project. Hence the effectiveness of the ‘last mile’ 
component  of the EWS  and particularly  the CBEWS  will be closely  assessed.  The review  will examine  the extent  to which 
a contribution has been made to improving the national, and particularly local institutions to implement, and manage 
CBEWS and CBDRM which affects the lives and livelihoods of rural  communities.  
 
224. To monitor and measure the changes brought by the project, impact evaluation will be designed to assist the project 
team to collect baseline information/data, final survey to gain insights into developmental and adaptive impact of the 
interventions that will be carried o ut during the project. For this purpose, before any interventions take place, a robust 
baseline survey needs to be administered. During the project, it is expected follow -up surveys and final large survey will 
also be carried out at end of project. The imp act of the project will be assessed by undertaking the  following:  
 
• A household survey targeting beneficiary households at least two times (baseline and final) during the project 
implementation;  
• Analysis of the survey  data;  
• Follow -up survey which will be used by project staff;  and


---
*Page 90*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 73   
 
• Training of project staff on the follow -up survey  methodology.  
 
225. The impact indicators will include but should not be limited to: (i) extent to which structural measures and non - 
structural  measures  have  reduced  exposure  to hazards  (e.g. whether  frequency  of flooding  has reduced  etc.) (ii) changes 
in income from agriculture and related activities (changes in income should take into account the level of home 
consumption);  (iii) yield from agricultural  production  for key produce;  (iv) yield of home  gardens;  (y) migration  for seasonal 
work; (vi) farm land left fallowed; (vii) freshwater availability for household use; (viii) change in family  savings.  
 
226. As part of the community survey a section will be included to monitor community involvement in the design and 
implementation of community -based EWS and CRM plans – tracking participation in paid work opportunities, as well as 
ongoing  involvement  in resilience  building  through  in-kind commitment  of time to maintenance  and enforcement  activities. 
This will include respondents’ estimation of approximate number of hours per month spent on local resilience building 
actions, as part of the project Activity 3.1. Comprehensive capacity and awareness building to foster such en gagement 
will be carried out by the project under Activity 3.2. All community capacity building, training and awareness activities wil l 
be accompanied with feedback collection/result monitoring tools. Finally, monitoring over the implementation and results  
of site specific structural protection measures at 13 sites will be ensures as outlined in the  SEMF.  
 
227. Since  the project  impacts  from many  of the interventions  are likely  to be realized  close  to the end and after the project 
implementation,  the impact  evaluation  methodology  and tools  will be embedded  within  responsible  agencies  to monitor  in 
the long -term, thus ensuring regular surveying of the key impact and development indicators required for long -term 
assessment of project  impact.  
 
228. Project monitoring  and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the  UNDP POPP , the UNDP Evaluation 
Policy . 
 
Oversight and monitoring responsibilities:  
229. National Project Manager : The NPM is responsible for day -to-day project management and regular monitoring of 
project results and risks, including social and environmental risks. The NPM will ensure that all project staff maintain a 
high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in M&E and reporting of project results. The Project Manager 
will infor m the Project Board, the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP -GEF Regional Technical Advisor of any delays or 
difficulties  as they arise  during  implementation  so that appropriate  support  and corrective  measures  can be adopted.  
 
230. The NPM will develop annual work  plans to support the efficient implementation of the project. The NPM will ensure 
that the standard  UNDP  and GCF  M&E  requirements  are fulfilled  to the highest  quality.  This includes,  but is not limited  to, 
ensuring  the results  framework  indicators  are monitored  annually  in time for evidence -based  reporting  in the Annual  Project 
Report,  and that the monitoring  of risks and the various  plans/strategies  developed  to support  project  implementation  (e.g. 
Environmental and social management plan, gender action plan etc..) occur on a regular  basis.  
231. Project Board: The Project Board will take corrective action as needed to ensure the project achieves the 
desired results. The Project Board will hold project reviews to assess the performance of the project and  appraise 
the Annual Work Plan for the following year. In the project’s final year, the Project Board will hold an end -of-project 
review to capture lessons learned and discuss opportunities for scaling up and to highlight project results and 
lessons learne d with relevant audiences. This final review meeting will also discuss the findings outlined in the 
project terminal evaluation report and the management  response.  
232. Project Implementing Partner: The Implementing Partner is responsible for providing all requ ired 
information and data necessary for timely, comprehensive and evidence -based project reporting, including results 
and financial  data,  as necessary  and appropriate.  The Implementing  Partner  will strive  to ensure  project -level M&E  
is undertaken by national institutes, and is aligned with national systems so that the data used by and generated by 
the project supports national systems.


---
*Page 91*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 73   
 
 
 233. UNDP Country Office: The UNDP Country Office in  Cairo Georgia  will support the NPM as needed, 
including through annual supervision missions. The annual supervision missions will take place per the schedule 
outlined in the annual work plan. Supervision mission reports will be circulated to the project team and Project 
Board within one month of the mission. The UNDP Country Office will initiate and organize key M&E activities 
including the Annual Project Report, the indep endent mid -term review and the independent terminal evaluation. The 
UNDP Country Office will also ensure that the standard UNDP and GCF M&E requirements are fulfilled to the 
highest  quality.  
234. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with all UND P project -level M&E requirements as 
outlined in the UNDP POPP. This includes ensuring the UNDP Quality Assurance Assessment during 
implementation is undertaken annually; the regular updating of the ATLAS risk log; and, the updating of the UNDP 
gender marke r on an annual basis based on gender mainstreaming progress reported in the Annual Project Report 
and the UNDP ROAR. Any quality concerns flagged during these M&E activities (e.g. Annual Project Report quality 
assessment ratings) must be addressed by the U NDP Country Office and the Project  Manager.  
235. The UNDP  Country  Office  will support  GCF  staff (or their designate)  during  any missions  undertaken  in the 
country, and support any ad -hoc checks or ex post evaluations that may be required by the  GCF.  
236. The UNDP Country Office will retain all project records for this project for up to seven years after project 
financial closure to support any ex -post reviews and evaluations undertaken by the UNDP Independent Evaluation 
Office (IEO) and/or the  GCF.  
237. UNDP -Global Envi ronmental Finance Unit (UNDP -GEF): Additional M&E and implementation oversight, 
quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided by the UNDP -GEF Regional Technical Advisor and 
the UNDP -GEF Directorate as outlined in the management arrangement  section  above.  
 
 
238. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: (a) re -orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence  
project implementation; (b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; (c) review the results framework and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles  and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; (d) review financial reporting procedures 
and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; (e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Pro ject Board.  
 
239. The Project Manager under the guidance of the CTA, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical 
Advisor will provide objective input to the annual Project Implementation Report (PIR) for each year of project 
implementation.  The Project  Manager  will ensure  that the indicators  included  in the project  results  framework  are monitored 
annually  well in advance  of the PIR submission  deadline  and will objectively  report  progress  in the Development  Objective 
tab of the PIR. The annual PIR  will be shared with the project board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office 
will coordinate  the input  of the NDA  Focal  Point  and other  stakeholders  to the PIR. The quality  rating  of the previous  year’s 
PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR along with the terminal evaluation report 
and corresponding management response will serve as the final project report  package.  
 
240. An independent mid -term evaluation will be undertaken within fourth quarter of the third  year of project 
implementation. Findings and responses outlined in the management responses will be taken unto consideration as 
corrective  measures  or measures  to enhance  the project  results  during  planning  and implementing  activities  for upcoming 
three -year period. The terms of reference, evaluation process and the final MTE report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the  UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final MTE report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country  Office  and the UNDP  Regional  Technical  Adviser,  and will be approved  by the Project  Board.  The final MTE  report 
will be available in both English and Georgian  languages.


---
*Page 92*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 73   
 
Additional GCF evaluation requirements:  
 
241. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to completion of the project. 
The terms  of reference,  the review  process  and the final TE report  will follow  the standard  templates  and guidance  available 
on the UNDP  Evaluation  Resource  Center . The final TE report  will be cleared  by the UNDP  Country  Office  and the UNDP 
Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be available in  English.  
 
242. The UNDP  Country  Office  will include  the planned  project  terminal  evaluation  in the UNDP  Country  Office  evaluation 
plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public UNDP 
Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) ( http://erc.undp.org ). Once uploaded to the ERC, the UNDP Independent Evaluation 
Office  will undertake  a quality  assessment  and validate  the findings  and ratings  in the TE report,  and rate the quality  of the 
TE report.  
 
243. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
 
244. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project  document.  
 
245. UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period in accordance with the AMA and 
Funded  Activity  Agreement  (FAA).  UNDP  has country  presence  and capacity  to perform such  functions.  In the event  of 
any additional post -implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final year of the project and will prepare a post -implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF Board as  necessary.


---
*Page 93*
---

I ANNEXES  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 73   
 
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING  PROPOSAL  
 
☒ NDA No -objection Letter Annex  I 
☒ Feasibility Study Annex  II 
☐ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  – 
Not applicable for this project  
☒ Letters of co -financing Annex  IV 
☒ Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) – Annex  V 
☒ Social and Environmental Screening Report Annex VI  a 
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework  Annex VI  b 
☒  Appraisal Report: Minutes from the pre -LPAC meeting Annex VII Appraisal Report or Due Diligence 
Report with recommendations (If  applicable)  
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project Annex  VIII 
☒ Map indicatin g the location of the project/programme Annex  IX 
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation Annex  X 
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation Annex  XI 
 
 
 
Additional information  
☒ Economic Analysis (narrative report) Annex XII  a 
Economic Analysis (excel spreadsheet) Annex XII b  
☒ detailed CBA for structural measures Annex XII  c 
☒ Additional Background Details Annex  XIII 
- Procurement Plan Annex XIII  a 
- O&M Plan Annex XIII b  
- Gender Assessment, Plan and Budget Annex XIII  c 
- Stakeholder Consultations Annex XIII d  
- Stakeholder Engagement Plan Annex XIII  e 
- Evidence of internal approval Annex XIII  f 
- Project Budget – GCF form Annex XIII g  
- HACT assessments - Annex XIII  h 
- Environmental and social report(s) disclosure Annex XIII i  
☒ Responses to GCF comments on Funding Proposal Annex  XIV 
☒ Letter of Endorsement from UNDP Senior Management Annex  XV ☒


---
*Page 94*
---

I ANNEXES  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 73   
 
* Please note that a funding proposal  will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.10  
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.10  
Page 1  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Scaling -up Multi -Hazard Early Warning System and the Use of Climate 
Information in Georgia  
Accredited entity  UNDP  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-25 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Georgian  
Link to disclosure  English: 
http://www.ge.undp.org/content/georgia/en/home/library/environme  
nt_energy/environment -and-social -assessment -report/  
Georgian: 
http://www.ge.undp.org/content/georgia/ka/home/library/environme  
nt_energy/environment -and-social -assessment -report.html  
A simplified ESIA consistent with the requirements for a catego ry B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Assessment Report.  
Other link(s)  http://  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-25 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Georgian  
Link to disclosure  English: 
http://www.ge.undp.org/content/georgia/en/home/library/environme  
nt_energy/environment -and-social -assessment -report/  
Georgian: 
http://www.ge.undp.org/content/georgia/ka/home/library/environme  
nt_energy/environment -and-social -assessment -report.html  
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project is contained in 
the Environmental and Social Asse ssment Report.  
Other link(s)  http://  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Not applicable