=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206110324+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206110324+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February - 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  15 GCF/B.19/22/Add. 09 
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package for FP067  
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Building climate resilience of 
vulnerable and food insecure communities through capacity strengthening 
and livelihood diversification in mountainous regions of  Tajikistan”;  
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  and 
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme Title:  Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities 
through capacity strengthening and livelihood diversification in mountainous 
regions of Tajikistan.  
 
Country/Region:   
Republic of Tajikistan  
 
Accredited Entity:   
United Nations World Food Programme  
 
Date of Submission:   
02 June, 2017


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
Section  F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
Section  I ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Acc redited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed  50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[WFP] -[02062017] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 77  
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
 
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure 
communities through capacity strengthening and livelihood  
diversification in mountainous regions of Tajikistan.  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Republic of Tajikistan  
 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Khayrullo Ibodzoda 
Chairman  
Committee on Environmental Protection Under the 
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  UN World Food Programme  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
 
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity : Committee of Environmental Protection  
Co-Executing Entity: WFP  
Beneficiaries : Climate vulnerable, poor and food insecure 
communities in rural Tajikistan  
• 50,000 direct  beneficiaries  
• Up to 70,000 indirect  beneficiaries  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☒ Micro (≤10)  
☐ Medium  (50<x≤250)  ☐ Small  (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large  (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☐ Mitigation  ☒ Adaptation ☐ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  02 June, 2017  
 
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Paolo Mattei  
Representative and Country Director  
Organization  WFP Tajikistan Country Office  
Email address  paolo.mattei@wfp.org  
Telephone number  +992 -44-6252000  
Mailing address  7 Tolstoi Street, Dushanbe Tajikistan 734003  
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)    
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)


---
*Page 5*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 77  
 
 
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒ 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
The project “Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities through capacity 
strengthening and livelihood diversification in mountainous regions of Tajikistan” will increase the adaptive 
capacities of the most vulnerable and food insecure communities residing in Rasht valley, Khatlon and Gorno - 
Badakhshan Autonomous Region (GBAO) regions. Due to their location , these communities are vulnerable to the 
negative impacts of climate change, particularly from rainfall variability resulting in adverse livelihood impacts, 
increasing temperatures with glacial melting and sudden onset extreme events causing loss and dama ge, in 
addition to high levels of malnutrition and poverty (See Annex 1.3). The proposed project intervention takes a 
transformative approach to ensure food security and support communities to adapt to climate change through 
two key components:  
 
i. Capacity s trengthening and awareness raising of food insecure climate vulnerable communities and 
national actors for enhanced rural resilience and food security,  and;  
ii. Resilience building at household and community level through diversification of livelihoods and 
imp roved market  access.  
 
A key element of this approach will be addressing institutional capacity needs at both national and sub -national 
levels  to better  understand  needs  and support  vulnerable  communities  develop  effective  responses  to prepare  for 
and manage  climate  risks.  Interventions  of the project  will reach  50,000  direct  beneficiaries  among  the estimated 
270,000 vulnerable individuals residing in climate vulnerable areas, and up to 70,000 indirect beneficiaries, who 
live in the proposed project loc ations. The proposed project contributes to climate -resilient development 
pathways  in Tajikistan  through  the sustained  impact  of project  measures  that  have  high  potential  for replicability 
and scale. Overall, many of these measures can be scaled to reach 1 00% of national coverage. The project 
stimulates a demand -based model for climate information and use of ICT/mobile platforms to enable public and 
private  sector  participation,  innovation,  and market  development.  It contributes  to key policies  in the country  and 
supports efforts to mainstream gender -responsive climate change adaptation into development plans. It 
institutionalizes knowledge generation and learning through the incorporation of climate change and food 
security in national and district lev el planning processes. At the community level, the project introduces new 
technologies such as renewables, rehabilitates dilapidated assets that take into account the diverse needs and 
capacities of women and men and that strengthens community resilience t hrough tailored social and behavioral 
change  interventions.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)   
N/A  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  31/05/2022  
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/07 /2018  
End: 30/06/2022


---
*Page 6*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 77  
 
 
Project/programme lifespan  4 years 0 months  
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
The proposed project will address a number of Tajikistan’s structural, institutional and financial barriers that 
make  it particularly  vulnerable  to climate  change  and in turn  affect  local  economies  that  are climate  sensitive  and 
have high emigration rates. A breakdown of cost estimates by sub -component in local and foreign currency is 
provided in Annex  4.1. 
 
 a breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, 
etc.) and disbursement schedule in project/programme confirma tion (term sheet) as included in section I, 
Annexes.  
 
Expected Disbursement (in million USD)  
 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)   
9,973  million USD  
($)


---
*Page 7*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 77  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient  (i) Senior  Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  * 
(vi) Grants  *  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
………………… 
9,273   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD  
($)  
( ) years 
( ) years   
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
( ) % IRR  
* Please provide economic and financial justification in  section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in  section E . 
Total  requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  
Financial 
Instrument  9,273  million  USD  
($) 
Amount  Currency  Name  of 
Institution   
 
 
Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Co- 
financing  to 
recipient   
Grant  
Grant  
Options  
Options   
 
……0.353  
……0.345  
……………  
……………  million  USD  
($) 
million  USD  
($) 
Options  
Options   
Government 
(in kind)  
WFP  
………………  
………………   
 
( ) years 
( ) years   
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
( ) % IRR   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: …Government of Tajikistan, WFP……………………  
 
Informal, parallel co -financing has been offered by the communities participating to the project in the form 
of construction materials and tools (pipes, gabions, diesel, renting tractors etc), for an estimated amount of 
USD 250,000.  
 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the reci pient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)   
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Grants   
million USD ($)  ( 4 ) years  ( ) %


---
*Page 8*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 77  
 
 
 Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable


---
*Page 9*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 77  
 
 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strategic Context  
Tajikistan is a food -deficit country and the poorest in the Commonwealth of Independent States. Poverty 
headcount ratio at national level was recorded at the rate of 31.3 % in 20151. According to WFP’s Food Security 
Monitoring System (FSMS), the severity of food insecurity in the country had been alle viated since its 
independence from the Soviet Union, but the recent economic contraction in the Russian Federation has hit the 
economy of Tajikistan, as it heavily relies on remittances.  
Economic context –Tajikistan is a low income country with USD 2,567 p er capita GDP purchasing power parity 
(PPP) and a population of 8.3 million in 20142. Its econo my grew strongly and the poverty level substantially fell 
from  about  80%  of poverty  rate  in 1997  to 31.3% in 2014.3 Agriculture  is the largest  sector  of the economy,  which 
accounts for 20% of the country’s GDP and 53% of dom estic employment. While the economic growth slowed 
down to 4.2% in 2015 due largely to the economic downturn in the Russian Federation and weak global demand, 
the government has maintained the ambitious goals for the growth for the next few years (i.e. to d ouble GDP, to 
reduce poverty to 20% and to expand the middle class by 2020) 4. Gender inequalities and discriminatory social 
norms, resulting mainly in disadvantages for women and girls, remaining a significant impediment to s ocial and 
economic development [Tajikistan ranks 69 out of 155 in 2014 5 in terms of gender  inclusion].  
Despite the progress made in the economic growth, Tajikistan is still among the poorest count ries in the Eastern 
Europe,  Caucasus  and Cent ral Asia  (EECCA)  region.  It is estimated  that  the cost  of environmental  degradation  can 
be 10%  of Tajikistan’s  GDP6.A study  by the United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for Europe  (UNECE)  shows  that 
a changing climate has alr eady being negatively affecting the economy, society and ecosystems of the country, 
including faster erosion of forest soil from extreme weather event s, deteriorating water quality from melting 
glaciers and loss of biodiversity, amongst others7. Remittances, predominantl y from migrants working in Russia, 
account for approximately 43 % of Tajik istan’s G ross Domestic Product  (GDP)8. 
Geographic context - Mountains occupy about 93% of the terrain, whereas glaci ers make up 6% of the total 
country area. Of the  7% available arable land, 97% is threatened by soil degradation9. In addition, there remains 
high levels of poverty throughout the country, Tajikistan has the lowest GDP per capita of the count ries in the 
Central  Asia  region  with  an estimated  47 % of the population  living  on less than  US$1.33  a day and 17 % subsisting 
on less than US$0.85 a day.10 In 2015, Tajikistan ranked 129th out of 188 countries on the Human Development 
Index.  
 
Extreme weather events (such as floods, droughts, avalanches, landslides) recurrently destroy land, crops, 
infrastructures, and livelihoods. In 2010, annual losses from climate -induced extreme weather events was  
 
 
1 World Bank, The World Bank in Tajikistan: Country Snapshot, 2016  
2 World Development Indicators, the World Bank Group (WB), http://data.worldbank.org/dat acatalog/world -development -indicators  
3 Tajikistan Partnership program snapshot, October 2015, the World Bank Group (WB), 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/pubdocs/publicdoc/2015/10/645741444794465533/TajikistanSnapshot.pdf  
4 Ibid  
5 UN Women 2015 -2020 global report  
6 Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework C onvention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), Government of the Tajikistan (GoT), 
http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/ Tajikistan/1/INDCTJK%20final%20ENG.pdf  
7 Tajikistan Environmental Performance Reviews, The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), 
www.unece.org/filea dmin/DAM/env/epr/epr_studies/TajikistanII.pdf  
8 WFP VAM Bulletin June 2016 Issue 17 http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286828.pdf  
9 UNDP -UNEP Poverty -Environment Initiative  
10 Central Asia. Business and Economy. Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO) http://en.reingex.com/Central -Asia -Business - 
Economy.asp


---
*Page 10*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 77  
 
 
estimated  at $600  million,  or 4.8%  of Tajikistan’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).11 More  recent  global  assessments 
conducted by German Watch in 2017 cites annual losses to be at 7.4% of GDP, ranking Tajikistan 9th globally in 
terms of losses, indicating the need for immediate adaptation activities. The most common impacts are those of 
land  degradation and erosion of fertile top spoil, impact on infrastructure due to mudflows, as highlighted by 
World Bank (2010) and the Third National Communication (UNFCCC 2014).  12 
 
Climate -induced  losses  will increase  with  rising  temperature  and precipitation  levels.13 The relatively  low level  of 
socio -economic development in Tajikistan, inadequate infrastructure, and high dependency on climate -sensitiv e 
sectors make the country extremely vulnerable to climate change and climate -induced extreme weather events. 
Lack of human and institutional capacity necessary to effectively reduce and manage climate change risks and 
impacts makes it extremely difficult to reduce climate change vulnerability and build the resilience levels 
necessary to overcome impending climate -related  problems.  
 
Food  security  context  - Food  production  in Tajikistan  is limited  by insufficient  availability  of arable  land.  Climate 
change is likely to compound these issues and impact rural livelihoods that are highly climate sensitive and 
dependent  on the agricultural  economy.  Nutrition  indicators  for Tajikistan  are the worst  in Central  Asia  and among 
all former Soviet republics. The 2015 G lobal Hunger Index (GHI) estimates that 33.2 % of Tajikist an’s population 
is undernourished. Twenty -six percent of children under 5 are stunted and 10 % are wasted 14. One major 
contributing fac tor to poor nutrition is poor infant and young children feeding practices (IYCF) wit h only 20 % of 
children  receiving  adequate  food  diversity  and frequency.  Micronutrient  deficiencies  are also  high.  Twenty -five % 
of women of reproductive age are anemic, as are 30 % of children under 5.15 The alarming nutritional status in 
Tajikistan is subject to high seasonal variations and undermines the resil ience and capacities of individuals, 
households and communities to effectively adapt to a changing  climate.  
 
Policies – Tajikistan is an active member of the United Nations Framew ork Convention on Climate Change an d 
has the lowest level of absolute and per capita emissions in Central Asia16. It has so far submitted three national 
communications and has ratified the Paris Agreement. It has also developed its Nationally Determined 
Contri butions and is in the process of finalizing its new National Climate Change Adaptation Stra tegy (NCCAS) in 
2017. At the national level, the following regulations have embedded climate change within them17: 
i. The National Action Plan of RT on Climate Change (adopted in 2003) - To be  updated;  
ii. National Action Plan of RT on Environmental protection (adopted in  2006);  
iii. State ecological programme and State programme of environmental education until  2020;  
iv. The National strategy on disaster risk management  (2010);  
v. The Law of RT on the power industry  (2000);  
vi. The Law of RT on transport  (2000);  
vii. The Law of RT on ecological expertise  (2012);  
viii. The Law of RT on environmental protection  (2011);  
ix. The Law of RT on environmental education  (2010);  
x. The Law of RT on the use of renewable energy sources  (2010)  
xi. The Law of RT on environmental information  (2011);  
xii. The Law of RT on energy saving and energy efficiency  (2013)  
xiii. The National Strategy for Enhancing the Role of Women  in the Republic of Tajikistan  (2010)  
 
11 IMF, 2010, Republic of Tajikistan, Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, Washington: International Monetary Fund.  
12 German Watch. 2017, Global Climate Risk Index 2017  
13 UNDP. 2012. Tajikistan: Poverty in the Context of Climate Change, National Human Development . Dushanbe: United Nations 
Development Programme.  
14 Acute malnutrition, or wasting, develops as a result of recent rapid weight loss or a failure to gain weight. In children, it  is assessed by 
low weigh t-for-height compared to the WHO international growth reference or mid upper arm circumference (MUAC).  
15 Micronutrient status survey, UNICEF, 2009.  
16 Third National Communication to the UNFCCC, 2014  
17 Ibid


---
*Page 11*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPO SAL | PAGE 10 OF 77  
 
 
xiv. The Agriculture Reform Programme of the Republic of Tajikistan for 2012 -2020 (endorsed by 
Resolution 383 of the  GoT).  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
Tajikistan has been identified as one of the countries that are highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of global 
climate c hange, particularly susceptible to low agricultu ral productivity, water stress and high losses from 
disasters18. With  73%  of the population  living  in rural  areas19, and depending  on land  for their  livelihood  and food, 
climate h as always been an important factor determining the incomes and lives of the rural population. Variation 
in precipitation patterns, glacial and permafrost degradation, forest fires, outbreaks of pests and diseases and 
increas ed occurrence of extreme weather events are key phenomena th at could be exacerbated by climate 
change 20. Recurrent natural disasters including droughts and floods are already impacting low -income rural 
househ olds, slowly eroding their capacities to cope  with and recover from each  event.  
 
During  the period  of 1940 -2012,  temperature  rise was  recorded  at an average  rate  of 0.1-0.2 ºС per decade,  annual 
precipitation rose by 5 -10%, degradation of glacier cover was estimated at 20%. Droughts over the period also 
affected the large parts of the country. Current climate change projections appear to have followed that trend21. 
These  changes  in the climate  are likely  to pose  numerous  threats  to the livelihoods  of people  and exacerbate  food 
security status of  households.  
 
By 2030, the average temperature is projected to increase by 2.3°С. Average rainfall is lik ely to increase by 8% in 
the territories  up to 2500  m above  sea level  and decrease  by 3% in the mountainous  areas.22 Climate  change  could 
affect Tajikistan through impacts on a number of different social, cultural, economic, and natural resources. The 
countr y is likely to experience considerable additional economic losses, humanitarian stress and environmental 
degradation  if robust  measures  to reduce  vulnerability  and enhance  adaptation  are not put in place.  More  frequent 
climate -induced extreme weather events may adversely impact the function and stability of both human and 
natural systems and further exacerbate climate -induced losses and  damages.  
 
The distributional effects are more likely to fall upon those involved in subsistence agriculture or pastor alism.23 
Vast  swaths  of agricultural  land  are being  affected  by wide -spread  deforestation,  soil erosion  and droughts,  whic h 
effectively decreases water availability for agriculture. Overall, lan d degradation, soil erosion and loss of 
biodiversity and ecosystems are driven primarily by inadequate environmental management, dilapidated 
agricultural infrastructure including obsolete irrigation and deranged drainage systems, as well as lack of 
educati on and awareness of the impacts of land  degradation.24 
 
Looking  towards  the future,  three  main  direct  channels  exist  through  which  adverse  climate  conditions  can affect 
people’s  livelihoods  from  agriculture:  (i) decline  in agricultural  productivity  (yields);  (ii) reduction  in agricultural 
wages; and (iii) increase in relative food prices (World Bank, 2009). Simulations based on household data show 
that a 20 % decline in agricultural productivity due to climate change could i ncrease the national poverty rate by 
13 % and poverty gap by 24 % respectively. A similar increase of relative food prices can lead to a rise in poverty 
rate by 16 % and poverty gap by 25  %. 
 
In terms of projections, climatic models (CCSM3, ECHAM5 and CSIR O) used for the preparation of the Third 
National Communication under UNFCCC (2014), highlight that the amount of precipitation in Tajikistan is likely  
 
18 World Bank 2009 , World Bank 2012  
19 Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment  
20 Ibid  
21 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan 2014 , World Bank 2012  
22 Makhmadaliev, B., Kayumov, A., Novikov, V., Mustaeva, N., & Rajabov, I. 2008. The Second National Communication of the Republic of 
Tajikistan under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Dushanbe. p. 89.  
23 Tajikistan: Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment World Bank Group Report Number 103077 -TJ 
24 UNDP -UNEP Poverty -Environment Initiative in Tajikistan: The Economics of Land Degradation for the Agriculture Sector in Tajikistan 
(2012) http://www.unpei.org/sites/default/files/dmdocuments/TJ_Economy%20of%20land%20degradation_ENG.pdf


---
*Page 12*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 77  
 
 
to increase during summer and winter and may reduce in spring and autumn. It is expected that the nature of 
precipitation will change with the amount of rainfall increasing and snowfall decreasing. There will be more 
intensive precipitation events of the type that that usually occur only once in fift y years, especially in Pamir. 
Geographically, the annual amount of precipitation is likely to decrease in southern Tajikistan and neighboring 
areas and is likely to increase in mountainous parts of the country. The models do not show significant change in 
precipitation in Vakhsh and Pyanj river basins, however an increased variation in maximum and minimum 
precipitation will be observed.  
 
An increase in temperature will be observed in all districts of the country. Winter and summer temperatures in 
the Pamir and Gindukush mountains will possibly increase at a faster rate than in plain and arid districts. By the 
end of 21st century warming may have become especially significant, exceeding 5°C in southern districts of the 
country  as well  as in mountains  of central  Tajikistan  and western  Pamir.  Diurnal  temperature  ranges  will increase 
as will the number  of heat  waves,  especially  in the lowland  districts  of southern  Tajikistan.  The risk of drought  will 
increase due to an increase in total evaporation and earli er snowmelt. Given the impact of climate warming, the 
glacier  losses  in 21st  century  will reach  2 km3  per year  on average.  An increase  in air temperature  and heat -waves 
will affect livelihoods. Insufficient winter precipitation (snow), especially in the mountainous glacier zone, may 
change river flow regimes. This, coupled with insufficient precipitation in spring will negatively affect agriculture 
and food  security.  
 
Historically, a number of extreme climate events have been observed with direct conseque nces for agricultural 
based livelihoods. For example, in 2015, high temperatures led to melting of glacier in the mountains leading to 
flooding of agricultural lands affecting 57 hectares of agricultural land and leading to displacement. In 2007, the 
longe st drought which stretched the coping capacities of most households was experienced. The drought was 
followed by the worst winter in early 2008 with temperatures falling to -20oC. The cold weather damaged 
agricultural assets (crops, orchards and livestock)  resulting into 40% decline in agricultural yields. Accelerated 
deforestation  was  one of the ecological  impacts  of the severe  winter  since  the shortage  of electricity,  gas and other 
energy supplies forced people to cut trees in the mountain  forests.  
 
Other  potential impacts of climate change on agricultural sector in Tajikistan include possible reduction in arable 
land due to inundation of agricultural land by floods from melting of glacier. Annual melting of glaciers brings in 
10 – 20% of water into rivers  but during dry and hot years, it can be up to 70%. In 2002, a whole village in Rasht 
region was completely destroyed by glacial lake outbursts killing 25 people and displacing 450 families.  
 
The effect  of climate  on the country’s  water  supply  is also  of considerable  concern  given  the importance  of glaciers 
in replenishment of country’s waterways. 60% of water in Central Asia (CA) originates from Tajikistan and 
therefore intervention on water resources will benefit the other CA countries. Based on climate projections, by 
2030  there  will be challen ges of drinking  and irrigation  water  as most  of the glaciers  (currently  the source  of river 
flows) will have  melted.25 
 
There  are several  socio -economic  factors  relevant  to Tajikistan,  which  derive  from  the legacy  of the Soviet  era. The 
removal of the technical and financial support of the centrally planned economy has resulted in crumbling 
infrastructure and limited institutional capacity. This has also been responsible for significant migration of the 
male working population to find paid employment abroad. All of these factors have eroded the ability of 
communities to cope with climate -related risks, and their ability to maintain and develop social and t echnical 
systems to reduce them. Also, the increase in female -led households in those communities, which were  impacted  
by the economic pressures resulting in the migration of many men of working age, has led to a significant change  
 
 
 
25 The second National  Communication of the Republic of Tajikistan under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (2008). Dushanbe. State Agency for Hydrometeorology of the Committee of Environmental  Protection.


---
*Page 13*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSA L | PAGE 12 OF 77  
 
 
in the traditional gender balance within these communities. In particular, this has increased the responsibilities 
of women in poverty -stricken families and communities.26 
 
The activities under this proposal involve partnerships with various agencies and build upon already 
accomplished works (in addition to PPCR) in the following projects:  
Environmental  Land  Management  and  Rural  Livelihoods  Project  (World  Bank  using  GEF/CIF  funds,  2013 - 
2018, $19.80mi ): Focuses on rural production and land resource management investment, knowledge 
management and institutional support and project management and  coordination.  
Tajikistan second public employment for sustainable agriculture and water resources management 
project (IBRD/IDA funds, 2012 -2020, $45.90 mi): Aims at providing employment to food -insecure people 
through the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, increase crop production and support the 
development of improved policies and institut ions for water resource management.  
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for the Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB) (World Bank using GCF 
funds, 2016 -2022, $68.78 mi): Aims to enhance regionally coordinated access to improved climate change 
knowledge services  for key stakeholders (e.g., policy makers, communities, and civil society) in participating 
Central Asian countries, as well as to increase investments and capacity building that, combined, will address 
climate challenges.  
 
KEY BARRIERS ADDRESSED THROUGH PROJECT OUTCOMES  
Rural communities who rely on agriculture for their income have been facing losses from natural disasters such 
as floods, droughts, and mudslides (Annex 1.3). While floods occur relatively frequently and devastate the 
communities  they  hit, the resultant  loss  of crops  and livestock  is limited  in comparison  to total  land  cultivated  and 
total livestock numbers. This is also true for mudslides, avalanches, earthquakes, and severe storms27. Localized 
disasters such as these can be managed effectively by better preparation and better allocation of ho usehold and 
community resources . Without effective and efficient adaptation measur es, rural communities face a potential loss 
of forage production due to higher temperatures, higher soil evaporation, changing precipitation patterns and 
increased overgrazing. Reduced income opportunities from farming would result in higher labor migratio n and 
investment of remittances in small ruminants (cattle, sheep etc). In addition, loss of glaciers will lead to a loss of 
watering points on both high altitude pastures and various lowland pastures , as many watering points are fed by 
glacier water. Taji kistan’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC pointed out that the country’s 
hydropower plants depend on river basins with glacial melt water and snowmelt, which makes them highly 
vulnerable to climate change. Most climate models predict big changes in the dynamics of 7 Tajik glaciers, 
snowmelt and precipitation due to warming temperature 28 . Rural areas of the country, in specific, are 
characterized by the  following:  
 
Lack of access to and awareness of the use of climate services by vulnerable populations for adaptation 
planning: Access to weather/climate information is limited for vulnerable communities as “last mile” 
dissemination channels are inadequate. At present a  range of dissemination methods are used, including radio, 
television, print, and websites. However, most of this information never reaches beneficiaries on time. There is 
limited understanding of the effectiveness of these methods and uptake of this infor mation by vulnerable 
communities, in particular women. This is partly because information, particularly scientific information is 
transmitted as non -actionable data without any instruction on integrating it with local knowledge and socio - 
cultural and gend er-differentiated contexts. While the reach of mobile networks is extensive, use of ICT/mobile 
platforms for climate services is vastly underutilized and faces challenges of technology adoption and cost 
effectiveness without scale.  
 
26 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked -documents/45354 -002-taj-oth-03.pdf  
27 Tajikistan: Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment World Bank Group Report N umber 103077 -TJ 
28 Third National Communications http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/tjknc3_eng.pdf


---
*Page 14*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 77  
 
 
Limited  awarene ss of climate  change  and  its impacts  on livelihoods  and  on nutrition:  During  the community 
consultations, most village heads mentioned that although the impacts of climate change are very much felt, the 
phenomenon itself has not been understood by most villagers. Communities mostly rely on traditional practices 
for forecasting weather without having an understanding of long term impact of the change. This also leads them 
to making inaccurate decisions regarding allocation and use of natural resources at their disposal. Communities 
also tend to construct their houses in hazard prone areas and end up losing their livelihoods and assets when hit 
by natural  calamities  like floods  or avalanches.  Community  representatives  stressed  the need  to get youth  involved  
in practical adaptation activities backed up by awareness raising  workshops.  
 
Limited adaptive capacities of communities: Communities in rural Tajikistan often face hardships due to the 
impact  of climate  change  and variability.  Recurrent  droughts  in the past  decade  have  led to youth  (mostly  men)  to 
migrate to neighbouring countries like Russia and Kazakhstan in search of work. This leaves abandoned women 
and families who have no other source of income other than remittances and donations (from charities).  During 
the community consultations, it was also found that poor households tend to sell -off their productive assets 
(livestock) when there is a shortage of rain. Another coping mechanism is to completely relocate to another area 
only to lose it all due to  lack of planning and  awareness.  
Limited knowledge and capacities at government levels: Despite investments done in the recent years to 
upgrade its equipment at the national level, lack of awareness with regards to climate change especially at the 
regional  and district levels is high. Whilst the government has submitted three national communications and is 
currently drafting its National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, there are no adaptation plans at the District 
Development Committee levels. These com mittees are responsible for making short -medium term development 
plans  for the districts.  In addition,  there  is a lack  of skill  and capacity  at the national  level  to forecast  weather  based 
on available information and data. Lack of inter -ministerial commun ication is another key challenge facing the 
country.  
Reliance on climate sensitive sources of income: The population of rural Tajikistan mostly relies on 
agriculture -based  livelihoods,  and even  though  it is an underdeveloped  sector  in the country,  it forms  a significant 
part of the economy of Tajikistan. However, insufficient employment opportunities have created untenable 
economic prospects for many people, driving significant levels of external labour migration (mainly to Russia) 
leaving behind children a nd women, who face multiple constraints in their roles as sole household  heads.  
Increased loss and damage due to weak community and household assets: Rural communities often lack 
climate proof storages to protect their harvest from disasters like floods an d extreme temperature. In addition, 
those  communities  that  do, have  some  form  of storage  from  the Soviet  era which  tends  to be weak  and dilapidated. 
Climate change impact is expected to intensify in the coming years. Ageing infrastructure and inefficient w ater 
and land management practices are only some of the obstacles that make rural Tajikistan less resilient to climate 
change. The risks and costs of inaction - demonstrated by the economic and social impacts from climate change 
in the absence of significa nt adaptation efforts - are particularly significant in rural areas of the  country.  
 
Loss of income due to absence of market information and linkages: During community consultations, it was 
noted that farmers often lack the time and skills to market and se ll their produce. In addition, due to lack of 
storages as pointed out above, they try to sell their produce as early as possible and get exploited by middlemen. 
They also do not know the real market demand or prices and often bear losses on their sale to t he middlemen.  
Lack of strong user associations at community levels to manage common assets: Farmers in communities 
often plan to produce crops  based on what fetches  them the  highest  price  from  the  middlemen.  This  creates  
fluctuations  in the market  as demand  for a commodity  rises  and falls  during  harvest  seasons,  further  exacerbating 
the losses  borne  by farmers  during  the production  process.  In addition,  due to disparate  sales  made  by individual


---
*Page 15*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 77  
 
 
farmers, the middlemen tend to hold significant bargaining power over the prices of commodities. Community 
assets such as storages, where they exist, are often unused due to lack of trust and organization.  
This proposed project aims to address the above barriers and improve on the baseline scenario. The project will:  
 
i. Enable the use of weather and climate information by men and women living in vulnerable communities by 
introducing climate services. The project will support development and dissemination of tailored information 
relevant for the most vulnerable mountainous communities in Tajikistan. It will catalyze ‘last mile’ access for 
weather and climate information by vulnerable communities through use of ICT/mobile platforms and 
comm unity outreach channels. Private sector will also be involved through engagement of service providers 
such  as telecom  companies  to stimulate  demand  or specialized  information  to enhance  market  scope  for use of 
climate information. At the national level, th e project will result in enhanced capacity of hydromet staff to 
generate climate -related data and forecast extreme weather and climate change; development and 
dissemination  of tailored  climate  information/products  for agrarian  livelihoods  and strengthened  capacities  of 
women and men in vulnerable  communities  
ii. Invest in communication, outreach, and knowledge sharing to enable increased awareness and adoption of 
best practices and sharing of lessons learnt through the implementation of this  project.  
iii. Provide  opportunities  for livelihood  and  income  diversification  for selected  group  of people  focusing  mainly 
on women. This will involve participatory processes that engage partners, beneficiaries, national institutions 
and municipalities  so that  interventions  address  the particular  needs,  priorities,  roles  and workloads  of women 
and men. Mixed orchards and solar greenhouses, temperature controlled storage facilities, cleaned irrigation 
canals, drip irrigation systems and water supply points will be established. Conditional transfers will be used 
to enable the poorest and most vulnerable populations, whose chronic food insecurity usually exclude them 
from this type of activity, to engage in climate change adaptation  activities.  
iv. Renewable energy in the form of solar panels, solar fruit dryers, wind pumps, and bio -digesters will be 
installed in suitable locations to strengthen the efficiency of the above mentioned assets. Solar panels will 
ensure electricity supply during power cuts which are very common during cold wi nter months. Solar fruit 
driers will be installed in the villages where orchards and greenhouses are established, while wind pumps will 
be used to raise water into the water supply systems. Bio -digesters will provide organic fertilizers to the 
orchards and  solar greenhouses, and biogas will be used to maintain temperature during the cold months in 
the food storage  facilities.  
v. Improving storages will enable farmers to store surplus and sell commodities for profit thereby avoiding 
overlaps of “new’ and “old” potatoes in the market given the fact that before exhausting old stock, markets are 
loaded with newly produced potatoes, due to the lack of storage facilities. Better postharvest processing and 
storage methods are an important strategy for reducing potenti al crop losses due to increased weather 
extremes as well as increasing the bargaining power of the smallholder producers and ultimately their climate 
resilience during the times of climatic shocks. The progress of these villages will be carefully monitored  and 
lessons learnt will be documented for future  replication.  
vi. Use a participatory approach including sensitization through awareness raising workshops, co -creation of 
information and products, use and evaluation of the products and invest in capacities of  institutions and end - 
users to assure adoption and use of adaptation solutions by communities and authorities  alike.  
vii. Strengthen  the adaptive  capacity  and reduce  exposure  to climate  risks  of vulnerable  populations  drawing  on 
enhanced generation and use of early warnings and climate information as well as adopting the Ecosystem 
based Adaptation approach. Vulnerable areas like slopes and riverbanks will be strengthened through tree 
planting.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Proposed components, outputs and outcomes:  
The project intervention proposes an integrated approach to ensure food security and support communities to 
adapt and is articulated in 2 components. It will provide skills, productive assets and increase tangible capacities


---
*Page 16*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 77  
 
 
of the most food insecure and vulnerable communities of Tajikistan who are most at risk from climate change. A 
key component of this approach will be building institutional capacity at both national and  sub-national levels to 
better understand needs and support vulnerable communities develop effective and equitable responses to 
prepare for and manage climate risks. In addition, the pr oposed project aims to contribute to the  capacity of the 
Government  of Tajikistan  by focusing  on its line ministries29, and importantly  local  authorities  in order  to support 
them with planning for, assess and implement climate c hange adaptation programmes and improve food and 
nutrition  security  in the country.  Gender  considerations  will be integrated  in all capacity  strengthening  aspects  of 
the project.  
The integrative approach of the project is achieved by these components building mutually reinforcing and by 
building and linking to each other. As such, Component 1 focuses on climate information services as well as 
awareness raising and capacity strengthening which will be crucial in preparing the ground and accompanying 
local commun ities for Component 2 activities related to climate adaptation and livelihood diversification. 
Furthermore, climate services will provide essential information about planting, irrigation requirements and 
provide  hazard  warning  that  allow  for preparedness  measures  to be put in place  in case  of climatic  shocks,  thereby 
reducing harvest and crop  losses.  
Component 1 : Capacity strengthening and awareness raising of food insecure climate vulnerable 
communities and national actors for enhanced rural resilience and  food security (See Annexes 2 & 3 for 
community needs assessments and hydromet capacity assessment).  
This component will support vulnerable communities in accessing reliable, timely and tailored climate 
information through the provision of improved climate  services specifically tailored to the needs of communities 
in the Rasht Valley, Khatlon and GBAO regions, through a user -driven and participatory approach facilitated by 
WFP. This will include building capacity of knowledge intermediaries to access and tr anslate climate information 
and provide location specific climate, crop, livestock and livelihood information and options to vulnerable 
communities.  It will also  entail  the use of a series  of ICTs  (i.e. radio,  sms,  web  platforms,  tv, etc)  that  will be chosen 
on the basis  of coverage  and the preferences  of men  and women  in target  areas  in order  to ensure  that  all members 
of the community have access to relevant information, with particular attention given to ensuring women will be 
able to also easily access this  information.  
Output  1.1:  Climate  and  weather  products  improved  and  tailored  to the needs  of vulnerable  food  insecure 
communities through increased capacity of  hydromet  
Data Rescue : The Hydromet operates and maintains a climatological data bank where various types of field 
weather observational data are stored and archived. This data and related information are essential for climate 
impact  assessment,  crop -weather  relationship  studies,  and climate  analysis.  There  are however  data  interruptions 
in the climate data as there is no real -time data quality control system in place; and most of the existing data are 
in paper cards at risk of being lost due to deterioration and are not computer compatible and therefore not easily 
accessible. While there is  on-going data rescue (digitization) of the climate data (from 1996/97 onwards) within 
the PPCR project framework, it was reported that only 15% of the data is targeted. This exercise needs to be 
extended to complete the remaining 85%. This output will aim  to complete the data rescue gap that exists in the 
current scenario. This activity will be done in consultation with the WMO’s Expert Team on Data Rescue30 (ET- 
DARE).  
Risk mapping : the information on areas prone to impacts of climate extremes exists but is not mapped. The 
information  needs  to be updated  and mapped  to make  it user  friendly  and enable  ease  of reference.  The Hydromet  
agency  will  be  trained  in  mapping  climate  an d  weather  information  to  visualize  their  climate  information  
 
 
29 Committee of Environmental Protection, Agency for Forestry under the Government of Republic of Tajikistan, Agency for Land 
Management and Irrigation under the Government of Republic  of Tajikistan, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources, Ministry of Health and Social Protection.  
30 The WMO ET -DARE have coordinated a number of data rescue projects in Met Services and Regional Climate Centers and therefore 
can be consulted for recommendation of experts in data  rescue


---
*Page 17*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 77  
 
 
products. This will also include training and capacity building in GIS mapping tools to monitor crops and pasture 
conditions based on indices derived from satellite data to enhance provision of agro -meteorological advisories.  
Develop capacity to generate monthly and seasonal climate forecasts: currently the Hydromet does not 
generate long -range (30 days ahead) forecasts and seasonal c limate outlooks which are requisite inputs into 
monthly to seasonal decision support tools for integration into crops, livestock and livelihood climate -risk 
management practices. The inability to generate monthly and seasonal forecasts is attributed to hig h spatial 
variability  of weather  and climate  over  the country  due to the mountainous  nature  of the terrain  and lack  of human 
expertise to use climate models for forecasting. Under this output, the capacity building of the Hydromet to 
generate monthly and s easonal climate forecasts will be supported through facilitating attachment of staff to 
advanced Climate Center for hand -on training on monthly to seasonal climate  forecasting.  
Output 1.2: Locally relevant delivery mechanisms for the provision of tailored climate and weather 
information through relevant ICTs identified and piloted.  
In addition  to TV and Radio,  there  are several  ways  in which  relevant  climate  information  could  be shared  locally. 
Examples include women’s groups, religious centers, information  boards in the schools and public places where 
community members gather to socialize. However, what clearly emerged is the need to establish an integrated 
approach for direct delivery of the information to target users, to ensure that all different members  of the 
community will be able to access information that includes a feedback loop from users. Community consultations 
in the target  districts  showed  that  mobile  phones  ownership  is high  and that  the majority  of people  in the targeted 
districts are members  of TCELL and MegaFon wireless telephone providers. SMS -based information delivery 
system was therefore indicated as one additional channel for delivery of information that the programme will 
pursue in the 35 Jamoats included in the project, with a specifi c focus on engagement with the private sector to 
ensure a financially viable partnership for long -term delivery of information (beyond project duration). In 
addition, focus will also be on piloting alternative ICTs to support an integrated approach to info rmation sharing 
that  will be based  on multiple  channels.  This  will include  strengthening  capacities  of intermediaries  to access  and 
communicate  information  through  mobile  apps,  exploring  the use of local  radios  for the broadcasting  of interactive 
radio programmes where farmers will be able to call in for free. Considering that SMS based information is space 
limited, for the advisories, WFP and TCELL will pilot services and information provision through an Interactive 
Voice  Response  Tree  – a voice  menu  with pre-recorded  voice  prompts.  It can consist  of different  layers,  levels.  This 
system has been tested in Tajikistan in the framework of a USAID funded M -Health project. The proposed system 
is simple and convenient for users as they will have free access to desired information (climate advisory, 
market/price information) 24/7. It  can be multi -language, and include different dialects (relevant for GBAO in 
particular). The system is highly user friendly as users simply dial toll free number, selects language and from a 
pre-defined menu, selects and listens to desired information whi ch will be updated on regular basis. Users can 
also be notified through SMSes about the updates. Considering that the system should be accessible for the most 
vulnerable and poorest farmers, a 3 -year trial period will be free of charges for project partici pants. When the 
project  is ending,  authorities  will have  responsibility  of the SMS  and IVR Tree  information  delivery  systems.  After 
the trial period, subscribing farmers will be charged a symbolic fee to maintain the system up and running. Here 
as well, lo ng-term sustainability of services will be addressed from the beginning by promoting governmental 
support and private sector engagement with a view to support a local market for climate services  provisions.  
Output 1.3: Decision making in vulnerable househo lds enhanced through improved capacities to 
interpret and act on tailored climate advisories  
Agro -meteorological services helps minimize the adverse effects of extreme climate events to agricultural 
operations  while  taking  full advantage  of favorable  weather  conditions  at different  stages  of crop  growth  in order 
to increase yield. At present, farm weather services in terms of seasonal forecasts, farm weather forecasts and 
advisories are not provided to vulnerable communities whose livelihoods are predominantly based on farming 
and pastoralism.


---
*Page 18*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 77  
 
 
The Hydromet only provides agro -met information in the dekadal bulletin, which is not sufficient to inform 
decision  making  and often  does  not reach  the farmers  at the community  level,  partly  due to absence  of agricultural 
extension services/local agricultural technicians in the Ministry of Agriculture. During the stakeholder 
consultations that was undertaken in November/December 2016, it als o became clear that there is lack of 
knowledge on climate variability and change, including how to make risk management decisions based on the 
available information at the local  level.  
The proposed  intervention  aims  to address  this gap through  an integrated  approach  that  in addition  to sharing  of 
information through ICTs will focus on strengthening capacities of intermediaries to enable them to access, 
understand and communicate relevant climate information together with context specific advisories  to support 
decision making at community level. In addition, trained intermediaries will also strengthen capacities of 
community members to make climate compatible decisions based on the advisories, including sensitization on 
climate change and its expecte d impacts on  livelihoods.  
This  output  will build  capacity  of communities  to interpret  climate  advisories  and working  with  intermediaries  to 
develop locally relevant weather and climate information to support daily on -farm decisions. This will include 
train ing the communities to make better decisions on natural resource management, crops selection, and how to 
prepare for and act during extreme climate events such as floods, droughts, mudslides, snow etc. Such trainings 
will be provided at district and jamoat  levels and will ensure participation of  women.  
The trainings for intermediaries will be conducted in the form of Training of Trainers (ToTs) and one of the 
approaches that will be be piloted in Tajikistan is the Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture 
(PISCA) developed by the University of Reading (Annex 10) which has been successfully implemented in several 
countries. This approach provides extension workers/intermediaries (and then farmers) with weather and 
climate data (historical and  forecasts), the skills to interpret it, and practical methods to identify livelihood, crop 
and livestock options that best fit their local needs. It facilitates the use of participatory decision making tools by 
smallholder  farmers,  in order  to enhance  farm and field -level  decision  making  for resilience  and food  security.  The 
approach would be tailored to the Tajikistan context and would also pilot a component tailored specifically to 
pastoralists.  
In terms of intermediaries, the ToTs will build capacities of NGOs already working with the local communities in 
the project areas and District -level government officers from the Committee of Emergency Situations (COES) and 
Community  members.  This  approach  will be used  during  the project  to train  at least  50 distr ict level  officers  from 
local authorities as well as NGOs and up to 200 key community members (village heads, farmer association 
members).  
This output will directly complement capacity building exercises under Output 1.1: Through engaging 
communities and h ydromet office through a participatory approach, improving information flow and feedback 
mechanisms. Information include early warning on weather events (for e.g. rain, snow) temperature (for e.g. 
normal, extreme temperatures) as well as food security rela ted information (for e.g. best times for sowing, 
harvesting,  storing)  will be generated  to ensure  that  losses  are minimized  and preventative  action  is taken  to avoid 
resource use in uncertain  periods.  
Output 1.4: Improved community capacities and awareness  on climate change impacts on health and 
nutrition  
Lack  of dietary  diversity,  poor  infant  and child  feeding  practices  and overall  lack  of awareness  on proper  nutrition 
and balanced diet has been discussed at the community consultation meetings (See Annex 2 ). A report31 by the 
World Bank and UNICEF identifies several reasons for malnutrition including lack of access to adequate food and 
clean  water,  overall  food  insecurity,  hygiene,  cultural  feeding  behaviors  (bread  only)  are a major  determinant  of 
nutritional status. Climate change further threatens health and nutrition due to its impact on water availability  
 
31 Situational Analysis: Improving economic outcomes by expanding nutrition programming in  Tajikistan.


---
*Page 19*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 77  
 
 
and quality, sanitation systems, food safety (including through more freq uent heat waves and warmer 
temperatures) and on waterborne, vector -borne and other infectious diseases.32 Thus, raising awareness and 
supporting behavior change for improved feeding practices, more balanced diets , and the importance of hygien e 
represent an opportunity to reduce the impact of expected climate change while also contributing to secondary 
objectives related to nutrition, food security and health. Through this output, awareness raising and behavioral 
change will be introduced withi n communities with a special focus on women who are uniquely positioned to 
address these challenges in Tajikistan. This output will also act as a complement to the use of climate services as 
communities will understand the reasons and impacts of climate ch ange and the need to adapt.  
Specific activities will include:  
- Local theatres to raise awareness of climate change and food security and its impact on livelihoods 
(agriculture, nutrition, health of children  etc) 
- Awareness raising on use of climate  advisories  
- Women’s workshops to address the importance of nutrition diversity and the link to climate  change  
Output 1.5: Publications of lessons learnt and best practices compiled and disseminated.  
During the implementation of this project, addressing clim ate change impacts on food security and livelihoods 
through  adaptation  will need  participation  and a coordinated  response  of multiple  stakeholders  starting  from  the 
communities right up to national level authorities. Given the complexity of these actions a nd the technical 
requirements associated with evaluating their effectiveness and impacts, it will be vital to generate knowledge 
through  participatory  approaches  and identification  and sharing  of lessons  learnt  for government  authorities.  This 
will support  the long -term  process  of understanding  solutions  that  are effective  and those  that  are not. Throughout 
the implementation of this project, this output will aim at periodic stock taking of lessons learnt and record good 
practices,  gaps  and identify  needs  through  regular  monitoring  and evaluation.  Bi-annual  reports  will be produced 
in a policy document format and will be shared with national  authorities.  
Specific activities under this output include:  
- Media campaign targeting both print and electronic media (and also regional media in local languages) 
generating at least 20 media reports on the  project  
- 1 National level workshop to inform policy development based on lessons learnt during the  project  
- 25 exchange visits from adjacent communities to promote repli cation potential and bring the adaptation 
focus in to local development planning processes, especially village development  plans  
 
Output  1.6:  Adaptation  plans  integrated  at District  Development  Committees  (DDC)  with  full participation 
of community members and local  authorities  
This output will support detailed, gendered analysis of food security in relation to climate change risks in each 
target  district;  detail  the context  specific  vulnerabilities  related  to climatic  uncertainty  and variability;  and provide 
the district level authorities with planning tools to design and integrate adaptation actions into the district 
development plans. It is expected that trained social mobilisers and DDP -level facilitators will support the 
planning  processes;  which  will include  several  seminars  and village  level  consultative  workshops  and meetings.  A 
participatory approach that engages both men and women will ensure plans reflect the urgent and immediate 
needs and the capacities of the most vulnerable and food insecur e households.  
The project will also produce aggregated adaptation plans on a watershed scale covering one or more DDPs. This  
takes in to consideration that certain livelihood assets (forests and water primarily) do not confine to village or 
settlement boun daries; and that their conservation has to be considered through a broader lens. In this regard,  
 
 
 
32


---
*Page 20*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 77  
 
 
spatial analysis of land (forests, agricultural land, homesteads etc.) and water resources will be conducted to 
complement the social analysis of vulnerability and the economic analysis of prioritized adaptive actions.  
This  output  will integrate  gender -responsive  adaptation  planning  in addition  to embedding  adaptation  options  in 
DDPs, identify the most vulnerable jamoats, communities and households in target districts and agree on priority 
actions and target groups with a long -term adaptation lens. At the end of the project 11 districts will have 
developed adaptation plants and prioriti zed actions for the most vulnerable jamoat, villages and  households.  
The target audience of communication, outreach and knowledge sharing is specific to activities proposed in the 
proposal. For climate services, a key target group will be local communities , particularly those whose livelihoods 
are climate sensitive, but also other stakeholders at national and district level such as ministries and local 
authorities. For best practices and lessons learned, these will be documented to facilitate annual stock t aking 
exercises with key ministries relevant to the project and that have a role in setting national policies and actions 
plans related to climate change more broadly. These include Agency on Statistics under President of the Republic 
of Tajikistan;  Center  for Strategic  Research  under  President  of Republic  of Tajikistan;  Forestry  Agency;  Committee 
of Environmental Protection; National Agency for Hydrometeorology; Ministry of Agriculture, Agrarian 
University;  Academy  of Agriculture;  Hukumats  in all 11 targeted  districts,  multilateral  organizations,  UN agencies 
and NGOs.  
Component 2: Resilience building at household and community level through diversification of 
livelihoods and market access.  
During  stakeholder  consultation s, it was  noted  that  the biggest  challenge  for target  communities  was  low adaptive 
capacity 33 while ensuring adequate food and nutrition throughout the year. This historical problem is 
compou nded by changing climate and irregularity of rain and  snow.  
The activities  outlined  in the outputs  2.1- 2.4 have  been  identified  in close  consultation  with  community  members 
and local authorities. To support the development of this proposal, WFP Tajikistan organized stakeholder 
consultation workshops in all three regions targeted by the GCF project during November - December, 2016. 
Representatives (men and women) of the  11 districts 34 participated in the meetings (See Annex 2 & 8). 
Throughout  the consultations,  WFP  also  identified  priority  areas  within  targeted  departments  where  people  have 
been most affected by climate events and assessed  their adaptive capacity. It was observed that local populations 
have developed a combination of short -term adaptive mechanisms and negative coping strategies based on 
seasonal  climate  variability  in the past.  However,  whilst  these  mechanisms  may  help  from  extreme  poverty  in the 
short run, communities have eventually relied on outmigration of male family members or foreign aid when 
disasters strike or during prolonged periods of climate extremes. Such extremes are poised to be more common 
with increasing te mperatures, water shortages, and rainfall variability triggering  disasters.  
This  component  is directly  linked  with  the activities  of component  1. With  climate  information,  awareness  raising 
and training programs, communities will embark on concrete adaptat ion interventions at local level as 
summarized in the following  section:  
Output 2.1: Climate change adaptation supported through diversification of livelihoods  
To avoid  land  degradation  and further the stress  on livelihoods,  tree  plantation  using  locally  adapted  and drought 
resistant cultivars was identified35 as an activity that could help local ecosystems by stabilizing denuded slopes 
(thereby  preventing  floods,  mud slides,  landslides  and avalanches)  as well  as generating  incomes  for the rural  
communities.  Planting  trees  and  cultivars  adapted  to  local  conditions  have  been  proposed  at  community  
 
33 According to the IPCC, adaptive capacity is the ability or potential of a system to respond successfully to climate variability and change, 
and includes adjustments in both behaviour and in resources and technologies.  
34 Regional and district level authorities from committee of environmental protection,  committee of emergency situations, ministry of 
agriculture, hydromet, agency of forestry, representatives of women associations, dehkan farms, lifestock producers, communit y 
members, local NGOs, public sector etc…  
35 This has been discussed during the com munity workshops and was supported by community members and local authorities as a 
feasible intervention.


---
*Page 21*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 77  
 
 
consultation  workshops  to enhance  adaptive  capacity  of populations  in targeted  areas. Type  of activities  will vary 
from region to region considering local specificities and beneficiary needs. Communities in GBAO proposed 
planting trees and shrubs along the banks of the rivers to reduce flooding, erosion and slow runoff water. While 
stronger winds were recorded over last years, they cause significant damage in Faizobod, which is the windiest 
area of Tajikistan. Consequently, wind protection trees were proposed at the community consultation meeting as 
an adaptation activity. The villages chosen lie in the 11 targeted districts i.e. Khovaling, Muminobod, Faizobod, 
Nurobod, Rasht, Tojikobod, Jirgatol, Rushon, Shugnon, Roshtqala,  Ishkoshim.  
Specific activities include:  
• Establishment  of 400  Ha of orchards  (using  drought  and flood  resistant  seeds  and saplings)  in 120  villages. 
This will be preceded by training on tree selection suited to local ecosystems, planting, and application of 
compost.  
• Agroforestry in 65 villages covering 200  hectares.  
• Creation  of women’s  groups  to receive  trainings  on drying  fruits  from  the orchards,  vegetables  and herbs, 
processing, preservation and marketing  skills.  
 
Capacity  building  interventions  in this output  will be carried  out by the Agency  of Forestry  under  the Government 
of Tajikistan.  
Output 2.2: Improved water management for drinking water and small -scale irrigation  
Water  is predict ed to be the main  channel  through  which  climate  change  impacts  will be felt by people,  ecosystems 
and economies.36 Lack  of access  to drinking  water  was  largely  discussed  at the community  consultations.  70 village 
identified for drinking water systems have no access to clean and safe water. This causes significant increase of 
illnesses linked to water and sanitation (Se e Annex 2 & 8). In Tajikistan, approximately 16% of mortality in 
children under five years of age is caused by diarrheal diseases (Liu et al.,  2014).  
This output will have the following specific activities:  
• Replacement of obsolete pipeline, inst allation of new as we ll as cleaning and rehabilitation of water tanks 
and installation of wind water pumps37 in up to 70  villages38. 
• Cleaning  of 200  km of irrigation  canals  across  all target  distr icts. Wherever  appropriate,  canal  cleaning  will 
be coupled  with  tree  planting  and erosion  control  works  to reduce  the risk  that  the canals  will continue  to 
be silted  again;  
• Installation of drip irrigation systems in villages facing water scarcity during hot summer months. Up to 
300 Ha of land will be irrigated using drip  method.  
 
Implementation of planned activities will provide access to clean water to more than 38,000 people in up to 75 
villages. Water supply projects that bring water access closer to people’s homes with the aim of reducing the 
household workloads for women in particular, while improving household hygiene towards reductions in 
diarrheal disease, and possibly improved nutrition outcomes.  
Wherever appropriate, the irrigation canal cleaning and drip irrigation activities will be coupled with orchard 
plantation projects to complement each other. In addition, water will be used for other income generat ion 
activities for example brick making. Cleaned and rehabilitated canals and drainage systems will provide access to 
water for more than 2000 hectares of agricultural land and improved management of water resources will 
enhance agricultural production.  
Increasing  irrigation  water  supply  will significantly  increase  food  production  while  improving  the incomes  of poor 
rural households. Sustainability of the assets will be characterized by the community ownership and  asset  
 
36 Bates el al, 2008  
37 Solar energy will be used for pumping water in the locations not yet connected to the grid.  
38 Villages selected based on level of drinking water availability


---
*Page 22*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 77  
 
 
maintenance strategy, which will b e discussed and agreed upon with men and women in each targeted 
communities. From the inception of the project, engagement of community leadership, Beneficiary Groups and 
district authorities will guarantee to ensure the quality, maintenance and access of very poor to the 
created/rehabilitated assets. Therefore, situation will be assessed case by case basis beneficiaries will be 
organized into various Beneficiary Groups including water user associations, women’s groups, etc. For this 
specific output, Water User Associations will be established among the communities to ensure maintenance of 
rehabilitated assets and equal access to water resources.  
In addition  to manual  works  related  to canal  rehabilitation  and cleaning,  the programme  will also  be working  with 
water user associations and community members (both men and women) on training and capacity development 
opportunities. These will include trainings on effective natural resource management technics, soil and water 
conservation practices, and canal (in frastructure) and asset maintenance. Tailored trainings will be delivered to 
both men and women in close coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and Committee of Environmental 
Protection.  
Output 2.3: Provision of and training to utilize green houses,  renewables and climate proof post -harvest 
storage facilities established to withstand long -term climate change.  
This  output  will enable  community  members  to generate  income  and increase  household  adaptive  capacity  during 
the harsh  winter  weathers.  Followi ng the climate  vulnerability  and project  selection  logic  of the proposal,  activities 
iin this output  will be further  selected  on the basis  where  communities  have  the ability  to co-finance  assets  which 
will further reinforce ownership and sustainability. Farmers, especially women, will be supported in the 
production and storage of food beyond traditional growing season through installation of low -cost solar 
greenhouse s 39 and food storage facilities. The activity will focus on women who lead the household after 
outmigration  of men  but often  lack  sources  of incomes.  Household  size  bio-digesters  will be introduced  to produce 
bio-fertilizers and provide bio -gas for heating and cooking purposes. In addition, small rooftop solar panels will 
be used  to generate  renewable  energy  for vulnerable  households  residing  in the villages  completely  disconnected 
from gr id. Such facilities are currently missing in the target areas and in little pockets where such interventions 
have been tried, they have failed due to lack of collective ownership and concentration of social power structures 
to a few.  During  community  consu ltations,  caution  was  expressed  regarding  commonly  managed  assets,  especially 
community owned greenhouses and storages facilities. Experience showed that there is high risk that these 
structures will become the property of local authorities. Possible risks  of theft also prevents villagers for using 
common facilities for producing and storing. In some locations, there exists an atmosphere of mistrust. Keeping 
this constraint in mind, the implementation of this output will be piloted using combination of gree nhouses, 
storage and renewable energy at household level and at community levels. Collective ownership will be 
encouraged through formation of beneficiary groups keeping in mind the social construct of the community. 
Successful  groups  will be used  as examp les for scaling  up the practice.  “Women’s  groups”  will be established  in all 
selected  villages  to create  collective  ownership  and promote  intra -community  collaboration  amongst  women.  The 
group composed by 7 -8 households will benefit from large size greenho uses, storage facility and bio -digester. Up 
to 5,000 people could generate incomes from proposed  interventions.  
Specific activities under this output will include:  
• Building  232  solar/and  rehabilitating  underground  greenhouses.  These  energy -efficient  greenhouses  will use 
solar energy as the source of light and heat for extending growing seasons of crops such as tomato and 
cucumber. This activity will be implemented in 64 villages reaching up to 4,800 direct  beneficiaries.  
• Developing (rehabilitating whe re possible and building new ones where needed) up to 232 storage facilities 
for the same 4,800 people benefiting from greenhouses and installation of solar panels to ensure electricity 
supply during power cuts which are very common during cold winter  mont hs. 
 
39 A UNDP -UNEP initiative for women proved that over a six month period, each greenhouse generated up to US$3600, an essential 
income source for them and their families. The project taught women cooperatives how to tend crops, make organic compost and run the  
greenhouses as successful microenterprises. - See more at: http://www.unpei.org/our -stories/tajikistan -overhauls -its-whole -planning - 
process -with -the%E2%80%98trip le-bottom -line


---
*Page 23*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 77  
 
 
• Bio-digesters will be provided to produce bio -fertilizers and provide bio -gas to be used for cooking and 
heating;  
• A service center will be established in each village and members of the communities will be organized into 
“Beneficiary Groups” to install and maintain these renewable  sources.  
 
Output 2.4: Household resilience and adaptive capacity of climate vulnerable poor in target areas 
improved.  
This  output  is designed  to increase  sustainability  of the proposed  interventions  by complementing  with  activities 
that  allows  better  access  to markets  and the private  sector.  Activities  will focus  on enabling  vulnerable  smallholder 
farmers to better link their local production with market and supply chains. This will include capacity 
strengthening efforts such as increasing the negotiating capacities of farmers with traders and other middle men, 
thereby increasing their net incomes and savings, which contributes to resilience to clim atic shocks and helps 
avoid  negative  coping  when  disaster  strikes.  Other  outputs  of this project  (including  rehabilitated  storage  facilities 
to avoid “dumping” produce at low prices, climate services - to manage resources better and prevent damages) 
will be supplemented by provision of market information including market locations, demand for commodities, 
prices etc – for informed decision  making.  
Considering differentiated needs of women and men, community members will be organized as Dehkan Farms 
(collec tive farming)  to work  in tandem  in planning  resources  and producing  in sync  with  market  demands  as well 
as increased bargaining power and  incomes.  
 
Farmers  will also  be linked  with  schools  to supply  food  to existing  school  feeding  programmesthereby  establishing 
a guaranteed minimum purchase. By introducing these interventions, farmers will be linked to value chains and 
markets, thereby fully capitalizing on adaptation benefits Specific activities  include:  
 
• Formation of Dehkan Farms or strengthening t he capacity of existing ones in 120 communities comprising 
500 farmers across selected project sites. Equal inclusion of women will be ensured through awareness - 
raising and sensitization sessions for men and community  leaders.  
• Establishing a system whereb y local market prices will be assimilated and disseminated to farmers through 
an SMS service. These prices will be institutionalized through district  authorities.  
• Linking demand from local school meals programmes and planning domestic production of commodi ties 
accordingly. In the framework of ongoing Country Programme (2016 -2020) WFP implements school feeding 
programmes in more than 2000 schools across Tajikistan feeding with daily hot meals more than 360,000 
children in rural areas.  These programmes will eventually be handed over to and managed by the 
Government of Tajikistan and hence will complement the sustainability of this output in creating a sustainable 
demand for commodities produced by  smallholders.  
 
The specific  community  level  activities  have  been identified  and discussed  during  the community  consultations  as 
the ones expected to be appropriate for the context, feasible, and able to increase climate change adaptability 
capacity  of the communities.  Activities  proposed  have  also  been  reviewed  by the CEP  and endorsed  as responding 
to the priorities identified in the national processes climate change adaptation. In summary, the benefit to each 
adaptation activity  includes:  
 
• Mixed orchard: a variety of adapted orchard will ensure diversification of income generating activities  
towards climate adapted livelihoods, while helping local ecosystems by stabilizing denuded slopes (thereby 
preventing floods, mudslides, landslides and avalanches made more frequent and intense by  climate  change).  
• Solar driers:  this is a sustainability element of the mixed orchards activity, as it allows to put subsistence 
farmers on a path of sustainable, profitable  livelihoods.


---
*Page 24*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 77  
 
 
 
• Agroforestry: cultivars adapted to local conditions will regenerate degr aded land, support stabilization of 
slopes, and prevent floods and landslides (in Faizobod they will also prevent damage from strong  winds).  
• Installation of drinking water points: this activity addresses the increasing water scarcity due to climate 
impacts  (droughts,  glacier  melting)  reducing  the incidence  of water -borne  diseases  and ensuring  people’s 
health (and particularly children’s) is less affected by climate induces water  shortage.  
• Canal  cleaning  and drip  irrigation:  the old infrastructure  is not appropriate  for the current  climate  patterns  
(more  frequent  and intense  rains,  floods  due to glaciers  melting,  droughts).  Cleaning  irrigation  canals  and 
protecting them from erosion, while providing drought prone areas with drip irrigation will ensure irri gation 
water is consistently available for agriculture reducing the impact of the recent changes in  weather patterns. 
This activity is complementary to the one on mixed  orchards.  
• Storing facilities: this activity will be able to protecting produce from climate shocks such as sudden changes 
in temperatures, floods and  mudflows.  
• Greenhouses: this activity will be able to stabilizing agricultural production by addressing the changing 
temperature and rainfall patterns. It will also complement other activitie s by diversifying farmers’ livelihoods  
portfolio.  
• Bio-digesters: by producing bio -gas and fertilizers this activity will complement the ones above, capitalizing 
on the increase of productivity and making farmers’ livelihoods sustainable in the long  term. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after WFP’s intervention.  
 
The impact of these activities is also summarized in the table below, the total villages benefitting will be 348 with 
a total of 50,000 direct beneficiaries and 70,000 indirect beneficiaries:  
It should  be noted  that  these  activities  are not the usual  activities  WFP  has been  doing  in the country  so far. Rather, 
this is a specific climate change adaptation intervention as opposed to mostly food security interventions 
conducted by WFP so far. However, some lessons can be inferred from WFP’s experience on assets creation. Fo r 
example,  regarding  maintenance  of small  scale  infrastructure,  WFP  has been  implementing  similar  activities  since 
early  2000  and there  are many  evidences  that  assets  were  maintained  after  completion  of the activities.  Recently, 
WFP  Tajikistan  assessed  the impact  of its asset  building  programs  through  satellite  imagery.  Satellite  observation 
of rehabilitated irrigation canals shows the positive evolution of vegetation coverage (measured through the 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index – NDVI) and highligh ts improvements in terms of new cultivated areas 
appearing  following  the rehabilitation  of irrigation  canals.  In summer  2015  and 2016,  new  crops  were  detected  
along the rehabilitated canal, where there were not before. Furthermore, 2011 and 2016 were two comparable 
years in terms of climatic conditions, yet, these assets retained functionality in spite of a number of shock years


---
*Page 25*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 77  
 
 
  Activity  Unit  Quantity  Land tenure  Beneficiaries  Villages  Management   
  
1.1.1   
mixed orchards   
HA  
400  
Community   
12,550   
120 Dehkan farmers  
associations  
  
1.1.1   
solar driers   
units   
400  
Community   
12,550   
120 Dehkan farmers  
associations  
  
1.1.2   
agroforestry   
HA  
200  
Community   
11,900   
65 Dehkan farmers  
associations  
 1.2.1  drinking water points  units  69 Community  37,750  70 WUA  
  
1.2.2  cleaning irrigation  
canals & drip irrigation   
HA  
2,310   
Community   
1,300   
75 WUA/Dehkan  
farmers associations  
  
1.3.1  building/rehabilitating  
storage facilities (HH)   
units   
112  
HH  
560  
4  
HH 
  
 
1.3.1  building/rehabilitating  
storage facilities 
(community)   
 
units   
 
120  
 
Community   
 
4,250   
 
60  
Dehkan farmers 
associations  
  
1.3.2  building/rehabilitating  
greenhouses (HH)   
units   
112  
HH  
560  
4  
HH 
  
 
1.3.2  building/rehabilitating 
greenhouses  
(community)   
 
units   
 
120  
 
Community   
 
4,250   
 
60  
Dehkan farmers 
associations  
  
1.3.3   
bio-digesters   
units   
75  
Community   
4,800   
60 Dehkan farmers  
associations  
 
Approach and targeting  
 
In order to enable highly vulnerable and poor communities to engage in assets creation under Component 2, 
farmers  receive  a vital  conditional  cash  transfer  from  WFP.  The transfer  is conditional  to the completion  (building 
or rehabilitation) of the community level adaptation assets identified during community consultations. In the 
short -term,  transfers  support  communities  during  the lean  season,  when  the food  gap  is most  severe  (low 
yields,  low stocks,  and high  prices)  and helps  them  meet  immediate  food  needs.  In the long -term,  assets  increase 
community adaptation against climate -related shocks and improve land  productivity . 
In the context of this project, transfers are a crucial element to for the most vulnerable populations to engage in 
climate adaptation activities, based on the following elements:  
a. Compared  to many  other  organizations,  WFP  targets  the most  vulnerable  rural  households  – both  farmers  and 
pastoralists,  who  fail to meet  their  daily  food  needs.  These  people  are the ones  who  are most  vulnerable  to the 
impacts of climate change. Transfers are therefore a necessary enabling condition for these populations to 
participate in the creation of adaptation assets, as th ey immediately cover the food and nutrition needs of 
people otherwise unable to feed themselves. In practical terms, without conditional transfers, the most 
vulnerable people would need to use their time and efforts to provide food for their families to me et their 
current needs, rather than participating in the creation of adaptation assets to address climate variability and 
shocks in the future . This means that without the enabling element of an initial transfer, those who are in 
greatest need of adaptatio n services would be excluded from the opportunity to restore land and create their  
own climate change adaptation assets. This, in turn, would undermine the sustainability of the  project.  
b. By enabling the most vulnerable households to participate in the creation of adaptation assets, transfers  
associated  with  asset  creation  contributes  to transformational  change.  As it brings  some  of the most  vulnerable 
people from a subsistence to a sustainable livelihoods level by, (1) reducing pressure on landscapes an d the 
natural  environment  (e.g.  avoiding  negative  coping  strategies  such  as deforestation);  (2) gradually  increasing 
adaptive capacity through training, creation and management of climate adaptation assets and (3) by 
improving productivity and building economic protection from shocks, thereby preventing relapse into  
poverty.


---
*Page 26*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 77  
 
 
c. In terms of sustainability, participants are gradually phased out of the conditional transfer, once the identified  
community  adaptation  assets  are completed.  Based  on several  other  experiences  with  this type  of intervention, 
rural populations are able to maintain and replicate the assets created thanks to the establishment of  
community level  structures.  
 
All the participating communities of the project have already been identified. Each beneficiary will receive a total 
transfer of $31 over the 4 years.  
Process detail : Over the past five years, WFP’s use of cash and vouchers has grown rapidly, across crisis, 
geographical areas, affected populations and economies. General information about this modality can be found 
here . The modality  used  by WFP  in Tajikistan  is the cash  transfer.  More  information  on Cash  and Vouchers  can be 
found  here . 
 
Assets cr eation interventions are designed, and a ssets are chosen, through Community -based Participatory 
Planning40 (CBPP) sessions facilitated by WFP’s experts and a pool of local trainers (technical services staff) 
previousl y trained by WFP,  which combine community’s current priorities with a long term vision into the 
potential impacts of climate change. The implementation of the activities is designed to be respectful of the 
calendar of activities of women and men and their work and social s chedules are taken into consideration when 
planning the asset creation so as to not disrupt their activities.  
 
Targeting : Selection of communities and beneficiaries for project activities will be completed through i) 
geographic, ii) operational and iii) household targeting.  
 
i) Project targets 11 mountainous districts classified as i) highly vulnerable to climate change and with ii) 
highest food insecurity profiles. The district selection process lies solely on the review of two studies as 
complementary tool s: i) Climate Risks and Food Security in Tajikistan and ii) 2015 Integrated Context 
Analysis. Below map illustrates targeted districts and selection process is detailed in the concept  note.  
ii) Within  11 selected  districts,  activities  will be carried  out in the communities  classified  as highly  vulnerable 
to climate change, with highest level of food insecurity and, where potential exists to achieve desired 
outcome taking into the consideration programme budget, WFP mandate and its accreditation to GCF 
project  category. Additional efforts might be needed to ensure community ownership and sustainability. 
A precondition  for selecting  communities  would  include  participation  in training  programs,  willingness  to 
adopt new livelihood practices and formation of user g roups for maintenance of assets will be given 
highest consideration. There are up to 400 villages in the targeted areas, out of which 217 villages have 
been  identified  for implementation  of this project  by WFP  sub offices  in consultation  with  local  authorities.  
 
WFP targets the poorest and most vulnerable populations. Therefore, beneficiary targeting mechanism will be 
aligned  with  World  Bank  supported  Targeted  Social  Assistance  programme41. Consequently,  project  benefic iaries 
will be identified from the TSA lists. Priority will be given to those who wi ll agree to participate in the capacity 
building activities and contribute time and resources that will be use d to maintain the assets in case needed. 
Beneficiary targeting process will be documented in the Household Targeting Report and signed by the project 
management committee members 42. Representatives of WFP, Hukumat and EE will supervise the  process.  
 
Maintenance of the assets : As outlined in section D, under the proposed project there are going to be both  
 household and community level assets. For the community assets, two concurrent sustainability paths will be 
implemented.  (1) At the beneficiary  level,  WFP typically  devotes  a significant  amount  of resources  to the  
 
40http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/communications/wfp264473.pdf?_ga=1.150016630.1731526006.14265  
99547  
41 World Bank supported TSA program uses Proxy Means Testing (PMT) to identify potential beneficiaries for social assistance 
programmes.  
42 Project management committees will be established in targeted villages. Their roles and responsibilities are described in the 
following chapters


---
*Page 27*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 77  
 
 
development of community -level management committees. In the case of Tajikistan, these will come in several 
forms from water users associations, to women’s associations, to Dehkan farmers associations depending on 
specific asset and its location. Each one of this entity is trained and becomes responsible for the maintenance of 
the assets  after  project  completion.  Both  in Tajikistan  and other  countries  where  WFP  operates,  such  entities  have 
been  showing  positive  results  in ensuring  that  assets  built  or rehabilitated  are appropriately  maintained  over  time, 
replicated and access is ensured to every member of the community. (2) At the institutional level, as pointed out 
in Output 1.6 , adaptation plans (including the assets creation interventions under Component 2 and their 
maintenance) will be integrate d into District Development Plans whereby District Development Committees will 
legally commit to ensure maintenance of the assets after project completion (through community -level 
management committees under point 1 above). Such commitment will be part of the Memorandum of 
Understanding that WFP will sign with the Government to kick start project implementation, however a letter of 
commitment will be provided in  annex.  
In terms of monitoring, in Tajikistan, satellite monitoring of the assets built under pre vious programs revealed 
assets were still functional and had been beneficial to the communities even after significant time from project 
completion . Recently,  WFP  Tajikistan  assessed  the impact  of its asset  building  programs  through  satellite  imagery. 
Sate llite observation of rehabilitated irrigation canals shows the positive evolution of vegetation coverage 
(measured  through  the Normalized  Difference  Vegetation  Index  – NDVI)  and highlights  improvements  in terms  of 
new cultivated areas appearing following the rehabilitation of irrigation canals. In summer 2015 and 2016, new 
crops were detected along the rehabilitated canal, where there were not before. Furthermore, 2011 and 2016 
were two comparable years in terms of climatic conditions, yet, these assets retained functionality in spite of a 
number of shock years after WFP’s  intervention.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
Committee on Environmental Protection under the G overnment of the Republic of Tajikistan  
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), established in 2008, is a specialized agency overseeing the 
use of natural resources and environmental protection. The State Administration for Hydrometeorology is an  
institution  under  the CEP  that  co-ordinates  the implementation  of the UNFCCC,  compiles  national  GHG  inventories, 
assesses vulnerability to climate change, distributes information on UNFCCC implementations in Tajikistan and 
co-operates internationally with  the UNFCCC Secretariat, IPCC and other relevant organizations. The Committee 
on Environmental Protection is the central government authority of the Republic that is involved in 
implementation of the public policy in the area of environmental conservation,  hydrometeorology, and rational 
nature  use and ensures  state  control  over  environmental  protection  and use of natural  resources.  CEP  also  houses 
the National Designated Authority for the GCF. The CEP has established an ‘Implementation Group’ to coordinate 
climate adaptation and environmental protection projects funded by the multilateral donor organizations. For 
instance, the Implementation Group, composed by qualified professionals are currently executing Environmental 
Land Management and Rural Livelihoods  project financed by the World Bank. Furthermore, the State 
Administration for Hydrometeorology, is also currently executing Modernization of Hydrometeorology Services 
financed by the World Bank. The Project cost 13 Million USD, and another Implementation Group is established 
under Hydromet to execute the project. WFP’s proposed GCF project component 1 will build upon this project to 
disseminate climate information to farmers. There are a number of other projects coordinated by various CEP 
institutes or thr ough CEP itself. However, the ELMARL and CAMP4ASB are the only projects executed by CEP 
directly through its Implementation Group. The CEP has an annual budget of 20,000,000 Somoni (approx. USD 
2.26mi - Exchange rate as of November 18, 2017: 1 USD 8.8214 T JS -source National Bank of Tajikistan). from 
Primary State budget including incomes for environmental services. In addition, it receives approximately USD 6 
mi from  donor  resources  (ELMARL  and CAM4ASB)  annually.  The CEP  has established  a system  where  the capacity 
of the Implementation Group can be strengthened based on the scale and number of the projects to be 
implemented. They work close with multilateral institutions like the ADB, GIZ, EBRD  etc.


---
*Page 28*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  27 OF 77  
 
 
As the Executing Entity (EE), the Committee for Environment Protection under the Government of the Republic 
of Tajikistan will jointly be responsible for the day -to-day execution and technical supervision of the project 
activities. Through its Implementation Group, the EE will oversee and coordinate the execution, monitoring and 
evaluation of the program; execute agreements with the local government units. It will also lead project 
procurement  activities  including  management  of the supply  and service  contracts  of various  suppliers.  The EE will 
submit quarterly progress reports as well as details on expenditures to WFP in order to release the next tranche 
of funding.  
 
WFP will also act as co -Executing Entity for specific project activities. More b ackground information about its 
work in the country is available in section E.5.2.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
N/A 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
WFP  operates  in Tajikistan  in the framework  of the United  Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework  for 2016 - 
2020 signed 10th of December 2015 between the Government of Tajikistan and UN agencies in Tajikistan; No 
special license or permit is required to implement proposed project. Financial Market Overview is not applic able 
in this case. However, for activities related to procurement of services including training by WFP staff, Section 7 
of UN Privileges and immunities state that the UN agencies are exempt from all direct taxes. If services are 
procured by government, na tional regulations on taxation may  apply.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
WFP  will be the Accredited  Entity  (AE)  as well as the co -Executing Entity (co -EE) for specific portions of the project,  
while  the Committee  for Environmental  Protection  under  the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (CEP) will 
be the  Executing Entity . CEP is accountable to WFP for managing the project, including  the monitoring  and 
validation  of project  interventions,  achieving  project  outcomes,  and for the effective use of resources. WFP will 
develop the project document in consultation with the CEP and other stakeholders involved. WFP will sign the 
Grant Agreement with the GCF and a Memorandum of Understanding/Standard Operating Procedures will be 
prepared and signed between WFP and CEP. WFP will manage the funds from GCF, and will disburse quarterly in 
advance against agreed work plans, to a project account managed by the EE. WFP will ensure the quality of the 
project deliverables, fiduciary risk management , progress monitoring, results monitoring, value for money 
analysis and reporting to  GCF.  
 
The project structure is depicted below:


---
*Page 29*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 77  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Level   
National Steering Committee  
Chaired by the Chairman of CEP  
 
Line Ministry Representation  
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Committee of Emergency 
Situations and Civil Defense (CoES), Agency for 
Hydrometeorology (Hydromet), Agency of Land 
reclamation and irrigation; Agency of Forestry.  GCF  
 
 
 
 
WFP  
 
 
 
National Project 
Management  Project Support Unit  
Project Manager, CEP and Support 
Staff  
Hired Technical experts  
 
 
 
 
District Level Implementing and Monitoring 
Committee  
DDCs, CEP (EE), Min. of Ag, Hydromet, CoES, Agency of forestry, 
Land Reclamation and Irrigation, WFP SOs  
 
 
Jamoat level 
planning  
 
 
 
Project M anagement 
Committee  
 
 
Beneficiary 
groups  
 
 
 
 
 
Fund flow 
Implementation Support  
Monitoring and  Reporting    
 
 
 
Figure 1: Project Management structure  
 
*The project support unit represents the EE (CEP).  
The roles and responsibilities of the accredited entity and executing entity can be divided as follows:  
 
As the Accredited Entity, WFP Tajikistan Country Office and Sub -Offices, Regional Bureau (RB) and Headquarter 
(HQ), is responsible and accountable to provide oversight and quality assurance of the project, i ncluding ensuring  
District and Village Level Implementation


---
*Page 30*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 77  
 
 
effective use of project funds according to agreements made with the GCF, oversight and reporting (annual 
reporting, mid -term and final evaluations, and audit), achieving project objectives and coordinate the involved 
actors to implement the project components and ensure Government handover.  
 
The RB and HQ is a second layer of oversight which will ensure: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) project 
implementation oversi ght and supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project completion and 
evaluation oversight. It also includes oversight roles in relation to monitoring, reporting and knowledge - 
management. Thus, the role of RB/HQ serves as an internal contr ol mechanism to ensure transparency and 
segregation of duties by:  
• Reviewing quarterly reports before CO disburses funds for the next tranche of  activities;  
• Reviewing APRs and Financial reports before submission to the  GCF  
• Conducting  site visits  for monitoring  project  activities  as appropriate  and keep  track  of annual  work  plan;  
• Reviewing evaluation reports as well as project audit  reports  
 
In addition, WFP Climate and DRR unit (OSZIR), in cooperation with the CO will:  
• Provide  a central  point  of contact,  coordination  and reporting  to service  the needs  of the donor  as required;  
• Provide specialized technical support to the CO upon  request;  
• Identify and document best practices and lessons learned to promote knowledge transfer and cross - 
fertilization  of experience and success  stories;  
• All communication with the GCF will be done via HQ  (OSZIR).  
 
Furthermore, the ‘project assurance’ function of WFP is to support the National Steering Committee by carrying 
out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project 
management milestones are managed and completed. A WFP Programme Policy Officer will hold the Project 
Assurance role on behalf of WFP. The role of WFP in the PSU is to represent the interests of the donor and/or 
technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing).  
 
The  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)  will be comprised  of the following  organizations:  The Chairman  of CEP 
will chair the NSC. The NSC advisory body will comprise the Hydromet agency under the CEP, the Committee of 
Emergency Services and Civil Defence (CoES), the Agency of Land Reclamation and Irrigation and the Agency of 
Forestry. Furthermore, as the accredited entity, WFP will also be p art of the NSC and provide quality assurance 
for the project to ensure adherence to the GCF guidelines. The NSC is responsible for making, by consensus, 
management decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. NSC decisions will be made in 
accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value money, equity, 
integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the 
NSC, final decision shall rest with WF P. The NSC will meet three times a  year.  
 
Project  Support  Unit  (PSU)  will be established  within  CEP’s  Implementation  Group  will be responsible  for project 
management and planning at the national level. It will comprise of the project manager, CEP and support staff 
including technical experts. The Project Manager will run the project on a day -to-day basis on behalf of CEP 
within  the constraints  laid down  by the NSC.  The Project  Manager  function  will end when  the final  project  terminal 
evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF and WFP has been completed and submitted to 
WFP. The Project Manager is responsible for day -to-day managemen t and decision -making for the project. The 
Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project 
document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and  cost. 
 
Both the NSC and PSU will be set up before the project inception workshop. There are no known pre -requisites.


---
*Page 31*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 77  
 
 
District  Level  Implementing  and  Monitoring  Committee : District  level  coordination  of project  activities  will be 
done  under  the chairmanship  of Head  of District.  The head  of district  will be the overall  coordinator  of the project 
at the district level. District level planning is further informed by decentralized structures such as the  Jamoats.  
 
Project Management Committee : The Project Management Committee (PMC) is to be set up in every 
Jamoat/village  and composed  of up to 6 members,  including  Head  of Committee.  50%  of committee  members  will 
be women. The members will not be  related to each other and/or to the Head of Village/Jamoat. The PMC will be 
set by the Jamoat authorities at the village assembly. Whenever possible, these processes will be supervised by 
the representatives of WFP and Executive Entity. The representative s of Executive Entity will train committee 
members on their roles and responsibilities, and will also share the Project Management Committee selection 
report with the relevant WFP Sub Office. The role of the committee is to ensure that proposed activities are 
implemented  according  to plan.  It must  also  ensure  that  project  targets  the most  vulnerable  food  insecure  families.  
 
Beneficiary groups: WFP’s climate change adaptation activities are oriented towards the creation of sustainable 
productive assets useful to the food insecure beneficiaries (both men and women) and the community. 
Sustainability of the assets is characterized by the community ownership and asset maintenance strategy, which 
will be discussed  and agreed  upon  with  men  and women  in each  targeted  communities.  From  the inception  of the 
project, engagement of community leadership, Beneficiary Groups and district authorities will guarantee the 
quality, maintenance and access of very poor to the created/rehabilitated assets. On a case by case ba sis, 
beneficiaries will be organized into various Beneficiary Groups including water user associations, women’s 
groups, etc. The role of the Beneficiary Groups will be to ensure sustainable asset management practices. This 
includes  maintenance  of orchards,  irrigation  and drinking  water  supplies  as well  as community  level  greenhouses 
and food  storage  facilities.  Group  members  include  beneficiary  households  who  can benefit  from  the project.  These 
are ordinary  cultivators,  individual  members  of lease -holding  farms,  owners  of private  and dehkan  farms,  owners 
of home garden plots, etc. Their roles are responsibilities are detailed in the Operation and Management plan 
(Annex 5). Overall, they will be responsible for managing and pooling financial, material, technical and human 
resources  for the operation  and maintenance  of the asset  within  their  jurisdiction  for the benefit  of all the 
members.


---
*Page 32*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 77  
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation  
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
N. ACTIVITY  Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 
0.1.1  National steering committee meetings                  
0.1.2  Community based participatory planning                  
0.1.3  District level workshops: good practices and recommendations                  
0.2.1  Establishment of project management comities                  
0.2.2  Beneficiary selection                  
0.2.3  Training of communities on different asset creation activities                  
1.1.2  Training Workshop for Data Clerks and Managers on DaRe activities  
including use of  CLIMSOFT Climate Data Management System                  
1.1.1  Data Rescue (DARE) exercise                  
 
1.1.2  Capacity building of the Hydromet to generate monthly and seasonal  
climate forecasts                  
 
1.1.3  Capacity building in GIS mapping tools to monitor crops and pasture  
conditions                  
1.2.1  Developing mechanisms for provision of tailored climate services                  
1.2.2  Provision of climate information (radio/tv/sms)                  
1.3.1  Visit of PICSA trainers from University of Reading                  
1.3.2  Training the communities on the use of PICSA approach                  
 
1.4.1  Community awareness raising on climate risk management measures,  
climate advisories, health and nutrition risks                  
 
1.5.1  Exchange visits from adjacent communities, lessons learned and awareness  
raising                  
1.5.2  Dissemination of publications of lessons learnt and best practices                  
1.5.3  National conference to inform policy development based on lessons learnt                  
1.6.1  Reviewing district plans with local authorities                  
1.6.2  Development of district level plans with Climate Change Adaptation                  
2.1.1  Delivery of seedlings                  
2.1.2  Installation of natural fences                  
2.1.3  Tree planting (orchards and agro forest)                  
2.2.1  Drinking water supply systems                  
2.2.2  Irrigation activities                  
2.3.1  Installation of storage facilities                  
2.3.2  Installation of solar greenhouses


---
*Page 33*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 77  
 
2.3.3  Provision of solar dryers and trainings                  
2.3.4  Installation of biodigesters and trainings                  
2.4.1  Provision of market information including market locations, demand for  
commodities, pri ces etc... (SMS, IVR, information boards)                  
 
2.4.2  Training of 500 dehkan farms and information sharing to better link local  
production with markets and supply chain                  
0.3.1  Monitoring of activities                  
0.4.1  Impact evaluation data collection


---
*Page 34*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 77  
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
Gaps  in food  security  related  adaptation  interventions:  While  climate  change  adaptation  at the national  levels 
has been a priority under the recent climate change related projects, many gaps still exist in introducing 
adaptation from the lens of food security and nutrition at the community level. Agriculture comprises 25 % of 
GDP and 53 % of employment across the country. A majority of the population is engaged in smallholder, rain - 
fed agriculture. The impacts of climate -related hazards in Tajikistan have already severely disrupte d food 
production, led to the displacement of communities, loss of life and assets, and caused an overall reduction of 
community  resilience,  outmigration  - especially  affecting  women,  who  are the most  vulnerable  to climate  change 
impacts. Since the target locations include the extreme poor, it is less lucrative for the private sector to invest in 
developing  services.  To add to that,  private  sector  investment  is limited  due to the insolvency  of banks  to provide 
loans. Since this is an adaptation project aime d building resilience of the most poor and vulnerable communities 
in rural Tajikistan, it is not expected to generate a revenue or profit for the government and beneficiaries 
involved. The project, however, will enable the beneficiaries to diversify their livelihoods, build community and 
household resilience, prevent losses to property and make informed decisions on the use of available natural 
resources.  
 
High vulnerability : Climate change presents significant threats to sustainable poverty reduction in Tajikistan. 
The country has been ran ked the most vulnerable of twenty -eight countries in the World Bank’s Europe and 
Central Asia (ECA) region.43 Sensitivity to the impacts of increased exposure  to climatic risks is high, especially 
for the rural poor. Climate change threatens livelihoods in Tajikistan, mostly because of low adaptive capacity. 
Vulnerability to climate change stems from inadequate productive structures, high income vulnerability, and 
numerous  institutional  constraints,  especially  in the agricultural  sector.  At the local  level,  the relevant  civil  society 
organizations  continue  to employ  traditional  approaches  focusing  primarily  on increasing  production,  improving 
water resource management or responding to emergency situations often triggered by climate  variability.  
 
Creating new enabling environments: Uptake of climate services by communities could potentially create 
conditions for investments by public and private sector actors to package and use this information to serve 
specialized needs across sectors and businesses. The project will enable producers and users of climate 
information thereby eliminating barriers including those related to adoption to new technologies and practi ces 
such as ICT/mobile technologies weather advisories. The project will provide the private sector (small -scale 
farmer  enterprises,  agri -businesses)  with  the weather  and climate  information  that  is required  to make  informed 
decisions to increase productiv ity and make medium and longterm  investments.  
 
A GCF funding will enable Tajikistan to expand its executing capacity to meet its targets. In addition, through 
partnerships with other ministries at the district level, the project will be able to further enh ance capacities in 
the areas of agriculture, land management, social protection, and responding to natural disasters in the country. 
Without the proposed project, the government of Tajikistan cannot mobilize development of the national and 
regional systems  to reduce mortality for its vulnerable populations and decreasing risks on climate sensitive 
livelihoods.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
Main principles  
WFP has 20 years of successful experience in Tajikistan implementing water management, tree plantation, 
greenhouses and other community asset building projects. The sustainability of these projects depends on 
several  factors  such  as i) relevance  of the intervention  with  community  needs  and ii) the community  engagement  
in   the   planning,   implementation   and   maintenance   process.   For   the   proposal   supported   by   GCF,  the


---
*Page 35*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 77  
 
 
 
implementation  of activities  will follow  a logical  sequencing  and for some  activities  a gradual  phasing  out, which 
particularly applies to asset creation and related transfer  activities.  
 
Activities under this proposal have been identified in consultation with communities and authorities of the 
targeted di stricts. Furthermore, the selection of target villages and communities builds on community 
contributions to project implementation and the maintenance of assets. Both factors ensure community 
ownership and support longer -term sustainability of intervention s. 
 
WFP’s internal procedures to approve interventions at community level will further ensure that the proposed 
projects are sustainable. Each project is reviewed by the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC). Approval of an 
activity by the PAC depends on its s ustainability over the longer term as part of locally relevant exit strategies. 
Furthermore, mandatory endorsement letters from the Hukumat and/or Jamoat guarantees land tenure and 
institutional anchoring and approval of activities.  
 
Based  on above,  the exit strategy  of the proposed  project  is based  on consultations  with  each  involved  community 
and tailored to each local situation on a case by case basis. For example, projects related to water management 
are expected to be handed over to the Water User Associations. In communities targeted for tree planting, 
beneficiary  groups  will be established  which  remain  the institutions  tasked  with  the management  of the orchards 
after the project has  ended.  
 
Since the Government can only provide limited support to each vulnerable community, vulnerable villages rely 
on their  own  efforts  to maintain  the assets  on which  their  livelihood  depends.  As specified  in the Operational  and 
Maintenance plan, each community will receive training on the effective use of natural re sources and their 
capacity  for maintenance  of the “assets”  will be enhanced  throughout  the project  implementation  period.  As these 
communities  have  the proven  capacity  to maintain  these  assets  after  completion,  the gains  and benefits  generated 
by the project will not be jeopardized once project resources are no longer  available.  
 
The proposed project has been designed through extensive consultations and involvement of government, 
communities, public sector, private sector, NGOs, and Civil Society Organ izations to ensure ownership of the 
interventions and effectiveness of their impact. Relevant government departments (national and sub -national 
level), as well as local communities, have been involved in the proposed design and will be leading on 
implement ation  of project  interventions.  This  proposal  requests  a grant  that  will neither  generate  profits  for the 
donor nor the implementer. It will, however, create an enabling environment whereby men and women in poor 
communities will be able to take ownership of assets (including repairs and maintenance), generate sustained, 
more resilient incomes and use newly learned skills over a long period after the project closure. The project 
ensures that the investments as well as the results are sustained beyond the pr oject duration and for the long - 
term through the  following:  
 
Institutional sustainability will be promoted in the project by strengthening and expanding the current 
capabilities of the key institutions that are directly responsible for the execution and m anagement of the project 
activities.  The project  aims  to generate  awareness  and train  regional  level  officials  on climate  change  adaptation. 
Training local and provincial government officials in supporting these processes will also ensure stakeholders 
have  the tools  to continue  their  work  towards  the vision  of climate  resilience  beyond  the duration  of this project. 
Climate change adaptation plans will be incorporated in the district development plans. Lessons learnt from the 
project  implementation  will be submitted  to national  ministries  as policy  and strategy  papers  to add to their  
 
 
43 World Bank 2009a


---
*Page 36*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 77  
 
 
 
institutional memory. This will add the food security lens to national policy formulation – something that is 
currently lacking.  
 
Socio -economic sustainability at the community level will be promoted by ensuring that actions are 
community -driven to increase ownership and commitment. Assets created under the project are prioritized a nd 
decided through a participatory approach that engages both men and women so that it is in the community’s 
interest to maintain, repair and replace them with their localized knowledge, skills, and resources after the 
project closes. Community members (es pecially youth) will be trained to maintain assets and will be involved in 
maintenance activities from the onset (See Annex 5 for O&M plan for assets created under component 2). The 
project will ensure that women are prioritized in income generating and sk ills development activities.  
 
Financial sustainability of the climate services in component 1 will be maintained by partnering with service 
providers who have been collaborating with the government so that an initially subsidized mechanism can 
gradually be come paid service (where free services like radio, TV or information centres are deemed less 
effective).  
 
Sustainability of outcomes and behavioral change will be embedded from various perspectives in the project.  
• Informed decision making : The use of clima te information for decision making, understanding the need to 
diversify from staples – both as income sources as well as dietary practices will be  key.  
• Nutrition education : Understanding the need to empower women and for women to understand the 
importance of nutrition for their children will be enhanced. Climate change affects nutrition by influencing 
people’s  food  security,  disease  levels  and patterns,  water  and sanitation  environments,  and choices  about  how 
to allocate  time  to their  livelihoods  and to caregiving.  In turn,  people’s  nutrition  status  and diet  choices  affect 
their capacity to adapt to climate change. For the poorest groups, the seasonal cycles of food availability, 
infection,  and time  use remain  a significant  challenge  to nutrition  security  and provide  a stark  indicator  of the 
vulnerability of populations to climate  risk.44 
• Empowering the smallholder : For small holders, it will be important to learn that the middleman is not 
always  right  and to be able  to negotiate  better  deals  and improve  incomes  through  availability  of local  market 
prices. Opportunities for sustainable income sources through linkages with public and private sector 
(including national school meal programs) will be fostered. Communities as a whole will incorporate an 
understanding of climate information in their everyday lives. The impact of climate change on future 
generations,  land,  natural  resources  as well  as steps  to adapt  and change  the way  of life will be key knowledge 
imparted throug h the implementation of this  project.  
• Community ownership and maintenance of assets : Community members will see concrete benefits in a 
variety  of ways,  for example  through  better  allocation  of resources,  increased  productivity,  and better  access 
to markets. Local government will also have the capacity to better support community -driven and owned 
processes.  Local  residents  will see value  in services  (trainings  etc.)  provided  by their  peers  and will be willing 
to pay for those services. Communities wil l be organized into beneficiary groups for maintenance and 
management of the assets created from the start to ensure ownership and sustainability. Using traditional 
means  and exercises,  community  members  will be made  aware  of the importance  of collaboration  and mutual 
trust.  
• In addition to the climate vulnerability lens that supports the overall geographical targeting of the project, 
communities  are selected  on the basis  of their  engagement  in project  implementation  including  willingness  
 
44 Thomson, Madeleine; Fanzo, Jessica. 2015. Climate change and nutrition. In Global Nutrition Report 2015: Actions and accounta bility 
to advance nutrition and sustainable development. Chapter 6. Pp. 74 -84. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research I nstitute  
(IFPRI).


---
*Page 37*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 77  
 
 
 
to co -finance and asset maintenance capacity. The proposed activities are identified through a participatory 
process  based  on community  priorities.  Authorities  and community  members  are involved  in the project  from 
the earliest design stages. Poorest communities are willing to contribute significant amount of their own 
resources,  and it is in their  interest  to put in place  sustainable  asset  management  strategies  as their  livelihood 
will fully depend on those community  assets.  
 
In practical terms : 
 
Component 1 : In relation to climate services an institutional agreement will be explored with the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MoA) to ensure long -term sustainability and management of the resources (equipment, internet 
access, etc), including the training component derived from PICSA (ToTs). A further partnership between the 
MoA and organizations such as the Agricultural Research Institute and the Agricultural Academy will  also be 
promoted to ensure capacitated extension services in the long -term. Agrarian research centers and universities 
shall also be involved in the process of co -production of CS, promoting the transfer of PICSA principles, with the 
aim of ensuring long -term . 
SMS,  and IVR Tree  information  delivery  systems  will be provided  for free  for a 3 years  trial  period  through  TCELL 
or Megaphone  as almost  all populations  have  mobile  phones  and large  majority  of people  in the targeted  districts 
are members of those wireless telephone providers. After the trial period, the alert system will be handed over 
to local stakeholders (CEP, the Hydromet and the Committee of Emergency Situations). During consultations, 
farmers were open to paying a small fee for these services  (annex 2), depending on their usefulness to be tested 
during the trial period. The IVR Tree information has already been tested in the country by a USAID project (M - 
Health).  
Other ICT channels are also being explored e.g. ad hoc radio programs with a str ong component of 
weather/climate advisory to be prepared by Hydromet/public extension office. Some of the radio programs are 
already  active  and run by NGOs  – the added  value  of WFP  would  rely  on the dissemination  of tailored  and locally 
derived  weather/climate  info,  and on live interaction  with  end-users.  WFP  will act as enabler  between  Hydromet , 
extension service and radio program  managers.  
Should some targeted communities – especially the ones located in very remote areas - experience difficult ies in 
using both the SMS/ IVR Tree information delivery systems and radio programs, WFP will also consider 
collaboration with women groups, religious centers, district level information centers to act as catalyst of 
weather/climate information for the who le community.  
 Component 2 : In relation with assets maintenance, under the proposed project there are going to be both 
household and community level assets. For the community assets, two concurrent sustainability paths will be 
implemented. (1) At the bene ficiary level, WFP typically devotes a significant amount of resources to the 
development of community -level management committees. In the case of Tajikistan, these will come in several 
forms from water users associations, to women’s associations, to Dehka n farmers associations depending on 
specific asset and its location. Each one of this entity is trained and becomes responsible for the maintenance of 
the assets after project completion. Both in Tajikistan and other countries where WFP operates, such enti ties 
have been showing positive results in ensuring that assets built or rehabilitated are appropriately maintained 
over time, replicated and access is ensured to every member of the community. (2) At the institutional level, as 
pointed  out in Output  1.6 , adaptation  plans  (including  the assets  creation  interventions  under  Component  2 and 
their maintenance) will be integrated into District Development Plans whereby District Development 
Committees   will   legally  commit  to   ensure   maintenance   of   the  assets  after  project  completion  (through  
community -level  management  committees  under  point  1  above).  Such  commitment  will  be  part  of  the


---
*Page 38*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 77  
 
 
 
Memorandum of Understanding that WFP will sign with the Government to kick start project implementation, 
however a letter of commitment will be provided in annex.  
In terms of monitoring, in Tajikistan, satellite monitoring of the assets built under previous programs revealed 
assets were still functional and had been beneficial to the communities even after significant time from project 
completion . Recently, WFP Tajikistan assessed the impact of its asset building programs through satellite 
imagery. Satellite observati on of rehabilitated irrigation canals shows the positive evolution of vegetation 
coverage (measured through the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index – NDVI) and highlights improvements 
in terms of new cultivated areas appearing following the rehabilitati on of irrigation canals. In summer 2015 and 
2016, new crops were detected along the rehabilitated canal, where there were not before. Furthermore, 2011 
and 2016 were two comparable years in terms of climatic conditions, yet, these assets retained functiona lity in 
spite of a number of shock years after WFP’s intervention.  
 
Combined, all components of the project will create a virtuous cycle where good policy, improved capacity and 
concrete adaptation actions empower communities to adapt to the effects of cli mate change and to reverse 
environmental damage, which, if unchecked, would further increase vulnerability. The knowledge and lessons 
learnt delivered by the project will be captured through regular monitoring and validation workshops, 
documented in access ible reports, shared and discussed with all relevant stakeholders, thus promoting the 
application and replication of valuable lessons in a wider scope (including national plans, projects and policies) 
beyond the project itself.


---
*Page 39*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMA TE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 77  
 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
The project  directly  contributes  to the GCF’s  strategic  results  areas  for adaptation,  namely:  increased  resilience 
of health,  water  and food  security  to the impact  of climate  change  and;  increased  climate  resilience  of livelihoods 
of people, strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and 
development,  increase  in generation  and use of climate  information  in decision  making  as well  as strengthening 
of awareness regarding climate risks adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate  threats.  
Interventions of the project will reach 50,000 individuals (direct beneficiaries) among the estimated 230,000 
individuals  residing  in areas  considered  vulnerable  to the negative  impacts  of climate  change,  and up to 70,000 
indirect beneficiaries, who live in proposed project locations and would therefore have access to climate 
services  (Annex  1.3).  The number  of direct  beneficiaries  (50,000)  is a preliminary  approximation  of the number 
of individuals that will be engaged, among which 50,000 will be a p reliminary target number who will be 
engaged  in adaptation  and asset  creation  activities  while  their  families  will rely  on transfers  to fill the immediate 
household food gaps. These individuals are selected from the total population in the shortlisted districts 
classified as vulnerable to climate change with High food insecurity trends 45 . The number of indirect 
bene ficiaries (70,000) pertains to the total population of the target districts (no t extreme poor) that would 
benefit indirectly from the activities of the project (e.g. climate services in the area may still be accessed by 
house holds not involved in agriculture). From the total direct and indirec t beneficiaries, 50% will be women. 
At the end of the project, it will reach up to 1.5% of the total population46 of the country with a potential for 
scale up and replication up to 17.25% 47 across the country. The Pro ject will also enhance capacity for 
Tajikistan’s long -term adaptation strateg y through the lens of food security by putting in place systems and 
skills which will ensure longevity of the investments after the project. In addition, small assets introduced by 
the project will ensure that liveliho ods are less vulnerable and have increased levels of climate resilience. The 
Project  will support  the systematic  assessment  and region -wide  sharing  of lessons  from  implementing  Project - 
supported  investments  to address  common  climate  challenges.  These  experiences,  offering  concrete  insights  on 
climate -smart technologies and practices, including their costs and results on the ground, can result in 
significant cost -savings from learning -by-doing and centralization of this experience for government agencie s 
overseeing climate -sensitive sectors, academia, civil society, farmers and  communities.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators   
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  N/A  
Lifetime  N/A  
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated  by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased  resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation  only)   
 
Total  120,000 (Direct 50,000; Indirect 70,000)  
52% Women – 62,400 women  
48% Men - 57,600 men  
Percentage 
(%) 1.5% of the total population (0.78%  
women, 0.72% men)  
 
 
 
 
 
45 Review of Climate Risks and Food Security in Tajikistan: National Profile  and Adaptation Priorities, 2016, WFP  
46 According to the World Bank, the total population of Tajikistan as of 2013 was 8.208 million people  
47 Total rural vulnerable population of Tajikistan is 1,416,000.


---
*Page 40*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 77  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  • % Increase  of climate  information  products/services  in decision -making  in climate -sensitive  sectors  
• # of government staff proficient in climate services, disaggregate by  sex 
• # farmers  and women’s  groups  with  better  understanding  and knowledge  regarding  climate  change 
and how to use it for planning and decision making  ; 
• # of community -based institutions and women association  trained.  
• % of targeted people disaggregated by sex rece iving key messages related to health and nutrition 
risks resulting from climate change  
• # greenhouses,  storage  facilities  and renewable  energy  based  systems  established  supporting 
women -led enterprises  
• # natural and physical livelihood assets created and improved for increased community and 
household resilience  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
• Data  will be gathered  at least  on a monthly  basis  by WFP’s  partners  as well  as by WFP,  with  regular  monitoring 
and verification. When partners are responsible for data collection, reporting intervals and formats will be 
included in all field -level agreements, memoranda of understanding and other partnership  agreements.  
• The target for this indicator is 100 % of planned WFP  beneficiaries.  
• All data will be aggregated for WFP global statistics, including over time (month, year) and geographic location 
(village, county, district, state).  
• Participant numbers will be disaggregated by gender: in all types of training, separate figures will be provided 
for women and  men.  
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Theory of change  
The theory of change depicted in Figure 2 illustrates how each of the two components of the proposed  project  
contribute to the long -term objective and how the resulting project impacts can  be sustained, replicated and 
scaled to contribute to climate -resilient development in Tajikistan. Through integration of the specific elements


---
*Page 41*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 77  
 
 
described in the Exit Strategy into the project design and implementation, conditions are created that lead to 
sustained  impacts  and potential  for scale -up of approximately  three  times  the initial  impact.  Figure  2 shows  that 
each of the outputs is made up of a series of activities responding to the identified barriers. Each output leads 
to intermediary outcomes, the longer -term project outcome and ultimately the impact expected from the 
project. Additionally, the project will promote a changing livelihood activities to adapt to future climate impact 
will contribute to changing the behavior of communities comprising farmers (men, women and youth), and 
institutions beyond the lifetime of the  project.  
 
In addition to the abov e, rationale for scale -up includes the project’s cost effectiveness, its alignment with 
national  policies  (including  the forthcoming  National  Adaptation  Strategy  2016 -2030)  as well  as its inclusion  of 
communities throughout the project implementation. The proposed intervention has selected communities in 
the most vulnerable mountainous districts of Tajikistan . The selection criteria for the project sites include 
climate vulnerability especially focusing on areas with high levels of food insecurity and malnu trition (See 
Annex 1.3). Lessons learnt from project implementation will be documented and regular meetings for 
monitoring and validation will be undertaken to revise the implementation strategy if required. There is high 
replication value of the project w ithin Tajikistan and success stories and lessons learnt could be replicated to 
the districts in the western part of the country near the borders with Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. 
The areas  of possible  future  expansion  may  be the ones  identified  as vulnerable  according  to the two studies;  
(1) Review  of Climate  Risks  and Food  Security  in Tajikistan,  and (2) 2015  Integrated  Context  Analysis,  possibly 
the districts classified with medium or high food insecurity profile and low or medium or high level  of climate 
change  vulnerability  under  the Review,  and also  classified  as Integrated  Context  Analysis  Category  2 and 3. The 
total rural population of the areas above is 4,253,000 , and the estimated number of the vulnerable is 
1,416,000 . 
This project will reach 120,000 people (directly 50,000 and indirectly 70,000) in the primarily selected areas, 
and up to a maximum of 230,000 vulnerable people in the rural areas where the project will be implemented. 
Moreover, the trainings, lessons lear nt and climate services capacities incorporated at the national level could 
be replicated across the country, reaching up to 5.2 times the current number of the vulnerable. Furthermore, 
as most districts have a unique set of conditions, these will be taken  into consideration in systems design, so 
that an adapted approach is offered by the project to meet district -specific circumstances. Such an approach 
could also serve as a model for neighboring countries, since the regional geography is similar.  
E.2.2. P otential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 42*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 77  
 
 
Potential for knowledge and learning  
Knowledge generation and sharing is an important part of the project. Lessons that emanate both from the 
adaptation  planning  process  and its actual  field  implementation  will be evaluated,  discussed,  shared  and scaled - 
up throughout the project outputs. The interest in evaluating impact - in physical changes, social and economic 
improvement of the target community is obvious; however of equal importance is the process and system 
through  which  planning,  implementation  and monitoring  is achieved - as this is the model  that  would  be/can  be 
replicated in other districts. Constant knowledge sharing between the c enter, the district, the jamoats (village 
clusters)  and the communities  will ensure  feedback  to policy  and technical  information  flow  to the community. 
Innovative approaches like participatory videos could help share knowledge generated through project 
imp lementation.  
For the CEP, the project will provide a necessary test of the advocated development and adaptation planning 
process.  Where  relevant,  knowledge  generated  through  the implementation  of the project  will be fed into  other 
line ministries  (such  as Ministry  of Agriculture,  Committee  of Environmental  Protection  under  the Government 
of the Republic of Tajikistan, Agency for Forestry, Agency of Land Management and Irrigation under the 
Government of Tajikistan and the Agency on Hydrometeorology under the  Committee for Environment 
Protection)  as studies  and policy  papers  in order  to enable  learning  at the policy  level.  The project  will also  aim 
at including  success  stories  in newspapers  for reaching  a wider  audience.  At community  level,  various  modes  of 
knowledge  dissemination  will be used  including  SMS  (for climate  services  and market  prices),  radio  (for climate 
services, awareness raising on climate change), exchange visits to communities (for influencing change in 
traditional mindset), community field workshops (for livelihood diversification), women’s training (for 
nutrition), and participatory videos amongst others. At national level the output will enable CEP to measure 
progress against National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (and future NAP proc ess) and the commitments 
made  in the Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (including  long/short  term  goals)  through  production  of case 
studies  based  on implementation  modality,  lessons  and successes  in adaptation  practices  and in understanding 
linkages between food security and improved water, land and forestry  management.  
Lessons and case studies will be disseminated within and beyond the project intervention through:  
 
• Existing information sharing (regional) networks and forums (for e.g. PPCR, CAREC, UN DP and World 
Bank  platforms)  
• Exchange workshops and communication of outcomes and experiences to relevant institutions across 
high mountains in Asia (e.g. ICIMOD, and UN  agencies).  
• Public media articles in both national print and electronic  media;  
• Local media news in local  language;  
• Exchange visits from adjacent communities and government decision makers to promote replication of 
best practices and to bring an adaptation focus into local development planning processes, especially 
village development  plans;  
• Awareness raising programs, and trainings on climate change for local communities, NGOs, CBOs, and 
local government  officers  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 43*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 77  
 
 
The project is closely aligned with the SDGs through its focus on building adaptive capacity and resilience —as 
well  as integrating  climate  change  considerations  into  national  policies,  strategies,  and planning.  By supporting 
the national governm ent in building climate resilient livelihoods, the project will help address Goal 2, "End 
Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved Nutrition", as well as Goal 13, “Taking Urgent Action to Fight 
Climate  Change.”  Beyond  these  explicit  food  security  and climate -focused  links,  however,  supporting  the project 
also helps address Goal 5 on “Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment” as well as Goal 17 and related 
targets on “Strengthening the means of implementation and revitalizing the global partnership for s ustainable 
development.”.  
The proposed project takes a multi -pronged approach to creating enabling conditions for continuous 
investments into the development of climate resilient livelihoods. The project's proposed intervention aims at  
(1) strengthening th e potential of local communities in the face of climate change and; (2) addressing capacity 
deficits by improving skills and developing value chains aimed at revitalizing local economies. This will create 
a long lasting enabling environment where local and  regional market demand will be met by the targeted 
communities.  
During initial stakeholder meetings with government agencies and NGOs (Annex 1.6), it was observed that as 
communities rely on a single climate -sensitive source of income (i.e. agriculture), they are not only vulnerable 
to losses arising from climate change, but are also vulnerable to exploitation by middlemen and lack of market 
information. Remittances from men migrating to Russia have, until recent time, added some resilience to the 
families  back in Tajikistan. However, the recent reduction in volume and frequency of remittances, due to 
reduced migration and changing labour regulations in Russia, is negatively i mpacting household food security, 
whereby 80 % of r emittances are used by Tajik households to purchase food.48 
Fostering local markets : The project will aim at exploring new markets, creating farmer groups to increase 
volumes  and link with  them  with  buyers  in local  markets  (such  as the national  school  meal  programs).  This  will 
help create a stable and sustainable demand for commodities produced by these communities. Improved 
climate services will provide timely and actionable information to help rural communities manage their 
resources in a proactive manner and to help mitigate losses (harvests, assets and livestock) caused by climate 
extremes. The project will create a conducive environment for private sector actors such as telecom and radio 
services to reach out to the masses by creating  utility.  
Boosting existing adaptation efforts : In the process of disseminating information on climate change, 
livelihood adaptation as well as disaster preparedness, nongovernmental and community -based organizations 
will benefit  from  strengthened  communication  and outreach  capabilities,  which  will be crucial  to the successful 
and sustainable  implementation  not only  of this project,  but also  broader  climate  change  adaptation  initiatives. 
The project  strategy  also  takes  into  account  the physical  and economic  vulnerability  of families.  This  project  will 
give a particularly strong focus on the development of rural livelihoods, targeting the most disadvantaged and 
vulnerable communities. Outputs from this project will create climate resilien t assets. Activities will include 
management of drainage channels, tree planting, recovery of degraded land, and building light structures like 
greenhouses  and storage  facilities,  which  help  build  adaptive  capacity  of communities.  The project  will also  seek 
to build adaptive capacity of vulnerable groups (through usage of solar panels, wind mills and solar water 
heaters) in remote mountain areas, and to develop alternative livelihoods for women (using solar kilns for 
drying  fruits)  as part  of broader  govern ment  efforts  to address  the underlying  drivers  of extreme  poverty,  food 
insecurity & malnutrition and climate  change.  
 
 
48 WFP VAM Bulletin June 2016 Issue 17 http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286828.pdf


---
*Page 44*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 77  
 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 45*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 77  
 
 
At the policy level, the project will provide an enabling environment for the integration of climate change 
adaptation and risk management considerations from a food security lens through regular policy briefs and 
updates to the Ministry of  Agriculture, as well as the CEP – something which is currently lacking. The interface 
between the policy level and local level institutions will be enhanced, in order to ensure evidence -based policy 
making  that  is informed  by community  needs.  Involvement  of communities  and other  stakeholders  throughout 
the planning and design to the implementation and monitoring stages of the project will further enhance the 
economic  and social  benefits  of the project,  and ensure  that  communities  are empowered  to be in charge  of their 
own protection from climate induced risks. Lessons learnt and best practices from the project will be captured 
and shared with relevant government ministries for adoption. The project will also complement the Nationally 
Determined Contribut ions and the forthcoming National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy  2017 -2030.  
The project  also  incorporates  many  priorities  in climate  change  adaptation  listed  in the country’s  Third  National 
Communication  to the UNFCCC.  In particular,  the recommendations  in the National  Communications  to improve 
water and food security, nutrition, forest improvement activities, awareness raising, diversification and 
increasing use of renewable energy are included in both components of the  project.  
 
Internat ional experience has demonstrated that early engagement of a wide -range of men and women 
stakeholders (from the community through to government authorities) leads to local acceptance, ownership, 
and ultimately  successful  adaptation  interventions.  Overall  synchronization  of the stakeholder  engagement  and 
capacity building activities in this project will be achieved under component 1. Such capacity building at 
multiple levels will ensure that the country is well equipped and motivated to maintain long -term, s ustainable 
adaptation strategies implemented under this  project.  
 
The proposed project intervention will bring about a shift in the planning for and adaptation to climate risks 
faced by poor rural communities in Tajikistan. Actionable information, training  and concrete adaptation 
activities will enable farmers to avoid the damage caused by the inefficient use and wastage of resources, and 
in turn, save national resources for use in response to the negative impacts of climate change such as droughts 
and vari able rainfall.  
 
The proposed project will use a combination of approaches such as provision of extended weather forecasts 
directly to rural communities, livelihood diversification and improving market access, and a more systematic 
approach  to training  and documentation  of lessons  learnt.  Trainings  will also  aim at developing  implementation 
capacity  of Tajikistan  at national  and sub-national  levels.  Lessons  learnt  will be documented  through  the lens  of 
national  development  policies  and strategies.  These  policy  documents  will enable  the government  to better  plan 
rural development interventions, keeping in mind the impact of climate change on the most vulnerable 
populations. The impact from the project in terms of raising awareness amongst communities, poli cy makers, 
local authorities and user associations is expected to have a catalytic effect on the incorporation of approaches 
to climate change into future  planning.  
 
A more  informed  national  apparatus  will enable  better  planning  and prioritization  of resources  and investments 
in climate change adaptation and food security. At the community level, more resilient livelihoods with 
diversified income sources will result in a decrease in the impact of climate shocks and improved accessibility, 
availability,  utilization  and stability  of food.  This  will also  create  appropriate  conditions  for the development  of 
sustainable value chains to take advantage of regional and international market  demands.  
The project will also complement the national social protection  strategy by investing in building light physical 
and natural assets that promote farm productivity and therefore contribute to food and income security for 
target households.


---
*Page 46*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 77  
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The UN has acknowledged the vast threat posed by climate change to food security and nutrition.49 Very often, 
it is the most  marginalized  and vulnerable  members  of societies  who  live in the most  exposed  loca tions.  Hence, 
targeted  measures  implemented  in this project  that  aim to increase  societal  resilience,  reduce  vulnerability,  and 
thereby minimize losses to future climate threats. The project will also bring indirect economic and societal 
benefits as a result of strengthened capacities, awareness, and engagement in  CCA.  
The pro ject is closely aligned with the SDGs through its focus on building adaptive capacity and resilience —as 
well  as integrating  climate  change  considerations  into  national  policies,  strategies,  and planning.  By supporting 
the national government in building cl imate resilient livelihoods, the project will help address Goal 2, "End 
Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved Nutrition", as well as Goal 13, “Taking Urgent Action to Fight 
Climate  Change.”  Beyond  these  explicit  food  security  and climate -focused  links,  however,  supporting  the project 
also helps address Goal 5 on “Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment” as well as Goal 17 and related 
targets on “Strengthening the means of implementation and revitalizing the global partnership for sustainable 
devel opment.”  
The project will deliver both ‘soft’ support in terms of awareness, planning capacity and technology transfer 
and “concrete” adaptation actions that are expected to transform lives of communities at risk. The project will 
engage  vulnerable  communi ties is assets  creation  and asset  rehabilitation  work  and follow  a cash/food  voucher 
transfer  model  in-line with  WFP’s  corporate  guidelines  on cash -based  transfers.  The cash/food  voucher  transfer 
will meet the immediate food needs of the targeted food insecure households. This will, in turn, enable them to 
participate in creation of assets that will contribute to longer term climate resilience . Activities implemented 
through such community participation will help building their climate resilience throug h increased availability 
of livelihood resources and increased production and storage, ensuring income and food security in the longer 
term.  
In the process of disseminating information on climate change, livelihood adaptation as well as disaster 
preparedne ss, nongovernmental and community -based organizations will benefit from strengthened 
communication and outreach capabilities, which will be crucial to the successful and sustainable 
implementation not only of this project, but also broader climate change a daptation initiatives. The project 
strategy also takes into account the physical and economic vulnerability of families. This project will give a 
particularly strong focus on the development of rural livelihoods, targeting the most disadvantaged and 
vulner able communities. Outputs from this pr oject will create climate resilient assets. Activities will include 
management  of drainage  channels,  tree  planting50, recovery  of degraded  land,  and buildin g light  structures  like 
greenhouses  and storage  facilities,  which  help  build adaptive  capacity  of communities.  The project  will also  seek 
to build adaptive capacity of vulnerable groups (through usage of solar panels, solar water heaters and fuel 
efficient cook stoves) in remote mountain areas, and to develop alternative livelihoods for women (using solar 
kilns for drying fruits) as part of broader government efforts to address the underlying drivers of extreme 
poverty, food insecurity & malnutrition and climate  change.  
Gender  inequality  in rural  areas  of Tajikistan  also  mean  that  women  are particularly  disadvantaged.  They  have 
less access to information, training, and credit, and women -headed households lack suffic ient labour power 
(UNICEF,  2011).  The 2014  gender  inequality  index  ranks  Tajikistan  69th of 155  countries.51 A poor  domestic  
economy has seen nearly one in five Tajik citizens – 1.5 million – work abroad, roughly 90 per cent of them in  
 
 
49 http ://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?LangID=E&NewsID=16702  
50 WFP has signed MoU with the Agency for Forestry under the government of the Republic of Tajikistan for the implementation of tree 
planting projects. Between 2010 -2015 WFP has re generated more than 2500 Ha of degraded land through tree planting activities.  
51 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country -notes/TJK.pdf


---
*Page 47*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 77  
 
 
Russia. From January to June 2016, more than 308,600 labour migrants have reportedly left to work in the 
Russian Federation (over 99 % of the total migrants), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. Their 
remittances are the country’s main source of income, and made up 43 per cent of GDP52. Most of the emigrants 
are male. Their left -behind or abandoned wives become de -facto heads of household s, solely responsible for 
generating family income – despite limited access to education, resources, micro -credit, social protection and 
employment,  particularly  in rural  settings.  On the other  hand,  women  carry  out a large  portion  of the farm  work, 
care for their children, and provide household food supplies from vegetable gardens. The growing number and 
severity of disasters triggered by climate change will further increase the burden on women and communities 
that are already vulnerable at present. A study b y ADB showed that despite gender inequalities in agriculture, 
women  have  great  potential  as agents  of change.  Rural  women  are quick  to “grasp  the holistic  nature  of farming 
and offer examples and solutions that they are already engaging in to adapt to climate change.” Rural women 
can also be potential agents for climate change adaptation, as demonstrated by several strategic projects tha t 
have successfully involved  them53. 
The implementation of activities under Component 1&2, will result in additional economic benefits , namely:  
a. Sustainable income generation : In the short -term, skills will be developed (practical and activity based) 
for diversification of livelihood activities and awareness raising on impacts of climate on livelihoods. 
Increased incomes for men and women will result from alternative livelihoods through cultivation of high 
value crops, re forestation/afforestation, herbs and medicinal plants, poultry farms, bee keeping. In the 
medium -term, new value chains will create demand for the commodities produced by rural commodities 
as well as create post -production employment opportunities, such as  packaging, storage and  processing.  
 
b. Reduced  losses  and  wastage : Through  this project,  rural  communities  will be empowered  to make  better 
decisions related to their existing livelihoods, and as a result, will be able to use their inputs (including 
labour  allocation)  more  efficiently.  Climate  services  will enable  farmers  to make  informed  decisions,  better 
manage risk, take advantage of favourable weather conditions, and adapt to change. Improved storage 
facilities will minimize post -harvest losses arising due to extreme weather and temperatures. In addition, 
there will be improved resource allocation for items such as seeds, livestock, and human  labour.  
 
c. Market  access  – The project  will be designed  to create  market  demand  and expand  market  access.  Market 
information provision (Component 2) will help understand market prices, demands and ensure that 
demand driven activities are undertaken and farmer associations are strengthened to enable long term 
sustainability  of incomes  at the right  market  prices.  Market  access  will be expanded  by connecting  farmers 
to public and private buyers (for e.g. the national school meal  programme)  
 
d. Government resources : The conclusions of the updated vulnerability assessment under the Third 
National  Communications  to the UNFCCC  show that  the impact  of the climate  change  on natural  resources, 
economy  and the population  is likely  to be significant  and negative  in case  of extreme  scenarios.  According 
to the assessment of WB (2008), Tajikistan tops the list of 28 countries of Central and Eastern Europe, 
Caucasus and Central Asia on the Climate Risk Index being a sensitive country with low adaptation 
potential. Most of the climate risks are faced by rural vulnerable populations due to the lack of accurate 
information  and early  warning.  If rural  populations  are able  to avoid  losses,  it would  enable  the government 
administration to shift investments from risk recovery to preparedness and  development.  
 
e. Building social cohesion: During all community consultations, caution was expressed by community 
members regarding common community assets especially community owned greenhouses and storages 
facilities. In past projects, an absence of local structures to manage and maintain common assets  have led  
to cases where these structures were taken ov er by the wealthy few including village leaders or local  
 
52 WFP VAM Food Security Monitoring Bulletin June 2016 Issue 17  
http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/gro ups/public/documents/ena/wfp286828.pdf  
53 Tajikistan country gender assessment: Asian Development Bank, 2016.


---
*Page 48*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 77  
 
 
authorities. Such experiences have led to an atmosphere of mistrust that prevents villagers from reaping 
the benefits of common facilities that are cost efficient at large scale. This also prevents donors from 
investing in such assets as they will never be used. Through this project, communities will be grouped and 
made  respons ible for managing  and maintaining  assets.  Social  cohesiveness  will be ensured  through  group 
exercises and awareness campaigns to highlight the common nature of the problems faced. Common 
greenhouses provided under component 2 will pilot this new approach o f trust building and cohesive 
planning which can then be replicated in future  interventions.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how 
the project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary 
country and groups, overall  income level, etc).  
 
Vulnerability: Tajikistan is considered to be one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change due to a 
range of factors. For instance, the agriculture sector relies highly on rainfall during the irrigation season, while 
high  levels  of environmental  degradation,  land  erosion,  deforestation  and deteriorating  social  infrastructure  are 
also  occurring  (UNDP,  2012).  Tajikistan  is judged  to be highly  vulnerable  to risk,  including  food  insecurity  risks 
and climate change risks. Accordin g to Fay and Patel (2008), Tajikistan is the most vulnerable to climate risks 
among all 28 countries in Europe and Central Asia (Figure 3.). (See Annex  1.1)  
Climate change vulnerability in Tajikistan is a product of many common risk drivers. These include the 
remoteness of rural populations, which suffer from high rates of poverty and food insecurity, as well as low 
levels of connectivity by infrastructure and service provision. Health outcomes are poor, further increasing the 
sensitivity of affected popula tions to the health risks present in the aftermath of a natural hazard. Agriculture, 
an underdeveloped sector in the country, forms a significant part of the economy of Tajikistan. However, 
insufficient employment opportunities have created untenable econo mic prospects for many people, driving 
significant levels of external labour migration (mainly to Russia) leaving behind inherently vulnerable 
population cohorts such as women and children.  
Vulnerability of target population: 
Figure 3. Vulnerability to Climate  Change  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Fay and Patel (2008). Taken from World Bank, June 2009, Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and Central Asia


---
*Page 49*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 77  
 
 
 
Adaptive Capacity: Even more than exposure and sensitivity, Tajikistan’s vulnerability is compounded by its 
very low adaptive capacity. Vulnerability to climate change stems from inadequate productive structures, high 
povert y levels and income vulnerability, and numerous institutional constraints, especially in the agricultural 
sector.54 With respect to climate change adaptive capacity, Tajikistan fares poorly (Figure 4.) in the region 
(only s econd to last in the list of Europe and Central Asian countries). See Annex 2 & 8 for coping strategies 
resorted to by vulnerable communities.  
Figure 4. Adaptive Capacity to Climate change  
 
 
Source: Fay and Patel (2008). Taken from World Bank, June 2009, Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and Central Asia  
Exposure to natural disasters: Natural disasters pose significant threats to the wellbeing and livelihoods of 
rural  populations  in Tajikis tan. The country  has already  been  impacted  by recurrent  climate  variability.  Natural 
disaster s that occurred from 1997 to 2009 led to the loss of 933 lives with damages amounting to 1.15 billion 
somoni.55 Natural disasters related to climate change and variability are increasing in numbers and magnitude. 
For the period  of January  – August  2016,  at least  45 natural  disaster  occurred,  resulting  in 18 human  losses  and 
total economic damages of around 135 million Tajik Somonis. Projected climate change and extreme events, 
such as glaciers retreats, floods, droughts and mudslides, pose real threats to food security, water security, 
energy security, human health and the ac hievement of development goals in the country. A description of 
Tajikistan’s climate vulnerability is provided in Annex  1. 
Natural disasters are the most obvious manifestations of biodiversity loss and environmental degradation 
impacts. Because of its geog raphy, Tajikistan is particularly prone to water -related disasters. Steep mountain 
slopes and unstable soil cover contribute to some 50,000 landslides per year. Along with climatic factors, these 
poor and unstable conditions make lands more sensitive to hu man -induced damage. Deforestation, cultivation 
on and overgrazing of slopes, strip mining and road construction exacerbate the instability of mountain areas. 
The spread of natural disasters causing accidents among the population living in the risk zone is continuously 
increasin g in recent  years.  Therefore,  environmentally  and climate  change -induced  migration  becomes  a major 
problem.56 
SENSITIVITY  
 
 
 
 
54 World Bank 2014: Report No. 85597 -TJ Tajikistan: Autonomous adaptation to climate change: economic opportunities and institutional 
constraints for farming households  
55 National Disaster Risk Management Strategy For 2010 – 2015 Republic of Tajikistan  
56 Ecological migration - http://www.osce.org/ru/eea/34464


---
*Page 50*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 77  
 
 
Poverty:  Tajikistan  is the poorest  of the Central  Asian  countries.  In 2015,  remittances  constituted  over  40 % of 
the country’s GDP.57 Poverty rates dropped from 73 % in 2003 to 47 in 2009 using the national poverty line58 
but this is still a mongst the highest in the region. Poverty also disproportionately affects rural population s, 
young persons and women, increasing the vulnerability of these  groups.  
The prevalence of poverty also impacts educational attainment and national skill levels, as a large proportion 
of young people in poverty do not complete secondary schooling. A considerable gender gap is also present in 
Tajikistan, with women experiencing greater barriers to accessing capital than men. Fem ale workers also have 
lower skills than male workers as well, as measured by education level. In particular, only 10 % of female 
workers had tertiary education in 2009, while for men this ratio was twice as high in the same year.59 
Figure 5. Share of population below national poverty line in Central Asia  
 
 
 
Source: Asian Development Bank  
Food  insecurity:  The latest  Tajikistan  National  Health  Survey  of 2012  showed  10 % of children  aged  under  five 
years  are affected  by acute  malnutrition  (wasting)  and 26 % suffer  from  chronic  malnutrition  (stunting).  WFP’s 
Food Security Monitoring System (FSMS) showed that despite improvement in food security in recent years, 
only  24 % of Tajikistan’s  rural  population  is food  secure,  with  the remaining  50 % marginally  food  secure,  22 % 
moderately insecure and 5 % severely food  insecure.  
Poor land management practices and the environmental legacy of the Soviet central planning, combined with a 
multitude of problems such as crumbling infrastructure, onerous external debt, and limited institutional 
capacity,  threaten  the sustainability  of Tajikistan’s  economic,  social  and human  development.  Climate  variability 
and change are likely to pose additional and significant risks to the country ’s economic drivers, human welfare 
and the  environment.  
 
The adverse effects of climate change will be felt most acutely by those parts of the population that are already 
vulnerable owing to gender, youth, age and disability. The poor are most vulnerable to the effects of climate 
change in Tajikistan. A large proportion of the population live just above the poverty line in Tajikistan and 
climatic shocks have the potential to tip a large percentage of population into poverty. Climate change is likely 
to com pound existing food security issues and impact heavily upon those dependent on the agricultural 
economy. The distributional effects are more likely to fall upon those involved in subsistence agriculture or 
pastoralism.  
Vulnerable groups : Outmigration of me n for income opportunities puts the household burden on women. 
Women and children are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, constituting a majority of the  
 
57 IOM Global Migration Trends Factsheet 2015  
58 2009 is the last year for off icial poverty estimates based on microdata. The World Bank currently works closely with the Statistical 
Agency of Tajikistan (TajStat) and the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade to update the poverty numbers using Househo ld 
Budget Survey collected and administered by TajStat  
59 Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity in Tajikistan World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6923 
http://documents.worldbank.or g/curated/en/599901468119377471/pdf/WPS6923.pdf


---
*Page 51*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 77  
 
 
country’s poor. They are often charged with the responsibility to secure water, food and fuel for cooking and 
heating in Tajikistan’s rural  areas and are dependent for their livelihood on natural resources that are also 
threatened by climate change. Despite women’s responsibilities in households and communities and their 
expertise  positions  them  well  to contribute  to livelihood  strategies  adapted  to changing  climatic  conditions,  they 
face social, economic and political barriers that limit their coping  capacity.  
Geography: In Tajikistan, increased water stress due to climate change will be the main influencing factor for 
the agricult ural sector. According to the World Bank, yields could drop by up to 30 % by 2100 in some parts of 
the country.60 Reduction in water availability is projected to occur along with a 30 % increase in irrigat ion 
demand (dri ven by higher temperatures that push up evapotranspiration). Combined with increased heat 
extremes  that  negatively  affect  crop  productivity,  substantial  risks  for irrigated  and rainfed  agricultural  systems 
can be expected. Agricultural yields could drop by as much as 30 % in some parts of Tajikistan by the turn of 
the century. At the same time, given the mountainous nature of the terrain in Tajikistan (93 % of the country is 
covered by mountains), climate change  will increase risk of glacier lake outbursts, mudflows and landslides 
caused by intense rainfall, snowmelt during spring, and extreme floods of meltwater during spells of hot 
weather in the country. All 11 districts targeted by the project are considered highly vulnerable to climate 
change impact according to the Third National Communication of the Government of Tajikistan to the UNFCCC 
(TNC). Through climate analysis, the TNC has identified vulnerability of households and assets to risks 
associated  with  climate  change.  The vulnerability  index  considered  in the TNC  comprises  adaptation  constrains, 
exposure and sensitivity. These areas are also considered to have high levels of food insecurity according to 
WFP’s food security  analysis.  
E.4.2. Financial, eco nomic, social and institutional needs  
Financial needs : In the period between 2013 and 2014, the climate -related development finance of USD 286 
million per year was committed to Tajikistan. While the majority of finance has been committed to mitigation 
projects (61%), a significant size of commitments has been made to multi -focal projects (both mitigation and 
adaptation). The amount of finance for multi -focal projects however is largely attributed to two largescale 
activities: a project on climate -resili ent hydropower rehabilitation, supported by the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the “Rural Development Programme I”, s upported by the 
European Union (EU), which together account for 95% of total f inance for multi -focal segment.61 
 
Tajikistan’s macro -economic environment is significantly challenged. According to the World Bank 62 , the 
economic slowdown in Russia had a major impact on Taj ikistan’s economy in 2014 through the dec line in 
remittances. The U.S. dollar value of remittances decreased by 8.3 % in 2014 from a year earlier, largely due to 
the strong  depreciation  of the Russian  ruble.  This  lowered  domestic  demand  and slowed  the growth  in services, 
the major contributors to economic growth in the past decade. However, with remittances equal to 42.7 % of 
GDP, Tajikistan remains the most remittance -dependent country in the world. Over 90 % of remittanc es 
originate in Russia, making the decline in remittances the most important channel through which Russia’s 
slowdown affects Tajikistan. A further reduction in remittances is likely because of the recession in Russia. In 
addition, the marked weakening of t he Russian currency exerted pressure on the somoni. After two years of 
nominal stability, the somoni depreciated by 11 % in 2014 and another 5.2 % in the first 2.5 months of 2015. 
Given the slowdown in foreign exchange inflows from remittances, the major s ource of foreign exchange and 
the principle  source  of financing  of the current  account  deficit,  the trend  is likely  to continue.  Low  international 
reserves, equivalent to about one month of import of goods and services, limit the room for National Bank of 
Tajikistan (NBT) interventions in the foreign exchange market during sharp exchange rate  movements.  
According to the ADB’s Economic Outlook 2016, Growth decelerated to 6.0% in 2015 from 6.7% a year earlier 
as recession  in the Russian  Federation  and a plunge  in the ruble  caused  remittances,  Tajikistan’s  main  source  of 
 
60 World Bank (2014). Turn Down the Heat: Confronting the New Climate Normal. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
61 OECD, 2016. Financing Climate Action in Tajikistan: Country Study 
https://www.oecd.org/environment/outreach/Tajikistan_Financing_Climate_Action.Nov2016.pdf  
62 World Bank Tajikistan Snapshot 2015 http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Tajikistan -Snapshot.pdf


---
*Page 52*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 77  
 
 
income, to fall by a third. About 135,000 Tajik migrant workers returned home as a result of tightened 
immigration control in the Russian Federation. These returning male migrants go back into the agricultural 
sector which makes their income more volatile as compared to wages in Russia. Ot her constraints on growth 
were lower prices for primary Tajik exports aluminum and cotton, weak private investment, and the 
depreciation of the Tajik somoni by nearly a third.63 
Social  needs:  Although  less than  seven  % of its land  is arable,  around  two thirds  of the population  of Tajikistan 
depends on agriculture for a livelihood – cotton, wheat, nuts, fruit and vegetables. People in Tajikistan are 
resilient when faced with difficulties and adept at taking advantage of good we ather, as the 2009 -cropping 
season showed (and WFPs community consultations showed). But challenges posed by climate change already 
strain their capacity to cop e and may overwhelm it if temperatures continue to rise. Tajikist an, according to a 
recent World Bank report64, is the most vulnerable country in the region to climate change and has the least 
capacity to adapt. Almost t wo thirds of agricultural production is  irrigated but many farmers still have to make 
a precarious living from rain -fed land – which is considerably more vulner able to the impacts of drought and 
climate change. Droughts in 2000 and 2001 cost Tajikistan 5 % of its GDP.65 Continued drought in the spring 
and summer of 2007, as well as a locust invasion further stretched the capa cities of households to successfully 
cope. Against the backdrop of increased foo d insecurity, in early 2008 Tajikistan experienced the worst winter 
in decades with temperatures falling to minus 20 degrees C. The exceptionally cold weather damaged or 
destroyed agricultural assets (crops, orchards and livestock), the aging energy infras tructure collapsed under 
the demand for electrical power to heat urban centres and the cold damaged rural and urban water supply 
systems due to frozen pipes and other structural problems - exacerbating lack of access to safe drinking water. 
There was a 40 % decline in agricultural yields following the harsh winter and  drought.66 
 
Floods, mudflows and avalanches may increase with climate change (for example sudden and rapid glacial 
melts) as they already occur regularly around the spring melt. There was a particularly severe and 
unprecedented  flood  in Hamadoni  district  in Khatlon  in 2005  caused  by heavy  winter  snowfall  followed  by very 
warm weather in June and July, causing excessive snowmelt. Over  11,000 people were evacuated. Lack of 
maintenance  of flood  defenses  and canals  were  also  culpable.  Climate  shocks  compound  cycles  of poverty.  When 
drought, floods or extreme weather conditions destroy crops and livelihoods, communities are thrown further 
into  poverty  – as a result,  many  move  away  to seek  work.  Migration  to Russia  is key to Tajikistan’s  economy  and 
remittances constitute the most important income for many households in Tajikistan. As populations on the 
margin seek work or are forced from their homes by extreme events, the pressure to migrate to Russia is likely 
to increase. As a result of male migration, there are a significant proportion of female -headed households. 
Increasing burdens will be placed on women as many have to work in the co tton fields as well as collect water 
and firewood, grow food and manage the household. More women work in the lowest paid sectors such as 
agriculture.  With  the closure  of state -run kindergartens  and the increasing  reliance  on the consumption  of home 
produc ed foodstuffs, the burden of unpaid work in the home has increased rather than diminished as a result 
of this transition.24 Tajikistan, like other countries in Central Asia, already suffers from serious challenges to 
the health of its environment. Soil fer tility management and nutrient conservation are poor, pesticide and 
fertilizer use pollutes many waterways. . Floods are being exacerbated by rampant deforestation. The nation’s 
forest reserves have dwindled from 1.3 metres cubed per person in 1990 to 0.9 metres cubed per person in 
2003. Deforestation has been put down to cutting trees, stock grazing and an increase in the number of insect 
pests.  The increase  in pests  is associated  with  increased  temperatures.  Acceleration  in deforestation  was  linked 
to the severe  winter  of 2007/2008  and shortages  of electricity,  gas and other  energy  supplies,  forcing  people  to 
cut trees in the mountain  forests.25  
 
 
63 Asian development outlook 2016. Asia’s potential growth.  
64 World Bank, 2009, Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and Central Asia.  
65 World Bank, 2009, Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and Central Asia  
66 Eurasia Insight, July 08, Tajikistan: Almost one -third of the population is in danger of going hungry this winter 
www.eurasianet.org/departments/insight/articles/eav100708.shtml


---
*Page 53*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 77  
 
 
Institutional needs: While a lot has been done to address the challen ge of climate change, more needs to be 
done. The national apparatus has been caught in a shock -recovery -shock cycle leaving little resources to be 
invested in preparation. As climate induced variability in precipitation and temperature will affect climate - 
sensitive livelihoods, a focused approach toward adaptation is much needed. The Tajik government has 
indicated its commitment to climate change adaptation, with policy frameworks implemented at the national 
level  of government.  However,  implementation  is weak  at the provincial  and district  levels.  The government  has 
faced significant challenges in engaging adequately with civil society groups and other key sectoral 
organizations, as well as v ulnerable groups such as women. Th e over reliance of livelihoods on remittance also 
creates additional volatility.67 In addition, whilst there are shortcomings in the content of national policies, the 
most significant gap is that of implementation. Even the N ational Development Strategy acknowledges that 
“Despite an advanced legislative framework for environmental protection, compliance with these legal norms 
is unsatisfactory  due to inadequate  implementation  mechanisms  and insufficient  inter -agency  coordination.  As 
a resu lt, the goal of promoting environmentally sound activities in various sectors of the economy is not being 
met”.68 As a result, local authorities still do not have adequate  knowledge or resources to participate in climate 
chang e adaptation planning activities. The proposed project will address some of Tajikistan’s structural, 
institutional and financial barriers that make it particularly vulner able to climate change and in turn affect the 
local economies that are climate sensitive and have high emigration rates. Through improved climate services, 
rural  livelihoods  dependent  on agriculture  will be made  more  resilient.  Through  income  diversificati on, market 
access and value chain development, the agriculture sector will become more sustainable, informed and 
resilient. By building its knowledge base, the national as well as regional administration will be well -informed, 
coordinated and better prepar ed to respond to climate shocks and plan adaptation activities for the  future.  
E.5. Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Climate change is a well -recognized challenge in Tajikistan and the proposed Project will support and 
strengthen the implementation of a number of national strategies and programs , especially those targeting 
cross -cutting concerns of the food security, water, and agriculture sectors. For the present GCF funding 
proposal, such strategic frameworks include the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy69 2017 -2030, 
priorities  listed  under  the Third  National  Communication  of the Government  of Tajikistan  to the UNFCCC  as well 
as the targets mentioned in the Nationally Determined Contributions of the  country.  
 
The country’s recent Third National Communication outlines some resilience measures that the project 
proposes to support. 70 Table A demonstrates the project alignment with priorities mentioned in the third 
national communica tions of Tajikistan.  
 
Table A: Aligning project outputs with elements of the Third National Communication:  
 Priorities for community level adaptation according to the third national 
communications.  Project outputs in alignment 
with national priorities   
 Protection of crops from natural hydrometeorological events, as well as from pests and diseases;  Output 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.6, 2.3   
 Increased energy -efficiency of stoves and insulation of houses to reduce the negative impact of 
sudden cold periods, as well as a reduction of energy consumption and GHG emissions;  Output 2.3   
 Improved water collection and storage for household needs and for irrigation;  Output 2.2   
 
 
67 A major portion of remittances originate from Russia as most men emigrate for unskilled labour work  
68 NDS 2006: 42  
69 WFP received a draft of the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2017 -2030 during the formulation of the proposal.  
70 See http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/tjknc3_eng.pdf


---
*Page 54*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 77  
 
 
 Increase the level and scale of the use of solar energy (introduction of solar dryers, greenhouses, 
photovoltaic panels);  Output 2.3   
 Enhance opportunities for organic farming;  Output 2.1, 2.3   
 Protection of agro -biodiversity and genetic resources (local cultivars and wild congeners);  Output 2.1, 2.3   
 Agroforestry, measures for the control of soil erosion and improvement of soil fertility;  Output 2.1, 2.3   
 
This  GCF  proposal  has been  officially  endorsed  by the National  Designated  Authority  of Tajikistan,  as evidenced 
by the No -objection letter signed by Mr. Khayrullo Ibodzoda, Chairman of the Committee on Environmental 
Protection. The NDA and his technical advisors have been closely involved in every stage of this project 
development and are in full agreement about the proposed  outputs.  
The proposal is also in alignment with the  Nationally Determined Contribution71 of Tajikistan as follows: 
Table  B: Aligning  project  outputs  with  the scope  of Adaptation  actions  as defined  by the NDC  of the Republic  of 
Tajikistan (conditional on international  support)  
Targets  Priority  Sectors  Measures  of implementation  Project outputs  in 
alignment with NDC  
The reduction  of •  Agriculture irrigation and  water  •  New methods and  planning  for • Output 1.6 and 2.2 
vulnerability  to the  systems   water resources management;  
impacts  of climate  •  Transport  and housing  •  Ensuring food  security  and • Output 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 2.1, 
change by  means  of  infrastructures   improving wellbeing  of the  2.2, 2.3,  2.4 
full scale integration  •  Resilience  to the  population;  
of climate resilience   hydrometeorological  hazards  •  Active role of women  and civil  • Output 1.4, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 
and adaptation  •  Disaster  risk reduction   society on the issues of climate  
measures  into  the •  Biodiversity  and ecosystem  change and disaster risk reduction;  
planning  and  protection  •  Dissemination of  knowledge  and • Output 1.1, 1.4, 1.5, 2.4 
development  of the •  Glaciers and water  resources   experience on climate change at  
green  infrastructure  management  various  levels.  
• Public health including  maternity 
and childhood protection in the 
context of climate warming  
Sources: GoT (2015) Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN F ramework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Executing entity and working partners  
The project will be executed by the Committee for Environmental Protection under the Government of the 
Republic  of Tajikistan  (CEP).  The national  executing  entity  has deep  understanding  of climate  change  issues  and 
of the context in which climate investments will be implemented (e.g., relevant sector development strategies, 
constraints, stakeholders, etc.).  In addition the CEP has solid operational experience with regards to the 
implementation  of internationally -funded  projects,  which  they  have  been  managing  for several  years  (including 
day to day administration, fiduciary oversight, safeguards management, a nd reporting). Institutional 
assessments have been conducted, with findings and recommendations helping to ensure that readiness 
requirements for implementation be met in a timely manner (e.g., skills, systems, and reporting mechanisms 
are in place to comp ly with WFP’s requirements in a timely manner). Working partners for this project will 
include  the Ministry  of Agriculture  (MoA),  Committee  of Emergency  Situations  and Civil  Defense  (CoES),  Agency 
for Hydrometeorology (Hydromet), Agency of Land reclamation  and irrigation and the Agency of  Forestry.  
 
The CEP  has established  an ‘Implementation  Group’  to coordinate  implementation  of the climate  adaptation  and 
environmental protection projects funded by the multilateral donor organizations. For instance, The Gr oup, 
composed by qualified professionals are currently executing Environmental Land Management and  Rural  
 
71 http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Tajikistan/1/INDC -TJK%20final%20ENG.pdf


---
*Page 55*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 77  
 
 
Livelihoods  project  financed  by the World  Bank.  Furthermore,  the State  Administration  for Hydrometeorology, 
is also currently implementing Modernization of Hydrometeorology Services financed by the World Bank. The 
Project cost 13 Million USD, and another Implementation Group is established under Hydromet to execute the 
project. WFP’s propo sed GCF project component 1 will build upon this project to disseminate climate 
information to farmers. There are a number of other projects coordinated by various CEP institutes or through 
CEP itself. However the ELMARL and CAMP4ASB are the only projects executed by CEP directly through its 
Implementation Group. The CEP has established the system where the capacity of the Implementation Group 
can be strengthened based on the scale and number of the projects to be implemented. They work close with 
multilate ral institutions like the ADB, GIZ, EBRD  etc. 
 
The State Administration on Hydrometeorology of the Committee for Environmental Protection under the 
government of the Republic of Tajikistan is the national institution responsible for dealing with climate ch ange 
issues  in Tajikistan.  Its director  is the national  focal  point  of the UNFCCC.  Hydromet  leads  the preparation  of the 
national  communications  to the UNFCCC,  in coordination  with  key ministries  and agencies,  and also  houses  the 
Climate Change Center, which handles climate -related research and reporting related to adaptation and 
mitigation.  
 
The Committee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense under the government of the Republic of 
Tajikistan is directly authorized and responsible for management of emergency situations due to natural and 
technogenic disasters.  
 
The Agency for Forestry under the government of the Republic of Tajikistan (FA) is responsible for 
management and protection of forests in Tajikistan. FA oversees compliancy with Forest Legisl ation in 
Tajikistan,  as well  as development  and implementation  of scientific  and technical  policies  in the field  of forestry. 
The FA has the capacity to deploy forestry experts throughout the country to support project implementation 
activities where neede d. The FA will also guide the community for selection of the most appropriate locations 
for activities, advice on the tree species to be planted considering local environment and changing climate and 
will train  beneficiaries  to develop  effective  techniques  on planting  and maintaining  the trees.  In addition,  the FA 
will provide long -term leasing of land for newly created forests/orchards to the selected  beneficiaries.  
 
The Ministry of Agriculture is the central executive authority, which is responsible for elaboration and 
implementation of the common national agricultural policy. The Ministry fulfills the following tasks: i) 
elaborates and implements the common national agricultural policy, including in the area of crop growing, 
livestock breeding and other sectors of agricultural production; ii) develops programs and forecasts of 
production  to ensure  effective  use of the national  agricultural  capacities;  iii) organizes  monitoring  of production 
and profitability of agricultural sector and identifies developme nt trends; iv) renders support to agricultural 
producers, prepares recommendations for the improvement of agricultural production and farming operation 
effectiveness;  v) assesses  and predicts  the state  of agricultural  sector,  provides  necessary  information  for public 
and local authorities, institutions, enterprises and civil  society.  
 
The Agency for Land Reclamation and Irrigation is the central executive authority in the area of land 
reclamation  and irrigation.  It fulfills  the functions  related  to elaborat ion of the common  national  policy  and legal 
regulation in reclamation of land, use and conservation of water facilities and water resources. The Agency has 
the following  responsibilities:  
i) keep records and monitor water resources, provide services to wat er users on the basis of contracts; ii) keep 
records and monitor wastewater, ensure their disposal; iii) control irrigation, drainage and other structures 
that are under responsibility of the Agency, according to the general plan of water distribution adop ted by its 
departments; iv) repair irrigation and drainage structures and, if necessary, repair other water management 
facilities that are under responsibility of the Agency at the expense of centralized or investment funds; v) 
identify  needs  for rehabilit ation  or improvement  of flow  capacity  in irrigation  structures,  drains  and other  water  
management facilities that are on the books of the Agency; vi) develop Cadaster of land conditions, control


---
*Page 56*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55  OF 77  
 
 
fulfillment of the Government’s decrees for land improvement at the expense of available funds, supervise and 
prevent  deterioration  of land;  vii) analyze  and monitor  bank -protection  activities  carried  out along  rivulets  and 
rivers; viii) develop a  plan for repair, rehabilitation and conservation of dams; ix) develop an annual plan for 
new land  development.  
 
The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade is responsible for overseeing the effective 
implementation of socioeconomic development prioriti es for Tajikistan, and has a role in developing 
sustainable strategies. It is also a co -executive body of the National Action Plan for Climate Change Mitigation 
and Adaptation.  
 
WFP in Tajikistan  
WFP has been present in Tajikistan since 1993, when it launched an emergency operation to provide life -saving 
assistance during the Civil War. WFP’s strategy has shifted from crisis assistance in Tajikistan to increasingly 
focusing on three longer -term objectives: (i) Policy advocacy with the Government and pa rtners to ensure food 
security and nutrition are prioritized in national strategies, policies and programmes; (ii) Support to the 
Government and partners to enhance their capacity to implement and monitor sustainable hunger solutions, 
through social safety  nets for the most vulnerable and (iii) Direct support to communities to respond to crises 
and to improve their longer -term food security and resilience to shocks.  
 
WFP’s priorities include long -term development, resilience and capacity building of local i nstitutions. WFP 
operations focus on DRR and climate change adaptation, school meals, conditional transfers for assets creation, 
nutrition and support to tuberculosis patients and their families. Globally, WFP has comprehensive policies, 
strategies and too ls to support nations to ensure sustainable food security, nutrition, disaster risk reduction, 
more  specifically  also  climate  change  adaptation  and resilience.  WFP  actively  contributes  to both  the formulation 
and implementation of global policies, strategi es and guidelines. This project will be supported by WFP experts 
from its Regional Bureau in Cairo as well as its Headquarters in  Rome.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
National Level Consultations for concept note development  
WFP  has worked  in close  coordination  with  the NDA  and the Committee  of Environmental  Protection  (project’s 
national executing entity) since day one of developing the concept note. Once the concept note was developed, 
the NDA and his technical team had a chance to review it and provide their inputs and suggestions to align the 
project with the national strategy as well as complement existing projects in the  region.  
 
During the concept note development, extensive consultations were held at the national level (See Annex 1.6 
for detailed reports) with the following key stakeholders between July and August, 2016: Agency of Land 
Management and Irrigation, Institute of Water Problems, Hydropower and Ecology, Committee of Emergency 
Situations and Civil Defence, GIZ, Committee for Environmental Protection, Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources, EBRD, Agency of Forestry, Welthungerhilfe Tajikistan, Ministry of Health and Social Protection, 
Agency of Hydrometeorology and Centre of Climat e Change Research and Ozone Layer, Meeting with Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Oxfam, Asian Development Bank (ADB), Meeting with Centre of Climate Change 
Research and Ozone Layer, PPCR Secretariat, FOCUS (AKDN)  
 
Full proposal development: Activities per taining to climate services under component one (Output 1.1 -1.4) 
were developed through close coordination with the National Hydromet Service in Dushanbe. A capacity 
assessment exercise was conducted by a WFP climate services specialist to identify the key  capacity gaps and 
needs at the national level and the type of climate data and inventory available through the recent 
modernisation of the hydromet. Activities on community capacity and resilience building (Output 1.6 – 2.4) 
were formulated based on in de pth consultation with communities, local authorities as well as NGOs in 
Tajikistan.


---
*Page 57*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 77  
 
 
National Capacities : A capacity needs assessment was conducted at the Tajikistan Agency of 
Hydrometeor ology in December, 2016 to inform development of a project proposal on building climate 
resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities in the Republic of Tajikistan with a component on 
improving  climate  services  to inform  appropriate  climate  risk management  decisions  and practice  in agriculture 
and food security, and disaster risk reduction. The goal of the assessment was to identify the: (i) Tajikistan 
Agency of Hydrometeorology (Hydromet) capacity needs for improved climate services, and (ii) user s’ 
(potential) needs for climate services, and recommend activities that needs to be implemented to address the 
gaps to support generation, delivery and adequate use of climate services by end -users for climate -risk 
management decisions in agriculture and food security to reduce climate -related loses that undermine food 
security. The assessment was carried out by climate services experts from WFP and based on interviews and 
discussions with the Hydromet; the climate service users from government sectors in charge of agriculture, 
water, environment and disaster management; and international non -governmental and humanitarian 
organizations. The list of stakeholders who participated in the assessment is provided in (See Annex  3). 
 
Market needs : To understand the  local market environment for sale of agricultural produce, experts from 
WFP’s Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping team conducted three separate missions between November and 
December, 2016 in Khatlon & Faziobod, Rasht as well as GBAO. Following the semi -structured interview 
methods, the experts interviewed local authorities, head of markets, retailers, wholesalers, and truck and 
minivan owners. The missions were tasked to assess the main challenges encountered by farmers and identify 
the main gaps to fill t o connect farmers to markets. The main question that the assessment aimed at answering 
was  if the markets  in the targeted  areas  (mostly  mountainous  areas  subject  to supply  chain  disruption  linked  to 
natural disasters) were functional and could absorb an in creased demand and respond to market shocks due, 
among other, to natural hazards. It also aimed at understanding possible secondary impacts of the injection of 
cash in the economy. At the same time the study aimed to understand the main constrains to conne ct farmers 
to markets and improve their wellbeing. (See Annex 6) for detailed findings of the  report.  
 
Community needs : To assess the needs of the communities as part of Component 1 and 2, three separate 
consultations were held by WFP at the regional level s where members of dehkan farms, representatives of 
villages, pastoralists, local authorities, women’s associations, CBOs as well as women’s associations, 
representative from district hukumats and local administration authorities (including Min. of Agricul ture, 
Hydromet, Committee of Environmental Protection, Agency of Forestry) were invited. Structured as well as 
unstructured discussions were done to identify the needs and challenges faced by the communities (See Annex 
2 & 8). These consultations were held  in 3 separate sessions with a gender balance, where possible. To 
understand livelihood types, activity profiles and household challenges faced due to the impact of climate 
change, exercises were also gender segregated.  
 
Addressing climate change risks was  explicitly stated as a priority by all the participants, enhancing the 
potential for their collaboration and interest in this project. As ownership at various levels is essential for the 
appropriation and sustainability of approaches and activities, this project, through its participatory, cultural 
and gender approaches will base all planning and implementation on the results of these considerations. A 
strong emphasis was laid on inclusion of youth in training and inclusion in adaptation activities to ensu re the 
future generation is informed and responsible. Women expressed their desire to generate incomes through 
cottage industries like drying fruits and the challenges faces due to lack of adequate energy supplies. The 
inability to plan and manage availabl e resources due to lack of climate and market information was also 
identified as a major challenge affecting all livelihoods.  
 
Communities also mentioned the need for more robust storage capacities, greenhouses and rainwater 
harvesting  tanks  as well  as need for better  inputs.  The capacity  of community -based  organizations  to adequately 
address  socio -economic  and environmental  risks  associated  with  climate  variability  and change  was  identified. 
Thus,  communities  in the targeted  areas  have  identified  climate  change  risk reduction  as a priority  which  will 
help them strengthen their livelihoods by not only reducing economic hardships on families and vulnerable


---
*Page 58*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 77  
 
 
groups, protecting the environment by not chopping trees, but also avoid negative strategies like sale of 
productive assets, and outmigration. Through this project, a concerted process with communities will enable 
them  to reinforce  their  strong  collaborative  culture  to address  the problems  related  to climate  change  that  they 
have collectively identified. Also, there is a recognition that their subsistence and cultural models are closely 
associated  with  how  they  address  the risks  that  affect  nature  and the resources  provided.  Thus , commitment  to 
and ownership of the project from the communities is a low  risk.  
 
WFP continues to constantly consult with the relevant stakeholders including the NDA, the Hydromet, NGOs as 
well as regional authorities and community members.  
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
For this project 70% of the project budget will be spent on adaptation activities, 21% on capacity building, and 
3% on project  management  costs  to support  the project  execution.  Co-funding  represents  7% of the total  budget.  
 
The proposed project will be implemented through existing structures at district and jamoat levels whilst 
creating  user  groups  to maintain  project  sustainability  in the long  run,  thus  saving  costs  in project  mobilization 
and inception.  Another  factor  contributing  to efficiency  and cost -effectiveness  is that  potential  beneficiaries  and 
communities will be screened and prioritized against speci fic pre -determined selection criteria. Further, the 
project will invest in climate change adaptation interventions that fall into nationally prioritized areas as 
described  by  various  regulations  enlisted  under section  E5. These filters  will  ensure  that  investments  are 
targeted appropriately.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
The project is an adaptation intervention and requests full project funding through a grant.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
The proposed  project  does  not envisage  any large -scale  investments  in infrastructural  objects  and technologies. 
Rather, WFP will develop and implement a mix of approaches and tools to be applied at the micro -scale in 
various locations within project areas  to strengthen the adaptive capacity of communities, taking into 
consideration local contexts. During the first year, the project will start with sensitization of the farmers/end 
users and during the second year the project will produce, deliver and suppor t the use of the weather forecast 
by farmers/end users. During these first two years of project, end users will be also sensitized about fee -based 
subscription  and have  the time  and possibility  to test the advantages  of receiving  and using  specialized  weat her 
forecasts. Starting from the third year, farmers/end users will subscribe for fee -based specialized weather 
services, which will be mutually agreed between Hydromet and  subscribers.


---
*Page 59*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 77  
 
 
As this is a project -based grant intervention, there will be no revenue generated for the donor nor for the 
accredited entity. However, adaptation interventions through this project will enable the target population to 
make better decisions based on climat e information, diversify their livelihoods and income sources as well as 
strengthen government capacities in the long run. The project will complement existing measures while 
implementing replicable practices for future scale up.  
 
In addition, through the project activities, the beneficiaries will enjoy significant cost savings. For example, 
interventions  such  as climate  services  under  Component  1 and tree  planting,  canal  cleaning  and storages  under 
Component 2 will ensure that beneficiaries are prepared we ll in advance and do not suffer negatively from 
climate  shocks.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
This  project  will leverage  practices  and learnings  of relevant  programs  in Tajikistan  including  the World  Bank’s 
Environmental Land Management And Rural Livelihoods Project, the Climate Adaptation and Mitigation 
Program  for the Aral  Sea Basin  and the Pilot  Program  for Climate  Resilience  (PPCR).  Implementation  of outputs 
under component 1 pertaining to climate services will be carried out in partnership with UK Met Office and 
capacity  building  at the Hydromet  will be conducted  in partnership  with  experts  from  the University  of Reading. 
Best practices will also be adopted as per the standard of the WMO specifically to conduct data rescue under 
component  1. The standards  adhered  to by these  academic  and research  based  organizations  are internationally 
recognized and reputed as leading practice to the standard of the IPCC. It should be noted that a number of 
leading authors from the University of Reading also  contributed to the  AR5.  
 
The end-user  engagement  elements  of component  1 of the project  will use the Participatory  Integrated  Climate 
Services for Agriculture (PICSA) approach. This decision -driven and science -informed approach has been used 
by several le ading organizations such as CCAFS, SEI, the University of Reading as well as WFP as a last mile 
approach to reach the end user and seek their feedback (Annex  10).  
 
Outputs under component 2 will focus on livelihood diversification and income generation, access to drinking 
water, renewables and post -harvest storage facilities for households and communities as well as soil 
conservation  on slopes  and riverbanks  through  tree  planting.  WFP  will leverage  its proven  solutions  (including 
the EbA approach) in building adaptive capacity in Tajikistan and will collaborate with the Committee of 
Emergency Services as well as draw upon experience of regional NGOs such as FOCUS who have had several 
successes in their projects across the  country.  
 
One of the main bene fits of this project will be that capacity building, awareness generation and community 
asset creation will be backed up by science, technology and innovation. Consequently, the investments in this 
project will not only be replicated in other villages in t he selected oblasts, but will also catalyze further 
investments  that  will help  scale  up this nationwide  approach.  Lessons  learned  from  the GCF  project  will provide 
the basis for detailed documentation of the impacts of livelihood diversification on communi ty resilience with 
specific  reference  to benefits  provided  to women  and youth.  These  will be shared  nationally,  through  awareness 
campaigns as well as internationally to contribute to current knowledge on building climate  resilience.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency  and effectiveness indicators  
 Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 60*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 77  
 
 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Due to the public good nature of the Project’s outputs, a financial analysis of the overall project is not deemed 
pertinent. Component 1 of the project builds capacity and social behavioral change whilst Component 2 
improves  resilience  of communities  which  will prevent  losses  and damages  due to the impact  of climate  change. 
However, due to the activities of component 1 and 2, communities and authorities will save significant costs 
which would otherwise be incurred due to climate induced  disasters.  
The small -scale nature and varied types of activities result in economic benefits that are multi -dimensional and 
multi -sectoral. Fur ther analysis along sectoral lines will be necessary to detail specific economic and financial 
parameters. Benefits from activities under component 1 and 2, are described below:  
Capacity  strengthening  under  component  1: The use of weather  and seasonal  clim ate information  by farmers, 
and those undertaking crop and livestock management activities, will lead to better decisions related to crop 
and other  activities,  including  planting,  irrigation,  harvesting,  production  of fodder  and protection  of plants  and 
animals, and minimize losses. Recent studies shows a cost -benefit ratio of 4:1 to 36:172, highlighting a how 
climate services that support more effective decision -making is one of the most co st-efficient adaptation 
measures  available.  
Adaptation activities under component 2 : This benefit -cost analysis was carried out for potential concrete 
adaptation measures considered under component 2. The an alysis carried out (Annex 4.3) reports on direct 
benefits through the project activities. Direct benefits are calculated as incomes generated by the proposed 
activities, or as cost savings in terms of assets and products (agricultural commodities). Sources  of data include 
national databases and surveys from different government entities and business organizations, as well as 
fieldwork exercises and surveys performed in November and December of 2016.  
Indirect long term benefits including impact of improved h ealth and nutrition as well as losses avoided from 
disasters  are excluded  as baseline  numbers  were  only  available  nationally  across  all 58 districts.  Nevertheless,  
these are additional benefits which could be quantified.  The Benefit -cost analysis (Annex 4.3) showed that the  
 
72 Clements and Ray 2013, Value of climate services across economic and public sectors, report to USAID  (a) Total project financing  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  overtime  
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a /  c) 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b /  c) US$   
US$    
   tCO 2eq 
US$ _______ /  tCO 2eq 
US$ _______ / tCO 2eq 
GCF  
core 
indicators  Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above.  
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable 
context.  
N/A 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
N/A 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/pr ogramme)


---
*Page 61*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 77  
 
 
component 2 activities will have a cumulative net flow of U SD 2.3 million in the fifth year (i.e. one year after the 
project closure) and up to USD 9.4 million after the end of the eighth year. Assuming a discount rate of 6%, the 
project has a positive net present value across the projected 8 year period, while th e benefit -cost ratio is 
estimated at of 3.54 . 
Sensitivity analysis : In Annex 4, a sensitivity analysis was performed (tabs 4.3.1 and 4.3.2.), whereby benefits 
have been increased and decreased by 10%. The benefit cost ratio increases from 3.54 to 3.90 for +10% 
scenario, or decreases to 3.19 for -10% scenario, but remains above 1  for both scenarios.  
The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan requests that 100% of the proposed GCF project is committed in 
the form  of grant  finance  as the country’s  macro -economic  environment  is significantly  challenged.  According  to 
the World  Bank  , the economic  slowdown  in Russia  had a major  impact  on Tajikistan’s  economy  in 2014  through 
the decline in remittances. The U.S. dollar value of remittances decreased by 8.3 % in 2014 from a year earlier, 
largely  due to the strong  depreciation  of the Russian  ruble.  Given  the slowdown  in foreign  exchange  inflows  from 
remittances, the major source of foreign exchange and the principle source of financing of the current account 
deficit, the trend is likely to  continue.  
In the period between 2013 and 2014, climate -related development finance of USD 286 million per year was 
committed to Tajikistan. While the majority of finance has been committed to mitigation projects (61%), a 
significant size of commitments has been made to multi -focal projects (both mitigation and adaptation). The 
amount  of finance  for multi -focal  projects  however  is largely  attributed  to two largescale  activities:  a project  on 
climate -resilient hydropower rehabilitation, supported by the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Developme nt (EBRD),  and the “Rural  Development  Programme  I”, supported  by the European  Union  (EU),  which 
together account for 95% of total finance for multi -focal  segment.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
The two components of this project have been developed through elaborate consultation with all stakeholders 
including communities, local authorities, NGOs as well as user associations. The adaptation solutions proposed 
through this project include a combination of capacity building and awareness raising activities whi ch will 
include best practices in information gathering, training and planning.  
 
Activities in component 1 that use technological applications include the use of mobile phone technology to 
distribute and receive warnings and advisories. This is a low cost technology that enhances the reach of these 
services and is available to a large number of households. However, it is recognized that costs can become 
significant if a large number of users are engaged and hence the project will envisage targeting househol ds on 
the basis of need and level of dependence on climate sensitive livelihood. Alternative traditional means of 
engagement through radio, TV and community centres will also be explored. In an effort to reduce 
communication  costs,  telecommunication  compan ies (Megafone  and T-Cell)  have  already  been  approached  and 
concrete  discussions  to test the feasibility  of public -private  partnerships  will be planned  during  implementation. 
The same will be done with radio and television stations based on viewership and a udience  spread.  
 
Activities in component 2 will include certain technologies such as solar panels for domestic power generation 
and providing household level heating (including heating, storage and drying facilities for women -led SMEs) as 
well  as greenhous es (at community  level)  for supporting  production  during  extreme  weather  conditions.  Certain 
areas may prefer installation of household level windmills in lieu of solar citing the abundance of wind in the 
region.  These  solutions  have  been  shortlisted  after  seeing  their  effectiveness  in other  projects  across  Tajikistan.  
 
Procurement of all material for Components 1 and 2 carried out by WFP, will be done in conformance with 
government standards as well as in consultation with relevant government agencies spec ifically the Agency of 
Standardization, Metrology, Certification and Trade Inspection under the Government of Republic of Tajikistan  
which is a member of the ISO.


---
*Page 62*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 77  
 
 
In preparation  of the funding  proposal,  the draft  was  submitted  to the Executing  Entity  and supporting  partners 
in order to obtain a technical evaluation from government experts in Agency of Hydromet, Ministry of 
Agriculture as well as the CEP. The funding proposal was carefully evaluated by all relevant sector  experts.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Compliance of project using the eight performance standards of the GCF E&S safeguards  
The project has been designed using knowledge  of best practices from other pertinent projects and through 
extensive consultations with the targeted communities and stakeholders, all relevant authorities, and with 
expert input from consultants who know the area and the communities. These consultations  took place in 
November  2016  in Gharm,  Kurgan  Tube  and Khorog  to involve  local  communities  and project  participants  in the 
project design and assess local impacts of climate change on livelihoods in project areas. Participants identified 
key climatic risks  affecting their communities and recommended actions to address specific adaptation needs 
which has been provided the basis for the project. The consultations were facilitated in Tajik language and 
delivered  by Tajik  nationals  with  women  facilitating  gender  segregated  exercise,  together  with  officials  from  the 
Committee of Environment Protection, the Executing Entity. Community consultations complement a national 
stakeholder level consultation which was held in August 2016. During project implementatio n, in -depth 
consultation with every project community in the 11 target districts will be undertaken to fine tune and ensure 
safeguards in project implementation based on the local conditions – which may vary from one village to 
another.  
The adaptation meas ures proposed by the project to adapt to climate change are small -scale, culturally - 
appropriate  activities  selected  by the communities  and have  virtually  no negative  environmental  impact.  In fact, 
due to the inclusive approaches undertaken in this project , together with the type of asset creation activities, 
there will be a positive environmental and social impact. After screening the project using the GCF’s 8 core 
Environment and Social Safeguard standards, this proposal has been categorized as a Category  “C” project.  
 
Resource  efficiency  and pollution  prevention  – The project  activities  will not generate  pollution  and will promote 
sustainable use of natural resources including water and energy. Activities in Component 2 will promote tree 
planting and use of renewables resulting in a net positive impact on the  environment.  
Community  health,  safety  and security  – Activities  of the project  will lead  to improved  food  security  and nutrition 
levels amongst the target population. There will be no safety and security risks introduced by the project. The 
project will mobilize local populations for any minor asset creation activities as well as tree planting exercises. 
Through climate services and skills development, climate risks and adaptation planning will be  embedded in 
district level plans and hence overall safety of populations will  increase.  
Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources – The project activities will 
conserve local biodiversity and improve ecosystem servic es in the target areas. Introduction of new seeds, 
saplings and trees will be done in consultation with the relevant ministries to ensure that invasive species are 
not introduced. Adaptation activities in component 1 and 2 will indeed contribute to creatin g enabling 
environments, new market access, income generation as well as improved knowledge and awareness of target 
communities, thereby promoting overall economic and social development.  
Cultural  heritage  – Through  activities  of this project,  cultural  heritage  will be untouched.  There  will be no impact 
on critical cultural heritage that is essential to the identity and/or cultural, ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of 
Indigenous Peoples lives. Certain activities in component 2 will aim at building trust amongst community 
members and strengthening a unified approach to addressing climate  risks.  
Land acquisition & involuntary resettlement – there will be no resettlement of people under the project. The 
adaptation  actions  will target  the most  vulnerable  rain -fed agriculture  and rehabilitate  the most  degraded  forest


---
*Page 63*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 77  
 
 
beyond the community settlement areas. To the contrary, the project objective is to enable communities to 
continue to live sustainable lives in harmony with nature in the same place where their ancestors lived.  
Labour and working conditions – using cash transfers under Component 2, beneficiaries will have opportunities 
to produce small scale agricultural and rural infrastructure assets that benefit their communities and halt or 
reverse land degradation. The timing to carry out asset works will be identified through consultations, and 
participation of poor families will be ensured through conditional cash -based trans fer mechanisms. The asset 
creation activities will be executed in compliance with government regulations. In May 2016, WFP has 
conducted consultations with relevant government agencies, UN and NGO partners involved in infrastructure 
building projects and r eviewed and updated work norms for asset creation considering gender and protection 
aspects. All participants will be above 18 years and will have access to first aid facilities. In addition, a thorough 
community  participatory  process  will be carried  out inclusively  to gain  a common  understanding  and agreement 
among the people, and to ensure that the adaptation actions (under Component 2) will not impede access to 
basic health services, clean water and sanitation, energy, education, housing, safe and decent  working 
conditions, and land rights. All contractual labour activities will comply with national employment and labour 
laws.  
Gender Equity and Women’s Empowerment – the project will take into account issues / challenges related to 
gender  relations  to ensu re that  the design  of the activities  is gender  sensitive.  Activities  should,  at the very  least, 
not have  a negative  effect  on gender  relations  and,  if feasible,  contribute  to improved  gender  equity.  For example, 
in farmer  communities  in Tajikistan,  women  often  actively  participate  in agricultural  activities,  while  also  seeing 
to household chores and raising children. This has implications on the availability of women to participate in 
activities. However, because they play a key role in achieving food secu rity, in terms of food availability, access 
and utilization and nutrition security, their active participation is crucial. Therefore activities will be designed 
in such  a way  that  women  participate  in and take  the lead  in planning,  designing  and implementing  projects  and 
ensuring that they make full use of the means, knowledge and skills that allow them to fulfil their  potential.  
Indigenous people and vulnerable communities – the project will address the development priorities for 
livelihoods, tar geting the disadvantaged and most vulnerable communities. WFP’s Vulnerability Analysis and 
Mapping (VAM) examined geographical variation of food insecurity and vulnerability at sub -national levels to 
support evidence -based geographical targeting and progra mme designing. WFP will conduct planning 
workshops  with  the District  Development  Committee  in the districts  selected  under  this project  to address  needs 
of the most vulnerable groups in a culturally appropriate manner. There will be no adverse impacts on h uman 
rights,  dignity  and aspirations  of people.  The project  will not only  respect  but reinforce  human  rights,  especially 
those  related  to ensuring  access  and equity,  prioritization  of marginalized  and vulnerable  groups,  gender  equity 
and women’s empowerment, core labour rights and protection of indigenous  people.  
Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts – Community assets developed 
through this project will be small -scale and have negligible environment and social im pacts. Specific 
environmental impact assessments (EIA) are not generally required for community -based and small scale 
projects. However, the following table includes a selection of asset creation activities and how any negative 
impact will be mitigated.  
Component 1 is comprised of studies, workshops, knowledge sharing sessions, fairs, and training sessions on 
Climate,  EWS,  and a compilation  of best  practices.  Capacity  building,  knowledge  and awareness  have  essentially 
zero environmental impact. Component 2 “Resilience building at household and community level through 
diversification  of livelihoods  and establishment  of value  chains  for market  access”  has some  concrete  adaptation 
measures under outputs 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 that are evaluated for potential impact as a rationale for their 
categorization ranking. The screening against GCF ESS standard on specific subcomponents will be carried out 
by WFP and partners by the end of the first year of the  project.  
Policies and strategies guiding project design and implem entation


---
*Page 64*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 77  
 
 
Tajikistan has developed a series of environment -related strategies which have guided the design and will be 
adhered to throughout the project implementation. Critical ones relevant to the project include the social 
protection and environmental protection in the context of mitigation and adaptation to climate change which 
include priorities identified by the National Development Strategy for 2016 -2030. The Concept of Transiti on to 
Sustainable Development, 2007 –2030 defines implementation mechanisms for sustainable development with 
economic, environmental, and social solutions. State Environmental Program, 2009 –2019 is a major national 
long -term environmental program detailing measures on environmental protection. The National Strategy on 
Disaster Risk Management includes five components aimed at reducing preventable damages of natural and 
industrial disasters.  
Tajikistan is an active member of the United Nations Framework Conve ntion on Climate Change and has the 
lowest level of absolute and per capita emissions in Central Asia. It has so far submitted three national 
communications, has ratified the Paris Agreement and is in the process of finalizing its new National Climate 
Chan ge Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS) in 2017.  
Grievance and feedback mechanism  
District level implementing and monitoring committee will coordinate project implementation at the jamoat 
level. WFP will remain accessible for project beneficiaries through its netwo rk of sub offices and focal points to 
receive feedback related to the project implementation. Moreover, a Feedback and Complaint Management 
Committee (FCMC) will be established in every community targeted by the project. FCMC committees will be 
established  at the village assembly in consultation with community members composed of at least 4 people, of 
which 50% are female. FCMC members will not be part of Project Management Committee, they should not be 
related to each other or to the Head of Village/Jamoat  in any way (i.e. brother, sister, son, daughter, spouse). 
FCMC committees are responsible for handling complaints related to the project implementation, identifying 
and ranking  problems,  providing  fair solutions,  and in necessary  cases  reporting  the abuse  directly  to WFP  while 
maintaining  confidentiality  (sub  office  telephone  numbers  and email  will be provided).  Committee  members  will 
be trained in maintaining confidentiality and processing feedback. Committee members will not be directly 
involved in the i mplementation of project. Rather, the expectation of their role is to assist the community on 
volunteer basis, to support the implementation of the project and guarantee transparency. Beneficiaries will be 
sensitized to address their concerns to relevant  committees.  
In addition, Cooperating Partners, WFP monitors and representatives of Executive Entity, will be regularly 
visiting project sites to monitor the success of the project and beneficiary satisfaction using the complaint 
committees. Selection process of FCMC will be documented and reported by the WFP sub offices. This system  
is already tested and functional in the framework of WFP’s resilience building  activities.  
Community consultations  
 
Between  November  10 and 24, 2016,  three  community  consu ltations  were  conducted  in Tajikistan  to inform  the 
development on the project. This community consultation process supplements an elaborate national level 
stakeholder  consultation  which  was  held  in August  2016  during  the concept  note  development  stage.  The results 
of the community consultation, in addition to an in depth market assessment exercise, were the basis of the 
development  of the full proposal  to be submitted  to the Green  Climate  Fund.  The full proposal  has incorporated 
suggestions, feedback and  concerns from national level as well as local level authorities and representatives. 
During project implementation, an in depth consultation with every target community in the 11 target districts 
will be undertaken  to fine tune  the project  implementation  based  on the local  conditions  – which  may  vary  from 
one village to  another.  
 
The first consultation was held on November 10 -11, 2016 in Kulyab, Khatlon (to cover Khovaling and 
Muminobod); the second and third consultations were held in parallel on November  23-24, 2016 in Khorog to 
cover GBAO districts and Garm to cover Rasht Valley area. The consultations were facilitated in Tajik language  
and delivered by Tajik nationals (and women to facilitate the gender segregated exercise) jointly with officials


---
*Page 65*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 77  
 
 
from the Committee of Environment Protection (the executing entity). The participants were not briefed about 
the project during the exercise in order to not tilt them in a particular dir ection. All questions were clearly 
explained and feedback has been recorded below.  
 
Methodology: The consultation workshop lasted 2 full days and included three target regions of Tajikistan. 
Participants included members of the community, farmers, women, N GOs, local administration etc. Various 
factors had to be considered to conduct this exercise including the availability of resources, permissions from 
government to speak with local communities (the President’s office must be involved), human resources 
(translation from English to Tajik and sometimes in Russian and local dialects) during facilitation and surveys, 
and Tajik to English to record and report, organizing venues for discussions in remote areas, inviting local 
officials  (includes  approval  from  President’s  office/central  office),  availability  of participants  (incl.  women  from 
communities, who are not always free to move outside) throughout the exercise etc. The exercise aimed at 
collecting information for Component 1 (Capacity building, including Climate Services activities) as well as 
Component 2 (livelihood resilience building, incl. market access and livelihood diversification) and included a 
focus group discussion and two group exercises. The exercise included dichotomous questions, contingency  
questions, multiple choice questions, and open ended questions. For the first group exercise, participants were 
divided  into  groups  of men  and women.  For the second  group  exercise,  participants  were  divided  into  members 
of community and those that are loc al administrators and members of institutions like  NGOs.  
 
The two day consultation was aimed at getting a deeper understanding at the community level on a variety of 
issues.  Day  1 included  activity  profile,  resource  access  profile,  and perception  of change  using  seasonal  mapping 
(comparing seasons 20 years ago versus current) as well as two group exercises. Day 2 included an assessment 
of existing  adaptive  capacities  as well  as community  needs  for climate  change  adaptation.  While  the communities 
initially attributed changes in livelihoods to a post -Soviet lifestyle as well as other factors like the Aral Sea, it 
became very clear towards the end that the communities were living through a changing climate and had very 
little adaptive capacity or understanding  of the phenomenon. This validated our initial assessments and plans 
for intervention through the proposed GCF  project.  
 
 
Gender considerations will be integrated throughout the design, implementation and monitoring of this 
project to ensure gender -transformative activities to address the gender inequalities and discriminatory socio - 
cultural norms which generally disadvantage women. WFP will ensure the sex and age disaggregation of all 
person -related data; the embedding of gender analysis in all assessments, technical assistance, knowledge, 
information management and related work; the mainstreaming of gender across capacity -strengthening 
initiatives;  and the engagement  of women  and men  in a manner  that  is empowering,  fosters  equitable  outcomes  
and advances gender equality. The Project will draw on community based participatory planning approach, to 
ensure gender responsiveness. This is also in direct alignment with SDG 5. Through this project, women and 
men will be trained on the importance of nutrition, understanding and using climate services as well as skill 
development in order to generate income through provision of inputs, seeds and water for irrigation and 
drinking. Training women on nutrition and dietary diversity will also enable them t o improve the nutrition of 
their children. Men and religious leaders will be sensitized to the importance of women’s inclusion. The project 
will closely work with partners (like Oxfam) - who have done extensive work in this dimension in Tajikist an – 
to ensure that the project does not create, exacerbate or contribute to gender inequalities or  discrimination.73 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
 
73 Oxfam GB has developed a community participatory methodology (Rapid Care Analysis) for assessing women’s contribution to unpaid 
household and care work that it plans to use in Tajikistan. The methodology could be used to ensure that women benefit from d evelopment 
activities (and are not, in  fact, additionally burdened); to gather evidence about gender equality; and to advocate for practical 
improvements to ease women’s workload (which, in the Tajikistan context, could include communal laundries, infrastructure 
improvements that enable home l abor -saving devices, preschools for children, care centers for the elderly, promotion of paternal leave, 
etc.).


---
*Page 66*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 77  
 
 
Financial Management: The project will utilize WFP financial management and  procurement systems in -line 
with  its accreditation.  All financial  management  and procurement,  including  financial  accounting,  disbursement 
methods  and auditing  will be specified  under  the Funded  Activity  Agreement  (FAA)  and will be aligned  with  the 
process and method agreed in the accreditation master agreement  (AMA).  
 
The GCF  will transfer  funds  to WFP  on the basis  of a disbursement  schedule  (annually)  as outlined  in the project 
proposal and relevant agreements. WFP will create a Trust Fund or Grant  Specific fund to receive the GCF fund 
at the country office level. All relevant expenditures will be charged directly to the Trust Fund or Grant Specific 
fund. WFP’s Finance and Treasury Division at Head Quarters level certifies annual financial statement s of 
relevant expenditures. WFP will be responsible for ensuring that project funds are spent according to the 
funding project proposal and the above mentioned agreements that will be entered with the  GCF.  
 
Procurement: WFP shall be responsible for all pro ject procurement of goods and/or services in accordance 
with  WFP  Regulations  and Rules.  WFP  follows  a competitive  and transparent  process  when  procuring  goods  and 
services from suppliers. The executing entity is responsible for procuring in a transparent m anner consistent 
with internationally recognized procedures and best practice. WFP Tajikistan will oversee the procurement 
processes to ensure  compliance.  
 
Audit: A final certified financial statement would be sent to the GCF once the project is completed in line with 
the financial regulations, rules and directives of WFP. WFP’s financial accounting, disbursement methods and  
auditing  are compliant  with  UN rules  and regulation  as well  as with  the requirements  of all major  donor  agencies 
worldwide.


---
*Page 67*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 77  
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
As identified in section F3, the project has negligible environmental and social risks associated primarily with 
Component 2. There are, however, project related risks (elaborated below) which may affect the 
implementation of the project. Whilst the risk of political instability is low, Tajikistan has a history of civil war 
and ethnic unrest which may create volatilities, however, this risk is deemed to be low and confined to areas 
beyond the project target sites. The project’s activities will also introduce new approaches and technologies 
which may face some resistance from older population groups more familiar with traditional livelihood and 
farming models . Lack of capacity, high turnover rates and coordination within government levels may also 
hamper the progress of project execution. Lastly, being highly prone, natural disasters and extreme weather 
may impede the progress made.  
 
All the above  risks  have  been carefully  identified  and mitigation  measures  have  been  put in place.  Nevertheless, 
the scale and duration of some of these identified risks may be difficult to perceive at the planning stage and 
risk of realization of every risk will be carefully monitored as per the schedule described in section  H2. 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Probability that political volatility and civil unrest could  
interrupt the project.  Social and  
environmental  Medium (5.1 -20%  
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The political environment in Tajikistan has been stable in years. WFP will mitigate this project risk by establishing strong 
operational  partnerships  and ownership  of the project  with  various  national  organizations  and government  stakeholders. 
Through the development of this project, the NDA and his team as well as various ministries involved have been closely 
consulted with. WFP also has a number of MoUs in place with various ministries further emboldening trust and 
cooperation in joint  activities.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
 
Technical Capacity of government partners   
Technical and 
operational   
Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)   
Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Because unexpected constraints relating to the capacities of national partners could result in delays in implementation, 
WFP will continue to develop partnerships with a broad range of development organizations to ensure sustainability and  
to limit risks.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring


---
*Page 68*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 77  
 
 
 
Natural disasters, in particular landslides, floods and 
drought in project sites  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
WFP and its partners have been supporting Committee of Emergency Situations (CoES) of the Republic of Tajikistan to 
strengthen National and District level disaster preparedness and early warning systems. Moreover, WFP conducted 
analytical studies (Impact of Climate Change on Food Security and an Integrated Con text Analysis) where areas exposed 
to natural disasters and shocks have been identified and mapped according to vulnerability level. To address these risks, 
WFP together with the CoES, will ensure that the communities selected have early warning systems an d preparedness  
actions in place to minimize the impact of possible disasters.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
 
Staff turnover impedes capacity building and retention 
of skills and knowledge in the relevant institutions  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To ensure the necessary buy -in WFP will directly engage with the local communities and leaders. Government technical 
services will be also fully involved in the project implementation and design. To mitigate the possible effect of the high 
turnover, WFP will include communities and different levels of district authorities in the project implementation, so as to 
ensure that acquired skills and knowh ow are adequately handed over.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring). This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors.  
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant ris ks.


---
*Page 69*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 77  
 
 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Manage ment Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level74 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
 
 
 
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  The proposed project contributes to climate -resilient development pathways in Tajikistan 
through the sustained impact of project measures that have high potential for replicability and 
scale. Overall, these impacts can be scaled to reach 100% of national coverage. The project 
stimulates a demand -based model f or climate information and use of ICT/mobile platforms to 
enable public and private sector participation, innovation, and market development. It 
contributes to key policies in the country and supports efforts to mainstream climate change 
adaptation into de velopment plans. It institutionalizes knowledge generation and learning 
through the incorporation of climate change and food security in the national and district level 
planning processes. At the community level, the project introduces new technologies,  
rehabilitates dilapidated assets and strengthens community resilience through social and 
behavioral change.  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verificatio 
n (MoV)   
Baseline  Target   
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if     
applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
 
 
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health and 
well-being, and food  and 
water  security   
 
Number of male and 
females benefiting from 
the adoption of 
diversified, climate - 
resilient livelihood 
options   
 
Community 
consultatio 
n 
workshops, 
Household 
surveys   
Vulnerable 
poor in target 
location are not 
familiar with 
climate resilient 
livelihood 
options   
 
 
12,500  
men and 
12,500  
women   
 
25,000  
men 
and 
25,000  
women   
Communities are 
interested and 
willing to 
participate in 
identification, 
planning 
implementation 
and maintenance of 
project activities.   
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and  enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions  Number of food - 
insecure households 
disaggregated by male 
and female headed 
households (in 
areas/periods at risk  of 
climate change impacts)   
 
Household 
surveys. 
FSMS  30% of 
population in 
targeted areas 
are food 
insecure 35,100 
women and 
32,400 men   
31,450  
women 
and 
29,040  
men  
23,14  
0 
wome 
n and 
21,36  
0 men  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 70*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 77  
 
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
 
 
Expected Result   
 
Indicator  Means 
of   
Verificat  
ion 
(MoV)   
 
Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions   
Mid-term (if 
applicable)   
Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to  Fund -level impacts  
 
 
 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision - 
making   
 
Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision -making in 
climate -sensitive 
sectors   
 
WFP  
monitori 
ng  
Farmers do not 
have access to 
climate 
information 
generated by 
climate services  8,000  
women and 
5,400 men 
engaged in 
farming in 
the targeted 
area will 
receive 
climate 
information  18,900  
women and 
12,600 men 
engaged in 
farming in 
the targeted 
area will 
receive and 
use climate 
information   
 
Agency for 
Hydromet 
under the CEP 
will be 
generating the 
information  
    40% of 
community 
assets 
restored;  80% of 
community 
assets 
restored;   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks   
 
 
 
 
 
Number of males and 
females reached by 
Climate services, 
capacity strengthening, 
livelihood 
diversification and 
asset creation  activities.   
 
 
 
 
 
Gender - 
sensitive 
field 
surveys 
in 
priority 
districts,   
Existing 
household and 
community 
assets are 
dilapidated and 
prone to damage  
due to climate 
induced shocks. 
Households 
report low food 
consumption 
score.  12,500  
women and, 
11,500 man 
will have 
access to 
created/reha 
bilitated 
climate 
resilient 
community 
assets;  
90% of 
planted trees 
survived;  22,500  
women and 
20,700 men 
will have 
access to 
created/reha 
bilitated 
climate 
resilient 
community 
assets;  
93% of 
planted trees 
survived;   
 
 
 
 
Communities 
are interested 
and willing to 
invest time and 
effort to 
implement the 
project.  
    40% of 
households 
with 
improved 
Food 
Consumption 
score.  80% of 
households 
with 
improved 
Food 
Consumption 
score.   
A8.0 Strengthened awareness 
of climate threats and risk - 
reduction processes  Number of males and 
females made aware 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses  Gender 
sensitive 
househol 
d surveys  Male or female 
households in 
the targeted area 
do not have 
information  
about climate  At least 
35,000  
women and 
32,500 men 
in the  
targeted  At least 
50,000  
women and 
45,000 men 
are aware of  
climate   
Communities 
are interested 
and willing to 
participate in


---
*Page 71*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 77  
 
 
   threats and 
adaptive 
measures  communities 
are aware of 
climate 
threats and 
adaptive 
measures  threats and 
adaptive 
measures  awareness 
sessions.  
Project/programme 
outputs  Component 1: Capacity strengthening and awareness raising of food insecure climate vulnerable 
communities and national actors for enhanced rural resilience and food security.  
 
 
 
Output 1.1: Climate and 
weather products improved 
and tailored to the  needs of 
vulnerable food insecure 
communities  through 
increased capacity of 
hydromet.  -Number of personnel 
proficient in using 
climate data to generate 
advisories, disaggregate 
by sex  Surveys/ 
tests of 
proficien 
cy at the 
beginnin 
g and end 
of 
training  Government 
staff not 
adequately 
trained.  25 
government 
staff (15 men  
and 10 
women) 
trained  50 
government 
staff (30 men  
and 20 
women) 
trained,  Trained 
personnel are 
retained and 
not transferred 
to other 
positions - not 
related to 
climate change.  
Number of men  
employed in the 
Government 
structures is 
much higher.  
 
Output 1.2: Locally relevant 
delivery mechanisms for the 
provision of tailored climate 
and weather information 
through relevant ICTs 
identified and piloted.  -Delivery mechanism 
for provision of climate 
services to local 
authorities and 
vulnerable 
communities 
established;  Project 
reports  General weekly 
TV 
announcements, 
website of 
hydromet, 
delayed delivery 
from 
information 
centres.  1 new 
effective 
delivery 
mechanism 
for provision 
of climate 
established  3 new 
effective 
delivery 
mechanism 
for provision 
of climate 
established  Stakeholders 
have an 
adequate 
understanding 
of climate 
issues and are 
interested in 
implementation  
. 
 
 
Output 1.3: Decision making 
in vulnerable households 
enhanced through improved 
capacities to interpret and act 
on tailored climate  advisories.  No. of households using 
climate services to 
make livelihood 
decisions, 
disaggregated by male 
and female headed 
households  Project 
reports  Currently none 
of the 
community 
members have 
direct access to 
climate services  29,00  
women and 
27,000 men 
of the target 
community 
households 
have access 
to climate 
services  58,000  
women and 
54,000 men 
of the 
targeted 
community 
households 
have access 
to climate 
services  Communities 
are in terested 
and willing to 
use climate 
services.  
 
Output     1.4: Improved 
community capacities and 
awareness on climate change 
impacts on health and 
nutrition   
% of targeted people 
(disaggregated by sex) 
who received trainings 
and key messages on 
climate change, health 
and nutrition risks   
 
 
Project 
reports   
No,/limited 
knowledge on 
climate risk and 
impact of 
climate change 
on nutrition  30,000  
women and 
28,000, men 
in the 
targeted 
communities 
understand 
key 
messages  60,000  
women and 
56,000 men 
understand 
key 
messages 
related to 
health  
and nutrition  Households in 
11 targeted 
districts are 
motivated to 
invest time and 
effort in the 
activities.


---
*Page 72*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 77  
 
 
    related to 
health  
and nutrition 
risks 
resulting 
from climate 
change  risks 
resulting 
from climate 
change   
 
 
 
 
Output 1.5: Publications of 
lessons learnt and best 
practices compiled and 
disseminated.   
 
 
 
Communication 
materials developed 
and disseminated 
among national, 
districts authorities and 
other stakeholders.   
 
 
 
 
Project 
reports   
 
 
 
 
 
None   
 
 
 
 
10,000  
booklets/pu 
blications 
produced;  15,000  
booklets/pu 
blications 
produced;  
4 radio 
shows per 
month 
describing 
climate 
advisories 
16 
newspaper 
articles and  
coverage   
 
 
Output 1.6: Adaptation  plans 
integrated at District 
Development Committees 
(DDC) with full participation 
of community members and 
local authorities   
 
Capacity building of 
District Development 
Committees in 
developing of 
adaptation planning   
 
 
 
Project 
Report   
 
Climate change 
adaptation and 
food security not 
included in 
district level 
planning  5 District 
development 
plans 
prioritize 
adaptation 
actions for 
most 
vulnerable 
jamoat, 
villages and 
households  11 District 
development 
plans 
prioritize 
adaptation 
actions for 
most 
vulnerable 
jamoat, 
villages and 
households  Local and 
district 
governments 
recognize and 
prioritize 
climate risks as 
a threat to 
development 
gains  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1.1 Training Workshop for 
Data Clerks and Managers on 
DaRe activities including use 
of CLIMSOFT Climate Data  
Management System  Capacity strengthening for 
hydromet to improve skills and 
equip with tools for analysis   
Trainers, technical experts and 
procurement of software   
 
1.1.2 Data Rescue (DARE) 
exercise  Capacity strengthening for 
hydromet to improve skills and 
equip with tools for analysis   
Trainers, technical experts and 
procurement of software   
1.1.3 Capacity building of the 
Hydromet to generate 
monthly and seasonal climate  
forecasts  Capacity strengthening for 
hydromet to improve skills and 
equip with tools for analysis   
Trainers, technical experts and 
procurement of software   
1.1.4 Capacity building in GIS 
mapping tools to monitor 
crops and pasture conditions  Capacity strengthening for 
hydromet to improve skills and 
equip with tools for analysis   
Trainers, technical experts and 
procurement of software


---
*Page 73*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 77  
 
 
1.2.1 Developing mechanisms 
for provision of tailored 
climate services  Identify and develop delivery 
mechanisms that are relevant to 
local communities   
Climate information & relevant 
ICTs   
 
1.2.2 Provision of climate 
information (radio/TV/SMS)  Pilot dissemination of climate 
information through identified 
delivery channels   
Climate information & relevant 
ICTs   
 
1.3.1 Visit of PICSA trainers 
from University of Reading  Build capacities of communities to 
understand and utilize climate 
information   
Technical experts   
1.3.2 Training the 
communities on use of PICSA  
approach    
Trainers & technical experts   
1.4.1 Community awareness 
raising on climate risk 
management measures, 
climate advisories, health and  
nutrition risks  Capacity strengthening for 
communities and women on climate 
risk management measures with 
regards to health and nutrition   
Community awareness sessions 
and trainings   
1.5.1 Exchange visits from 
adjacent communities, 
lessons learned and  
awareness raising  Collection and production of lesson 
learned & best practices    
1.5.2 Dissemination of 
publications of lessons learnt  
and best practices  Dissemination of publications 
produced    
1.5.3 National conference to 
inform policy development 
based on lessons learnt  Inform national policy with 
learnings and best practices 
collected    
1.6.1 Reviewing  district plans 
with local authorities  Integrate climate change adaptation 
planning within district plans  District plans, local authorities 
and community members   
1.6.2 Development of district  
level plans with Climate 
Change Adaptation  Integrate climate change adaptation 
planning within district plans    
 
 
Expected Result   
 
Indicator  Means 
of   
Verificat  
ion 
(MoV)   
 
Baseline   
 
Target   
 
Assumptions  
Project/programme 
outputs  Component 2: Resilience building at household and community level through 
diversification of livelihoods and market access.  
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Climate change 
adaptation  supported 
through diversification of 
livelihoods.  Hectares of orchards 
established in targeted 
districts;  
 
Hectares of 
agroforestry 
established in targeted 
districts;  
 
# of women group 
received training on   
 
 
 
Project 
Report  There are no 
climate resilient 
varieties of 
orchards 
established in 
targeted 
districts  
Limited 
knowledge, 
especially 
among women  6,350  
women and 
5,870 men 
benefiting 
from  
200 ha of 
orchards and 
100 ha of 
agroforestry 
established  12,700  
women and 
11,000 men 
benefiting 
from 400 ha 
of orchards 
and 200 ha of 
agroforestry 
established 
in targeted 
districts;  Farmers and 
women groups 
in targeted 
districts are 
motivated to 
invest time and 
efforts in the 
activities.


---
*Page 74*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 77  
 
 
 drying fruits, vegetables   on drying fruits,  in targeted  40 women   
and herbs, processing  vegetables and  districts;  group  
and marketing  herbs,  15 women  received  
activities  processing and  group  training on  
 marketing  received  drying fruits,  
 activities  training on  vegetables  
  drying fruits,  and herbs,  
  vegetables  processing  
  and herbs,  and 
  processing  marketing  
  and activities  
  marketing   
  activities   
   Natural and  12,000  20,000  Target 
population are 
interested and 
willing to 
participate in 
identification, 
planning, 
implementation 
and 
maintenance of 
project 
activities.   
Number of assets built, 
restored or maintained 
by targeted households 
and communities, by 
type and unit of 
measure   physical 
livelihood assets 
are very 
insufficient to 
provide 
adequate  
protection to  women and 
10,000 men  
in the 50 
targeted 
villages have 
access to  
clean  women and 
18,000 men  
in the 69 
targeted 
villages have 
access to  
clean  
   climate change  drinking  drinking  
   risk water;  water;  
    1200 ha of  2300 Ha of  
Output 2.2: Improved water 
management for drinking 
water and small -scale 
irrigation.    
Project 
Report   arable land  
will be 
irrigated in 
30 villages  
and 10,000  agricultural 
land will be 
irrigated in 
75 villages  
and 23,400  
    women and  women and  
    8,000 men  21,600 men  
    benefit from  benefit from  
    it; it; 
    800 women  1,600  
    and 750 men  women and  
    will benefit  1,500 men  
    from drip  will benefit  
    method of  from method  
    irrigation.  of drip  
     irrigation.  
 Number of people 
engaged in income 
diversification 
strategies to reduce 
risks and vulnerability 
of food security to 
climate   
 
 
 
 
Project 
Report  People in 
targeted 
districts, 
especially in 
mountainous 
districts have 
high risk and 
vulnerability of 
food security to 
climate  100  232  Community  
 greenhouses  greenhouses  support the  
Output 2.3: Provision of and 
training to utilize green 
houses, renewables and 
climate proof post -harvest 
storage facilities established 
to withstand long -term 
climate change.  and storage 
facilities are 
established 
in the 
targeted 
communities. 
1,100  
women and  and storage 
facilities are 
established; 
2,500  
women and 
2,300 men 
have access  
to storage  initiative and 
willing to 
participate  
 990 men  facilities and   
 have access  greenhouses;   
 to storage


---
*Page 75*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 77  
 
 
    facilities and 
greenhouses; 
4,160  
women and 
3,840 men 
have access 
to renewable 
energy  
sources  9,300  
women and 
8,700 men 
have access 
to renewable 
energy 
sources   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.4: Household 
resilience and adaptive 
capacity of climate vulnerable 
poor  in target  areas  improved.  No. of smallholders 
using market 
information through 
SMS.  
 
% of farmers supported 
by the project that raise 
their income through 
sale to public or private 
sector (including 
national school meal 
programme)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 
Report  Market prices 
are not 
institutionalized 
for access by 
farmers.  
Smallholders do 
not have 
sustainable 
partnerships for 
income 
generating 
activities.  9,300  
smallholder 
women and 
8,600 men 
have access 
to market 
prices 
through SMS.  
 
7,000  
smallholder 
women and 
6,500men 
have 
improved 
income 
generating 
opportunitie 
s. 18,700  
smallholder 
women and 
17,300 men 
have access 
to market 
prices 
through SMS  
 
18,700  
targeted 
smallholder 
women and 
17,300 men 
have 
improved 
income 
generating 
opportunitie  
s. Smallholders 
will negotiate 
with 
middlemen for 
better sales 
prices.  
 
Opportunities 
for public and 
private sector 
partnerships 
exist.  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
2.1.1 Delivery of seedlings   Seedlings and technical experts  2.1.1 Delivery of seedlings  
 
2.1.2 Installation of natural 
fences    
Technical experts  2.1.2 Installation of natural 
fences  
2.1.3 Tree planting (orchards 
and agro forest)    
Technical experts  2.1.3 Tree planting (orchards 
and agro forest)  
2.2.1 Drinking water supply 
systems  Improve water management for 
drinking water   
Technical tools and experts  2.2.1 Drinking water supply 
systems  
 
2.2.2 Irrigation activities  Improve small scale irrigation 
systems   
Technical tools and experts  2.2.2 Irrigation activities  
2.3.1 Installation of storage 
facilities  Install storage facilities that 
withstand long -term climate change   
Technical tools and experts  2.3.1 Installation of storage 
facilities  
2.3.2 Installation of solar 
greenhouses  Provide and train on the use of 
greenhouses  Greenhouses, technical experts 
and trainers  2.3.2 Installation of solar 
greenhouses  
2.3.3 Provision of solar 
dryers and trainings  Install and train on the use of solar 
dryers  Solar dryer, technical experts 
and trainers  2.3.3 Provision of solar dryers 
and trainings  
2.3.4 Installation of 
biodigesters and trainings  Install and train on the use of 
biodigesters  Biodigesters, technical experts 
and trainers  2.3.4 Installation of biodigesters 
and trainings


---
*Page 76*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 77  
 
 
2.4.1 Provision of market 
information including market 
locations, demand for 
commodities, prices etc... 
(SMS, IVR, information  
boards)   
 
Improve access of farmers to market   
 
Technical experts  2.4.1 Provision of market 
information including market 
locations, demand for 
commodities, prices etc... (SMS, 
IVR, information boards)  
2.4.2 Training of 500 dehkan 
farms and information 
sharing to better link local 
production with markets and  
supply chain   
Improve access of farmers to market   
 
Technical experts & trainers  2.4.2 Training of 500 dehkan 
farms and information sharing 
to better link local production 
with markets and supply chain  
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will be carried out in accordance with WFP procedures, under WFP supervision. 
WFP will assume financial oversight of the project and provide information on a regular basis in conformance with GCF 
operational regulations. To facilitate coordination on outcome monit oring and evaluation, project management team 
meetings will take place at least twice per year.  
 
In addition to semi -annual performance reports, technical reports and a yearly performance report, specific M&E activities 
to be undertaken include the followi ng: 
 
A Project Inception Workshop (IW) will bring together all stakeholders for project implementation within the first two 
months after project approval. Through this workshop, stakeholders and local leaders will build project ownership and 
identify prior ities for first year of implementation. This workshop will involve local leaders and community youth, women 
and elders. A supervision plan will be agreed upon by relevant stakeholders during this workshop.  
 
An Annual Progress Report (APR) will be prepared by the project management team and evaluate yearly project progress, 
using identified M&E indicators. The APR will identify yearly objectives and targets, lessons learned and risk mitigation 
measures, as well as relevant financial information. The data for  monitoring will consist of financial, procurement and 
physical progress reports as well as compliance with the requirements of the environmental and social assessment and 
management  frameworks,  along  with  financial  audit  reports.  It will also  include  meas ures  considered  in the risk  management 
plans proposed in Section  G2. 
 
An independent and external Mid -term Evaluation will take place at the mid -point of project implementation (Nov/Dec, 
2019). The MTE will determine progress made toward outcome achievemen ts, assess financial, social and environmental 
risks and pinpoint corrective actions as required. It will present initial lessons learned on project implementation and 
management. The findings of this review will be incorporated in a midterm report.  
 
An independent  and  external  final  evaluation  will also  be submitted  no later  than  nine  months  after  the completion  of the 
project. These reports will assess progress towards the project’s outcomes and impacts defined in the logical framework as 
well as the overall project performance against the six GCF investment criteria. Final evaluations will include information on 
challenges and lessons  learnt.


---
*Page 77*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 77  
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection  Letter  
☒ Feasibility  Study  
☐ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if  applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If  applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme  Confirmation/Term  Sheet  (including  cost/budget  breakdown,  disbursement  schedule, 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex  I 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If  applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the  project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme  implementation  
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.


---
*Page 78*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 77  
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 79*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 77


---
*Page 80*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 77  
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure 
communities through capacity strengthening and livelihood 
diversification in mountainous regions of Tajikistan.  
Accredited entity  UN World Food Programme  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category C  
 Note: Environmental and social report disclosure not required for Category 
C and Intermediation 3 projects and programmes.  
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Description of report/disclosure  N/A